THE DOCTRINE OF THE SABBATH VINDICATED, In a confutation of a treatise of the
Sabbath, written by M. Edward Breerwood against M. Nic. Byfield, wherein these
five things are maintained:

First, that the fourth Commandment is given to the servant and not to the
master only.

Secondly, that the fourth Commandment is moral.

Thirdly, that our own light works as well as gainefull and toilesome are
forbidden on the Sabbath.

Fourthly, that the Lords day is of divine Institution.

Fifthly, that the Sabbath was instituted from the beginning.

By the industry of an unworthy labourer in Gods Vineyard, RICHARD BYFIELD,
Pastor in Long Ditton in Surrey.

Verily I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot, or one title,
shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled. Matthew. 5. 18.
LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Philemon Stephens and Christopher
Meredith at the golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1631.

To all that love the LORD JESUS in sincerity.
Dear Christian, bought with a price, most happy in this that thou art not
thine own; for thy sake I have undertaken to answer this Treatise; to thee,
do I Dedicate it, who may of right challenge all that I am or can. Thou,
whether noble, wise, mighty, learned, unlearned, weak or mean, near or
far off, art interessed in all that makes for the Truth, and in all that is
done against it. Paul, Apollo, Cephas are thine, 1. Cor. 3.
all thine; for thou art Christ's, and Christ is Gods. In the broaching of
Heresies, thou art wounded, in the making of schisms thou art racked, in every
lie thou art laid at; nothing comes against a painful Minister, but
reaches to thy heart through his sides; nothing from a laborious Minister, but
aymeth at thy settling, stablishing, comforting, perfecting, Were thou the
meanest that ever lived, who can think this too much for thee, seeing God
withholds not himself as a Father, his Son as a Redeemer and Brother, his
Spirit as sanctifier, Comforter, and the Spirit of Sonne-ship in thy heart, and
thy very body also, he ownes as his Temple? For a recompense be enlarged:
give thy self to God, receive nothing against, but all that is for the Truth:
Let the reproaches wherewith Christ and his Ministers, are reproached fall on
thee; own the Ministers gifts and labors, as thine, reign, but not without
them, be honorable, but not when they are despised.

When I first received this book entitled, A learned Treatise of the
Sabbath, a little before November last, though I was utterly ignorant of any
such controversy to have passed between my Brother, and Master Edward
Breerwood; and had not yet cast mine eye on the base language of the reply in
the end of that Treatise; yet the very noveltie and dangerous vileness of the
Doctrine, without any reference to things personal, struck me. My spirit was
stirred in me, when I saw the whole right of the Law for the time of Gods
worship alleviated; the consequence whereof must needs be this, the whole
kingdom wholly given to Atheism and profaneness. The zeal of Gods glory and
thy good began to eat upon me: I throw my self into the open field, that thou
may be nourished; I resolved what I was, or am, or may be; should be (Christ
strengthening me) Gods and thine; that God the Lord of Heaven might have his
Royalty untouched, man his duty laid out; Superiors directed to stand for God
and Men, in the things of God, and Inferiors be Gods, while men's; and men's, in
and for God.

Now knowing that there are none but are flesh, as well as spirit, and that the
unregenerate part will catch at the most excellent truths, to suck thereout
advantage to it self, by tearing a sunder things inseparably united, and
taking to things hand over head in a wrong application, fearing thy
miscarriage, I could not but advertise thee a little, in that part that
concerns thy duty.

The superior or master may conceit his power entrenched upon, the inferior
or servant may suppose some unwarranted liberty granted him, all may think of
an over-rigid construction of the unchangeable precept. This D^spute yields
none of those, neither prejudice to the master, nor occasion of liberty to the
servant, nor other then a received and allowed sense, to the never-failing law,
as will appear to him that thoroughly peruseth it. But for prevention of
overhasty conceits in all, behold thy way-markes, before thou read or receive
any thought to fore-stall thee, take what I set here before thee, which has
been seen, and heard, and allowed and received, Blessed be Gods holy Name,
and I doubt not but shall be, maugre the malice of contradicting spirits. For I
admonish thee of no other things then what are already received, in the printed
Books of Mr. Nich. Byfield. Consider, I say, what that Master of Assemblies
has left, in his writings as stakes to bound out the way of both master and
servant, superior and inferior, in running the race of this fourth
commandment, and as goades to quicken thy heart in the embracing of that
divine Law.

For the Doctrine of the Sabbath he thus explaineth himself in two places,

First, God has provided by his unchangeable law that one day in seven,
servants shall rest from their labor. M. Byf. on 1 Pet. 2. 18. page 723.

Secondly, Servants must show their fear of God in their callings, by
carfulness to do Gods service, as well as their masters, not only by
spending the Sabbath in the duties of religion, but in redeeming the time in
the week days (as may be without hinderance of their work or offense to
their masters) to employ themselves in prayer, reading, conference, etc. And
the reason is, because as servants must do their masters work, as they are
servants: so they stand bound in the common obligation, to do Gods service, as
they are men; and no man but is subject to the law of God; who has given all
his commandments to servants as well as to masters. Byf. in 1 Pet. 2. 18. page
734.

For the servant he lays down these godly and savory limitations, as Caveats:

First, the subjection of servants is of Divine institution, to which God has
bound them by the fifth Commandment, and so is a moral and perpetual
ordinance, in 1 Pet. 2. 18. p. 721.

Secondly, no faults in Superiors, can free inferiors from their subjection, in
matter or manner, in 1 Pet. 2. p. 742.

Thirdly, if the matter be only inexpedient and unmeete, thou must obey, in
Col. 3. 23. p. 130.

Fourthly, thou must be sure that it be sin that thou refusest, if thou
must needs doubt, it is better to doubt and obey, than doubt and disobey, Id.
ibid.

Fifthly, thou must in unlawful things yield to obey by sufferings, Id. ibid.

Sixthly, the servant must avoid inquisitivenesse, the servant knows not what
his master does, Ioh. 15. 15. in 1 Pet. 2. p. 735.

For the master he gives these heavenly admonitions*

First, the master must give account of all he does to God, though he be not
bound to do so to inferiors, in 1 Pet. 2. p. 737.

Secondly, good masters not only license, but teach their servants to keep
Gods Sabbath, and worship him. Commandment 4. Genesis 18. 19. in 1 Pet. 2. p. 736.

Thirdly, masters do not only wickedly in restraining their servants from the
means of their salvation or comfort, but do foolishly also, in hindering them
of that means that should make them good servants, in 1 Pet. 2. p. 725.

Fourthly, they may not make their servants break Gods Sabbath, to satisfy
their wills, in Col. 3. 23. p. 130.

In these Aphorisms, that faithful servant of Jesus Christ being dead, yet
speaks; unto which let me add a word or two, that thou might on all hands
be leftready to duty in this behalf; Remember (if thou be a servant) that in
works of holiness, mercy and necessity, the masters power is to be obeyed in
subjection to his commands; for in those is he under God, for God, and over
thee. Then it is thy praise to follow Isa. 41. 2.
him in the lawful use of his power, at his foot.

Lastly, the well-ordered household of that worthily praised Centurion, should
be the platform for families that intend their welbeing, When he bad his
servant go, he went; and come, he came; and do this, and he did it: if thou
be a master, and had such servants, would thou, could thou serve Ier.
43. 9.
thy self of them? I am persuaded there is not the most covetous and profane
Atheist, but he has so much sense of a deity, and so much conscience
yielding and heart giving, and relenting, that he would sometimes in a mood,
proclayme to his household the Lords liberty. Is it so indeed? my prayer shall
be for thee, that of this deed thou may never repent and pollute Gods
Name, with those wretched Israelites, lest it should hasten desolation on thy
house and name; thy repentance may be far better bestowed, upon the
remainder of other sins, against other the Holy Laws of God. To which work
I leave thee and all others that know, that Repentance toward God, and Faith
toward the Lord Jesus is that which summeth up Christianity among those that
follow the Truth in Love; the Lord answer us all with strength in our souls,
that always we may labor fervently one for another in prayers, that we may
stand perfect and complete in all the will of God.

So prays Yours in the Lord, RICHARD BYFIELD.

THE CONTENTS OF THE BOOK.
THE PREFACE. THE Preface of this Confutation shows
The illiteratenesse and vanity of the Title, page 1, 2, 3. The abusiue
application of holy Texts to such a Treatise, p. 4. The state of the Question
opposed by Mr. Breerewood, page 5.
CHAP. I. The first Chapter delivers
The plain sense of the words of the fourth Commandment, which concern the
persons to whom it is given, page 6. Seven reasons from the Commandment it
self to avouch that exposition, page 7. 8. Two texts in the old Testament to
confirm it, viz. Ier. 17. 20. Exodus 34. 21. page 9. The Infirmenesse of Mr.
Breerwoods Collection, page 9, 10. An argument taken out of Gal. 5. 3. to
prove our exposition, page 10. A gross absurdity and wicked, against the
souls of inferiors, arising from the contrary doctrine of our adversary, page
10. The singularity and Novelty of this opinion, page 10.
CHAP. II. Contains
Two things that make Precepts parallel, and equally obliging, page 11, 12. A
distinction to clear this, page 12. Another argument to prove that the fourth
Commandment is given to servants, taken out of the Romans 3. 19. Many arguments
to prove that the stranger-Moabite eating the Passover, sinned though he were
invited, page 13, 14. Instances proouing that a commandment in form of words
given of and not to one, may yet be sinned against by him of whom it is so
given, page 13, 14. A retortion of M. Breerwoods argument, page 14, 15.
CHAP. III. Shows
The weakness of that instance of the Precept of a Prince, applied to
confirm his exposition, page 15. The greatness of the Servants sin, that
neglects attendance on Christ upon the Sabbath, under the similitude of a
Prince, gathered out of Aquinas, page 16. How commandments that are
privileges, bind the privileged; and therefore if the commandment were of
servants and not to them, yet it obliges them, page 16, 17. A further proof
that the fourth Commandment is given to Servants also, page 17, 18.
CHAP. IIII.
Proves that the fourth Commandment is given to Children, out of Lev. 23. 3.
and 19 3. and therefore to Servants, page 19, 20.
CHAP. V. Shows
Our Adversaries unsound Reasoning from the Text, in Deuteronomy. 5. page 22, 23. The
meaning of that text, page 23. Many passages in his unfolding the place, in
Deuteronomy. 5. liable to just exceptions, page 24, 25, 26, 27.
CHAP. VI. Delivers
The difference between the Oxes and the Servants subjection to the fourth
Commandment, page 28. Two arguments drawn* thence, to prove that the
Commandment obliges Servants, page 28, 29. Further proofs hereof, page 29,
30. A Rule to know when Precepts that are alike for form of words, yet do not
oblige alike, page 30.
CHAP. VII. Shows
That the Servant working on the Sabbath at his Masters commandment, sins,
though the wrought Ox sin not, p. 31, 32. The Horridness of that position,
that the Servant and the Ox or Ass, are alike subject to their Masters, page
32, 33. Three Rules that guide Subjects in obedience to their Superiors, page
33, 34.
CHAP. VIII. Delivers
the examination of our Adversaries explication of that distinction of the
matter and form of sin, page 35, 36. The Infirmenesse of his Reasoning from
thence, page 36.
CHAP. IX. Shows further
What clause of the Commandment binds servants as servants, page 37, 38.
Another argument drawn from the Texts, Exodus 20. 1, 20, 21. and 35. 1, 2. page
38. The exposition of the Commandment by Thomas Aquinas, page 38, 39, 40.
CHAP. X. Shows
the weakness of the adversaries reason, taken from the wisdom and equity
of God, page 41, 42. Diverse unsound passages let fall in laying down that
Reason, page 42. In special, the falsehood of this; that the Servants are
void of power and liberty to obey Gods Commandment on the Sabbath, if their
Master bid them work, page 42, 43.
CHAP. XI. Clears our Doctrine from unjust aspersions, and proves that it
occasioneth
No Disobedience to Masters, page 44, 45. No hard usage to the Servant, page
45, 46. No breach of the Law of Nations, where many things about the Law of
Nations, page 46, 47. Charge our Adversaries Doctrine to produce these three
evils, page 47, 48. Confirms further our Doctrine, page 48, 49.
CHAP. XII. Shows
How our Adversaries Reason from Gods goodness is faulty for form and
matter, page 50, 51, 52, 53. That his Doctrine casts into mischiefs and
Inconveniences, page 54.
CHAP. XIII. Shows
the abuse of that place in Neh. 13. which is unfolded, and makes for us; A
justification of our English translation, and the signification of the word,
(...) page 56, 57, 58.
CHAP. XIIII. Shows
What work for kind is forbidden on the Sabbath, and how the Adversaries
argument makes against him, page 59, 60. The text in Esa. 58. 13. vindicated
from his false gloss, and unfolded, page 60, 61, 62. Diverse things about the
form and residence of sin, page 62, 63. How far this is true, that the
Minister of another exorbitant will sins not, page 64. The vanity of that
distinction, that the Servants work done in obedience to his Master, is his
naturally, not Morally, page 64, 65.
CHAP. XV. Shows
How sin is attributed to the members, and that properly the man sins,
page 66, 67. The faultiness of our Adversaries, Reasoning about a Natural and
Voluntary Instrument of sin, page 67, 68. What takes* Voluntarinesse from a
deed, and the danger of that speech, work on the Sabbath has sin annexed to
it, page 68.
CHAP. XVI. Proves these particulars,
The Servants working on the Sabbath, impeacheth his serving of God, page 72,
73. The Distinction of forbidding Nakedly and Immediately, is vain, and freeth
not him that does the thing forbidden, from sin, page 73, 74. The specification
of the Servant in the Commandment, makes his working never the less his
sin, but the more: and the venime of that word, Exception, page 74, 75. The
Governor is charged more then the governed, in respect of a Political
observance of the Commandment, not of a personal, page 75. The fourth
Commandment is a Law of Nature, by Reasons, Authorities, and the Adversaries
own words, page 75, 76, 77. To work on the Sabbath is evil materially, page
78, 79. The danger of that Position, that prohibitions in the Commandments are
caused by the Native illness of that which is prohibited, page 79. The
footsteps of every specialtie in the fourth Commandment, found among the
Gentiles, page 80, 81, 82, 83, 84. Gomarus exceptions against this, answered,
page 84, to 87. Our Adversaries reasons answered, with a proof that the fourth
Commandment was kept by the Patriarchs, before the Law given in Sinai, page
87, to 90.
CHAP. XVII.
Proves that the Servant in such work sins, as consenter to his Masters
sin, where, the ways of partaking with other men's sins, are laid down, page
92, 93, 94. Decideth a great Case, viz. what works Servants may do on the
Sabbath, page 94, 95. With Cautions both to Master and Servant, page 96.
CHAP. XVIII. Shows
that the Servant in this case may break the Moral Law, and yet not fall
under the Judicial Law, page 98. Some fearful examples of Gods justice on
Inferiors, working that day at the command of Superiors, page 98, to 102.
CHAP. XIX. Proves
that light works, that are our own, are forbidden on the Sabbath, by four
arguments, page 104, 105. A large explication of the meaning of the Hebrew word
Melachah, page 105, 106. Authorities to prove this Doctrine, page 107, 108.
CHAP. XX.
Our Adversaries senseless Answer to that place, Exodus 35. 3. with the true
meaning thereof, page 109, 110. The clearing of the Instances of our Savior,
in commanding some works to be done on the Sabbath, page 111. That that which
some Divines term Christian liberty on the Sabbath, is no other then
Christian duty to the eternal Law, and was the Jews freedom also, page 111,
to 114.
CHAP. XXI. Shows
that to work on the Lords day, is a breach of the fourth Commandment, page
116. 117. Where to find the Lords Sabbath, page 117. 118. Authorities to prove
this, page 118. 119. That the Lord Christ translated the day, and that it is of
divine authority, and of the Lords own institution, page 120. to 127.
CHAP. XXII.
Shows the weakness of our Adversaries position, that the Lords day is by
constitution of the most ancient Church, and therefore Jus humanum, a humane
law: and how he jumpes with Arminians and Papists, page 128.
CHAP. XXIII.
Examineth our adversaries doctrine about the abolishing of the Jews Sabbath,
and the proofs to prove it ceremonial, page 129. 130. Declares, there is no
ceremony in the fourth Commandment, yet if there had been, it cannot cause
the Sabbath to vanish, page 131. 132.
CHAP. XXIIII.
Shows the absurdity of this opinion, that the Sabbath was translated by the
Church, and of the distinction of his generality and speciality of the
Commandment, page 133. 134.
CHAP. XXV.
Proves notwithstanding, that if the Church have just power to translate the
day, the Commandment needs no translation, but stands in force to bind us to
that day, page 135. 136.
CHAP. XXVI. Proves.
that the speciality of the fourth Commandment inioyning one day of seven, and
the seventh, and a whole day, and that with precise vacancy from work, is
moral, page 138. to 144. In special, that Gomarus his evasions are frigid and
senseless, page 140, 141. That the Commandment yields enforcing consequents
for the Lords day, page 144.
CHAP. XXVII.
Proves that the Commandment of God binds equally, and as strongly for the
Lords day, as it did for the Jewish Sabbath, page 146.
CHAP. XXVIII.
Disprooueth the distinction of Sanctification and exact vacation on the
Sabbath, and the Instance of the Popes Succession of Peter, Idly applied to
the Lords days Succession of the Jewish Sabbath, page 147, 148.
CHAP. XXIX. Delivers
Authorities of Fathers, to prove a general restraint of labors on the Lords
day, page 149, to 152. The constitution of Constantine answered by
constitutions of the same Emperor, and by that of Leo with an Apology in
brief for Constantine, page 152, 153. The clearing of the Council of
Laodicea, page 154, 155, 156.
CHAP. XXX. Shows
the vanity of our Adversaries Reasons and wish, to persuade (notwithstanding
his Doctrine) as devout an observation of the Lords day, as the Jews held of
their day, page 157, 158, 159. The sound Doctrine of our Church concerning the
Sabbath, and the full concord between it and ours, with the plain dissent
thereof from our Adversaries, page 159, 160, 161.
CHAP. XXXI. Delivers
Constitutions of Churches and Edicts of Princes, that forbid and censure light
works, page 162, 163. Constitutions that bound Masters in commanding, and free
the Servants in obeying that day, page 163, 164.
CHAP. XXXII. Shows
three limitations laid down by the Apostles, touching Servants obedience,
page 167, 168. There can come no dishonor to the Gospel, nor inconvenience to
servants dwelling with heathen masters, by their observing of the Sabbath. page
170. 171. 172. This doctrine is no seminary of disturbance or contumacy, p.
173. The obedience to this command does not alienate masters from their
Christian servants, page 173. 174.
CHAP. XXXIII. Shows
that Antiquity does bear out the servant in refusing the doing of servile
works at his masters command upon the Lords day, page 176. 177. That the cause
of the persecution of Christians, was their withdrawing of themselves from
obedience to their superiors, page 178. What the Heathens and many of the
Papists do teach concerning this doctrine* page 179.
CHAP. XXXIV. Shows
that Master Breerwoods doctrine is like the waters of Marah and Meribah, page
181. That the fruits of this doctrine can be no other, but disturbance and
sedition, by five consequences that follow upon it, page 181. 182.
CHAP. XXXV. Answers
Master Breerwoods provocation and adiuration to a polemicke discourse. page
183.
CHAP. XXXVI. Shows
the true relation of the occasion of the controversy betwixt Master Breerwood
and Master Byfield. That Master Byfield did not indeed give any such advice to
John Breerwood. That this pretended scruple did not make John Breerwood
disobedient to his Master, who would not urge him, nor did it occasion his hard
usage, nor tend to his ruin; his Master being deceived with his false
pretenses, desired the more to enjoy him.
THE SECOND PART CONTAINS A BRIEF SVRVEY OF Master BREERVVOODS Reply, and
Shows

THAT Master Byfields declining of the controversy with Master Breerwood,
could not impeach his Knowledge, Zeal, or Charity, page 193. 194. 195. That
Master Breerwood opposes Gods Sabbath, page 195. 196. That the Commandment
concerning the Rest and Sanctification of the Sabbath, was given to Adam, page
197. Diverse distinctions used by Master Breerwood against this truth, answered,
page 197. 198. 199. 200. The true sense of the words of the text, Genesis 2.
verse 2, 3. page 202. Authorities to confirm that exposition, page 203. 204.
205. 206. 207. The Commandment concerning the Sabbath, was one of the ten
perpetual words from the beginning, page 208, 209. That place in the 56. of
Esaias. 4, 5. must be understood of the Christian Sabbath. page 210. No mystical
Sabbath spoken of in the Scripture, page 210. The Sabbath translated by the
authority of Christ, page 211, 212. That place in Matthew 24. 20. meant of the
Christian Sabbath, proved at large, page 213, 214. That the Ceremonies of the
old Law were deadly at the time of the siege of Jerusalem, page 215. That the
old Sabbath was not observed in the East Churches 300. years after our
Saviors death, as Master Breerwood affirms, page 216. The sufficiency of
Master Byfields Reasons, not to answer the Treatise at that time, sent to him
by Master Breerwood, page 218, to 222. A letter of Master Breerwoods, in which
he promises, that this controversy between him and Master Byfield shall
never be made public, page 223, etc.
FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE ABSVRD AND GROSS POsitions, that lie scattered in this
Treatise of the Sabbath, written by Master BREERWOOD.
1 THe servant, as touching bodily labor, is merely subject to his Masters
power, page 11. 2. The servant, as touching bodily service incident to
mankind, is in like degree of subjection to his Master, as is the Ox and
Ass, page 11. 3. Children are merely under their Parents power, as the
Cattle are under their owners, page 13. 4. Servants are under their Masters
power for service only, page 14. 5. A servant cannot justly perform any
labor which his Master forbids, nor omit any which his Master commands, page
14. 6. If the fourth Commandment * be given to servants, they cannot keep it
Their calling carries a necessity of breaking the Law, as this Author would
have it.
as they are the servants of men, page 17. 7. The compassion and goodness of
God is such, that it agrees not therewith to give to man such a Commandment,
which, through the wickedness of other men, he cannot keep without an
inconvenience and mischief, that is, without sharp punishment, page 17. 8.
Sin essentially is nothing else, but the inordinate and unruly election or
resolution of the will varying from the Scripture or Gods Law, page 19. 9.
Outward unlawful actions are not sin properly, page 19. 10. Actions are no
whit further sinful then they are voluntary, page 20. 11. The guilt of sin
is the form of sin, page 12. 12. The eye beholding vanity, the tongue loose
to blaspheme, slander and lie, and the hand stretched out to shead blood, sin
not, page 20. 13. To work on the Lords day, is certainly no breach of any
divine Commandment, page 37. 14. The designement of the first day of the week
to be Sabbath, is but ceremonial, page 42. 15. Gods resting from Creation was
his Sabbath, and his resting in himself, the sanctification thereof; other
institution or sanctification of the Sabbath in Paradise, will never be
proved out of the place in Genesis 2. 2. page 63, 64. 16. The Sabbath for the
moral part of it (I keep his own phrase) became in the wilderness on Sinai
one of the ten perpetual words, not before, page 67. 17. By the Judicial law
of Moses it was death for a man in case of necessity or danger, to depart from
the place of his residence on the Sabbath, further then a Sabbath-dayes
journey* page 73.
FINIS.
THE PREFACE.
BEfore I touch upon this Antisabbato-Dominicall Pamphlet to grapple with it,
it is requisite briefly to skan the title and sentences of Scripture prefixed;
and to propose the case or question controverted.

First* the Book is entitled, A learned Treatise of the Sabbath. What the
Treatise affords shall be seen anon, God willing: the Title savours of little
learning, wherein for Sabbath is written Sabbath, which signifies, hosts, as
in Esaias 1. 9.
Esaias, Unless the Lord of Sabbath had left us a remnant. What hosts brings
in this Treatise? What, the hosts of flies, of which Saint Austine speaks
Sermon. de temp. 95. Consideremus ergo cur and ibi december praecepta, and hic
decemplagae memorentur: ideo sine dubio, quia in illis erant vulnera, in^stis
medicamenta. Attendite tertiam plagam huic tertio praecepts contrariam.
Cyniphesnati sunt in terra Aegyptide lino, muscae minutissimae,
inquiretissimae, inordinate volantes, in oculos irruen^^s, non permittentes
hominem quirescere, dum abiguntur i^erum irruunt, dum expulsae suerint, iterum
redeunt. Quales istae sunt muscae, tol^s sunt homines inquieti, qui Sabba^^m
spiritaliter observares: id est, bonis operibus studere, and lectioni vel
orationi insist^re nol^nt.
? Who comparing the ten Precepts and ten Plagues of Egypt together, as the
diseases and the medicines, does parallel the plague of flies to the
Commandment of the Sabbath, and thus applies it: Such as ^^e (says he) these
Dog-flies, (or Lice, as our Translation reads it, Exodus 8. 16.) such are
unquiet men, which will not spiritually observe the Sabbath, that is, which
will not study good works, nor insist in reading and prayer. Hold ye the
Precept, beware of the Plague. These are hosts under the command of that
Don-Beelzebub The Lord of Flies.
. I would have imputed this to the Printers oversight, if either the Errata had
mentioned it, or the whole Treatise in any one place had given the true
Orthography. Well, but be it so, the Treatise (...) plied to this Discourse,
and therefore how profanely abused to Gods high dishonor appears, by
setting other places to them, and applying them to the matter in hand. Take
them thus:

The first place.
Prove all things, hold fast that which is good. 1 These. 5. 21.

Ill applied to try that reasoning, that blots out one precept of the
Decalogue: Oppose that Text;

Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least Commandments, and shall
teach men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven: but
whosoever shall do and teach them the same, shall be called great in the
Kingdom of Heaven. Matthew. 5. 19.

The second place.
For the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness, and righteousness, and
truth, proving what is acceptable to the Lord. Ephesians. 5. 9, 10.

Ill applied against the work of the Spirit in Christians, and the intent of
the Lord. See those Texts;

I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and
will be their God, and they shall be my people. Ierem. 31. 33. Heb. 8. 11.

The Lord is well-pleased for his righteousness sake, he will magnify the
Law, and make it honorable. Esaias 42. 21.

The third place.
Holy Father, Sanctify them through thy truth: Thy Word is truth. Ioh. 17. 17.

Ill applied against the great things of the Law written by Gods own finger.
Look to that Text;

I have written to him the great things of my Law: but they were counted as a
strange thing. Hos. 8. 12.

Thirdly, now for the matter controverted: this learned Treatise has in it the
occasion, and the substance. We take the last first, that all may the better
judge of every passage only out of the first part, viz. the occasion thereof.
The Case of Conscience questioned must be proposed to clear the words of the
whole Discourse, that the force of the arguments against it in this Treatise
may be seen, and the blunting of their edge if they have any, or the
unsheathing of them, that all may see they are but wooden Daggers, may be
apparent to every understanding. The Author of this Treatise states it thus,
and so opposes it as untruth.

Breerwood. Page 3.
THat for a servant to do light businesses* or any other work on the Sabbath
day, although it were such work as might lawfully be done on another day; and
although he did it not of his own disposition, but only in obedience to his
masters command; yet was a sin and transgression of Gods Commandment
touching the Sabbath, and that he was not bound to yield, nay, that he sinned
against God in yielding obedience to every such commandment of his masters
that day, which by the precept of Almighty God, was wholly precisely
consecrated to rest, and the service of God.

This is the point oppugned by our Adversary, whose reasons shall be delivered
in his own words and confuted: I will neither add nor diminish, but only cut
it into parts, that every part may receive its answer apart. This prefaced, I
proceed.

CHAP. I. Breerwood. Page 4. l. 29.
YOu are a teacher of Gods word, within the compass of that word I will stay
with you; and by it examine, with your patience, whether this frame of your
Doctrine be grounded on the rock, or on the sand, on the firm rock of Gods
Law, or on the fickle sand of your own fantasy misunderstanding the Law, and
so whether it tend to the edification or ruin of the Church. For touching the
commandment of the Sabbath (upon which I aver this Doctrine of yours cannot
be grounded) lay it before you and consider it well, and tell me, to whom is
the charge of servants ceasing from work on the Sabbath day given? Is it to
the servants themselves or to their masters? It is given of servants I
confess, their work is the matter of the Commandment. But I demand, whether
it be given and imposed to the servants themselves, or to the masters whose
servants they are? For if the Commandment be not given to them, then do they
not transgress the Commandments, if by their masters they be set to work,
but the masters to whom the Law was given, that the servant should not work,
and consequently the sin is their masters and not theirs: so if the Law be
not imposed to them, then it requires no obedience of them, it obliges them
not; therefore is neither the transgression of it, any sin to them, but only
to those to whom it was given as a Law.

Answer.
First, the Commandment is given to servants also, the Words are, Thou, nor
thy servant, which referred to the former, Thou shall do no manner of work,
can have no other sense than this; thou shall do no manner of work, that art
the master, nor thy servant shall do no manner of work Father and son, son
and daughter, bond and free, were bound religiously to observe it. Doct.
Slater, in the Ministers portion, page 95.
: the Commandment of ceasing from work not given of him only, but to him
also. For, how know you, that the commandment is given to the master but
because the Lord says, thou (meaning, that have a servant) shall do no manner
of work? And can you be so purblind as not to see, the Commandment is given
as well to the servant, when it is thus delivered in the same form, Thy servant
shall do no manner of work? Nay, consider, you the Publisher (for, as for the
Author he knows already by the issue whether his collection hence were sound
or no, and if he might have the favor the Saints had that aroseat our Saviors
resurrection, Iam persuaded he would judge this Treatise to the fire, and
therefore) you the Publisher I say, and all ye that fear God, and know that a
bored ear is the best Sacrifice, consider, The Commandment is given to the
servant, as a servant, and as thy servant. I will not work, may thou say,
but my servant shall, his work is mine by Covenant. The Lord with whom there
is neither bond nor free, interposeth, and says not, thou shall not command
him to work, but thus, thy servant shall not work. What is this but to say,
as servant and as thine, he shall not work. As if he said, at other times
his work is thine, but now his work is mine: thy covenant shall not infringe
his covenant with his God. As thy servant, he is not thine in thy works or
servile works that day, but the Lords freeman, yet thy servant that day by
thee to be enjoined to the Lords work, Gods servant to be free from thy works.
Thou must observe the Commandment in thine own person, and preserve it in the
persons under thy charge, thy servant must do no manner of thy servile work
that day, but must be thy servant to be ordered for the Lords work. Consider
it well and see, the matter forbidden is the servile cares and labors of the
household, both of masters about servants, and of Servants toward their Masters.

Secondly, and seeing we are afforded by your good leave to consider the
Commandment, let us with your patience (for I cannot but think the heart of
any deceiving or deceived, is not only stumbled but convinced by the former
words) weigh the Words of the precept, from which I thus reason:

First, The servant, eo nomine as a servant, is commanded to remember the day,
therefore as a servant the Commandment is given to him to cease from his
servile work, or the work of a servant. For is he to remember a part and not
all the precept? Or may he earth himself in forgetfulness, and put all on his
masters memory.

Again, the servant as a servant is commanded to keep the day holy. If any
deny this, then God and Caesar cannot have their due, God and callings cannot
stand together, God and societies must subvert each other; and is this your
quiet peaceable doctrine, that ruins all and brings confusion? Yield the
Antecedent and then this conclusion will follow, that he is a a servant
commanded not to work: For rest on the day is enjoined, that holiness may be
followed, and cessation from work forbidden, to whom holiness is commanded,
as the words run, Remember the Sabbath or resting day, to keep it holy.

Besides, That permissive mandate is not only given of, but to the servant,
six days thou shall labor and do all that thou have to do, therefore the
command for the seventh days rest is not only given of, but to the servant:
for the commands of both, respect the same persons.

Likewise this Command, Thou shall not do any work, is given to him that is
contained in the word, Thou: but the servant as thy servant is contained in the
word, thou; and is it not given to him then? For the words following expound
the first Thou, Thou shall not. Who mean you by this Thou? who but thou
master, thy servant; thou father, thy son; thou mother, thy daughter, etc.

Further, the Commandment is given to them to whom the reasons of the Command
reach, but they reach alike to thy servant as to thee; therefore the Command
reaches alike to thy servant as to thee. And if you say, yea, the reasons
reach to all alike to persuade to sanctify, but not to all alike to forbear
work; It is false: for, besides that there can be no sanctification without
cessation from servile works, the reasons do equally and strongly bend to
persuade cessation from work; as the reason from the right of the Lawgiver
appropriating it to himself and his worship, the equity of the Law which
gives six for work, and restraines but for one day, the example of God, and
the special blessing given to the day.

To come to handy-gripes with you: you yield, the servants work is forbidden.
I demand, Is it forbidden; because it hinders the master only from sanctifying
the day, or the servant also? Surely, because it hinders the servant chiefly,
and not the master, or not chiefly: his work crosses the end of the Sabbath
in him, if therefore the command of sanctifying the day be to him as a
servant, the command of ceasing from work is to him as a servant.

Let me again reason with you from the command; if the negative be of the
servant, and not to the servant, then also is the affirmative, which is this,
Thou shall do the works of holiness that day: and from hence will follow
this gross absurdity, that if the servant go not to the assemblies, nor apply
himself to works of holiness, and the master also do not bid him, his
master only sins, and not the servant; because according to your new
learning, the master is charged with the servant for the works of holiness,
and the servants holiness that day is the matter only of the Command: the
master and not the servant is the subject person commanded. This Command, Thou
shall do the works of holiness, is of the servants holy work, but no
precept to the servant. It may be you will flee off here-from, but you are
caught in your own net, as sure as the negative precept has his affirmative
every way proportionable.

Thirdly, and seeing store is no sore, where each apart will make a party good
Quae pros^nt singula multa juvant.
, I add: He that gave the Law, knows best the meaning of his own Law; let
us see from his Word in other Texts the persons that stand expressly charged.
To whom is it given? In Ier. 17. 20. to the Kings of Judah, to all Judah, to
all the Inhabitants of Jerusalem that entered in by those gates was this Command
given of ceasing from work; of bearing no burden on the Sabbath day: Were the
Jewish servants none of Judah, none of Ierusalems inhabitants, none of those
that entered in and went out by Ierusalems gates? To whom is the Command of the
Sabbath rest given? In Exodus 34. 21. to him that serves, these are the words of
the Text, Six days thou shall serve (...)
, but on the seventh day thou shall rest: in eating time and in harvest thou
shall rest. Now who serves so properly as a servant; and is not the original
word the same that notes is that serving, and a servant (...)
, save that one is the Verb, and the other the Noune? And what serving does it
signify? No other than that service of servants, (...)
of household servants, of such as till the ground. There can be no way to
Servitus, ministerium, samulatus, cultura.
exclude the servant at all from the charge of this precept.

Fourthly, besides all this, how is your doctrine built on the words of this
Commandment; the Law says, Thou and thy servant shall do no work; you say,
it only says, Thou shall not command thy servant to work. Again, take your
saying, the Law binds the Master from commanding, and will this follow,
therefore it binds the servant to obey his master, if he should be so wicked as
to command what God prohibits him. This is a plain non-sequitur, and can not
hold together by all the Geometry in the World, nor can any Carpenter make this
join, but such loose reasonings hold best for them that would go in a broad
way. Now weaken these following arguments if you can.

Fifthly, he that is circumcised is bound to keep the whole Law, and none is
bound by your own confession, but he to whom the Law is given: the Jewish
servant then, being circumcised, was bound to keep this Law as given to him.
The circumcised, says the Apostle, is a debtor to do the whole Law Gal. 5. 3.
.

Sixthly, he that wrought on the Sabbath being a stranger, was not fit for
communion and ordinary conversing with the Jews, as appears by the words of
the Commandment, that charged the stranger within the gate to rest that day,
and by the practice of Nehemiah, that drove such from within and without the
City Jerusalem, and by a like instance of leaven at the Feast of the
Passover, and of unleavened bread. For if the stranger that sojourned only,
and was not borne in the Land, did this while eat that which was leavened, he
was to be cut off from the Congregation of Israel Exodus 12. 19. See Junius on
the place.
. Now shall the servant be left to the subjection to that command, that makes
him unfit for communion with the people of God? God forbid. Yet thus would you
provide for servants, and be such a sinner against their souls.

Seventhly, how much better might you have tuned to Lyra's Harp, than to run
a new strain; he says thus Non loquitur de adultis, qui jam sciebant legem
Sabbati, quia prohibiti sunt simul cum parentibus: sed hoc additur propueris
ignorantibus legem, qui non debebant permitti dparentibus aliquid operari in
diem Sabbati. Lyra.
, he speaks not of those of ripe age, which did now know the Law of the
Sabbath, because they are forbidden together with their parents: but this is
added for childrens sake, that knew not the Law, which ought not to be
permitted to do any works on the Sabbath day. This interpretation he had
from Rabbi Solomon. I do not say, it is the truth of the place, but this I
say, you have neither truth nor patron for your abortive opinion.

Let all Christians be warned how they receive every one that pretends
Scripture; all Heretics were such, according to that of Irenaeu^, they were
evil Expositors of things well spoken Pravi expositores probe dictorum.
Iraeneus l. 1. advers. Haeres. in prooem.
: Satan laid his most dangerous assaults against Christ, and would persuade
them by Scripture too. Behold here one professing to stay within the compass
of the Word, and by a futilous distinction of of, and to, erres from the A. B.
C. Such words fiet like a Canker or Gangreene 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18. (...).
.

It shall be your wisdom, not to serve God by distinctions, and to learn
Divinity of your Teachers, and not Divisions of Sophisters.

CHAP. II. Breerwood. Page 5. 6.
FOr the better clearing of which point, let me ask you a question or two of
other Commandments, that for their form are parallel to this, and whereof you
have no prejudice. God commanded the Israelites, that no stranger should eat
of the Paschall Lamb: again, that no Ammonite nor Moabite should enter into
the Congregation of the Lord to the tenth generation. Good Sir tell me, did the
Stranger sin if he eat of the Passover being supposed invited? or did the
Ammonites and Moabites sin if they came into the Congregation being admitted?
Did the Stranger, I say, and the Ammonites and the Moabites in these cases
sin, of whom the Commandments were given, or the Israelites to whom the
Commandments were given touching them: no, but it is clearly the Lords
meaning, that the Israelites should not admit of any Gentile to the
participation of the Passover, nor receive the Ammonites and Moabites into the
Congregation of the Lord.

Answer.
First, I reply, these Commandments are not parallel, and so your ground
fails: these Commandments; I say, this, Thy servant shall do no manner of
work; and this, No stranger shall eat of the Passover. In the first, you
acknowledge the masters work is forbidden to the master, whether done by
himself or by his servant. In the latter, the Passover forbidden to the
stranger, is enjoined to the Jew. The Jew must eat the Passover, the Jew must
not admit the stranger to eat, but the master must not work, and must not
admit his servant to work. The thing prohibited, viz. to do servile work on
the Sabbath, is sinful in it self, but the eating of the Passover (which is
the thing forbidden the stranger) was the special worship of God, his
ordinance and service, required of the Jew. Now this makes a wide difference in
the sense of those precepts that sound alike: for where the thing is evil it
cannot but be evil who ever does it, that is capable of the divine precept, as
the servant is; for he is a reasonable creature, and was a Jew: but where the
thing it self is holy, it becomes evil only to him that prophaneth and
defiles it.

The Jew is made the observer of the Passover, and the preserver of it from
the strangers observation, but here the master and servant are both made
observers of the command of ceasing from work, and the master is to preserve it
to the servants observation.

Besides, where the words run in the same form, the precepts are not
presently parallel, or the prohibitions: for to make them so, the parties
commanded must stand alike capable of the Law, or incapable. We Will not go
far for instance; the words in this precept are every way for form of words
parallel, Thy son shall do no manner of work, the stranger within thy gate
shall do no manner of work; yet the form of the precept is not the same
because the son of the Jew stood otherwise obliged to the Sabbath, as your
self do yield, page 25. than the stranger. And to put it beyond all
exception, these for form of words are parallel, Thy son shall do no work,
Thy cattle shall do no work; yet the precept is not parallel, because the
son is capable of Gods Law to obey it properly^, and the Soli homines capaces
sunt propriae legit. Zuarez. de leg. l. 1. c. 6.
cattle are not. There is a difference between the form of precepts, and the
form of words, in which precepts are signified. The form of the precept must
partly be gathered from the subjects, to which they have reference, and as
they are capable, or less capable of law, so the precepts to be understood:
for the Law in its own nature carries a certain respect and disposition to
them, on whom it is imposed Lex essential^^er quandam habitudinem ad eos dic^^,
quibut imponitur. Zuarez. l. 1. ca. 6. de leg.
. Now for the Law of the Passover, the stranger was not so capable of it, as
being not under the Law; but the servant being a Jew, is alike capable of the
Law of the fourth Commandment as is his Master, because equally under the Law.
What the Law speaks, it speaks to them who are under the Law Romans 3. 19.
, says the Apostle.

Secondly, I affirm, that the strangers, Moabites and Ammonites, did sin in
thus doing, though invited or admitted, they profaned holy things, as
Balthazar did the Bowls of the Temple Dan. 5. ^.
. Now the Jews sinful invitation cannot take away their profanation. It is
all one as if a Pagan living among us, that refused our Religion, and were not
baptized, should yet come and eat of the Bread of the Lord, though some
Minister for some by respect should be supposed to invite him. There were among
the Jews strangers that kept house, and had servants, that yet were no
Proselytes, but only strangers within the gates; these sinned against this
precept, if they would kill the Passover and eat it, although the sewes
should through remissness suffer it. Further, that a stranger may sin
against a precept given of him, is clear by that precept in verse. 48. of chap.
12. of Exodus, Let all his males be circumcised, and then let him keep the
Passover. The commandment is given expressly to the Israelites of the
stranger, and yet if that stranger should out of Zipporah's tenderness hide or
spare a male, and so eat, all the Jews held that he sinned against this
precept given of him Maimony in Korb. Pesach. c. 5. 5. 5.
. It is evident also by the penalty laid on the stranger, with whom leavened
bread was found and eaten on the Feast of unleavened bread, he was to be cut
off from the Congregation of Israel (for punishment is to be inflicted only
upon transgressors) and yet the Commandment of keeping the Feast of unleavened
bread was given to the Jews only in any fonne of words that we find verse. 15,
17.

Thirdly, and for your instances, I have yet further to except against them, as
they are alleged by you.

This precept, No stranger shall eat thereof Exodus 12. 43.
, has been understood to bind the stranger there mentioned, as well as the Jew*
for the Chaldee Paraphrast renders it thus; No son of Israel that is
Apostate, shall eat of it: Now the Apostate Israelite sinned if he ate,
as well as the Jew that invited him to eat, the persons that were unclean
legally at the day of the Passover sinned, if they kept it at that season,
though the Governors took no notice of it, or would permit it. Numb. 9. 6, 7,
10, 11.

And for the Moabite and Ammonite Deuteronomy. 23. 3.
it is clear, that it is spoken of them converted, and made Proselytes, who
stood therefore bound to keep the whole Law, as being circumcised: for the Law
speaks of a temporal punishment to be inflicted on them to the tenth
generation after their conversion; the one hundred generation of them remaining
Heathen had been still far from admission. These then did break this command
of God, as well as the Jews that admitted them, though the command in your
opinion be given but of them, and it is also in part true. And that they did
break this precept, appears also by the example of the burst, and of the
bastard Deuteronomy. 23. 1, 2.
, the commandments are given in the same form, given of them to the
Governors, yet bound them of whom given: For God by his prohibition makes them
incapable of such an honor and privilege, if they should rush upon holy
things when he has interdicted them, their profaneness and contempt were
great. I retort therefore your instances thus: The strangers, Moabites and
Ammonites forbidden these holy things, though the precept were of them chiefly,
and to the Jews principally touching them, did profane them, transgress the
Law, and did proudly rush upon things peculiar, if they meddled therewith:
therefore much more the servant, though the precept be of him chiefly, and to
his master principally concerning him, if he work on the Sabbath, prophanes
it, transgresses the Law, and proudly rusheth upon the privileged and
peculiar time enclosed by the Lord of time himself. It is clearly the Lords
intent, that the master should not suffer, nor charge his servant to work this
day; and as clearly the Lords meaning, that the servant should not do his
masters work that day which is the Lords, and not his masters day.

CHAP. III. Breerwood. Page 6.
LEt me ask you one question more, of a case that has fallen in my
remembrance: A precept comes out from the Prince; That every Citizen in London
shall on such a day keep his servants within doors and not suffer them to go
abroad. If notwithstanding that precept, some master sends forth his servant
about his business, does the servant transgress the Princes commandment by
obeying his masters: Or ought he by pretense of that precept to disobey his
master and neglect his charge? It is plain he does Here the sense carries
that you must read, be does not the former; that is, he does not transgress
the Princes commandment, or else the force of this instance is lost: correct
it thus then, though the Errata have not seen it.
the former, and therefore he ought not to do the latter. For the commandment
was given to his master not to him, and the purpose of it was to restrain his
master from commanding such service, and not to restrain the servant from
obeying his master if it were commanded: there it is apparent that the
obligations of commandments, pertains to them to whom they are prescribed as
rules, and not to them of whom only (as being the matter of the precept) they
are prescribed.

Answer.
First, this agrees not with that in the commandment; for the Lord says not
thus, Thou shall not suffer thy servant to work; but thus, Thy servant shall
not work. If the Princes command were this; Thy servant shall do no work of
thine, that he may attend on me in my house, and on my work without avocations
and disturbance, did not the servant transgress the Princes charge, if he
forsook the Prince, and obeyed his master? or would his masters command excuse
him in doing that which was against the Princes command, or in neglecting the
Princes service? Sure this doctrine of yours would leave Princes persons,
kingdoms, and necessities (...) days thou shall labor, is likewise of
indulgence: for the Jews in keeping the days of Purim-festivals sinned not.
Yea, sometimes that comes under the form of a command in words, which is
only spoken by concession, when yet the thing so granted is not allowed or
approved for good, as when the Apostle says, Be angry, but sin not Ephesians. 4.
26.
. Be angry, is in words of precept, yet spoken only by concession, and yet no
way allows the anger he speaks of: for that he speaks not of a laudable
anger is evident, when it follows, let not the Sun go down upon your
wrath. How needful is it that we understand this thing distinctly, lest we be
deceived with the show of a command? To return then, that learned Scotchman,
Camero, gives us this excellent rule, whereby to know a precept that is of
indulgence, or of Empire and Lawlike charge, as I may say truly; Whatsoever,
says he Sane quicquid Deus prescribit quod non simpliciter benesicii, sed
officii rationem habet, idest d Dei imperio: itaque in distinguendis iis quae
mandatorum forma concipiuntur in Scriptura, id semper ob oculos habendum est,
pertineantur res prescriptae ad officium, an vero ad beneficium and privilegium
simpliciter: quod si occurrat in mandato officii ratio, non est profecto
indulgentia sed imperium. Simpliciter, inquam, nullum enim exigit officium Deus
a creatura quod idem reipsa non sit benesicium, sed benesicium simpliciter
Domino in quo nalla se ostendit ratio officii erga Deum. Joh. Camero ^om. 1.
prelect. ad Mat. cap. 18. verse. 15. page 15.
, God does prescribe which has not the reason and nature of a benefit simply,
but of a duty and office, that is from the Empire of God. And afterward
explaining himself, he adds; I say simply a benefit; for God requires no
duty of his creature which is not in the thing it self a benefit, but that is
simply a benefit in which no nature of a duty toward God does show it self.
Now follow this Rule, and who sees not that this precept, Thy servant shall do
no work on the Sabbath, has in it chiefly the nature of office and duty the
servant owes to God as well as the master, even the observation of the Sabbath
to God, though in a second place here is a matter of fatherly indulgence, God
graciously tendering the servants (as he does also the very brute beast, for
whose ease he mercifully provides that day. Now Master Publisher, if you have
any mind to put questions, you shall have leave, if you please, to ask as many
more.

CHAP. 4. Breerwood. Page 7.
NOw that that clause of the Commandment touching servants was not given to
the sevants themselves, but to their masters, in whose power and disposition
they are, the text and tenor of the commandment does clearly import; for
mark it well and answer me; to whom is this speech directed? Neither thy
son nor thy daughter, shall do any work on the Sabbath day: is it not to
the Parents? For can this manner of speech ( thy son, thy daughter) be
rightly directed to any other than the parent, and is not by the same reason
the clause that next follows, ( neither shall thy man servant nor thy
maidservant do any work on the Sabbath day) directed to the Masters of such
servants? Seeing that phrase of speech ( thy manservant, thy maidservant)
cannot rightly be used to any other? It is therefore as clear as the Sun,
even to mean understandings, (if they will give but mean attendance, to the
tenor of Gods commandments, rather than the fond interpretations and
depravations of men) that that clause of the commandment touching servants
cessation from working on the Sabbath, is not given to servants themselves, but
to their masters concerning them.

Answer.
First, this proof is sufficiently overthrown by all the former arguments,
yet I add: This precept is directed to the parents restraining the use of
their power to interrupt, and injoyning the use of their power to preserve the
sanctification of the day; and to the son and daughter also not to work at
the household work: for, says God Levit. 23. 3.
, The seventh day is the Sabbath of rest, and holy convocation; ye shall do
no work therein; it is the Sabbath of the Lord in all your dwellings. Who are
these charged in the word, ye? Who, but ye that stand bound to come to the
holy convocations; ye that constitute families; therefore ye children as well
as ye parents.

Secondly, and to free all that subscribe to this truth from fear of so much
as any private interpretation, and to cast it (...) be commanded nor entreated
(license would serve their turn) but to the masters whose desire of gain by
the servants labor might stand betwixt the Sabbath and the servants rest: and
to make an end with the Text, with the last words of it: what is it, that the
Lord for these reasons commanded? was it barely to keep and observe the
Sabbath, as it is in the vulgar English, Latin and Greek translations? No
they are all short, it is (...) that is, to make a day of rest. Deuteronomy. 5. 15.
Now to make it to be so, imports not only to observe it himself, but to
cause others also to observe it, which is evidently the property of masters and
governors: wherefore seeing both the commandment touching servants rest from
labor on the Sabbath day, and reasons added by Moses to persuade that point,
(and draw their minds to obsequiousness) are evidently directed to the
Masters, and not (neither of both) to the servants themselves, I take it out of
all question as clear as the Sunshine at midday, that if servants by their
masters command do any work on the Sabbath the sin is not theirs, who as
touching their bodily labor are merely subject to their Masters power, but it
is their masters sin. For their sin it is that transgress the law: they
transgress the law, who are obliged by it: they are obliged by it, to whom it
was given and imposed, and given it was as I have plentifully proved only to
Masters.

Answer.
First, your first way of confirming your exposition was by instance; then you
go on to proofs from texts, whereof the first taken out of the commandment
was taken off in the former Chapter: this is your second proof built on the
text in Deu. 5. And here because you flaunt it out in many words, and in many
of them glance at things as if they made to your purpose, besides the maine of
your argument, I thus reply, first, to your reason drawn from the text:
secondly, to some chief passages in the venting of it.

The substance of the reasoning is this in brief: Moses applies the precept
of servants rest, to the masters that were slaves in Egypt, but now ransomed
and set in the estate of freemen, that they should allow their servants rest,
and make the Sabbath a resting day, therefore the commandment (thou shall not
do any work) is given only to the masters. It is applied to the masters,
therefore given to them, were a right consequence: but therefore to them only,
is fallacious, for more is in the consequent, than was in the Antecedent: and
if you put the word ( only) into the Antecedent, then both the propositions are
false: For in Levit. 19. 3. as above was specified, Moses applies it to
children. And the argument is yet unsolid, for it stands thus, Moses applies
it in his expositions only to masters, therefore it was given only to
masters: for applications are according to several occasions, but not always
extended to the utmost breadth of the precept, and yet in all this Moses
fidelity no way impeached, inasmuch as he faithfully applies where it most
needs as occasion serves (keeping the bounds of truth. These consequents
from this place as you expound it, may be gathered; therefore that reason binds
not servants, or this, therefore the master sins most ungratefully that will
disturb his servants rest: or this, therefore it is given chiefly to the
masters, as those that must not only keep, but make a Sabbath; all which we
yield: but the mind that once is big of a new fancy, makes all that it feeds
upon, nourish that fancy.

Secondly, the truth is, the Lord by Moses pleades in those words, the reason
of the right that he has to command thy servant rest, who is his freeman by
virtue of that redemption; the servant as well as the master called into the
liberty of his holy people, as appears in the Preface to the Decalogue, Exodus
20. and in Exodus 19. 4, 5, 6. bond and free indifferently entertained into the
privilege and honor of the Covenant, and into the band of it: and the reason
the master has both to obey, and yield up his servant for that day to Gods
commanding and appointing, and also to use his authority for God, in seeing
that his servant keep the Sabbath: but in other respects both master and
servant to rejoice alike in the great work of their redemption.

Thirdly, but let us examine more narrowly some of the special passages.

Moses adds in verse. 14. that thy manservant and maidservant may rest as well
as thou; it is to this ( Thou) therefore to whom this charge is directed, etc.]
Which ( thou?) that in those words, thou and thy son. That makes nothing to
the exemption of the servant, as thy servant from the obligation of the first
thou, which is this, thou shall do no manner of work: for thy servant is one
contained under this thou, as well as thou art that art the master. Or if it
be meant of this first thou, that were absonant from the very context. It
being meant of the latter thou, we must ask what you mean when you say, it is
to this thou to whom this charge is directed. Mean you by charge, the charge to
make the servants rest? That you say afterward were needless, they need but
license, and neither command nor entreat. Or mean you the charge to give them
leave to rest? nay, that is against your own reading, the master is to make a
day of rest, and your own interpretation, to make it to be so, imports not
only to observe it himself, but to cause others also to observe it. Or by
charge, mean you the command, Thy servant shall do manner of work; and this
is directed to this thou; namely, the master of the servant? Well, be it so:
And what will follow thence? Why surely this; Thou master must know that God
commands thy servant to rest, and thee to make him keep the Sabbath day: but
not this; Thou art commanded to rest, but thy servant is not commanded to rest,
but may work if thou biddest him, the sin and peril is thine only. What new
Divinity and Logic is this? We see then, here is some motion in, but no
promotion of your cause. Nay, because the command is given that the servant may
rest as well as the master, and that all might be free to attend on Gods
service that day alike; therefore it cannot be that the servant should remain
bound to the commands of the master for servile work on that day. For as
master Calvin well observes, Calvin in quartum praeceptum. Tenendum est,
proprie spectatum fuisse unum Dei cultum? Scimus enim totum Abrahae genus sic
fuisse Deo sacrum, ut serviessent quaedam accessio, unde and circumcisio illis
communis fuit.
We must hold this, that the alone worship of God was properly looked unto: but
we know (says he) the whole offspring of Abraham was so sacred to God, that
this that they were servants was a certain accession, whence also circumcision
was common to them all.

If the commandment of rest had been directly and immediately given to
servants.] Does your own conscience know and force out this acknowledgement,
that it is given to them, though not directly and immediately?

Would not servants overset and wearied with six days toil, be of themselves
glad to rest on the seventh] These interrogations are brought in, to set on the
proof, that the commandment of rest was not given at all to servants: but how
ill they conclude, may be seen by these certain truths. That the servant (if
not religious, which God looks not to find, but by his word to make us such)*
had rather often times work for his master, than be employed in the duties of
sanctification for a part, much more for all the day: for they are more
irksome to flesh and blood, than handy work. True, that question might take
more place, if it were rest alone that were aimed at, and not rest for an
higher end. That the master (if covetous and profane) will not stand upon
pleasing or displeasing God, in requiring such unlawful work, but respect his
gain more than all, and to the utmost call for the servants work that day,
when the servant in the Court of God and man can have no redress; yea out of
irreligious petulancy he will most exact work then. Again, that the toyled
servant will be often ready to work for himself, as in mending his clothes, or
the like; now the master is charged to remember the condition of his slavery,
that he may not dare to overset his s^rvant with work in the six days, but
every way make a Sabbath day.

Has it any other but to declare, etc.] Yes, it declares Gods just title over
their servants to command them that day, and their unequal and wicked
carriage, if they should offer to plead their covenant to evert Gods covenant.

Which reason could not be intended, nor directed to them that still remained
in servitude] No: not at all intended, nor could be. This redemption prooved
them Gods servants, and not theirs, nor any man's to use them as slaves to use
them as servants on the Sabbaths: as we read in Levit. 25. verse. 39, 41 42.
Thou shall not compel him to serve as a bond-servant, he shall return in the
year of Iubile, for they are my servants which I brought out of the Land of
Egypt, And in verse. 53. 55. The stranger (meaning to whom the poor Jew was
sold) shall not rule with rigor over him, he shall go out in the year of
Iubile; for unto me the children of Israel are servants; they are my servants
whom I brought forth out of the Land of Egypt. I am the Lord your God. Here the
servant saw that God put no difference between bond and free, and that the
Sabbath made master and servant equal in respect of freedom for attendance on
God. Cessati^nem indixit, ut fulgeret ubique Sabbathi Sanctitas, at que ita ad
ejus observantiam terrae conspectu magis animarentur filii Israel. Calvin. com.
in 4. praeceptum. in Lev. c. 25.
Those Sabbaths of years had all respect to engrave on them the respect of
this Sabbath. Here no slavery (but liberty for Gods service, which is perfect
freedom,) may pass upon the redeemed: and therefore their servitude did not
make the Redemption void to them. But such an Expositor as you are, would leave
them slaves, because servants, and slaves without intermission, even on the
Lords Sabbath; to drudgerie, and not the Lords servants, when yet they were the
Redeemed of the Lord equally as their masters were. Thus you derogate from the
breadth of the commandment, and the reasons, and clip the wings of Scripture,
while you take that precept to belong only to masters, and the master enjoyed
no further than to make a rest for his servant, when the text says, He shall
make a Sabbath day. And the whole reason applied to the Sabbaths rest for
servants sounds no less than this, Remember when thou wast in Egypt the
Egyptians made thee a slave, and mard the Sabbath day; now I have set thee free
thou shall free thy servant that day, and make the Sabbath day.

Moses reasons are evidently directed to the masters, not to the servants;
therefore the servant working at the masters command sins not.] What
reasoning is this; the master is by arguments pe^swaded to make a day of rest,
and therefore the servant must work if the master bid him: or therefore he is
not commanded to make a holy rest to his servant.

Who as touching bodily labor are merely subject to their masters power.]
This merely in this place must needs exclude Gods power over the servant,
that he may not lawfully command him in any thing that respects the use of
bodily labor, but only his master: which wicked ground laid, it will follow
that the Lord may not command the master to let his servant rest, but only
entreat or persuade, but the Lord speaks pro imperio as a Lord and Emperor,
thy servant shall rest. This merely takes in all time, so that the master may
require their work, and not allow them any time for solemn worship; now it is
certain that no man has power to sell himself to any in such a manner, no
more than he has to sell himself from God and to the devil; for take away
time from solemn worship, and that falls to the ground, nothing can be done
in an instant; take away solemn worship and you are without God, Ier. 10. 25*
and without him, under the power of Satan, Act. 26. 18. This merely in a word
takes away all bounds, and makes the servants bondage and the masters power
infinite. Now Plato says well, Servitus and libertas infinita nullisque
cancellis circumscripta, summum est malum, quod si modo quoda^modo definiatur,
summum bonum. Optimo illa modo constat servitus, quae Deo paret. Plat. tom. 3.
Epist. 8.
Servitude and liberty that is infinite and circumscribed with nolimitte, is
the chiefest evil: but if some way it be defined by measure, it is a chief
good, that servitude stands in the best form, which obeys God. And Doct.
Ames. Ames. de conscientia, lib. 5. c. 23.
worthily in his Cases of Conscience, it is the general office of masters,
neither to exercise nor to imagine it is permitted them, any absolute empire
over their servants; but a limited dominion: the account whereof they must
render to God as the common master of themselves and their servants, Ephesians. 6.
9. Col. 4. 1.

CHAP. VI. Breerwood. Page 11.
OR if notwithstanding all these evidences, you will still contend that the
prohibition touching bodily labor on the Sabbath is directly imposed on the
servants themselves, see whether you bring not the Ox and the Ass and other
cattle also under the obligation of this commandment, whose work is
immediately after that of servants prohibited, and precisely under the same
form of words, whose labors yet on the Sabbath I hope you will not say to be
in them sins and transgressions of Gods law?

Answer.
First, No, we do not; it is imposed on servants, yet not on ox or ass: for
the servant is forbidden labor, because he can labor without thee, and so
he is capable properly of commandment to rest; but the Ox is not forbidden
labor, but to be labored and wrought; for he cannot work without thee, and
is not capable of the commandment. The servant is therefore forbidden labor
even in his masters work, that he might be vacant to holy duties, Otio non
otioso. Zanch. in 4. praecep.
not so the Ox. The servant is forbidden to be wrought by his master, because
now he must acknowledge another master, in whose service he is this day
commanded to work; with whom there is no respect of persons; and this end, the
servants obedience to his masters unlawful commandment of work that day,
would cross; no man can serve two masters. Moreover, does God take care for
Oxen? No doubt it was written for the servants sake, that he might not attend
to guide the Oxes labor, and that mercy due to the Ox might call for more to
man, Zanchy is express, that the commandment was given to the servant, he
says; Neminem vult excludi a sanctificatione Sabbati: quia tam servi, quam
domini: tam silii, quam parents, tam advenae, quam indigenae obstricti Deo
sunt, natique ^d ej^s cultum. De jumentis alia est ratio: non enim jubentur
qui^scere a laboribus, ut possint vacare cultui divino sicut homines. Id. ibid.
God would have no man excluded from the sanctification of the Sabbath, because
as well servants as masters, sons as parents, strangers as home-borne, are
bound to God, and borne to his worship, touching beasts there is another
reason, etc.

Secondly, the Ox is forbidden to be wrought, that they might have no snare
to draw them to work: and may a servant work at his masters command? how
great a snare would this be to the master; who naturally (and such a master as
will require his servant to work on that day, is not far from his pure
naturals) loves profit more than his soul; and fears a penny loss, where he
thinks it might be gained, more than the breach of a precept that God
threatens with the curse and hell? He will be ready not only to say with
Rebecca, Genesis 27. 13.
On me be the curse, my son, only do as Ibid; but in another tone; Sirrah,
the sin and curse is mine; go you about your work, you shall not answer for
my faults; how comes on you this new religion now? therefore I conclude against
you thus, he that forbade the strangers work, and the cattels, that all
examples and occasions might be remooved that might entise to evil, it cannot
be that he would leave son, daughter, man and maid in the family free to
the master, that they should, and must obey him in his unlawful commands.

Thirdly, and to requite you out of the Text. In the same form of words that
the Ox and Ass is prohibited, the stranger within the gate of another, is
also forbidden work, and is it not given to the stranger It is partly
understood of the strangers within the Covenant, those (says Zanchy) without
controversy were commanded so to sanctify the Sabbath even as other Jews.
Zanch. in ^ praecep.
as well as of? yet I hope you will not say it is given to the ox. If you say it
is not given to the stranger; I urge you thus: The stranger is there meant
partly of the stranger, which being a Jew, is with thee for the time as a
guest, Dr. Williams of the Church, l. 2 c. 8.
and can this (that he is a guest) free him from the bond of this Law; or if
the Jew within whose gate he is, should require him to work, is he excused,
because he is within his gate, as you say the servant is? Again, Adiger^
quisque paterfamilias potest and debet suos do nesticos a^ externum cultum: cur
non etiam magistratus suos subditos? Non enim a^t, memento ut sanctifices,
monebis autem* sil^^m, sed memento ut sanctifices and ut alii tui sanctificent.
Zanch. in 4. praeceptum.
the Governor is commanded to compel those within his gate to keep the rest,
and to punish refractory: Will God authorize any to punish those that do not
offend? and those do not offend, you say, to whom the Law is not given: those
do not offend that can no more transgress a command, than the Ox or Ass.
Furthermore, Zanchy says expressly, that though upon the Sabbath, the heathen
which did not agree with the Jews in the true religion, did not come to their
assemblies to be partakers of the sacrifices, and to the performance of other
parts of Gods service, which pertained to the sanctification of the Sabbath;
yet they were commanded to rest upon that day, as well as the homeborne Jews:
Iubebantur feriari eo die, quemadmodum and Iudaei indigenae.
and he gives one reason of this command, which concerns the strangers
themselves, namely, that they might after some sort be trained up in the
knowledge of the Law of God Isti jubebantur non simpliciter quiescere: sed
quiescere ut and ipsi suo modo Sabbatum sanctificare possent. Id. ibid.
.

Fourthly, therefore you must know, that the same form of words make not the
like bond and obligation in a precept; nor the precept the same: For besides
all that I have said before in chap. 2. 3. The end not only differenceth the
precept and proves it a precept, or a privilege, as here the end of the Oxes
rest, as respecting the Ox, is merely rest; but of the servants, chiefly
holiness, which labor servile wholly thwarteth; but also the end gives the
precept its modification: for the end of the prohibition of the servants labor,
being the sanctification of the day, the servant is hereby bound to rest and
apply himself to holiness and the master not only not to work him, or to
admonish him to sanctify the day, but to compel him to the outward worship.

CHAP. VII. Breerwood. Page 11.
But as the labor of the beast is the sin and transgress of the Master, to
whom the commandment of the beasts resting from labor was given, so is the
labor of the servant also, which by the masters commandment he executed on
that day (as being, touching bodily service, incident to mankind in like degree
of subjection) the masters sin, and not the servants.

Answer.
First, here you deliver your Doctrine and your reason. Your Doctrine is this:

The labor of the servant on the Sabbath done at his masters command is no
more the servants sin, than the labor of the Ox is the Oxes sin. This
beastly profane opinion deserves rather stripes than arguments: yet in a word
or two:

The labor of the Ox does not violate the commandment of the Sabbath, but
you acknowledge, the work of the servant does, when in the words of the next
page (page 12.) you say thus of the servants work this day, ( the act indeed,
wherewith the commandment of the Sabbath is violated, is the servants.)

The Law of nature it self requires in general of all men, the sanctification
of times no less than of places, persons, and things unto Gods honor: for
which cause God exacts some parts of times by way of perpetual homage, never
to be dispensed withal, nor remitted. Of this kind among the Jews was the
Sabbath day, the chief and general festival. Now Nature has taught the
Heathen, and God the Jews, and Christ us (says worthy Hooker Eccles. pol. l.
5. sect. 70.
Hooker.) First, that festival solemnities are a part of the public exercise
of Religion; secondly, that praise, liberality and rest are as natural
elements, whereof solemnities consist. The labor of the servant, though
enjoined by his master, on this day violates the rest and so the sanctification
of that time, indispensable, irremissable to any man who owes it by way of
perpetual Homage unto God, by the obligation of the Law of Nature. For
ordinary labor with festival services to God can neither easily concur,
because painfulnesse and joy are opposite, nor decently, because while the mind
has just occasion to make her abode in the house of gladness, the weed of
ordinary toil and travel becomes her not. Thus learned Id. ibid.
Hooker again. Now can the masters command dissolve the eternal Law, and the
servant filching holy time be found less sinful than one profane and
sacrilegious? But what kin between Oxen, Asses, and the everlasting Covenant
and Holy times? Let them to their stalles, and servants as Christ's freemen to
the assemblies in the beauty of holiness, as they will answer it to the God of
Nature, the eternal Lawgiver.

When the servant has no more soul than the ox, nor holiness and attendance
on Gods worship required more of him, than of the ox; nor the Sabbath made for
man, but for the ox, then shall the servants and oxes labor that day be alike
faultlesse in either of them Servants being created, red^emed and sanctified,
are as highly indebted to the worship of God as their masters. Greenham of the
Sabbath, page 163.
. This of your Doctrine, which brings to my mind that of Hagur Prove. 30 2, 3.
, which I wish might be the confession of every one that has been infected
with this dotage: Surely I am more brutish than any man, and have not the
understanding of a man: I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of
the Holy.

Secondly, your reason is this:

That the servant as touching bodily service incident to mankind, is in like
degree of subjection to his master, as is the ox and ass.

This is abhorring to Christian, to natural ears: no slave is so the masters.

It fights with that Rule; Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you,
even so do ye to them Matthew. 7. 12.
, Mat. 7. 12. A perfect voluntary servitude between Christian and Christian
can scarce be lawful to be exercised on the masters part, says Amesius Ames.
de consci. l. 5. cap. 23. parag. 2.
. Yet this places not man in the condition of a beast for subjection.

It fights with that humanity and lenity which masters owe to their servants,
with whom they may not deal imperiously as with their cattle. Ephesians. 6. 9.

It fights with that restraint given to servants to obey their masters in the
Lord, which cannot be applied to beasts.

It fights with that liberty the servant has, in things unmeet and
inexpedient, though lawful, humbly to use all means to prevent and avoid the
commandment of that nature.

It fights with that liberty the servant has humbly to contend with his master
Job 31. 13, 14.
.

It fights with that common honor both master and servant are equally estated
in by creation Verse. 15.
; Did not he that made the master in the womb, make him? And did not one
fashion them in the womb?

It fights with the eternal Law in the fifth Commandment, in which the master
of the servant is required, that he be to his servant in his manners a brother,
in his office a father 2 King 5. 13.
, things incompatible to brute beasts and man. Command. 5. 2 King. 5.

Thirdly, and howsoever the condition of a slave was harder than that of an
ordinary servant, or one hired, yet our question has been all this while of
Jewish servants, and so of Christian servants; now the Jew in service might not
be used as a slave or bond-servant, but as an hired servant, as in Levit. 25.
39, 40.

The Jew that was a servant, was still a brother in Religion, and so to be used
in his service and labor; not so the ox.

Fourthly, for the duty of subjects to their superiors, to clear the whole
matter, these grounds I lay down:

First, subjects are bound to obey their superiors only in those things in
which themselves are subjected to their superiors, and in which the superiors
themselves, are not contrary (...) respect guiltiness has somewhat of good in
it, and is of God: and in this regard God can separate guilt from sin: But
partly it follows sin as that which flows from out of sin, and is the
desert and merit of punishment, and so it participates of the nature of sin,
and is quid vitiosum, a thing vicious: and in this respect it cannot be
separated from sin. This double consideration of guiltiness is intimated in
Romans 1. 32. We know the judgment of God, that they which commit such things,
are worthy of death. This is the nature of guiltiness, but the form of sin
can no way be separated from sin; and yet the sin be sin: that were a
contradiction. The form of sin is in no respect good, that were likewise a
contradiction.

Thirdly, besides this, you say first; there are two things in every sin, the
act and guilt, as the matter and form; yet in the same breath you tell of
three things in every sin, the Act, the Anomy or unlawfulness, and the Guilt.

This for the application of your Schoole-termes.

Fourthly, hence, you say, it appears manifestly, that his is the
guiltiness, whose the transgression is, and his the transgression to whom the
law was prescribed as a Rule, and that is the masters, etc. what coherence is
here? because guiltiness is, in your style, the form of sin, therefore his
is the guiltiness whose is the transgression. Is guiltiness and transgression
all one, and is not transgression the form of sin? This is then in your own
sense, as much as to say, his is the sin, whose is the sin. A fair
conclusion, but no marvel you were thus puzzled here, for your reasoning
should thus have run from your own grounds: The Act wherewith the
commandment of the Sabbath is violated is the servants, therefore the guilt is
the servants; for whosoever violates the Law, he is guilty; and thus not only the
master that commands the work, but the servant that does the work, violating
the command of God, is guilty.

What follows in this section of yours, has been partly answered already,
and follows to be answered below in its more proper place.

CHAP. IX. Breerwood. Page 12, 13.
But you will reply perhaps that the commandment touching servants rest on the
Sabbath, is given to their Masters indeed, but not only to them, but to their
servants also. No such matter; for if it be; let that appear and set down the
clause wherein it is manifestly expressed or necessarily implied, that servants
are forbidden all labor on the Sabbath day, as servants I say touching matter
of service or labor imposed on them by their Masters, for that in those works
which servants do on the Sabbath day of themselves and not as proceeding from
their Masters injunction, but from their own election, it is no question but
they transgress the commandment: but those works they do not as servants,
that is, at another command; but as in the condition of their service or
favor of their Masters they retain some degree of liberty, and have some
disposition of themselves permitted unto them, so in that respect fall into the
clause of free men, viz. the first clause of the commandment, Thou shall do
no work; but to servants as servants (in case they be commanded to work)
which is our question, there is no clause of the commandment imposed.

Answer.
First, this indeed is our just exception against your doctrine, that the
commandment, though given chiefly to masters in those words of specification,
authorizing and appointing them not only to cease their labor by themselves,
or any under them, but to cause them to cease, and to cause them to sanctify
the day for outward conformity; yet is given also to, and imposed on son and
daughter, man and maid: and when you ask for the express or implied precept,
reaching them as servants, you have the same expressly in that clause, thy
servant shall not work; and in that other, Thou shall do no work, as has
been hitherto abundantly and unanswerably prooved, and is of plain light to
manifest it self. Therefore when you call the first clause of the commandment,
thou shall do no work, the clause of freemen; thereby implying, that the
latter is of bondmen, (...) ding the loss of things, according to that in
Deuteronomy. 22. Thou shall bring home thy brothers erring ox; and therefore a
corporal work, pertaining to preserve the health of ones own body, does not
violate the Sabbath; as to eat, and such like, whereby the health of the body
is preserved. So the Jews fought, Macchab. 2. Elias traveled fleeing from
Iezabel; and the Disciples plucked the ears of Corn on the Sabbath, etc.

This Schooleman says, that the bodily works whereby man serves man, of all
other bodily labors are forbidden this day, and to the other the servant as
well as the freeman is bound freely to apply himself. And that these works of
servants do contrary the observance of the Sabbath, and hinder the application
of the man that serves, to divine things.

CHAP. X. Breerwood. Page 13, 14.
WHereby may easily and clearly be discerned the difference betwixt the
equity and wisdom of Almighty God in the constitution of the Law of the
Sabbath, obliging Parents, and Masters and owners, for the children, and
servants and cattle that are merely under their powers; and the rashness and
iniquity of wretched men interpreting the law as immediately and directly
obliging the children and servants themselves: for (good Sir) consider it well,
and tell me, whether it be more equal to impose the law of ceasing from work
to the servants themselves, or to their masters in whose power they are?
Servants are not homines juris sut nor operum suorum domini, as Lawyers speak*
they are but their masters living instruments (...), as Aristotle terms
them, they have no right or power to dispose of themselves, they cannot play
and work at their own pleasure (for this is the condition of freemen, not of
servants) but are merely and entirely for bodily labor and service under the
power and commandment of their masters, and under their power for service
only: in such sort as they can neither justly perform any labor, which their
masters forbid, nor omit any which their Masters command, but are under their
inforcement, and punishment also if they disobey. This I say is the property
and obligation of a servant, and that by the law of nations, which allows,
and ever has done, Masters over their servants (as the law of nature does
Parents over their children) not only a directive, but a corrective and
coactive power: So then I pray you (tell me) whether the commandment touching
the Sabbath was not of common reason, rather to be imposed on them which were
at liberty, and had power to obey it, than on them which were utterly void and
destitute of that power, and liberty? Whether in such a case it were not more
reasonable to enjoyne the masters that they should not command, than injoyne
the servants not to obey? for the poor servants, if their masters command
them, could not choose but work, the law of nations bound them unto it, which
had put them under their masters power, and inforcement: but the masters might
forbear to command, there was no law, that bound them to that, or enjoined
them to exact ought of their servants.

Answer.
First, here begin your reasons; the first whereof is taken from the equity
and wisdom of God: and it stands thus in brief; It was more equity and
wisdom to impose the commandment on masters for their servants and children,
rather than on the children and servants themselves, who are under their
masters power and inforcement. Therefore what? You leave us to gather up the
conclusion, for you may be ashamed indeed of the consequence, which is this;
Therefore it is against Gods wisdom and equity to impose it on servants and
children also: it is more wisdom and equity to do the one, you say, is it
therefore against wisdom and equity to do the other also? If the first be
more equal and wise, the second joined to the first, is of equity and
wisdom, and no rashness nor iniquity, as you lavishly term it. It is given
to masters for their servants, you say, and rightly, is it therefore not
intended to oblige servants also? We grant, it is more equity and wisdom to
impose it chiefly on masters, that they ensnare not the servants, and that they
provide that the worship of God and his religion may be kept a foot in the
family, and all attend on God in the assemblies; insomuch that God will require
of them, and the Church also, those that are under their charge: and not
chiefly on the servants who have no authority over others, but are under the
authority of another: but this hinders not the imposing hereof on the servant
also, who shall answer for his own soul to God, and cannot be excused by the
command of his master.

Secondly, but in your discourse diverse things suffer exception as most
unsound, as; First, that they are merely under their masters power; this
confuted before in Chap. 5.

Secondly, that they are under their power for service only: which is most
false; for in this fourth Commandment they are put under their power directive
and coactive for duties of Religion. And this your position overthrowes the
power of Princes over their subjects in matters of Religion. A wicked doctrine.

Thirdly, that they cannot justly perform any labor their masters forbid.
They may in case the masters life or livelihood be in manifest hazard, by
obeying the masters prohibition, as in Abigails case 1 Samuel 25. 18, 19.
. They may lift their neighbor out of a pit, or save him from some imminent
danger or loss, though the master should forbid it.

Fourthly, that they may not omit any labor which their masters command. They
may omit the labor which will manifestly creeple them, and ought to do it by
virtue of the sixth Commandment, Thou shall not kill. And so that phrase of
yours in page 9. l. 7. (overset with six days toil) if spoken as a thing
lawful on the masters part to overset his servant, is sinful. Again, they
may omit the labor that is against the commandment of an higher power, as
Thomas Aquinas shows in his Sums 22a. q. 104. art. 5.

Fifthly, that servants are utterly void of power and liberty to obey the
commandment of God, in resting on the Sabbath when their master bids them
work.

This is manifestly false: for,

First, if they are not void of liberty to refuse works that will creeple them
on any day, then much less are they not void of liberty to refuse such works
on that day. They are not void of liberty to refuse such uncessant employments
as will not give them leave to take breath, in as much as that will kill them.
Now to work the seventh day too, is to have no time to take breath, as the
phrase is in Exodus 23. 12. That the son of thy handmaid and the stranger may
take breath. And so in the other cases forementioned.

Secondly, they have power to refuse a thing unlawful: but the servants work
that day is a thing unlawful: for it is forbidden, as your self acknowledges.

Thirdly, they are here for this day restored to freedom, by this that the Lord
commands the master not to work them.

Fourthly, they have no power to sell themselves from Gods solemn worship and
service, and such a bargain is void, if it were made, ipso facto, nor did ever
the Law of nations so bind the servant to his master, and make him so to be his
masters.

Fifthly, if the master bid the servant do any thing which is either contrary
to piety, or repugnant to a servants duty, he is not bound to obey Si herus
jubeat servum aliquid facere, quod aut pietati contrarium, aut a servili
officio alienum sit, non tenetur parere; quia dominus non debuit talia
imperare: recte igitur Hieronymus hanc exceptionem apposuit, per omnia;
nimirum, (inquit ille) in quibus dominus carnis, Domino spiritus contraria non
imperat. Davenant in Col. c. 3. v. 2^.
, because the master ought not to command such things. Rightly therefore S.
Hierom annexed this exception to the Apostles ( In all things) to wit (says
he) in which the master according to the flesh, does not command things
contrary to the master of our spirit. Now these commands of the master are of
this nature, and where the master ought not to command, the servant is not
bound to obey; the master here, you confess, ought not to command, then the
servant is not bound to obey; and thus, being a freeman, by your former
doctrine the commandment is in force upon him, and he sins, if he work at
his masters command this day.

Thirdly, and as these grounds are wicked, which you interlace your argument
withal, and therefore do not strengthen, but weaken your reason, so where your
ground is good, your consequence is naught. This is indeed true which you say,
that the master has over his servant a coactive and corrective power. But what
a miserable consequence is this? Masters have a coactive power; therefore there
is no wisdom, justice or equity in the Almighty to give a commandment to a
servant in obeying whereof he is liable to the stripes of a wicked master. Nay,
God requires servants to undergo wrongful buffetings patiently, 1 Pet. 2. 18,
19. and yet he is wise, and just, and equal in so doing.

CHAP. XI. Breerwood. Page 15.
IT was therefore much more agreeable both to the wisdom and justice of
Almighty God to impose the commandment rather on the Masters than on the
servants, for thereby was pr^vented the disobedience of servants to their
masters, and the punishment that might attend on that, and the breach of the
law of nations, (all which the other had occasioned) and yet the masters were
in no sort wronged. for their servants remained in their power, no less on the
Sabbath, than the other six common days, only the Lord did qualify, and
determine the act, or execution of that power, on the Sabbath day, namely to
command their servants cessation from bodily labor, and instead of that to
ex^rcise themselves in spiritual works of holiness; it was I say (to
establish the commandment in such form) more agreeable to the wisdom, and
justice of God.

Answer.
First, in this continuance of your former reason, partly you charge our
doctrine, and partly you clear your own. First, you charge ours as
occasioning servants disobedience to their masters, and servants punishment by
their masters, and the breach of the Law of nations: but yours, as you say,
prevents all this. We affirm, that the giving of the commandment of the
Sabbath to servants as well as to masters, though to masters as those that
should preserve this Law, if those under them would violate it, occasioneth
none of these three evils: First, it occasioneth not any disobedience to
masters; for at the most it gives but power to the servant submissely to
refuse the unlawful command of his master, and not to cast off subjection to
his authority: to the first he is not bound, and therefore is not disobedient
when he obeys not, but on the contrary, if he should yield to do the thing
that is unlawful, he is a man pleaser. And to the second he yields himself in
his submisse refusal, and acknowledges his power to the full, when he gives
up himself that day to be commanded by him in things pertaining to the
worship of God, in which thing alone God has allowed the master the acting or
execution of his power over his servant for that day. The reason hereof your
self suggests, when you say, the servant remains in his masters power no
less this day, than any other, but to other and better ends, unto which ends,
viz. respecting the worship of God, you confess the masters power, for the
time, is determined in respect of the execution thereof. And who sees not
then, that if the execution of their power be bounded, the servant is not to
fulfill the boundless and unlawful puttings forth of that power; here it is
enough to be a patient merely, and by no means an agent. So then the servant
remains no less in the masters power, but to higher ends, but more free to
Gods service, while the master may not call him off by unjust exactions. And so
far is this from occasioning any disobedience, that it occasioneth, and
properly effects in the servants heart a conscionable, and produces in his
life an entire and singlehearted obedience to his master as to the Lord.
Inasmuch as they are hereby brought to the house of God where they learn all
duty to God and man, though their master should be wicked, and so return to
their masters fruitful, faithful and conscionable serving them, not with
eye-service, but with all uprightness, to which the fear of God will bind
them. But the unfaithful to God will be unfaithful to man. Oh the wisdom of
God that provides for particular men and societies by this his Law, better than
they could or would for themselves. Secondly, this occasioneth not any
punishment wilfully incurred, if then it come, it may patiently, yea, joyfully
be borne; for this is thanke-worthy with God 1 Pet. 2. 18. 19.
. But we see by experience, that as religious observing the duties of the
Sabbath makes one faithful in his Calling all the week; and as fideli^ie is
in it self amiable, and to the master profitable, so many evil and covetous
masters will willingly choose such servants, and give them willingly that
liberty on the Sabbath, which themselves care not for, nor fear sinfully to
forgo. Moreover, if any master should bestow blows on his servant for going
to Church, when his master on the Sabbath commands him to the works of his
calling; this very precept requires the Magistrate to relieve the servant
against the injury of a wicked master, when it gives the Magistrate charge to
see the Sabbath kept by all within his gate, and the supreme Magistrate to
punish the inferior Magistrates neglects, or injust impositions, as we see in
Nehemiah, who contended with the Nobles for profaning the Sabbath by unjust
impositions of work upon inferiors. And so you see also the justice and
equity of God in providing for the servant both in soul and body.

Thirdly, for the Law of Nations, if you take it stricktly and properly, it is
simply and universally a positive Law, as says John de Salas Ius gentium est
simpliciter and universe jus positivu^. Ioh. de Salas tract. de. leg. q. 91.
disp. 2. sect. 3.
, and is thus described by Zuarez, it is the common Law of all Nations, not by
instinct of nature alone, but constituted and ordained by their use Et jus
common omnium gentium non instinctu solius naturae sed usu earum constitu^um.
Zuarez de leg. l. 2. c. 19.
. It is that which al Nations wel-ordered, do use: for use requiring, and
humane necessities, Nations of men have ordained to themselves certain Rites
or Laws. Of this sort of Laws these examples are reckoned up by Isidore Ius
Gentium est sedium occupatio, aedificatio, munitio, bella, captivitates,
servitutes, postliminia, foedera pacis, induciae, legatorum non violandorum
religio, co^nubia inter alienigenas probibita. Isid. Orig. l. 5. c. 6.
, first, possessions, or the taking up of our abodes; secondly, building;
thirdly, munition; fourthly, wars; fifthly, captivity; sixthly, servitude;
seventhly, recovery of possessions lost, or alienated unlawfully; eighthly,
covenants of peace; ninthly, truces; tenthly, the care not to violate
ambassadors; eleventhly, marriages forbidden with them of another Nation. Now
that the imposing of this commandment of the Sabbath on servants also should
occasion the breach of the Law of Nations is a mere pretense: for the Law of
Nations could never charge servants with such a subjection as should cross and
cast out the worship of God, so that the servant should be so obliged to his
master, that of conscience and necessity the servant of a wicked master must
be left in a condition, wherein he should never have power to frequent the
solemn worship of God, as will of necessity follow, if he be always,
absolutely, as you teach, his masters. Show me whether ever the Nations
generally, nay, ever any one Nation well ordered, gave such a Law? If no such
Law ordained, it is no way of the Law of Nations: if not ordained, it is much
more absonant from Natures instinct. I say, such a thing could never possibly
be found among the Nations of men, it is so abhorring to Nature: but if men
could so far and so universally degenerate, yet this without all controversy
determines this case: Ius Gentium quum sit positivum, non potest derogare juri
naturae. Ioh. de Salas tract. de leg. q. 91. disp. 2. sect. 5.
the Law of Nations being a positive Law and humane, though brought in by the
custom of Nations, cannot, nor must derogate from a Law of Nature. Now the Law
of Nature binds all men, even servants as servants to serve God solemnly on
the times he shall call for their homage from them indispensably, as on this
day he does, and to this end to be vacant and free from bodily labors that are
servile for that time. The Decalogue is the Law of Nature, it charge servants
in the fourth and fifth Commandments; the duties there required servants stand
bound unto, and to them first as the rules of the Law of Nature, to other
duties after, under, and in reference to them, if any such be agreed upon, and
constituted by the Nations: but if Nations should constitute any thing against
any duty in the ten Commandments, it is not a Law: for that is no Law which is
not just Ius non est, quod non est justum and rectum* non lex sed faex: non
lex, sed labes: non lex sed lis.
and right; it is perverseness, no Law: it is not Law, but lees, but strife,
but a destroyer, but error, but tyranny, any thing rather than Law, as all the
learned conclude. If you, or any can show such a Law, or rather lees of
Nations, blessed be God in his wisdom, justice and equity for ever, who by
his eternal Law freeth poor servants from such tyrannous exact* on.

Secondly, as our doctrine is wine that comes of the pure grape, so yours is
the poison of Dragons pressed from the vine of Sodom: for I affirm, that it
produces all the former evils: For this, That the servant is left, even the
Sabbath day also merely in his masters power to be obedient to his commands
for servile works; first, it would occasion rebellion in the servant through
bitterness of soul arising from an unsupportable burden; secondly, and so
from thence just punishment on the servant, if the masters strength can reach
them to inflict it, or from superior Magistrates; and thirdly, evert the Law
of Nations, by striking at the life of Religion and Societies in the first and
fundamental society, viz. a family; and in one of the most necessary props of
that society, viz. master and servant. From this likewise it will follow, that
God shall be neglected by the servant, through neglect of holiness, and that
the servant of an unjust master shall no way be provided for, in respect of his
refreshing, no not so well as the ox or ass: for God will be the avenger of
that injustice, his poor creature being mercilesly used, but for this, God,
you say, provides, that the servant must of conscience obey, and so Gods
justice, wisdom, goodness, and the ends of giving the commandment in regard
of the servant shall be impeached, and wholly frustrate.

Thirdly and lastly, you overthrow your own Tenet: for if the execution of
that power be bounded for that day, as you rightly teach, how is the servant to
obey the unjust usage of their power? For if he have no power to command, the
servant may refuse to obey, and must, both because in this respect the servant
is made a freeman, and so under the obligation of Gods command by your own
confession; and Quisque ex tharitate propria tenetur non amittere libertatem
sine gravi causa. Ioh. de Sal. tract. de leg. q. 91. disp. 2. Sect. 5.
because every one of charity to himself is bound not to lose his liberty,
without some weighty cause, but to enjoy and use it rather where he may be free
1 Cor. 7. 21.
; and because the power the master in this case takes, he usurpeth, nor is it
of God, but is turned directly against him. I say, therefore if the masters
power be determined, the servant is freed; but if he have power, how is it
notwithstanding herein determined? Again, if the master must not only
discharge the servant of work, but in stead thereof charge him to the
exercises of holiness; the servant must needs in obeying his masters sinful
command of working, flee off from his charge and power, to charge him at that
time of his so laboring, in the duties of holiness, seeing no man can do two
things (chiefly of this nature) at once.

CHAP. 12. Breerwood. Page 15, 16, 17.
ANd was it not also to his goodness, and compassion? For say that the
commandment touching servants vacation was given to themselves, not to their
Masters, should not thereby poor servants (to whom every where else the law of
God appears mild and pitiful) be entangled with inextricable perplexity?
For suppose his master injoyne him some work on the Sabbath day (covetous
masters may soon do it) especially if they think that precept touching their
servants cessation, not to touch them) or else they may be ignorant of the law
of God, (as Christians and Jews may happily serve Pagans) Admit I say some
Master commands his servant to work on the Sabbath, what should the servant
do, should he work? God has forbidden him; should he not work? His master
has commanded him: for the law of God is set at strife with the law of
nations, and that poor servant like the Sailor between Sylla and Charybdit,
stands perplexed and afflicted in the midst between stripes and sin: for
he must of necessity either disobey Gods commandment, which is sin; or his
Masters, which is attended with stripes. Besides it is absurd that the law of
God, should restrain the servant from obeying his Master, and yet not
restrain the Master from commanding his servant unlawful things: As it is
also another absurdity that that day which by the law given was manifestly
intended to bring servants release, and remission of their weekly toil;
should by the decree of the law it self above all other days breed their
greatest perplexities: forasmuch as above all other days (if their Masters be
not men that fear God) enforced they are (there is no avoidance) to venture
either on sin or stripes, for either God must be disobeyed, and sin
cleaves to their souls, or their Masters; and stripes light upon their
bodies, either they must obey God, and be plagued by men; or obey men, and be
condemned by God: you will say, it is better to obey God than men; and worse to
disobey him that can cast both body and soul into hell, than him that can only
for a time afflict the body: true, who doubts it? But that is not the point I
stand upon; the point is how it agrees with the tender goodness, and
compassion of Almighty God toward poor servants (whose condition is yet
honest and lawful) to plunge them into such perplexities, as namely to impose
on them a commandment, which they can neither keep nor break without a
mischief and inconvenience; neither keep as the servants of men, nor break
as they are the servants of God: neither keep without sharp punishment; nor
break without heavy sin: all which intanglement of servants, and
calumniation against both the justice and mercy of God, is clearly avoided, if
the commandment be given (as the tenor of it does simply import) to the
Masters, and not to the servants; which I have sufficiently proved, both by the
evidence of holy scripture, so to have been, and by evidence and inforcement
of reason, that it should be so.

Answer.
First, here I have to say against both the manner and the maine of your
arguing: For the manner; first, you play the Sophister egregiously, the
question is, whether it be given only to masters, and not to servants? And you
take the rise of your reasoning from hence, that the commandment (according to
our opinion) is given to servants only, and not to masters; and therefore you
talk (that you might put a gloss upon your reasoning, and make the contrary
appear the more foul, of the commandment of the servants cessation, not
touching the master. The commandment given to themselves, not to their
masters? This is mere cavilling: for who ever thought or dreamt, save your
self, much less held, that the commandment was not given to their masters,
though it were given to the servants also. Again, you seem to promise the
servant liberty, but indeed make him the bond-slave to his masters unlawful
commands: and while you would free him from blows of an injurious master, you
free him (if it may be called freedom) from the service of God, which is
perfect freedom.

Secondly, for the maine of your reason, it is thus: to give the commandment
to servants also, is against the goodness of God; for it casts the servant
upon stripes or sin: I answer: Does the commandment cast any upon sin? If
it any way provoke, or revive sin, it is by accident, because a spiritual,
just, and good Law meets with a carnal heart, sold under sin Romans 7. 11, 12.
. Sin takes occasion by the commandment the commandment does not cause
sin. Had you had Paul's spirit, you would have justified the Law, and laid
load upon the flesh and corrupt nature as out of measure sinful, and have
advised all youth to cleanse their ways by taking heed thereto according to
Gods word Psalm. 119. 9.
: and not go about to fill green heads with crotchets. Yea, but if they sin
not, but obey, stripes attend them, and this is against the mercy of God.
Indeed? Is this your stumbling block? It is then against his goodness that
Hagar Genesis 16. 6, 9.
should return to her Mistress and submit her self. It is against his pity,
that the Apostle from Gods spirit should require servants to suffer buffetings
that come undeserved, 1 Pet. 2. 19. It is against goodness to be happy; for
blessed are ye (says Christ) when ye suffer despightfull usage for
righteousness sake Mat. 5. 11, 12.
. It is against goodness, that any man should be, or do good, inasmuch as
some wicked men will persecute a man for that good. Why should the pitiful God
require that which will cast us on the wheel, greediron, rack, fire and
faggot, and what not that is of torment and torture? Oh divelish, earthly and
sensual reasoning. This is far from our Saviors Doctrine and Spirit, the
King of Sion, meek and having salvation, who bids us Luke 14. 26, 27,
take up our cross daily, and hate father and mother, and our own lives, as
ever we mean to be worthy of him, and find life to life eternal. Such
sufferings are to Gods glory, and to our glory. Our Savior premeditating of
his sufferings, said, Father, glorify thy Name; that is, says Chrysostom
(...). Chrysostom. in Ioh. 12. 28.
, Lead me now to the Cross: the Cross he calls, glory, says Ammonius
(...). Ammonius.
. Glorify thy son; that is, do not forbid him now hastening to death,
assent to thy son herein for the profit of all, says Cyrill (...). Cyril. in
Ioh.
. We have an excellent Chapter in Lactantius his Institutions answering this
se^suall argument upon another occasion, for the poverty and afflictions and
unjust persecutions of the Church, and the prosperity of Idolaters and Heathen
might seem to prove the worship of God to be vain, and the Rites of gods or
idols to be true, because their worshippers enjoyed (...) brought. Therefore
that Star in the firmament of your reasoning ( whose condition is yet honest
and lawful) shoots and falls.

Yea, but you say, the point you stand on, is not, how much better it is to
obey God than man, but how the command, requiring obedience in a thing that
will cast us into the hands of wicked men, can stand with the goodness of God.
This is the point that all this while I have handled: read and see how.

Fourthly, and for a recompense, when you talk so freely of mischiefs and
inconveniences, free your Doctrine of them if you can. For if the servant must
obey his masters unlawful commands of work on that day, I say, he cannot do
it, but he falls into mischief; for he is sold from Gods service and the
Covenant of God, ( Esaias 56. 6.
Every one that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it, takes hold of Gods
Covenant) if a master be wicked; and into inconvenience, for he has no
breathing time: he cannot leave it undone, but he falls into stripes and
sin at once, without any support from God or man.

Therefore your Conclusion, that all is avoided by this your dream is most
untrue, neither Scripture nor reason favors your opinion, and in this you
suffer the just reproof of 2 Pet. 2. 12. Jude 8.
Peter and Jude, you are one of the filthy dreamers. Lactantius says of Plato,
that because he talked much of one God that made the world, but nothing of
Religion and his worship, that he dreamed, and knew not God Somniaverat enim
Deum non cognoverat. Lact. Instit. l. 5. c. 15.
. How much more do you dream and know not God that talk of him to evert his
worship?

CHAP. XIII. Breerwood. Page 17, 18, 19.
ANd does not the practice of holy governors registered in the Scriptures,
declare, that they had the same understanding of the commandment? Nehemiah,
when he saw among the Jews at Jerusalem the Sabbath profaned with treading of
wine-presses, carrying of burdens, buying and selling, whom reproves he for
it? The servants by whose employment and labor these things were done, and the
Sabbath defiled? No, but them under whose power the servants were, the rulers
of Judah; and what rulers? the Magistrates only? No such matter; but the
freemen of Judah, that is to say, the Masters of those Servants: for such
(namely freemen) the word (...) there used does properly import, not only the
Magistrates or Rulers of the commonwealth, for the Septuagint which (being
themselves Jews) I hold, best knew the property of their own language;
translate (...) by the greek word* (...), which word is properly and directly
opposed to servants: and every where almost in the old Testament where the
hebrew word (...) is found (which is known, to signify a freeman) and is
translated in the greek (...), it is in the Chaldee (...) which is manifestly
known to be the same with the hebrew (...), but far more usual in the
Chaldee tongue. They were the freemen of Judah then, that by Nehemiah were
called to account, and reprooved for the profanation of the Sabbath by those
servilo labors which (no question) had been executed by their servants; but
if the servants by those labors, had themselves transgressed the commandment:
had he not done hoth justly, to have made them partakers of the reproof, who
had been partakers of the sin, (seeing the commandment of God lay equal on
both) and wisely too; that if he could not restrain the masters from
commanding, yet he might restrain the servants from obeying, and so have two
strings to his bow? This Nehemiah did not (who understood well the
commandment) but rebuked the freemen, or Masters only, and omitted the
servants; and yet, dealt (you will not deny I am sure) both justly and wisely:
for had he done more wisely think you to rebuke servants for not resting on
the Sabbath, that would have rested with all their hearts, if they had not been
constrained to work? Or had he done more justly to exact that of the
servants, which (for ought that appears) the commandment of God exacted not
from them? (...) 10. 14. (...), rendered thus by our Translators; Blessed art
thou, O Land, when thy King is the son of Nobles: which in truth cannot be
understood of freemen, but of men nobly descended and educated. All things
considered, I question much, whether in the old Testament there be any thing to
force us to understand it at all of freemen, as opposed to servants. But if it
were so that the word had such a signification, yet seeing it is neither the
only, nor the proper signification of the word, it must of necessity in that
place of Nehemiah not be taken in your large sense, but in that true and
restrained sense, for chief Rulers and Princes, that had authority over
householders and others that kept servants.

CHAP. XIV. Breerwood. Page 18, 19.
FOr what work is it that men are forbidden of the Sabbath? Is it not the same
that is permitted on the six days, their own work Thou shall do all thy
work (...), and is it the servants work whereabout as a servant he is
employed, that neither is undertaken of himself, nor for himself? that
neither begins nor ends in himself, but begins in his Masters command,
and ends merely in his Masters profit; and from beginning to end is
performed in his masters fear? It is manifest that in the account of God, it
is not; for God beholds the heart, and that is a man's own work with him,
that proceeds from his own will. And therefore in Isaiah: it is the will
Isai. 58. 13.
that is forbidden, about the profaning of the Sabbath, that which in the law
was (...) thy work is there (...) thy will and that most justly, for the will
it self indeed is the proper seat and subject of sin, which essentially is
nothing else, but the inordinate, or unruly election, or resolution of the will
varying from the Scripture, or Gods law (for this very election of man's will,
is the proper form of actual sin) those outward unlawful actions of ours,
are but the expressions or manifestations or fruits or effects of sin, sin
properly they are not which has her residence, and inhesion in the soul it
self, and passes forth of it only the tincture and evidence and name of sin
they carry with them, because they issue from a sinful determination of the
will, and are no whit further sinful then they are voluntary. Seeing therefore
sin consists especially in the exorbitance of the will, they that are only
ministers of another exorbitant will, are only ministers of another man's
sin, which so far only becomes their own sin, as their own will
concurreth thereunto. The servant therefore doing that work on the Sabbath day
in obedience to his master, which of his own will and election he would not
do, although the work whereby the commandment of God is transgressed, be in
some sort his, yet the transgression is none of his, but his masters, that
exacted the work, so that although the work as naturally considered be the
servants, yet morally it is the Masters; The labor of it is the servants, but
the sin of it is the Masters: for the sin is not the servants obedience to
the Masters commandment, but in the masters disobedience to Gods commandment,
which has indeed prohibited the work of servants in the Sabbath, but yet the
prohibition is imposed, and directed to their Masters not to them, who are
only ministers, not authors of their own labors; now in the imputation of
sin, difference is to be made betwixt the authors and the ministers Betwixt
the principal, and isntrumental agents.

Answer.
Let the reader remember, that you here yield, that if the commandment be
imposed on servants, then they sin in working this day at their masters
command. Now this hitherto has been proved, and all plainly answered that may
seem to make against it: and so I proceed.

First, the work forbidden is; First, service, which is permitted on the six
days; Six days shall thou serve. Secondly, servile work, in which, and about
which the messenger is employed; so the notation of the word in the
commandment which you cite does properly signify. Thirdly, all thy work: as
opposed to works of sanctification, that is, of piety and mercy properly,
though they be not servile work properly so called, or mechanical, as the
study and exercise of the Liberal Arts; for these concern natural and civil
things, and look not immediately to the worship of God, nor the unavoidable
necessities of man. It is apparent then, that servile works, or works of
ministry about our callings, and so servants work, is in a special manner
prohibited. Now then take your own argument. The work permitted on the six
days, is prohibited the seventh; the (...) in sense with the middle word, with
which it is the self same in sound. If the first, then it is opposed to all
that duty of the Sabbath which consists in the immediate honor of God, done
with the full complacency of heart therein, and the honorable mention of it in
our words and discourse, as is clear in the Text to him that duly weighs it.
Now say, Is not the servants contained in this word ( thy pleasure) as that
which is no duty of Gods worship, public or private? If the second, then it is
not all that is forbidden (and so your argument falls; but rather concerns (as
many learned and conscionable Divines deliver our works of recreation, or
sports which we find out, though at other times lawful, which take off the
heart from holy duties; for God has found us another recreation; chiefly on
that day, if any will be merry, let him sing Psalms (as in Ps. 92. The Title
compared with the Psalm) and would have the Sabbaths duties our delight.

Fourthly, Now whereas you lay this for a ground, that the election of man's
will is the proper form of actual sin, I wonder how you should so mistake,
but that Divinity was not your covenanted Wife, but only your Concubine, which
for a turn you use, and in the use you ravish. Ataxy or irregularity is the
proper form of sin actual, be the Ataxy in thoughts, in desires, in deeds,
or in words. Moreover, election of the will is an act, and good, and therefore
by no means the form of sin: and if you say, you speak not of election,
but this election, namely, the unruly and inordinate election; tell me, is the
election or the unrulinesse the form of sin; unrulinesse doubtless, which
informs both the election that is sinful, and the action that is sinful.
And whereas you say, that outward unlawful actions are but expressions of
sin, and not sin properly; if they be unlawful actions, they be
sinful actions properly so called, for you yielded before, according to the
truth of Scripture, and reason (page 12.) that sin formally is nothing else
but unlawfulness: unless you will say, that sin formally is not sin
properly: A proper position.

For your reason whereby you would maintain this (that sin has her
residence and inhesion in the soul it self, and passes forth of it, the
actions outward carry only the tincture of sin, therefore they are not
sin) I reply: If they carry the tincture of sin, then are they sinful.
Again, are they died with sin, and yet has sin no inhesion nor residence
in them. This is strange: and for the residence of sin, it is not in the
soul alone: Peccat um est in ^bjecto occasion ^liter, in intellectu
originaliter, in voluntate formaliter, in membris quoad usum.
Saint Paul says, the law of sin is in our members, Romans 7. 23. and we know
sin comes by propagation, but the soul is not propagated, only the body
comes, and is traduced from the parents, I would know where, in this
propagation, sin has its inhesion, and whether an unfitness, and
perverseness fighting with the rightnesse and aptness God approves, be not
traduced, and do not naturally stick in the very bodily faculties?

And when you say sin only consists in the exorbitancy of the will, it is
most false; sounder philosophy refelleth this, for Aristotle Arist. lib. 3.
Ethic. c. 1.
excuses not from a fault, the things that are offended in, or done amiss
against ones will through ignorance: and Divinity teaches, that errors in
judgment and ignorances Ignorantia exc^sat, non a toto sed a tanto.
(when it is of things which of duty we should know) are sins, that the
want of original righteousness, and the defects of graces are sin. And
Thomas d says, that so is every habit, and Act deprived of due order. The
habit also of sin is first in the understanding, because all sin comes
from error which is in the understanding; consider it also in its absolute act
without working with the will, so sin is firstin it. Upon such rotten props,
what building can be reared? Yet let us take notice of your reasoning for
further satisfaction to all, and the utter subversion of this new learning. It
stands thus.

The minister of another man's sin, being but the minister of another
exorbitant will, no further sins, than his own will concurreth thereunto.

The servant doing his masters work on the Sabbath, not of election, but in
obedience to his master, is but the minister of another exorbitant will, and
his own will no way concurreth therewith; therefore, so doing he sins not.
(...) instrument in the works of his Master and conferreth also will: I
answer; he conferreth will indeed if he be a good servant, by reason of the
obligation of obedience wherein he stands to his master, but yet not absolute
but conditional will: not the self election, but only the obedience an
yielding of his will; and th(...) only as it is his masters work: not as it
is his masters sin; for the work on the Sabbath, having sin annexed to it,
and so being a sinful work, the servant and the mastster must divide it
betwixt them: the work is the servants, and the sin is the masters, for the
servant does but his duty, in obeying his masters commandemet, but the master
transgresses his, in disobeying Gods commandment, touching his servants
ceasing from that labor.

Answer.
First, why should we fear to say, the eye beholding vanity sins, and so
of the tongue loose to blaspheme, slander, and lie? For, first, they move
irregularly; secondly, they are the weapons of sin; thirdly, in them sin is
finished, to the bringing forth of death both on body and soul; fourthly,
these are the sins of both body and soul, and not of either apart; fifthly,
the sin is made greater by the outward acting, in respect of the extent
thereof, it having now invaded the body, and not only possessed the soul: so
that there is filthiness of flesh, as well as of the spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. and
in respect of the damage it brings to others, either by way of scandal and
offense, or by some real discommodity, as slaughter, defamation, with the
like: sixthly* and hence it is, that certain punishments are rightly inflicted
for the outward acting of some sin, which never could have place for the
inward sin alone, as divorce is rightly inflicted for the act of adultery,
that cannot be so for the intent of it. And thus the Scripture charge the
members of the body, eyes full of adultery 2 Pet* 2. 14.
, the tongue is a world of wickedness Iam. 3. 6.
, Rivers of water run down mine eyes because they (that is, mine eyes) keep
not thy Law Psa. 119. 136.
. Your hands are full of blood Esaias 1. ^5.
. I doubt not but the Scripture speaks more exactly than you. You would be
thought to speak properly when you say, These works are the sins of the
dissolute mind: but neither Philosophy nor Divinity will admit it: for we may
not say, The will sins, the body sins: but thus, The man sins. For
actions are spoken, and are the acts of the subject persons Actiones sunt
suppositorum.
: it is not a proper speech to say, The body sleeps, but, The man sleeps:
The soul understands, but, The man. And the Scripture phrase inclines more
to this, The eye sins; than this, the will sins. For that saying, The
soul that sins shall die, Ezekiel. 18. is meant thus, the person or man that
sins; as in that phrase, so many souls went down into Egypt, Genes. 46.
26. Now from this it follows* that not only in lying the tongue is abused,
as the senseless creature is abused by a sinner, but (inasmuch as the body and
soul are but one man, and make one person whose are the a^^ious and works good
or bad) the body and members thereof have their share in the very sin, in the
irregularity, filth, and guilt of it, and so shall find it by the punishment
hereafter, and do fine it by the punishment that seazeth on the body here: and
though the members be instruments of the soul, yet not such as can be
separated from the man; for the body and soul are essential parts of man.

Secondly, and for objecting, first, I would retort upon you your own
argument: if the natural instrument, that in your opinion sins not, (as the
tongue lying, lies not, a sottish speech) yet it is charged with sin in the
Scripture, it is punished for sin here, and hereafter, and is polluted with
sin: then how much more is the voluntary instrument charged, polluted, and
shall be punished, that cannot work in evil, but must needs bring will to the
work, and election too in some sort.

Thirdly, for your objection and solution: the objection is this, The servant
is a voluntary instrument, not so the eye, or hand in the body; therefore from
the hand to the servant will not hold. You solve and salve it thus; The servant
conferreth will, but thus and thus; as a conditional will, a will obeying, not
selfe-electing, a will to the work, not to the sin; therefore a natural
instrument and such a voluntary are all one. This can never be made good; for
by your own confession, such an instrument is in part voluntary, and so is not
the natural instrument.

Besides the maine of your answer lies in this, that to obey the master in his
work, and not in his sin, is lawful; you yield then that if it be a sin;
no conditional or halfe-election will serve to free him, that so chooses it,
from being a sinner. I urge not only the masters commanding of work that day
is sin, but the work of the master that day is forbidden to be done, and so
is sin. There the conditional, half, or under will, the obeying will of the
servant (if he work) will not excuse him from sin. For nothing takes away
voluntarinesse from a deed, but absolute violence of compulsion, and a mere
casualty that could not be foreseen or foreheeded. As if one be compelled to
bend the knee (by force his knee bowed by others) before an Idol; or if one
kill another by mere chance, Deuteronomy. 19. 5, 6, 10.

Fourthly, for that speech where you say, The work on the Sabbath has sin
annexed to it, it is not right; for the work on the Sabbath is sin, that
circumstance of time, on the Sabbath, is the form of it. And this indeed must
be divided between the master and the servant, as both their sins; the
masters in commanding, the servants in working. But to divide sin from
servile work on the Sabbath that they should not meet in the same person,
neither master, nor servant, nor all the oxen in the Gate are able with
Cart-ropes to do. I pray you note; the work (say you) is the servants, the
sin is the masters. Why, the work is the sin, and is it not the servants
then?

CHAP. XVI. Breerwood. Page 21, to 28.
But seeing I have begun to object I will proceed a little farther in that
course, both the more evidently to declare my meaning, lest it be obnoxious to
calumniation, and also to resolve the objections that may be produced against
servants obedience touching work on the Sabbath, if my imagination be so good
as to find them, and my learning also to satisfy them. labor, but not the
works of sin: for to the first they are obliged by the law of nations, but
the second are forbidden them by the Law of God, not nakedly forbidden as their
labor on the Sabbath is but directly and immediately forbidden them, for it i^
clear that all the other commandments, being indifferently imposed without
either specification or exception of any person whatsoever, respect not any
more one than another: and therefore hold all men under an equal obligation;
and so was it altogether convenient, because they are no less the secret laws
of nature, than the revealed Laws of God, and no less written with the finger
of God in the fleshly tables of the heart, than in the tables of stone, all of
them forbidding those things that by their property and nature, or (as the
Schoolmen say) exsuogenere, are evil; but the commandment that forbids
servile works on the Sabbath is of a different sort; first because the servant
is, touching the matter which it forbids ( labor) wholly subject to another
man's command: secondly, because the commandment forbids not the servant to
work, but only forbids the Master his servants work; thirdly, because the
thing it self, namely, servants labor, is not evil materially and
exsuogenere, as the matters of the other negative commandments are: but only
circumstantially, because its done upon such a day: for idolatry, blasphemy,
dishonouring of Parents, murder, adultery, theft, false testimony, coveting of
that is other men's; which are the matter of other commandments, are evil in
their own nature; and therefore forbidden because they are evil in their own
nature: But to labor on the Sabbath is not by nature evil, but therefore
evil because it is forbidden. So that the native illness in the other causes
the prohibition, but the prohibition in this causes the evil, for laboring on
the seventh day; if God had not forbidden it had not bin evil at al (no more
than to labor on the sixth, as not being interdicted by any law of nature, as
the matters of all the other commandments are: for although the secret
instinct of nature teaches all men, that sometime is to be withdrawn from
their bodily labors, and to be dedicated to the honor of God (which even the
prophanest Gentiles, amidst all the blind superstition, and darkness,
wherewith they were covered, in some sort did) appointing set times to be spent
in sacrifice and devotion to their idols, which they took for their Gods, yet
to observe one day in the number of seven, as a certain day of that number,
and namely, the seventh in the rank, or a whole day by the revolution of the
Sun, and with that severe exactness of restraining all work (as was
enjoined to the Jews) is but merely ceremonial, brought in by positive Law;
and is not of the law of nature. For had that form of keeping Sabbath, bin a
law of nature, then had it obliged the Gentiles as well as the Jews, seeing
they participate both equal in the Exodus 31. 13. Ezekiel. 20. 12. 30.
same nature: yet it did not so, but was given to the Israelites, to be a
special mark of their separation from the Gentiles, and of their particular
participation to God: neither shall we find either in the writings of Heathen
men (whereof some were in their kind very religious) that any of them had ever
any sense of it, or in the records of Moses, that it was ever observed by any
of the holy Patriarchs before it was pronounced in mount Sinai: But if it had
been a law of nature her self, and so had obliged all the Patriarchs; and as
large as nature her self, and so obliged all the Gentiles: and had it not
been as durable, as nature too, and so obliged us Christians also* Certainly
it had; for if that precise vacation and sanctification of the Sabbath day had
consisted by the law of nature, then must it have been by the decree of all
Divines immutable, and consequently right grievous should the sin of
Christians be, which now profane that day with ordinary labors, and chiefly
theirs, which first translated the celebration of that day, being the seventh,
to the first day of the week; who yet are certainly supposed to be none other
than the Apostles of our Savior.

To turn to the point and clearly to determine it; the master only is
accountable unto God, for the servants work done on the Sabbath: but for what
work? Namely, for all the works of labor, but not for the works of sin: and
how for the works of labor? Namely, if he do them not absolutely, of his
own election, but respectively, as of obedience to his masters command; for
touching labors, servants are directly obliged to their masters. But touching
sins, themselves are obliged immediately to God. Therefore those they may do
because their master commands them: these they may not do (although commanded)
because God forbids them.

The servants then may not in any case, sin at the commandment of any Master
on earth: because he has received immediately a direct commandment to the
contrary, from his Master in heaven: For it is better to obey God than man. And
there is no proportion betwixt the duties which they owe as servants to their
masters according to the flesh: and which they owe as Children to the father of
spirits: or betwixt the obligation wherein they stand to men, who have power
but over their bodies in limited cases, and that for a season. And that
infinite obligation wherein they stand to him that is both creator, and
preserver, and redeemer, and ludge of body and soul; sin therefore they may
not, if their Masters command them, because God has forbidden them (nor only
forbidden, I say, but forbidden it them) but labor they may if their masters
command them, because God has no way forbidden them that; God has indeed
forbidden the Masters exacting that work on the Sabbath; but he has not
forbidden the servants execution of that work if it be demanded or exacted: he
has restrained the master from commanding it, but he has not restrained the
servants from obeying if it be commanded, for although I acknowledge the
servants work on the Sabbath to imply sin: yet I say it is not the servants
fault. And albeit I confess the commandment of God be transgressed, and God
disobeyed by such works on the Sabbath, yet it is not the servant that
transgresses the commandment, it is not he that disobeyeth God. For the
question is not the passive sense, whether God be displeased with these
works, but of the active who displeases him. The thing is confessed, but the
person is questioned. Confessed, that is, that there is sin committed in that
work, but questioned whose sin it is. For work having relation both to the
Master and to the servant: to the Masters commanding and to the servants
executing; I affirm that (...) were given more to servants than to others* and
crosses your former words, where you say, their labor is forbidden: for if
they labor, is it not their labor, and so on the contrary? Or to the words (
directly and immediately?) you yield then, that servants labor is forbidden
indirectly and immediately. The truth is, that which is nakedly forbidden, is
directly forbidden: and that which is immediately forbidden, is sinful to be
done, though mediately: mediately or immediately takes not away the edge of the
precept, or power of the commander.

Thirdly, you say, The other commandments were imposed without specification
or exception of any person whatsoever, and therefore hold all men under an
equal obligation; but this not so. Answ. What arguing is this? This
commandment is with specification, and the servant is specified, and his work
of service to his master on the Sabbath specified and prohibited, therefore it
binds him not, it is not his sin. Nay, the specification makes it the more
his sin, and God provided by this enumeration of the persons, (as all have
and will agree, unless any should use your false glass) that this rest might
by no means be violated. Master Attersoll Upon Numb. chap. 28. verse. 11, 12,
13. p. 1142.
saw in this enumeration not a freeing of the servants and subjects from the
obligation, because a charge is laid on the Governors to see that others keep
the day: but a reason to persuade the inferior the more chearefully to keep
it: thus he says; The charge is laid on Governors, that inferiors might
yield chearefully to Gods will, considering how strait a charge God has given
to all Governors. And that he meant by Gods will, the commandment here
imposed upon, and binding servants from doing their masters work, though
commanded, is apparent by his words in the same place, which run thus: Many
fathers urge their children, many masters command their servants to go about
their own business, and send them from place to place at that time, when they
should attend to the holy Commandment of the Lord, whereas both of them might
well and lawfully reply to their fathers and masters, and say with Christ our
Savior, Luke 2. 49. Wist ye not that I must be about my Fathers business?

That word ( exception) is venomous, as if some persons were excepted by that
specification of persons in the fourth Commandment: these are cankred words
and evil that will quickly corrupt good manners. Therefore Christian Reader, I
give thee this note as an Antidote; and that it may be the more strong to
expel poison, know that the specification of persons in a precept negative,
cannot be an exception of those parties from under that precept, if specified
in the prohibition, not excepted. And for the equal obligation that holds all
men alike under the other Commandments, it is the same also in this: for if
you say the commandment more obliges Governors, I answer; It does so in
respect of their political observing of the command, as they are Governors,
and so ought to see this Law kept, and not violated: and thus they are bound
more, and otherwise than other men to every of the other nine Commandments.
For the Magistrate is the keeper, or preserver of both Custos utriusque tabulae.
Tables of the Law. But in respect of their personal observance hereof, it is
equally charged on them, as on the servant and subject: and so it is also in
the rest of the precepts.

Fourthly, you say, this commandment is of a different sort from others,
therefore it otherwise obliges, and you give three things to show this
difference; first, the nature of it; secondly, the matter prohibited; thirdly,
the command it self.

First, for the nature of this Law, you say, It is a Law engraven in the Tables
of stone, but not on the Tables of men's heart, nor any Law of nature. You make
this distinction, that there are revealed Laws in the Decalogue which are not
the secret Laws of Nature, the Laws engraven in stone by the singer of God,
were not all of them the Laws of Nature.

Against this I press you with reasons, authorities, and (...) of the other
Commandments in the nature and property of the things, as you say, and so you
give three instances; two of them have been already answered, namely, that the
labor of the servant is wholly subject to another man's command, and that the
commandment only forbids the master his servants work. The third
difference (which now we will, God willing, scanne) is this, That the thing
forbidden, viz. servile work, and so the servants work, is not evil
materially,, and ex suo genere, as the matter of other commandments is, nor
evil of its own nature, but only because it is prohibited, and therefore,
you hold, it is no Law of nature.

Here first consider how far wide this is to your scope, and the question in
hand: for what if the matter prohibited be evil but only by prohibition;
would not that prohibition make it sinful of lawful, and that to the servant?
I Will give you an instance in a precept ceremonial: God commanded that no leaven
should be in their houses during the Feast of unleavened bread: suppose the
master should command his servant to make in those days leavened bread, if the
servant did it, the servant sinned as well as his master.

Secondly, the proposition it self is faulty: for the matter of the second
Commandment is not evil materially, any more than the matter of the fourth,
to make an image or likeness of any thing in heaven, earth, or sea, is not
evil, but only circumstantially, as to make it to bow to it. If you say, to
make it to bow to it, is the matter of the Commandment: (as indeed it is) then
I say, to work on the Sabbath, is the matter of this Commandment; and as to
make an image to bow to it, is evil materially, and of its own nature, so to
spend (the Sabbath I say not, that seventh day, but) the Sabbath, the
consecrated time of Gods worship in our labor, is evil materially. And
therefore the masters command cannot excuse the servants work that day. And
now hence I further reason against you thus: Though the second Commandment
forbid to make images, which is not evil in it self, but only with this
circumstance added, to make them to bow to them; yet he that makes them for
another that he knows will worship them, breaks the second Commandment;
therefore in this Commandment, the servant that works at his masters
commandment, whom he knows to abuse his labor in this kind, breaks this
Commandment. Now by your Rule, the servant commanded to make an image, which
he knows his master would abuse to worship it, ought to make it, because to
make a likeness or image is not simply evil.

Thirdly, when you hold, that the Law of Nature is of those things only that
are evil by their property and nature, this passage received thrusts out the
second commandment from being a Law of Nature, according to your exposition of
a thing that has in it native illness: for to make an image (setting aside the
circumstance) to bow to it, is no more evil, than for a servant to work,
setting aside this circumstance (on the Sabbath.) This your slye arguing
savours of Popery, which has thrust out the second Commandment as a positive
and ceremonial Law upon the same grounds.

And when you say, that the prohibition of other things is caused by their
native illness; if you mean, their illness was before the Law (not
understanding by Law, the promulgation thereof, but the Law of Nature written
in the heart of man, inasmuch as this Law is the express righteousness of
God) it is a blasphemous Tenet, for hereby transgression shall be where there
is no Law, and a chief evil, a summum malum, as well as a chief good, or an
absolute goodness out of God, which this illness swerveth from. For my part,
I cannot tell how any thing should be evil natively, but evil, because it is
defective of good, which good perfecting man is the Law of righteousness. If
by prohibition, you mean the promulgation of the Law, then I say, that this
makes not the thing prohibited unlawful, but only makes the sin the
greater in them that yet offend, after God by lively voice has renewed those
obliterated precepts, offuscated with sin in the heart of man.

Thirdly, the Commandment it self in these five things (you say) is merely
Ceremonial, brought in by positive Law; and is not of the Law of Nature;
first, to observe one day in seven; secondly, to observe a certain day of that
number; thirdly, to observe the seventh in the rank; fourthly, to observe a
whole day by the revolution of the Sun; fifthly, to observe it with severe
exactness of restraining all work. This you essay to prove, first, by a place
of Scripture; secondly, by the example of the Patriarchs; and thirdly, by the
absurdity that else will follow.

This matter shall be more largely discussed, because it will much clear the
Doctrine of the Sabbath; for now you strike at the root of it, and would lay
Religion on the ground: but your own staff will break your back, which you
give by the handle into our hands. This you yield, that the secret instinct of
nature has taught all men, even the prophanest Gentiles, that some time is to
be set apart, and dedicated to the solemn worship of God, as set times to be
spent in sacrifice and devotion. Now go on; this instinct is the Law written
in their hearts; therefore the Sabbath is a Law of Nature. But did this
instinct of Nature guide them to your former five particulars about the time of
worship? If it did, and that the sheards hereof are found among the Gentiles,
you cannot, nor any other for you conclude (unless you will play the madmen
with reason) that every of them has less than morality and perpetuity in
it. It is true, the Gentiles a thousand ways depraved the use of the Sabbath,
by keeping holyday to their Idols, says Aretius Aret. problem. loc. 55. de
Sabb. obser.
they also wrested the name to a wanton and ridiculous signification, in which
notwithstanding there has remained some footsteps of the ancient original, to
which sero tandem Gentes redire debuerunt, at length the Gentiles, though late,
ought to return. To omit their depravations, see in them the footsteps of
every particular.

First, the Gentiles set apart certain and constant days not moveable and
wandering.

Macrobius says, there are four kinds of public holidays ( Feriarum, that
is, days vacant from pleading and labor) Stative, Conceptive, Imperative, and
nundinative: and the Stative are common to all the people on certain and set
days, and months, and noted with standing observations in their Calendars.

Secondly, they observed a certain day of seven, and particularly the seventh.

Hesiod says (...) Hesiod. (...).
the seventh day is a holyday. Lampridius tells of Alexander Severus, that on
the seventh day, when he was in the City, he went up to the Capitol, and
frequented the Temple. Homer says, the seventh day is holy, and was the day in
which all things were perfected, and on which we depart from the banks of Hell.

Callimachus says the like, and that it is the birthday, chief and perfect
Clemens Alexandr. stromat. l. 5.
.

Clemens Alexandrinus shows (...) Clem. Alex. l. 5. strom.
, that not only the Hebrews, but the Greeks also knew the seventh day holy.
And Eusebius Eusebius. de prepar. Evang. l. 13. c. 7.
affirms, that almost all as well Philosophers as Poets knew, that the
seventh day was more sacred. And Philo Philo. lib. 2. de vita Mosis.
the Jew says, Who does not honor that sacred day, which returns every
week.

The seventh day holidays were wont to be granted to children in Schools
among them Lucianus in Pseudo logista.
.

Certain of the Ethnicke Doctors were wont only to dispute on the Sabbaths
Aul Gell. l. 13. c. 2. Sueton. Lib. 3.
.

Seneca Senec. ep. 95.
in his 95. Epistle showing that exhortations are not enough, but we need
obliging precepts, yea, the decrees of wisdom; be reckons up the Sabbath,
as the festival day for Religion; but condemns their manner of observing it,
when he says; Let us forbid any one to light a candle on the Sabbaths: for
neither do the gods want light, and men themselves are not delighted with
smoke; he worshippeth God who knows him. Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 7.
Macrobius shows, that Saturn (of whom is the name of Saturday) was honored
with Candles lighted at his Altars, and wax-Tapers offered on his days.

Aretius has these words Aret. problem. loc. de Sabbathi observe.
; The Greeks and Latins call the Sabbath, The day of rest, which the
Gentiles(...)

But before I pass over this point, I would take off the exceptions of one
Franciscus Gomarus Gomarus de Investigat. sententiae and originis sabbati. cap.
4. page 42.
a Germane, who pleades, that these allegations for the seventh days celebrity
observed among the Gentiles are insufficient, and the consequence thence drawn
to prove this to have ought of the Law of Nature in it, infirm. The
insufficiency of allegations out of the Poets he would evince from this, that
those Poets talk, as the proverb is, of Garlike, but we speak of Onions; and
though Clemens Alexandrinus and Eusebius allege them, yet for this cause they
deserve little credit, because they speak of the seventh, but the Poets only
of a seventh. I answer, that they must needs avail, and be of force to any
that has reason: for (be it they spoke not of that seventh from the Creation,
yet) that they speak of the celebrity of a seventh, makes wholly and
sufficiently to prove, that they were guided to* a seventh; and if they knew
not the seventh through iniquity and vanity, that can no more disproove the
festivity of the seventh to be from the beginning, and reach to all, than the
failings in many specialties of the first, and second, and third, and other
commandments, can disproove their ingraving on the heart of man, as Laws of
Nature: and on the other side, it prooveth as sufficiently that this
commandment is a Law of Nature (so far as it is expressed in the Decalogue,)
as the relics of the other precepts in the hearts of Gentiles, prove them to
be Laws of Nature, and therefore his exception in special against that
authority out of Hesiod, if it should be understood of every seventh day,
taking the calculation from the first day of the month, does no way supplant
our intended purpose. Well has a learned Bishop Pattern of Catech. Doctr.
page 124.
of our Church observed, that sufficient is found in the heart of the Gentiles,
to their condemnation, for breaking the Law of the fourth commandment, they
knew that numerus septenarius est Deo gratissimus, and it was numerus quietis;
and thence they might have gathered, that God would have his rest that day: and
so the seventh day after birth they kept exequiae, and the seventh day after
death, the Funeral. Note also that Gomarus passes over those sayings, brought
by Clemens and Eusebius out of Homer and Callimachus untouched, because they
are not found in their writings now extant; which proves the weakness of
this cause.

That quotation out of Philo Iudaeus, he thinks he has taken off by that
place of the same Author, in his book of the Decalogue, whereby (he says) it
is evident, that Philo spoke not properly, but only by similitude of the number
of seven, because he thus expounds himself in that place; The fourth
commandment (says he) commands the seventh day: commanding it to be spent
holily and godly. This certain cities celebrate every month, as a Festival,
beginning their reckoning from the New Moon: but to the Jews every seventh
day is holy. I answer; First, it is a mere presumption of his to say, that
here Philo expounds his meaning in the other place, for this is in his book of
the decalogue, that in another book, viz. The second of the life of Moses: nor
does he make the least intimation of reference thither. Then this quotation,
that he makes the exposition of his meaning in the former place, cannot be;
for here he speaks only of some few cities, there in general terms, ( who
honors not that holy day?) Moreover, in another place Philo de mundi
opisicio.
he calls, that very seventh day, (...), a general Festival to be observed
of all people for ever. Lastly, if he had but perused Philo, or not perverted
him wilfully, he might have seen his plain meaning, whose words (both for
this purpose, and for the rest of servants, about which our dispute is) I set
down, not mangled, but entire; and they are these: It admonishes (says he,
meaning the Divine Law) it admonishes all of duty: Barbarians, Graecians,
inhabitants of maine continents as well as of Islands the Westerlings, the
Easterlings, the Europeans, and the Asians, the whole habitable World, even to
the uttermost coasts. For who does not honor that holy day, returning every
week, bringing remission of labor and holy vacations to the master of the
family with his household; not only to freemen, but also to servants, yea
moreover to the beasts under the yoke? and so forth.

Again, he helps us to another authority out of losephus in his second
book against Appain, who says, Neither is there any city of the Grecians, or
Barbarians, nor any Nation, to whom the custom of the seventh day, in which
we rest, has not come. A pregnant proof. But Gomarus says, there are words
foregoing which do end the controversy, namely these, Moreover the people do
now much emulate our piety. Which words (says he) do only show, that the
observation of the Sabbath among the Gentiles, was only an imitation of the
Jews by Proselites, and perchance many others. What? were all the Gentiles
East and West, become Proselytes; or would all of them admit a mere ceremony?
Some Nations besides Proselytes, admitted Circumcision: but did all the cities
of Greeks and Barbarians admit thereof? And if they imitated their piety, could
it be thought that they imitated it as theirs, and not rather as that which
their natural light glimmeringly guided them unto; especially seeing the Jews
were naturally hated of all people.

For his quotation out of Theodoret upon the 20. chap. of Ezekiel, to testify
to his tenet, who says, That in the observation of the Sabbath, the Jews
seemed to obtain a certain proper commonwealth; for no other Nation did
observe this rest, and neither did Circumcision so distinguish them from
others, as did the Sabbath. I answer: This cannot be understood of any kind of
observation of the Sabbath, for then Theodoret must speak directly against all
received testimonies of antiquity (which may not be thought) but of the true
observing thereof in the solemn rituall worship of God, which being all
public and solemnly used on that day, as the sanctification thereof, did
as much more lively distinguish the Jews, Gods people; from the Heathen
Idolaters, than did circumcision; as the whole Law does more than any one part
thereof.

Thus we have made good the sufficiency of the quotations excepted against,
we leave them therefore with the rest fore-alleaged to be cavilled at by the
next that dares to attempt it.

The infirmenesse of the consequence (says Gomarus) is this, that if the
observation of the Sabbath had prevailed among the Gontiles, yet from thence no
such antiquity of the Sabbath may be evinced, but only thence appears the
imitation of the Jews by the Gentiles, as by Proselytes and others perhaps. I
answer, the consequent is firm, for the former Heathen Authors have no
reference to the Jews, and the Gentiles derided the Jewish Sabbathes, Lament.
1. 7.

But suppose it came up among the Gentiles by imitation of the Jews, yet this
spreading of it far and wide, prooveth the goodness of the consequence, that
it is of the moral Law. For hence it sufficiently appears, that the
institution of a set seventh day in the week is immutable, and not ceremonial
and temporal; not proper to the Jews only, but common to all, seeing nature
apprehends it meet and necessary, that we often exercise the worship of God,
and cannot but acknowledge (as we see in the inclination of the whole universe
of men) that this weekly determination of a day is most convenient, and
altogether absolute.

Hitherto of the answer to your position, determining what is ceremonial in
the fourth commandment. Your proof for the ceremony of it in those respects,
is, first, taken from Texts of Scripture in Exodus 31. 13. and Ezekiel. 20. 12, 20.
Hence you reason thus; That form of keeping Sabbath was given to the Jews, as
a special mark of their separation from Gentiles, and consecration to God;
therefore it was merely ceremonial, and obliged not the Gentiles; which it had
done, if it had been a Law of Nature.

First, here your consequence is weak and fallacious: for every mark and
sign of separation from others, and consecration to God, is not ceremonial.
Baptism is such a mark between Persian and Heathens, yet no ceremony; so is
the Sacrament of the Lords supper. Such was the Sabbath then, and is at this
day.

Neither does every mark of separation and sanctification, oblige only those
that have that mark: for the duty (...) was no less necessary to men before
the Law given, than after, and examples are not wanting of the Majesty of God
himself Genesis 2. 2. and 7. 4. and 8. 10, 12. Exodus 16. 6.
, of Noah, and of the Israelites before the Law, by whom the days were
gathered into weeks, which shows, that the observation of the Sabbath was
not unknown.

Lastly, you urge us with an absurdity that will follow on this doctrine, that
if it be of Nature to keep the Sabbath, it binds us Christians to keep the
seventh day Sabbath, and so the first changers of the day to the first day of
the week sinned grievously. This argument is of no consequence: for the first
day of the week is now the Lords Sabbath, as the seventh day from the Creation
was then. And thus neither Law of Nature broken, nor sin incurred; and
therefore all absurdity avoided: the first day of the week is also the
seventh, though not that seventh day.

This accommodation also of the fourth precept to the Jews in the
determination of the day makes not the commandment ceremonial, nor yet the
change of it to our Lords day, no more than the fifth Commandment is made
ceremonial by this promise, respecting Israel in Canaan, That thy days may
be long in the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee. And this change in the
application of the precept by the Apostle, that it may be well with thee, and
that thou may live long on earth Ephesians. 6. 3.
.

It standing firm then, that the Commandment in every part thereof, as it is
contained in the Decalogue, is moral, and of the Law of Nature, and the breach
thereof a sin, your conclusion takes place against you, namely, that the
servant may not in any case work on the Sabbath at prohibited works (because
it is sin) at the commandment of any master on earth: For it is better to
obey God than man. To the Answer whereof I leave you, or others that in pride
of spirit, and a spirit of contradiction dare to attempt it in your behalf.
All that follows in this part of your Discourse, seeing it is but by way of
Recapitulation, by the former Answers is found to be of no force.

CHAP. 17. Breerwood. Page 28, 29, 30.
But there is another objection, for admit the servants, work upon the Sabbath
be the Masters sin, that imposes it. Is it not sin to give consent and
furtherance to another man's sin? But this servants do when they execute
their Masters commandments, and consequently it is unlawful so to yield;
lawful therefore it is to resist and reject such commandment. I answer, first
touching the point of consenting, that in such a work is to be considered the
substance and the quality, that is the work it self and the sinfulness of
it, servants may consent to it, as it is their masters work, not as it is
their Masters sin, for except these things be distinguished, God himself can
no more avoid the calumniation of being the author, than poor servants of
being the ministers of sin; for that God concurreth with every man to every
action whatsoever, as touching the substance of the action, is out of all
question, seeing both all power whence actions issue, are derived from him, and
that no power can proceed into act without his present assistance and
operation, but yet to the crime, the faultiness, the inordination, the
unlawfullnesse of the action (wherein the nature of sin does for malice
consist) he concurreth not. But it wholly proceeds from the infection of the
concupiscence, wherewith the faculties of the soul are originally defiled, the
actions themselves issuing from the powers, and the sinfulness of the actions
from the sinfulness of the powers, like corrupt streams flowing from filthier
springs. It is not therefore every concurrence of the servants with the Master
to a sinful action, which causes the stain, and imputation of sin upon the
servant: as when he consents and concurreth only to the action, not to the
sin: namely, likes and approves it, as his masters work, yet utterly
dislikes it as it is his masters transgression, likes of the work for the
obligation of obedience, wherein (touching work) he stands to serve his
Master, and yet dislikes of the sin, for the great obligation wherein every
one stands toward the honor of God. But yet (to answer secondly, to the
point of resisting) the servant ought not for any dislike or detestation of the
annexed sin, to resist or reject his masters commandment touching the work:
for in obeying he is at most but the minister of another man's sin (and that
as they say per accidens, namely, as it is annexed to such a work) but in
resisting he is directly the author of his own sin, by withdrawing his
obedience about bodily service from(...) I say, for the master does not sin
only in commanding his servant to work, but in working him, and so bringing
his command into execution; which thing the servant knowing to be unlawful,
must (that he may not partake therein) not only, not touch it with one of his
fingers, but also persuade the contrary and modestly rebuke it. Again, he
ought to attend on holy works, which directly will hinder that unlawful
work, and to these is he bound as Gods servant that day. Thirdly, by
approving; and this the servant does really, by his work, and by his example.

Your second solution is found by this that has been set down, to be vain
and frivolous, the servant must refuse to sin in any kind. And his refusal
in this kind is not against the Law of nations as we have heretofore showed,
nor against his own covenant, for his covenant (though without limitations
expressed) does not exempt him from the service of his Prince and Country, the
Prince may press him to the wars, much less from the service of his God,
when his Lord and Savior presses him to his wars; as he does in the day of
assembling his army in holy beauty. It is therefore wicked and injurious to
God, man, nations, laws and covenants, that you say, that the Servant stands
bound to his master in all bodily service, without any exception of the Sabbath
more than other days. Your phrase you use of the Servants resisting, is your
own; we teach the servant may refuse and must, all such works which God has
forbidden to be done that day; but not resist, no, he must acknowledge his
masters authority, though not obey his unlawful commands, and be so far from
resisting, that he must suffer patiently the hard usage of an evil master, and
endure stripes rather than offend God, in all, committing his cause to him that
judges righteously.

And for the servants more full direction in this thing, one case of Conscience
I would here briefly decide, which is this, what works may servants do on
the Sabbath, and in what are they under their masters command and bound to obey
them? Answ. To conceive hereof plainly: There are four sorts of works
lawful on the Sabbath: First, works of holiness. Secondly, works of mercy.
Thirdly, works that are in their nature servile, yet do directly respect the
present worship of God; as out travel to the places of Gods worship: for these
works become now holy works, and are not ours but Gods works. Fourthly,
works of common honesty, that is, works that make to the comely, decent and
orderly performance of Gods worship, and our carriage and behavior therein.
Such are the tolling of a bell for the calling of the Assembly, the comely and
modest dress of the body, provided that it be not vain, curious, nor ask
much time, but be thrust into the narrowest room that may be. The spreading
of our Table, so that state be not taken up, and all things be prepared before
as much as may be, with the like. By works of mercy, I mean, not only the
necessary labors in the help of the sick, and of women in travel, and of
beasts out of a pit, with the like; but also all those that are called works
of necessity, which I rather call works of mercy, because they are therefore
necessary, as they tend to the preservation of things, not from feared or
suspected, but eminent and imminent and present danger; and the work it self
must be done in mercy, not in covetousness or other respects. Now of this sort
are these works, labor in provision of convenient food, tendance of cattle,
fight for defense of our country being assailed, riding of posts on the
affairs of the state in causes of present and imminent danger.

In all these the master has power to command, and so has the superior over
him that is under his charge, and the servant is bound to obey. The master may
command him the works of mercy, and the works servile, that directly look to
the worship of God, or to go with him to the Sermon though many miles off (if
it cannot be had nearer hand) and as the master may take his horse and ride
thither, his servant going on foot, so may he command his servant for this
purpose to saddle his horse, as in 2 King. 4. 22, 23. The question of the
Shunamites husband shows, who to his wife desiring one of the Asses to be
made ready, and a servant to be sent her, that she might go to the man of God,
says on this wise, Wherefore wilt thougo to him to day? it is neither now
moon nor Sabbath. It was then their custom so to do on the Sabbath and new
moon. In like manner, the master may injoyne the servant such works as tend
to necessary provision of food, and tending of children in the family, etc.

Yet here again some things seem to fight with the sanctification of the day:
First, if the master shall strictly stand upon his state and distance, for if
the familie-necessities in respect of young children should necessarily require
the presence of some constantly at home, the master may not keep his servant
hereby constantly from the public worship, but rather sometimes change turns
with him. Much less may he desire such unnecessary superfluities as may cause
absence from the Assemblies: for this is to feed thy carcass on the life blood
of the souls of thy servants. Deal in all plainness of heart, and know thou
have to deal with God. The servant must be sure the work is unlawful before
he offer to withdraw his obedience, but thou may sin in that work in which
thy servant sins not, because thou art bound to search more into the nature
of thy necessities.

Secondly, if the master set not his business in so wise and discreet an
order, that without all unnecessary hindrances he and all his household may
sanctify the day and keep it holy.

Thirdly, if the master remember not that he is a God, and that both by
communication of name and power, to provide for and see to the servants and his
households rest, and therein respect that mercy which God would have shown to
servants, yea, to cattle on that day.

CHAP. XVIII. Breerwood. Page 30, 31, 32.
Exodus 31. 14, 15.
work on the Sabbath day, was by the law to be cut off from his people, and to
dye the death, every person therefore, the Servant as well as the master.
authors) cause others to work (as masters do their servants) not of them who
only (as ministers) and against their wills are set to work. And rather
because the work of the servant (that, I say, which he does by the
commandment of his master, to whom for matter of labor he is merely
subordinate) even reason and equity will interpret the masters work. And
certainly that God accounts it so, the declaration of that Precept in
another place does make manifest. Six days thou shall do thy work, and the
seventh day thou shall rest, that Exodus 23 12.
thine Ox and thin^ Ass, and thy Son, and thy Maid, etc. may be refreshed:
for is it not manifest that the servants work is accounted the masters, seeing
the rest from the masters work is the refreshing of the servants? the master
therefore who by the moral law was commanded that his servants should not
work on the Sabbath, was by the judicial to be punished with death, if the
servant did work that day by his commandment.

Answer.
First, that place is to be understood of the presumptuous offender as
appears in Numb. 15. 35, 36. with that in verse. 30, 31. The soul that does
ought presumptuously, reproacheth the Lord, and shall be cut off. For if the
sin were of ignorance, infirmity and error, he was bound to bring a
sinne-offring, verse. 27, 28. thus the Jews understand that place in Exodus.
Now the servants work at the masters command will not come under a wilful and
presumptuous sin: yet that law shows this truth, that men for breach of
Sabbath shall be punished according to the nature of their offense, so shall he
that forgoeth Gods to do his masters work. This is the true Answer, you
merely trifle, and therefore the force of the objection lies still upon you,
and your Answer falls like an untimely fruit or rotten nut. And your hard
cases (for they seem full of pity, and yet would have a servant to be in the
condition of a beast) are mere conceits. And for that phrase of yours, saying,
The servants may be compelled to work by men, speaking there of such work as
the fourth commandment has forbidden, does contradict your former Tenet
expressly, who say, that the master may not command his servant to work: may
he not command him? and may he yet compel him? Good stuff I promise you.

Secondly, in this place also seeing you offer to our thoughts Gods judicial
Law, and so his judiciary proceeding, I urge you with the just hand of Gods
yengeance that lights oftentimes on children and servants working at the
command of their parents and masters on that day. God punishes none but those
that offend less or more. But this ungodliness he has punished from heaven.
And all wise Christians will esteem more of one Demonstration of Gods wrath,
than of two hundred sophisticated Rhetorical Demonstrations of any Disputer
in the world. At Kimstat a town in France, Job. si^col. l. 3. De mirac.
there lived in the year, 1559. a certain covetous woman, who was so greedy
of gain, that she would not frequent the Church her self, nor suffer any of
her family to do it, but continually toyled a bout drving and pilling of
flax, and doing other household businesses: neither would she be reclaimed by
her neighbors, who admonished and dissuaded her from such unseasonable works.
One Sabbath day as they were thus busily occupied, fire seemed to issue out of
the flax, without doing any hurt: The next Sabbath it took fire indeed, but
was quickly extinct: Yet this wretch continued obstinate in her profaneness
even the third Sabbath, when the flax again taking fire, could not be
quenched till it burnt her and two of her children to death, for though they
were recovered out of the fire alive, yet the next day they all three died; and
that which was much to be wondered at, a young infant in the cradle was taken
out of the midst of the flame without any hurt. God we see, took vengeance on
the children that wrought at the mothers commandment. Are there not strange
punishments for the workers of iniquity Job 31. 3.
? Above fifty persons were consumed in the fire which burnt the town of
Fevertone in Devonshire, in the year 1598. where 400. dwelling houses were all
at once on fire and consumed for their horrible profanation of the Lords day.
Can any think that of those fifty, none were children and servants, whose
work that day had been usually abused?

Here also, Christian Reader, I thought it my part to lay before thy more
serious consideration these notable and late examples of Gods wrath from heaven
against men's ungodliness on the Sabbath day.(...) Blackesmith by trade, (he is
yet alive, the Lord give him an heart to repent, and all the Town to learn by
that hand of God) this woman was with her young child in her arms within her
own gate looking on them: and so it was that while she looked on, one of the
greatest ropes failed and broke, and the Pole fell down upon the pale that
parts their gate and the street, and the upper end of it with the fall,
lapped over, and struck the child on the head in the mothers arms, and
killed it. It was the edge of the weather-cocke that hit the child on the
head, (mark it well) and cleft the skull, and it dyed the next day.

It is time for thee Lord to work, for men have made void thy Law. Psalm. 119.
126.

The Lord is known by the judgment which he executes: The wicked is snared in
the work of his own hands. Higgaion. Selah. Psalm. 9. 16.

That place in Exo. 23. 12. which comes in on the left side is abusively
rendered by you when you read, that thy son and thy maid may be refreshed,
whereas it is thus in the text, the son of thine handmaid: and when you say,
it is manifest that the servants work is accounted the masters; seeing the
rest from the masters work is the refreshing of the servant, is it not as
manifest that it is the servants, when the rest is his refreshing? For by
another rest* I am not refreshed, if I work: and what if in some respects it
may be called the masters work, is it therefore no sin in the servant to do
it? This is a begging of the question, and a shame in a professed Disputant.

CHAP. XIX. Breerwood. Page 32, 33, 34.
ANd thus have I proved my assertion, namely that the commandment of the
Sabbath was not given, nor fit to be given to the servants themselves, but to
their governors, both by arguments of reason which is the rule of men, and
authority of Scriptures, which is the rule of Christians, and cannot find any
thing material in either of both that may reprove it: but yet if I should
admit (which I doubt you will never prove) that the commandment was directly
given to servants themselves, as servants, and that they might lawfully disobey
their masters touching those works whereby the precept of the Sabbath might
be transgressed: yet have I another exception against your doctrine; namely,
for condemning every light work (such as inviting of guests, or fetching of
wine from a neighbors house, or giving a horse provender) for these are the
very instances which bred the question) for transgression of Gods
commandments, forbidden on the Sabbath: no, it is not; the commandments,
imports no such thing, for it is not [(...)] that is, every work, but
[(...)] that is there forbidden, that is, every servile work, for such the
word [(...)] properly does import, and servile work, by the interpretation of
the best Divines is accounted, either that which is attended with the toil of
the body, or at least intended and directed to lucre and gain of riches, with
some care of the mind, such as men's ordinary work is wont to be on common
days. And that the work there forbidden has a special relation to the gain
of riches is the better apparent, because the same word [(...)] signifies (
opes) as well as ( opus) riches as well as work; and not only where the
commandment was pronounced (in the 20 of Exodus) but wheresoever it is
repeated in the books of the law, which is oftentimes (and differently for
other circumstances) the same word [(...)] is ever retained and never changed;
not every work therefore absolutely, but every work of such a kind, namely,
consisting in toil, and tending to gain, is restrained by the commandment;
and is there not evident reason to understand it so? For seeing the intendment
of the Precept is clearly (in the point of that days vacation) that the body
should be refreshed by abstinence from labor; And (in the point of
sanctification of it) the mind should be refreshed by attendance to spiritual
exercise: it follows manifestly, that if there be any works that resolve
not the body, and so hinder not the refreshing of it, nor dissolve and alienate
the mind from the Service of God, and meditation of godliness, that these
works are not forbidden, because neither the vacation which the commandment
imports, nor that sanctification which it intends, is impeached by them.
(...) written by his own hand at the time when these things were in agitation:
the copy being his first draught, and so very imperfect in many things, cannot
be published as could be wished for the satisfaction of the Christian Reader.
Therefore we must be contented here and there to give thee a little taste:
and first in this particular you have it thus in his own words. Melachah does
signify properly servile works, and is a choice word of purpose used in this
Commandment.

Melachah should have any such special weight in signification: For though your
conceit of it that it signifies opes, as well as opus, might cast some color to
persuade that it might mean works of gain, yet that it should specially note
works of toil, there is no color. Nay me thinks, Magnaseh, is of a larger
signification, and fits for toil, as signifying to work, cum energia. Thus
the wicked are workers of iniquity, and Nabals cattle are called Magnasehu,
and appellantur nomine operis, eo quod homo seipsum occupat in illorum
acquisitione, and are called by the name of Work, because man busieth himself
in getting them; and yet Pegnulah more fit than them both, it signifies opus
and op^ris merces, work and the reward of work; works of hands, Psalm. 9. 16.
The work of the hireling. Job 7. 2.

It is likely that he that published this Treatise of Master Breerwoods, has a
perfect coppie of a full answer. (For Master Breerwoods provoked spirit, as he
terms it himself, would not have been allayed, without a satisfactorie
answer.) Fair dealing would have required, it should have been produced, and
then I had saved this pains in answering: But then the Publisher had missed
his aim, which was to traduce the Dead; who then being Dead, had yet spoken.

Sixthly, that this interpretation is orthodoxe, and yours novel and adulterous;
see how Divines and the Church^s of Christ have understood it.

Our Church of England declares her mind in the first part of the Homily of
the place and time of Prayer; where the example of the man that gathered
sticks on the Sabbath day is alleged: and those that pranke, and prick, and
paint, and point themselves to be gorgeous and gay, those that toyishly talk,
are reckoned a sort of transgressors, worse than those that keep Markets and
Faires that day.

Tertullian says, Non facies opus, quod? utique tuum. Arcam vero circu^serre,
neque quotidianum opus videri potest neque humanum, sed bonum and sacrosanctum,
etc. Tertul. l. 2. contra Marcionem.
God forbade humane works, not divine. Thou shall do no work, what work?
namely thine own: but to carry abou the Arc (that is, about the walls of
Jericho) can neither seem a daily work, nor an humane, but a good and holy
work; and therefore by the very Commandment of God, divine.

Master Greenham, Greenh. Treatise of the Sabbath. As we deny Church feasts,
as imit^tions of the Heathen; so we deny Holy Day plays as remnants of ancient
profaneness. page 169.
shows excellently, that recreations, as shooting and the like, at other
times lawful; and bankettings, and the exercises for sick persons refreshing,
if it be not in reading, singing, and holy conference; (for if they be sick,
it is a time of praying, not of playing; and if they be well to play, are they
not so to do these Heavenly and comfortable duties?) All these are unlawful
to be used that day; neither, says he, is the Sabbath only broken by
profaneness, but also by idle works. Mayer page 260.
upon the fourth Commandment says, We must rest from worldly speeches and
thoughts: small works which come not within the compass of religion, mercy or
necessity must not be done on the Sabbath, says Master Dod on the
Commandments. page 152.
Polyander, Rivet, Wallaeus and Thysius, say, Synopsis purioris theol. ^^sp.
21. page 261.
That it is moral and ingrafted in nature, that the whole mind be taken off
from other cares on the Sabbath, and the whole day bestowed in the duties (...)
moral? or if so, how should the Jews put a difference between the one and
the other? for you will needs have ceremonial precepts in the body of the
fourth Commandment. And why bring you in, the Instance of our blessed Savior
who was a Jew, and bound to the law as given to the Jews, and kept the
ceremonial as well as the moral law?

Secondly, Come, come, you are plunged, let me help you. In that our Savior
did allow and do many light and laborlesse works, in your Ashdodaean phrase
(for we take your words till we come to examine the matter further) and yet by
voluntary dispensation was bound to all the law, it is clear, that no
ceremonial law or clause of any law in the old Testament forbade the works
that he did on the Sabbath: and so your answer, that that command in Exodus
35. 3. was If it were ceremonial, the equity nevertheless must bind
Christians, although the sanction does not constrain them. The equity of the
Law teaches us, we ought not to turn this liberty, to be servants of our
wanton desires. Greenth. Treatise of the Sabbath, page 168. I ad the equity of
it shows that it is not the lightness of the work, if it be once opposed
to Gods, that makes it that day sinlesse.
Ceremonial, is a mere fancy, you must fly to some other reason: and you
might have known it has been alleged by diverse to be this, that the Lord
there answered a particular case about working at the Tabernacle, and prohibits
every work though never so light about the erection thereof for that day;
because it tended not immediately to the worship of God: and thus now at this
day it were sinful to build Churches on the Sabbath, or to kindle a fire to
prepare or fit any work thereabout. So the precept, about the boiling and
baking of the Manna gathered on the sixth day; that it, might not be left till
the Sabbath to be then dressed, was Vatablus in locum. Trem. Junius. Bysh.
Babingt* in v 4. of Chapter 31. Exodus page 319.
A precept that concerned that present time, while the Manna fell, that they
might see the miraculous power of God, in the keeping of it without corrupting,
till the next day; and because on the Sabbath they should not find it in the
field.

Consider it well, if to kindle a fire to prepare things for the building of a
Church be unlawful, which your self hold to be a light work, and cannot but
confess to be no work of private gain; then certainly much more are all
other light works forbidden, that fall not under the works afore-rehearsed.

Thirdly, but let us see what you allege in our Savior; He approved of the
letting of the Ox to the water, of rubbing the ears of corn: He made clay to
anoint the eyes of the blind: He bade the lame man healed, take up his bed.
What then? Are therefore light works to be done? It is no light work to make
clay and carry beds; or that cannot be your reason; nay your instances are all
wide from your purpose; you need clay or glue, to glue them together. Christ
allows not these works of letting the Ox to water, and rubbing the ears of
Corn, because they are light; but because they were works of mercy to save
life, that could not be deferred, and did those other works himself; not
because they were light, but inlightning. He commanded the impotent man to
carry his bed; not because it was laborlesse, for it was laborsome, and
therefore did he prescribe him that, and no light work to show his perfect
soundness, and the truth of the miracle, to excite him and all to glorify
God. Mayer in his English Catechism explained page, 262. shows that all the
reasons of the Commandments bind us, and reach to us as to the Jews: and
alleges it to prove that this Law is of force for every one of us, as well as
Jews, and as much in force as any of the other nine: page 261.


Fourthly, thus we need not dispensation for our Savior, but a pardon for
your abuse of his blessed words and deeds. That also which you allege touching
his being under the Law, cuts the throat of your solution to the objection; and
gives us just cause to consider and conclude, that all that you, or any other
Divine has ever said for the Christians freedom on the Lords day, will be
found but the Jews freedom, which both they might have had, and had also by
the Law of the fourth Commandment, had not their superstition, or
superstitious teachers, wronged the Law, and them; for see what Christ did on
the Sabbath and allowed, and in that behold those burdens of Jewish
superstition abandoned, and that (as some call it) of Christian liberty; which
yet are no other, than matter of Christian duty to the eternal and moral
Law, delivered in the fourth Commandment.

First, you would have allowed a comfortable use of the Creatures, not only an
use for mere necessity. God ever gave it on this day, for the Sabbath was a
festival ever;(...)

The Jews were usually (as too many are now) for want of right collation of
Scriptures together, either superstitious, or sacrilegious.

Fifthly, you would that things that tend to decency might be done, without
which the ordinances cannot be so used to order and edification. They ever
might; The Priests might blow their Trumpets and Horns on the Sabbath day, for
the assembling of the people, Numb. 10. 2. So may our Bells be thus rung.

Sixthly, it is not against Christian liberty to have the precise day appointed
of God: it was not against the liberty and glory of our nature in integrity.
And tell me (I pray you) whether it make more to Christian liberty to observe a
day, by the constitution of the Church, or by institution of God, whose Service
is perfect liberty. Yea, since it is usual with God to power upon the Church
on the Lords day the holy Ghost (which is the Spirit of liberty) certainly it
never returns, but it increases that liberty with greater accessions daily.

That which some Divines have said, that the Sabbath in the Law* was a day In
se and per se sanctus. Per se, pars and instrumentum ^ultus.
in it self, and of it self holy, and was of it self a part and instrument
of piety, in respect of the rest. I cannot see how it can be grounded on the
Commandment, or any other Scripture: the Commandment is, Remember the Sabbath
or resting day to keep it holy; it was sanctified; and the rest enjoined, that
it might be subservient to piety and holiness, as also the Lords day is. If
any such thing were found to belong to that day, it was accessory; and if ought
of type were in it to the Jews, it was not enjoined in the precept, but given
as an appendix to it, and so is taken away by Christ, and no way binds us to
the use thereof.

CHAP. XXI. Breerwood. Page 36, 37.
But let that be admitted also; first, that the commandment was immediately
given to servants. Secondly, that it was given touching the lightest degree of
works. Let servants be the persons, and those works the matter to whom, and
of which the commandment was given, is your doctrine yet justified hereby, and
subject to no other reproof? The persons have afforded me exceptions against
it, because the commandment was not given to servants And the matter because it
was not imposed touching that light sort of works; the time also will, because
it cannot be understood of the Lords day; for what day was it, of which the
charge of vacation was so strictly given? Was it not the seventh day of the
week? The seventh (says the precept) is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; In
it thou shall do no work. And why the seventh* Because in six days the Lord
finished all the works of creation, and rested the seventh day; therefore he
sanctified the seventh day; and what day is it whereof we question? The Lords
day? That the first day of the week* It is therefore the seventh day of the
week ( the Sabbath of the Jews) not the first day of the week (the Sabbath
of Christians) that was so strictly by Gods commandment destined to rest.
Therefore the works done on the Sabbath day are no transgressions of Gods
commandments. Iure divino. Not by any commandment of God, and consequently
that to work on that day, is certainly no breach of any Divine commandment.

Answer.
You proceed, and would prove this wicked assertion, That it is no breach of
any Divine commandment, for a servant at the commandment of his master, nay,
for any one on his own head, to work on our Sabbath, which is the Lords day,
the first day of the week.

First, the commandment, say you, cannot be understood of the Lords day. Why I
pray you, can you understand it of any other day save the Sabbath day? Does not
the tenor of the precept sound thus, Remember the Sabbath day to sanctify it?
You yield in the next breath, that the Lords day is the Christians Sabbath. You
must then yield, that the commandment is understood of it. You would be thus
understood, and take it very hainously, that you should be said to oppose Gods
Sabbath, do you? No: you do not, nor ever did. Far be it from you; to
think it, were to wrong you; to write it, were to calumniate you (thus you
plead for your self in the first section of your Reply, page 61, 62.) Yet lo,
now the commandment cannot be understood of the Lords day? Why then, say man,
the Lords day is not the Sabbath; for of the Sabbath is the commandment.

Secondly, but to your reasoning; for it is not reason nor religion.

What day was it of which the charge was so strictly given? was it not of the
seventh day of the week, say you? Yes indeed, of the seventh, as the precept
was first applied to man. But ask again, Why of the seventh more than the
sixth? And the Lord answers, Because it was the Sabbath of the Lord: for when
it cease to be the Lords Sabbath, the commandment is not of it, (as you also
acknowledge, or else why keep you it not?) Yet the commandment stands in
full vigor, viz. of sanctifying* and resting on the Sabbath. To the Jews the
seventh from the Creation was the Sabbath, the commandment stood in vigor to
them for that day: to the Christian, the seventh, even the first day of the
week is the Sabbath: the commandment stands in vigor to them also for that
day. Therefore he says not, Remember thou sanctify the seventh day, and keep
it Sabbath; nor, thou shall do no work on the Sabbath day, for it is the
seventh: but he says, Remember the Sabbath day to sanctify it; and, Thou
shall do no work* on the seventh, for it is the Sabbath. This Reason you
leap, and yet you ask a Why; And why the seventh? Because God rested thereon,
and sanctified the seventh day. Here you violate first, the words of the
commandment written with Gods own finger, and then the sense; for it is thus
read, Exodus 20. 11.
Therefore he sanctified the Sabbath day, or resting day, and so he
sanctified our Sabbath day as well as theirs: for, the Sabbath he sanctified,
be it what day he shall be pleased to nominate: a matter of infinite comfort
to us, that desire to do the duties of the day with faith, in Gods both
blessing, and acceptance. And hereby your conclusion is utterly weakened.

Thirdly, this reason is given both as a reason of the rest on that day, and as
a plain declaration of the institution of that Sabbath day, and of this day in
the precept now. He rested the seventh day, Wherefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath day and hallowed it. When did he so? Genesis 2. 3. In the beginning. Yea,
he did sanctify the seventh. Yea, then he sanctified the Sabbath, it was
instituted, when he blessed and sanctified it, and this was in the Creation.
But how was this done? The very work of the day instituted the day, which was
this, the Lords resting, blessing, and sanctifying it. Now this teaches us,
that the institution of the Sabbath, in respect of the determination of the
time, is to be looked for, in the work of God. Gods resting, blessing, and
sanctifying the seventh day, made it the Sabbath day: therefore in the
commandment it is said, The seventh is the Sabbath, and the following words
show how it was made the Sabbath, and what day he blesses, and sanctifies, is
the Sabbath. Now Christ is the Lord of the Sabbath, by whom the worlds were
made, Col. 1. 16. by whom also they are renewed, look in his work, and find
undoubtedly the making and institution of the day to the world renewed; the
seventh day he lay in the grave, here was no work of blessing and sanctifying;
but the first day of the week very early he arose, and appeared to his
Disciples; and unfolded the Scriptures, and opened their understandings to
understand them.

The fourth commandment (to speak all clearly) stands in Nomine Sabbathi
nobis significatur, quod in nostris debeamus and nos Sabbathies ^^, Hoc est
quiescere ab illis operibus, a quibus and Iudaei quiescere jubebantur. Zanch.
de red. l. 1. c. 19.
force to us, and the Lords resurrection, resting from the work of our
redemption, and rejoicing in it, blessing it with that work, with diverse
apparitions that very day, and sanctifying it with spending it among his
Disciples in his presence bodily, now glorified, in heavenly expositions and
operations upon their hearts, and in the return of the day many times, and in
special, upon the return of it at Whitsontide with the mission of the Holy
Ghost. This, I say, applies, and determines it to this day we now observe*
And as the Jews are sent to seek the precise day in the Lords resting from
the works of Creation, so we are sent to the rest, from the work of
redemption. The institution of this day is clearly in the very work of the
Resurrection, as the institution of the seventh day, was in the work of
finishing the Creation.

This has been anciently taught, and still is sparsed in the writings of the
godly learned.

S. Augustine says, Domini resuscitatio promisit nobis aeternum diem, and
consecravit nobis Dominicum Domini. Qui vocatur Dominicus, ipse proprie videtur
ad Dominum pertinere, quia eo die Dominus resurrexit. Aug. de verbis Apost.
Sermon. 15. Dominicum ergo diem Apostoli and Apostolici viri ideo religios^
solennitate habe^dum sanxerunt, quia in eodem Redemptor noster* ^ mortuis
resurrexit* Sermon. de temp. 251.
The Lords Resurrection has promised us an eternal day, and has consecrated
to us the Dominicall day of the Lord. The day which is called the Lords day, it
seems properly to pertain to the Lord, because that day the Lord rose again.

The same Father tells us, that in this resurrection of Christ, the Apostles
and Apostolical men saw as much: he says, the Lords day the Apostles and
Apostolical men have ordained with religious solemnity to be kept, because in
the same our Redeemer rose from the dead.

Ignatius (...). Epist. ad Magn^s.
gives this for the only Reason binding every one to keep this day, saying,
Let every one that loves Christ, celebrate the Lords day, the day pertaining
to the Resurrection, the Queen and Prince of all days.

Athanasius Athanas. de Sabbat. and circumcis. Psalm. 118. 124.
calls the Lords day in which Christ renewed the old Man, the beginning of the
new Creature; and therefore, he says, when he had renewed the Creature which
was made within six days, he would have that day consecrated to this
instauration, which the Spirit foretells in the Psalm, This is the day which
the Lord has made.

Iunius Tempus ad conventus sacros, semper est dies octavus, quem inde a
resurrectione Christi Ecclesia vocavit Dominicum, quod Christus
suaresurrectione and sacto sacris coetibus dicavit, quem Apostoli observarunt
and coetibus dicatum esse doc^erunt, and quem Christiana Ecclesia dictis little
obsequens, and facta imitans, concelebrat. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 4. sub sinem.
speaking of the time necessary to public worship, says, It is the eighth day
for ever, which the Church from the resurrection of Christ, has called the
Lords day, which Christ by his resurrection and deed has dedicated to holy
assemblies, which the Apostles have observed, and have taught, that it is
dedicated thereto, and which the Christian Church obedient to their words, and
imitating their deeds, does jointly celebrate.

In the Preface to the Assembly of the Church of Scotland at Perth, Anno 1618.
the question being moved, how the particular and material day may be known,
that the Christian Church should observe; the answer is, that the particular
day was demonstrated by our Saviors Resurrection, and his apparitions made
thereon; by the Apostolical practice, and the perpetual observation of the
Church ever since that time, of the day which in Scripture is called the Lords
day, as that which the Jews observed, was called the Lords Sabbath; because as
the one was appointed by the Lord for a memorial of his rest after the
Creation, so the other was instituted by the Lord for a memorial of his
Resurrection after the Redemption. For this we must hold as a sure ground,
whatever the Catholic Church has observed in all Ages, and is found in
Scripture expressly to have been practiced by Christ and the Apostles, (such
as is the sanctification of the Lords day) the same most certainly was
instituted by the Lord to be observed, and his practice in (...) Word of the
Lord, and of equal worth, as if the Lord by voice from heaven had spoken it,
and more sure for us than such a voice, 1 Pet. 1. 12, 25. and 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20,
21. Whence it is clear, that the Gospel preached by the Apostles with the
holy Ghost sent down from heaven, is the Word of the Lord that endures for
ever.

Secondly, it was enjoined by the Apostles precept, and observed by them:
enjoined, and the work of the day in part prescribed, 1 Cor. 16. 2. observed
Act. 20. 7.

Thirdly, the Apostle says, that which you have seen and heard in me, that
do; and the God of peace shall be with you, Phil. 4. 9. But this was seen,
and heard of, to be done by him, Act. 20. 7. Therefore do it. Perkins on Gal.
4. verse. 10.

Fourthly, if the same reason, grounded on Gods Word, be as well for the first
day of the week, as it was once for the Sabbath of the Jews, then we are as
certainly tied by the Lord to the observation of this day, as they were for
their Sabbath: for the same reason is of the same force. But there is the same
reason; therefore we are bound by the Lord. That there is the same reason, is
apparent by those three places laid together, Exodus 20. 10. Mat. 12. 8. Ioh. 5.
23. The maine reason of the Jews Sabbath is, because it was the Sabbath of the
Lord. In like manner ours is the Sabbath of the Lord Christ, when he had
finished the work of our redemption: for which cause he takes this name, the
son of man is even Lord of the Sabbath: as if in more words he should say; when
God the Father had once ended the making of the world, he rested, and
published himself to be the Lord of that rest, and dedicated it to himself,
giving it the name of the Sabbath of the Lord. In like manner, when I shall
have finished the work of man's Redemption, I will rest (and have the day of my
rest dedicated unto my self; for which cause, I say, that the son of man is
even Lord of the Sabbath also; it shall be called, the Lords day. And thus the
will of the Father shall be fulfilled, which is, that as they honored the
Father in keeping the Sabbath betwixt the Creation and Redemption; so they
should honor the Son, in keeping the Sabbath betwixt the redemption and
consummation of the world.

Fifthly, the judgments of God fearfully, and to miracles lighting on the
contemners and prophaners of this day by worldliness, the opposition of
godless and most evil men; the Conscience working on men, for the observation
and against the neglect thereof; the errors of Familists, Anabaptists, Papists,
and such loose pleaders, as you and others have showed themselves to be, are
strong and impregnable arguments for the Divine Authority of it; together with
the contradictions, and the gross opinions you are forced to run into, which
argue that you rebel against the light in you, and your profane Atheistical
hearts would have that true, which yet your own light disproveth, in the
truths that are forced thereby to drop from you.

Sixthly, yea I shall (through Gods grace) evince this, that it is of the Lords
own institution: for, besides that his resurrection institutes it, as I said
before;

First, it is called the Lords day. Rev. 1. 10. Which cannot be for any
reason, but because it is of the Lords institution: for so, first, the phrase,
his day, not by creation, for so all days are his; not by destinatio^, for
that intends a time yet to come; and so the day of general judgment is his
1 These. 5. 2. but by consecration, and choice and institution; a fourth way I
would hear designed, and then I shall be ready to make answer. Secondly, the
like phrases of Scripture prove it in the same case in Exodus 20. 10. the
seventh is the Sabbath of the Lord; in other ordinances of Christ, the Lords
Supper, 1 Cor. 10. the Table of the Lord, 1. Cor. 10. 21. his ministry, 1. Tim.
1. 12. Thirdly, the manner of predication shows, Thom. Aquin. 3. q. 16. art.
3.
that this day belongs to him by his own assuming, properly, for its
predicated of him denominatively, because it is said to be of the Lord
denominatively, the man Christ is not the Lords, but the Lord; but his will,
hand, Passion is lightly called, the Lords Will, the Lords hand, the Lords
passion: for that which is of, and belonging properly to the Lord, is called
the Lords. (...)

^he first day of the week, says Tylenus, g Is destinated Primus Hebdomadis
dies sacris congressi^us destinatus est, isque non modo ab Apostolis observatus
sed etiam ab ipso Christo institutus videri potest, quem hoc die in conventus
discipulorum venisse, testatur historia Evangelica. Tylen. Synt. loc. 44. p.
276.
to holy assemblies; and that not alone observed of the Apostles, Act. 20. 17.
1 Cor. 16. 1. But also it may be seen to be Instituted by Christ himself,
whom the evangelicall History does testify to have come this day into the
assemblies of the Disciples, Ioh. 20. 19, 26.

Polyander, Rivet, Walaeus, Thysius, affirm Hic dies absolute non (...)
tantum, sed and denominative cum articulo (...) nominari coepit, Apoc. 1. 10.
nempe non solum quod eo resurrexit Dominus, and vivum se exhibuit, sedetiam
quod ei rei imo universim Domino imo a Domino sacratus dedi^aiusque esset.
Qualiter and coena Domini (...) appellatur and locus conventus (...) and
praec^tios^lemnis (...) site declarat Aug. de verbis Apost. Sermon. 15. Si autem
Apostolicae institutionis, divinae quoque fu^rit authoritatis synops pur. Theo.
2. disp. 1. p. 263.
that this day began to be named not only the day of the Lord, but also
denominatively the Lords day. Apoc. 1. 10. To wit, not only because the Lord
rose thereon, and presented himself alive, but also because it was made holy
and dedicated to that thing, yea, wholly to the Lord, yea, and of the Lord so
sanctified and dedicated; like as also the Supper of the Lord is called the
Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 20. and the place of assemblies the Lords, and the
solemn prayer The Lords Prayer, as wittily Augustine declares in his
fifteenth Sermon of the words of the Apostle. But if it were of Apostolic
Institution; it were also of Divine authority.

Bishop Andrews says, Sermon. 13. of the Resur p. 529.
the Lords day has testimony in Scripture; for how came it to be the Lords
day? But that, as it is in the Psalmest, the Lord made it; and why made he it?
but because on it the stone cast aside, that is, Christ was made the head stone
of the corner; that is, because then the Lord arose, because his resurrection
fell on it.

Who altered it? I answer, (says Master Attersol) Attersoll. on Numb. 15.
verse. 3^. p. 644.
Christ himself is the Author of this change; the Apostles often teach, that
whatsoever they taught, they received it from Christ; they learned it at his
hands before, either by word of his mouth, or by revelation of his Spirit: but
the Apostles enjoined the first day of the week to be kept as a Sabbath of
rest. 1 Cor. 16. 1.

Master Barker, On the fourth Commandment p. 186.
God did change the days, and to show the alteration, the Apostles gave this
day the name of the Lords day, they themselves kept it and ordained that the
Churches in their time should observe it.

Our renowned Champion Doctor Fulke, in the confutation of the Rhemists says,
Dr. Fulke on Reve. 1. 10. sect. 6.
To change the Lords day and keep it upon Monday, Tuesday, or any other day,
the Church has no authority; for it is not a matter of indifferency, but a
necessary prescription of Christ himself delivered to us by his Apostles.

Christ did appoint the new Sabbath, says Wolphius, Wolph. Chronol. l. 2. c. 1.
when our last enemy death being overcome, he made an end of the labors of
our Redemption, which in his humanity were to be borne, and the next day with
the new man restored, he brought out a new time; the time of our Redemption,
and of the new Covenant.

Add hereunto Docter Bownd in the book of the Sabbath commended by that
painful and learned Divine, Doctor Willet and Doctor Jones, in two latin
epistles prefixed.

To conclude this matter, the Apostles made this day the Lords day, by a
declaratorie consecration, which Christ himself made before the Lords day, by
a fundamental and binding relation, to wit, His resurrection thereon; and by
blessed and actual applycation to his use in his apparitions and expositions
thereon, and by institution in his deeds and words, for the Apostles taught to
do but what Christ commanded. Matthew. 28. 20. Act. 1. 3.

CHAP. XXII. Breerwood. Page 38, 39.
HOw then has the first day of the week gained the celebration and solemnity
to become the Sabbath of the Christians? By the constitution of the Church, and
only by that, yet of that most ancient Church, I confess that next followed
the ascension of our redeemer. But* yet all this is but Ius humanum, it is but
the decree of (...)

Secondly, but you go about to prove the Jews Sabbath ceremonial, because
first, it was a sign of difference between Jews and Gentiles, and part of
the partition wall. The first part of this proof was answered before; it was a
sign between God and them, that the Lord sanctified them; so the
Sanctification of the Sabbath (understand it of ours) is still a sign that God
sanctifies a man, every sign is not a ceremony, as every living creature is
not a man. The Sabbath was a sign of the creation, says Athaenasiu^ Athanas.
and de Sabbato and Circumcis.
, yet not therefore a ceremony.

The second part of your proof employed, when you say it was a part of the
partition wall, is very unsound: the partition wall Zanch. in Ephesians. 2. v. 14.
15.
spoken of in Ephe. 2. 14. was the Law of Commandments contained in ordinances
spoken of in the next verse, which was not the Law moral, but the ceremonial;
therefore you must prove first the Sabbath to be ceremonial, and then we
yield it is taken away, and so far forth as you can make that good.

Thirdly, again to prove it ceremonial, you allege the place in Col. 2. 16.
but that the Apost. speaks not there of the fourth Commandment is evident.
First, because he treats expressly of those Sabbaths which were of the same
rank with the New-Moones, and were ceremonial shadows of things to come in
Christ: but the Sabbath prescribed in the Decalogue, is altogether of another
nature, as has been, and shall be further showed. Secondly, he speaks as
the Apostles does to the Galatians, cap. 4. 10. but the place there treates
only of the observation of the days, months, and years, which pertained to
the servitude and bondage of weak and beggarly rudiments; as in verse. 9.
appears. Now that any precept of the Decalogue should be so accounted and
reckoned as a weak and beggarly rudiment, was far from the Apostle to
think, and is abhorred to Christian ears and religion.

Whatsoever also was Ceremonial in the Sabbath (if it be granted according to
the opinion of many Divines, that some ceremony was in the day) in respect of
that precise day, that is, by constitution annexed to it extrinsecally, and not
of the nature of the Sabbath, and first institution thereof, which nothing
hinders the morality of the seventh days institution; for so in the Authority
of Fathers and first borne, which pertaines to the fifth commandment, there
was annexed a Ceremonial reason of a type, namely, the shadowing out of
Christ, the first borne among many brethren: yet by this annexed typical
figure, the fifth commandment, nor the privilege of the first borne, in
respect of the first nature of it, is not ceremonial.

Nevertheles, by Scripture there appears not unto me of certainty, any
ceremony or type in the observation of the seventh day properly so called: for
the mention of a spiritual Sabbatisme in Heb 4. 9. presignified in some type
foregoing, under the nature of a type if referred only to the rest in Canaan,
and by comparison of the like, to the rest of God: but by no means in the
least signification is it referred to the rest commanded in the fourth precept,
as to a type and shadow.

And whereas the Fathers, and many others include the Jewish Sabbath within the
former text, they must in my judgment, be understood of that day, as it was
the day in which the ceremonial worship (which was then the worship of God)
was the sanctification of the Sabbath, and as that precise day was, till Christ
came, apt and fit; but now after Christ's resurrection, not fit for the new
world, but swallowed up of the greater, namely, the Lords day, fit for the
memorial of the works of Creation and Redemption. For to observe the Sabbath
with Moses Rites, were to deny Christ come in the flesh, whose Kingdom is not
meat and drink, but righteousness, peace and joy in the holy Ghost; and to
this the old Sabbatarian Heretics had an aim: and to observe the Jewish
seventh for Sabbath now, deserves worthily the Anathema of ancient Councels,
and Saint Austins sharp sentence, who says thus; Quisque illum diem observat,
ut litera sonat, carnaliter sapit, Despir and lit. c. 14.
Whosoever shall keep that day as the letter sounds, savoureth of the flesh.
And lastly, to observe the Sabbath in the devised assumed superstitious
strictness Jewish, which was never commanded, but taken up of their own
heads; or in the luxurious heathenish sports that others of them used, is
deservedly condemned by the Ancients, and is against, or Christian liberty, or
Christian sanctity.

Fourthly, but, to return; grant it to be ceremonial, yet your arguing will
not hold, that the Sabbath in the Commandment is utterly vanished: for all
that place, ceremony in that rest, do hold that the rest in heaven was that
which was chiefly aimed at. Now this makes against you; for then a Sabbaths
rest must remain till that eternal rest be come: for though it be assured,
yet it is not come. And if the assurance by word and pledge would have cut off
the necessity of a Sabbath rest to shadow it, then might all the shadows of
the ceremonial Law have been spared, for they had the Word, Oath, and Spirit
of God to assume Christ's coming and from that place in Heb. 4. Doctor Willet
D. Willet on Genesis 2. his places of doctrine.
saw enough to prove the divine institution of the Lords day, as a Sabbath
rest, he thus reasons:

Every simbole significative or representing sign mentioned in Scripture had a
divine institution, but so is the Sabbath a simbole or type of our everlasting
rest, Heb. 4. 9. there remains therefore Sabbatismus, a Sabbath rest to the
people of God. Which words do conclude, that both the type remains, that is,
a Sabbatisme, and the signification of the type everlasting rest.

CHAP. XXIV. Breerwood. Page 39.
But might not the celebration of the Sabbath, which thus ceased, be justly
translated by the Church to the first day of the week? Yes certainly, both
might and was justly. For I consider that the generality, was of the moral
law, of the law of nature, namely that men should sequester sometime from
worldly affairs, which they might dedicate to the honor of God, only the
speciality, that is the limitation and designement of that time, was the
churches ordinance appointing first one certain day, and that in relation of
Christian assemblies, namely that they might meet and pray, and and praise God
together with one voice in the congregation. And secondly designing that one
day to the first day of the week, for some special reasons and remembrances.
For first it was the day of Christ's resurrection from the dead. Secondly it was
the day of the holy Ghosts descention from Heaven to power infinite graces upon
Christians. The first of them for our justification as the Apostle speaks.
The second for the sanctification, and edification of the whole Church (to omit
some other reasons of less importance) justly therefore was the consecration
of the Sabbath translated to that day.

Answer.
First, Yea; a shadow? Of which we have the substance in Christ? Out of Date?
and expired of it self? Part of the partition wall? And yet the celebration
and consecration of the Sabbath translated justly? Then the Church, by your
Doctrine, may revive the ceremonial law, and put life into the dead carcass
thereof; the Church may not alone embrace the shadow, of which Christ is the
body, but also appoint it to be embraced: the Church may translate part of the
ceremonial Law (which yet Moses the typical mediator would not, might not
order a tittle of it, to a loope, lace, or placing of either, but keep to the
pattern showed him in the Mount) and so by the same reason translate
priesthood and all, Heb. 6. The Church then is Lord of the Sabbath, and can
consecrate, and not only celebrate the Sabbath, all full of blasphemy against
Christ, and blemish to his chaste spouse.

Secondly, and for your distinction of generality and speciality of the
commandment, (besides what has been said before) if you yield not the
speciality to be moral, you turn out one commandment of the ten from being
moral for all your generality for to say that this is the morality of the
commandment and no more, that some time should be sequestered to divine worship,
makes this commandment no more moral, then the building of the Tabernacle or
Temple is moral: for therein this perpetual will of God was showed, that some
place must be assigned for Church assemblies and public worship.

By this also it will follow, that the Papists that in their Catechismes render
the fourth commandment thus, keep holy the festival days, do render the
full s^nse of it. Which being yielded, this also will follow, that you may
as well put it down thus, frequent the assemblies.

Moreover, all the feast days of the Jews contained this general equity.
Lastly, then God should in this command nothing to particular men, because it
is not in their power to institute these days, and so nothing shall be commanded
to them further, than what public persons shall injoyne, be it but one day in
the year: and for them neither is there any thing commanded in special, and
they sin not if they appoint but one day in a Moon, or if they appoint but
one in a quarter, then also the Feasts of Christ's Nativity, of Easter of
Whitsontide, etc. are of equal authority with the Lords day, which thing, what
ears can hear with patience? These also are constitutions of the ancient
primitive Church.

CHAP. XXV. Breerwood. Page 39, 40, 41.
But what of that? What if the consecration of the Sabbath was by the Church
translated to the first day of the week? Was therefore the commandment of God
translated also? That that day ought to be observed under the same obligation
with the Sabbath? For if the commandment of God were not translated by the
Church, together with the celebration from the seventh day to the first day,
then is working on the first no violation of Gods commandment. Was the
commandment of God then translated from the Sabbath to the Lords day by the
decree of the Church? No: the Church did it not, let me see the act. The
Church could not do it, let me see the authority: the Church could not
translate the commandment to the first day, which God himself had namely
limited to the seventh. For could the Church make that Gods commandment which
was not his commandment? Gods commandment, was to rest on the seventh day, and
work on the first; therefore to rest on the first, and work on the seventh,
was not his commandment: For does the same commandment of God enjoin both
labor and rest on the same day? is there fast and lose in the same
commandment ^^th God? Thou shall work on the first day says that, and work
^^ the seventh says this. Can the Church make these the same commandment? But
say the Church has this incredible and unco^ceivable power: Say it may forbid
to work on the first day, by the virtue of the very same precept. That does
neither expressly command or license to work on that day. Say that the Church
of God may translate the commandment of God from one day to another at their
pleasure, did they it therefore? I spoke before of their authority whether they
might do it. I enquire now of the act, whether they did it; did the Church (I
say) ever constitute, that the same obligation of Gods commandment which lay
on the Jews, for keeping of the Sabbath day should be translated and laid upon
the Christians for keeping of the Lords day? Did the Church this, no, no, they
did it not; all the wit and learning in the World will not prove it.

Answer.
First, this reasoning is on false grounds supposed (as has been proved) and
therefore falls to the ground.

Secondly, yet take their own grounds.

If the Church have power to translate the day and consecrate it a Sabbath,
they may have power, and had so, to translate the Commandment: for the
Commandment is but the consecration of the Sabbath, and determination thereof
to a certain day.

And if they do not translate the Commandment, yet the Commandment stands in
force for that day to which by just power they have translated the Sabbath. For
the Commandment is in force as a law of nature; you confess, for the
celebration of a Sabbath, or else you deny a morality in any part of that
Commandment, but if that your morality stand, (as without doubt it does) then
is working on that day equally a violation of the Commandment of God; as
working on the seventh, from the creation, for then it was sinful, because
that day was then Sabbath: and now it is so because this is now Sabbath.

Thirdly, and for those quaeres, let me see the Act? Let me see the Authority,
as they may be retorted to your conceit of their translating the seventh day,
and consecrating it a Sabbath, so in the true sense of consecrating that day,
you have seen before the Act and Authority, and may now see (if you wink not)
that the Commandment is not translated but remains the same it was, namely,
to keep holy the Sabbath day. Neither is there a making of that Gods
Commandment which was not his, nor yet does the commandment contain any
impossibilities and contradictions. Distingue tempora, and toll dubia,
Distinguish the times, and the doubts vanish, the Commandment enjoyneth rest
and holiness Sabbath-like on the Lords Sabbath, then that seventh day, now
this seventh day: and of both is it true, the seventh is the Sabbath of the
Lord thy God. Then the seventh day was it, and so enjoined thereon; Now the
first day of the week, and so enjoined thereon. Hence this reasoning is easily
answered. First, God commanded to work on the first and rest on the seventh,
therefore to rest on the first, and work on the seventh was not his
Commandment, it was not then, it is now, moreover, six days thou shall
work, does not point out, which six days, and the seventh day will contain
both ours and theirs: and their seventh they knew then by the work of Creation
as our seventh we know by the work of Redemption.

For the authority and Act of the Church we need it not, the Scripture as
before, has saved the labor. But that the act of this power was put forth,
the Church has acknowledged and your self do while you yield, the first day
consecrated Sabbath.

CHAP. XXVI. Breerwood. Page 41, 42, 43.


It is not therefore the translation of the old commandment of God from the
one day to the other (which yet if it were translated, can oblige servants no
otherwise than it did under the old law) but the institution of a new
commandment, of the Church her self (yet guided by the spirit of God) that
consecrated that day to the solemn service of God.

Answer.
First, this objection we own, and for your distinction thus disprove it. Your
granted Generality is commanded in the commandments foregoing, in which God
that commands a worship, commands also time for it, as when he created the
world, time was concreated of necessity. Besides, this vain conceit was before
blown up. Therefore if all you name and put into the speciality of the
Commandment be merely ceremonial, we have no fourth Commandment distinct
from the former.

Secondly, for your speciality which you say is all merely ceremonial, we
proved before that the light of nature would prove the contrary, and now we
assault every particular with the sword of the spirit, that the hairy scalpe of
it may be wounded, and in the welding of the same put our hands on the hands of
the Lords Worthies, to fetch the blows with more force.

First, that one day of seven, and particularly the seventh, is not
ceremonial, is evident by the commandment, which delivered with Gods own
mouth in the mount, and charged by way of command, is no other than moral and
indispensable. And by the celebration of the Christian Sabbath in the New
testament, which was on the seventh day, viz. the first day of the week, and
was constantly in weekly revolution celebrated. Calvin says, Calvin. in
quar^u^ praec^ptum. diem unum separat a reliquis, and ab omnibus terrenis
negotiis and curis imm^ne^; quoad hanc partem, nobis cum veteri populo communis
est Sabba^i necessitas, ut die uno liberi simus atque ita melius parati tam ad
discendum qudm ad fidem nostram testandum.
God separateth one day from the rest, and wills that it be free from all
earthly business and cares. In this respect the necessity of the Sabbath is
common to us with the ancient people, that one day we be free, and so the
better prepared as well to learn, as to testify our faith: so Peter Martyr on
Genesis 2. and Mast. Perkins on Gal. 4. 10. and infinite many more. The Apostles
knew and that by the Scriptures, says learned Fulke, that one day of seven was
appointed to be observed for ever, during the world, consecrated to the public
exercises of Gods true Religion. The Church of Scotland says, that the Preface
to the assembly at Perth.
day commanded in the Law, formally must remain, and ever be the seventh,
after six days work. Chemnitius Chemnit. examen Council. trident. cap. de
dieb. fest. Tam Veteris quam Novi Testamenti pagina septima^ diem ad humanam
quietem specialiter deputat, id est, (interpret Zu^rez. de diebus festis Cap.
1.) utrumque Testamentun appro. bavit morem deputandi ad quietem humanam,
septimum quenque diem hebdomadae: quod est formaliter deputate septimu^ dicm,
licet materialiter non idem dies fuerit semper deputatus: and hoc modo verum
est, scptimum diem in lege veteri esse Sabbathum, in nova vero esse dominicam
diem. De fcriis cap. licet.
(who with the Lutherans, ascribes too much in this thing to the Churches
liberty) yet affirms truly thus much: This is that which is said usually and
truly, that the New Testament in the commandment of keeping holy the Sabbath
day, abrogated not the Genus, the general, which is moral, but the species,
the special: that is, has not taken away the general, which is the seventh
day, for this is natural: but the special or particular, namely, that seventh
day which the Jews kept in remembrance of the first Creation. Alexander the
third Pope of Rome, affirms that the page as well of the old as the new
Testament has specially deputed the seventh day to humane rest: that is (by
the interpretation of Zuarez) both Testaments have approved, the manner of
deputing every seventh day of the week to humane Rest: which is to depute the
seventh day formally, although the same day materially has not always been
deputed: and by this means it is true, that that seventh day in the old law
was Sabbath, but in the New the Lords day is Sabbath. M. Attersoll on Numbers
15. 35. p. 645. well observes, that if one day in seven be not moral and
perpetual, a man may say that one day in seven weeks or seven years is
enough, and so at length it shall be said, we are not bound to meet together
publicly above one day in a 100. years. But this absurdity Gomarus, a that
holds the contrary opinion, thinks he Gomarus de invest. haeret. and orig.
Sab. c. 5. pa. 61. Certi dies and sufficientes.
has evaded, by these words, when he holds that not only certain days, but
also sufficient days be observed for Gods worship. But this is just nothing,
for are not one day in a year yearly certain days, and so of the rest: and
if that some shall say they are enough, though others speak against it, who
shall tell which of these two sides, sides with the truth, when what is enough
(you hold) God has not particularly determined: yea, but Gomarus says* that
what days are sufficient may be gathered out of the precept of the Sabbath,
namely, that they be, either not more seldom, or else a little more often, than
the Sabbaths of the Israelites, as the indulgence of God in giving that
precept, shows. For when the Lord for his clemency sake, took one of seven
only to his worship for the Israelites, men of a stiffe-necke and pressed with
the heavy yoke of feasts and other ceremonies; how shall more seldom suffice
among Christians, that are free from that yoke and burden? Very good: Can any
look on this without grief and laughter. If out of the precept you must
gather your sufficient days, why will you not take the days God has in
precept warranted for sufficient and sufficiently blessed; one of seven, the
seventh? If this your sufficiency must be gathered from the precept, and that
too as you gather that they be more to us than were to Jews, then we are to
have two Sabbaths a week at the least, and the Church erred that Anathematized
the keepers of Saturday in the time of the Gospel, and still erreth that never
saw this yet, much less observed it. Or if you say, no they must not be
Sabbaths, how then gather you this sufficiency of the days out of the fourth
Commandment which concerns the Sabbath and not half holidaies, and other
feasts: and if the Jews were yoked with observation of feasts, and therefore
Gods clemency would they should keep but the seventh day? What an insupportable
yoke do you lay upon Christians, that must, as you say, keep more than one of
seven, or else they keep not a sufficient number? all the Jewish feasts would
hardly arise to the number that two in a week constantly do amount to: and
what interfearing is here? One of the seven days of the week in perpetual
revolution is not necessarily to be observed by force of the fourth
Commandment. And yet fewer than one a week cannot be sufficient, and that by
virtue of the fourth Commandment. What? would you have more than one a week
by virtue of the Commandment, and therefore you say, one is not necessary? Or
is that which is only sufficient, not necessary? Why then take that which is
insufficient, and let that be yet necessary, even one when you will, and more
when you will, now this day, now that, you may do them all a favor to take
them over by turns. Thus far for Gomarus in this thing.

Secondly, that one whole day be kept holy and no less is moral, and not
ceremonial, you yield that the commandment for a Sabbath is moral: now God
never mentioned less than a day, saying, Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath
day, the distinction also of time by the Lord of time clears this, for the
whole week is divided into seven days, and every of those days consists of
24. hours. David, in his Psalm for the Sabbath day Psalm 92. title with verse
2.
, describes the time thus, It is good to show forth thy loving kindness in
the morning, and thy faithfulness every night (meaning every Sabbath day
morning and night) as the title shows. The apparition of our Savior at the
night of the day of his Resurrection in the midst of the Disciples assembled
Ioh 20. 19. Profunda jam nocte, it being now very late at night, says Are^ius.
, proves that the night following of the day of Sabbath (take here day for the
daylight between sun and sun) is of the Sabbath: and lastly, the
celebration of the Lords day by Paul at Troas in Act. 20. 7. out of which,
says Mr. Perkins, I note two things: First, that the night mentioned there,
was a part of the seventh day of Paul's abode at Troas: for, if it were not, so
then he had stayed at least a night longer, and so more than seven days,
because he should have stayed part of another day. Secondly, that this night
was part of the Sabbath which they then kept. For the Apostles keep it in
manner of a Sabbath, in the exercises of piety and divine worship, (...)

Answer.
This also suffers just exception, both in it self, and in reference to the
matter in hand: it binds you yield; because Gods command binds to obey the
Churches just constitutions. Consider, it is Gods Command that binds, and not
the Churches, but as it is Gods. Now Gods Command binds equally: and to
despise Christ, and despise him in his Apostles (in as much as he says, He
that despises you, despises me,) is alike sinful: or what if it bind not
equally? (to take your own words) if it bind enough to make the transgressor a
sinner before God? For this was never questioned, whether the Master or Servant
were the greater sinner, in the servants working on the Sabbath. Again, it
binds equally, by your own doctrine, because you say in page 43. lib. 1. it
is of the Church guided by the Spirit of God, unless you will say that the
doctrine of the New Testament, preached and written by men with the Holy Ghost
sent down from Heaven, is of less binding power than the Ten Commandments
delivered on Mount Sinai; which runs against, not only all Christian
religion, but also those Texts in special. Heb. 2. 2, 3. and 12.

CHAP. XXVIII. Breerwood. Page 43, 44, 45.
But if you ask me how far does that constitution of the Church oblige the
conscience? I answer you, as far as it does command, (you will desire no
more) further it cannot: It cannot oblige farther, than it does ordain; it
cannot bind the conscience for guiltiness further than it does for obedience;
because all guiltiness both presuppose disobedience; now that the Church
ordained solemn assemblies of Christians, to be celebrated that day to the
honor of God, and in them the invocation of Gods holy name, thankes-giving*
hearing of the holy Scriptures, and receiving of the Sacraments, is not denied;
It is out of question, all antiquity affords plentiful remembrance of it.
But that it injoyneth that severe and exact vacation, from all works on the
Lords day, which the commandment of God required in the Jews Sabbath, you
will never prove. It relisheth too much of the Jewish Ceremonies, to be proved
by Christian divinity: for this is no proof of it, that the Lords day is
succeeded in place of the Sabbath, or as some Divines term it, as the heir
of the Sabbath. It is, I say, no proof at all (except it were established by
the same authority, and the observance of it, charged with the same strictness
of commandment) for if it succeed the Sabbath in place, must it therefore
succeed in equal preciseness of observation? (So if the Pope succeeds Peter
in place, must he therefore succeed him in equality of power?) The Lords day
therefore succeeds the Sabbath in the point of sanctification, for
celebration of the assemblies, for the Church has precisely commanded that,
but not in the point of exact and extreme vacation, from every kind of work,
for that the Church has not commanded: and so although the Lords day may well
be termed the heir of the Sabbath, yet is it not, ex ass haeres, as the
civil Lawyers speak. It inheriteth not the whole right of the Sabbath, for
that right and prerogative of the Sabbath was not given to the Sabbath and its
heirs; it was no fee simple (and if I may speak in the Lawyers style) it was
only a tenure for term of life: namely, during the life of the ceremonial
law, which life ended in the death of our Savior. This reason therefore of the
succession of the Lords day in place of the Sabbath is no reason.

Answer.
First, what was acknowledged by the Church, as enjoined by the point of
vacancie from all labor, without the least relish of Jewish ceremonies; we
shall see in the next Chapter. Here only we examine your supposed confutation
of a reason to prove it; which reason is this; The Lords day is succeeded in
the place of the Sabbath, or as some say, as Heir of the Sabbath, therefore to
be kept Sabbath-like. You confute it thus: If it succeeds it in place, must it
succeed in equal preciseness of observation? No, It succeeded in point of
Sanctification, not of exact vacation. I reply, your distinction is not
distinct; for if in Sanctification, then in exact vacation, namely, vacation
Sabbaticall: for if in the end, in the means necessary to that end, and for
that end ordained, which is exact vacation, so far as it may further
Sanctification: Now for your playing on the terms about an Heir, it is
frivolous.

Secondly, for your instance in the Pope succeeding Peter, arguing from place
to power, it little conduces to this matter: for the Pope succeeds not in
place Apostolical, if he did, I should not much doubt of his power
Apostolical. Had there been a certain Commandment of God to show, that God
in his eternal Law commanded his people to obey the Apostolical place? But by
place you mean room, not Official function, and then what kin between your
instance, and the matter in hand?

CHAP. XXIX. Breerwood. Page 45, 46, 47.
ANy other reason besides this, or else authority which I might in your behalf
object to my self, I know none worthy mentioning: for the commandment of God,
as I have proved, is not of this day. The commandment of the Church is of this
day, but not of these works, neither will all the histories of the ancient
Church, nor canons of the ancient councels, nor any other monuments or
registers of antiquity afford you (as I am certainly persuaded, search them as
curiously as you can) record of any such constitution of the Church for the
general restraint of works on the Lords day. You may find I know in some of
the ancient Fathers much sounding the prerogative of that day: as that it was a
holy day in Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 22.
Eusebius: a day of Christian emblies in Apolog. 2.
Justin Martyr; and a day of rejoicing in Apolog. c. 16
Tertullian: a festival day in Epi. ad mag.
Ignatius; and some more of the like, but does any of all these import or imply
a general restraint? a desistance from all work; No they do not; neither
shall you find in these, nor in any other records of antiquity any
constitutions of the Apostles; and of the first Church extant to that effect;
no, nor any relation or remembrance that such a constitution had ever been
made by them, nay I find clear evidence to the contrary; for would
Constantine the Great (that most holy Emperor and best nursing Father of
Christian religion that ever Prince was) would he I say, have licensed by his
decree, the country people freely) libere liciteque are the words of the
constitution) to attend their sowing of grain, setting of vines, and other
husbandry on the Lords day, if those works had been forbidden by the
commandment of God, or decree of the Apostles, and first Church? Or would the
Fathers in the council of Laodicea (one of the most ancient and approved
counsels of the Church) inioyne the vacancy of the Lords day with this
condition? And if men can? Certainly servants full ill can, if they be
constrained by their Masters to work: would they I say have added such a
condition, had it been simply unlawful, for all sorts of people by the
ancient sanctification of the first Church to do any work that day? It
appears therefore that there were no such universal constitutions of the
Church. The actual forbearing of all works by some Christians that day* stand
not on: nor on the exhortations of some ancient Fathers to that purpose, some
remembrances of both are to be found I know, but these are particular examples,
and persuasions; constitutions of the Church they are not, edicts of sundry
Princes likewise, and decrees of some provincial counsels are extant I
confess in record to the same effect, and those are constitutions indeed, but
partly not of the Church, partly not universal nor very ancient, and therefore
are no sanctions to oblige the whole Church, which beside the law of God, and
decrees of the Apostles (to whom the government of the whole Church by our
Savior was committed) and the canons of the universal Synods, no positive
constitution can do.

Answer.
Having made it evident that the Commandment of God stands in force for our
Sabbath, I might easily cast off all that you shall say to the end of your
Discourse: but to clear and scour the coast, and make it apparent that what
you say is nothing, and all makes for us, who in this thing hold the Truth, we
proceed.

You say, you find nothing for the general restraint of works on the Lords
day in any History, cannon monument, and register of Antiquity, but clear
evidence to the contrary.

First, for the first; let the places you allege speak out that all may hear
them, and not be blindly huddled up.

That in Eusebius. l. 4. cap. 22. is a passage in the Epistle of Dionysius, Bishop
of Corinth, to Soter Bishop of Rome, concerning the accustomed reading of the
Epistle of Clement to the Corinths; in their public assemblies on the (...).
Lords day, of which he says thus; We have spent (or passed through to the
end of it) the Lords day to day, an Holy day. Now to spend the Lords day
throughout, an holy day, is not to spend any of it in servile work; let
Scripture, Heathen writers, and all men testify: this was done says that
Bishop (...) After their ancient custom: Justin Martyr, after he has recorded
all the duties of their public assemblies, adds this, (having spoken in the
precedent words of the administration of the Lords Supper) But we after those
things for the remainder (of the time) do ever remember one another of these
things, and those of us which have any thing, help every one that wants, and
are always together one with another. A little after he says, that the
assemblies on that day were frequented of all in City and Country, prayer,
preaching, and the Sacrament was administered, Collections for the poor, which
was after the assemblies, distributed to the needy, imprisoned, stranger, with
the like, whom they visited.

Tertullian, in that 16, chapter of his Apology against the Gentiles, gives
this as one cause of their conjecture, that Christians worshipped the Sun,
because they kept the Sunday Holy. We give our selves to joy (says he) the
Sunday, for another far wide reason than in honor of Diem solis laetitiae
indulgemus.
the Sun are we in the second place from them which appoint Saturday, to
idleness and feeding themselves, also wandering from the Jewish custom, which
they know not. What means he hereby, but that such a solemnity is kept and
ought to be by Christians, as should exceed in that kind the feasts of the
nations and Heathen, as in his book of Idolatry, chap. 14. he speaks.

Ignatius speaks enough to any man not prepossessed, for he says, let every
lover of Christ celebrate the Lords day as festival, (...) the Greek word
signifies a solemn festival free from work and workeday labor.

That others also of the ancients did understand this celebration to be with
exact vacation is evident.

Saint Austin says, come ye to the Church every Lords day, for if the unhappy
Jews do celebrate the Sabbath with such devotion, that in it no earthly
works were done; how much more ought Christians to be vacant to God alone on
the Lords day, and come together for the Salvation of their souls?

Again, Apostles and Apostolic men have therefore ordained that the Lords day
be kept with religious solemnity, because in it our Redeemer arose from the
Dead; and which is therefore called the Lords day, that in it, abstaining from
earthly affairs and the enticements of the world, we may serve only in divine
worship.

That of Saint Clement is also worthy note, neither on the Lords days, which
are days of joyfulnesse, do we grant any thing may be said or done, besides
holiness.

Austin also in the sixth book de Civitate Dei chap. 11. speaking of Seneca's
scoffing at the Jews Sabbath, that they lost the seventh part of their time in
vacancie, adds this; Notwithstanding he durst not speak of the Christians,
even then most contrary to the Jews, on either part, lest either he should
praise them against the old custom of his own Country, or reprove them
perhaps against his own will.

Saint Austine likewise reproves their telling of tales, their slanders,
playing at dice, and such unprofitable sports; as if one part of the day were
set apart for duty to God, and the rest of the day together with the night to
their own pleasures: In the same place also he condemns walking about the
fields and woods, when they should be at Sermon. 251. De Temp.
Divine Service with clamor and laughter, and says the day must be sequestered
a rurali opere, and ab omni negotio; from country work and all business,
that we may give our selves wholly to the worship of God.

Saint Chrysostom speaking of the fitness of the Lords day for alms, says;
it is a convenient time to practice liberality, with a ready and willing
mind; not only in this regard, but also because it has rest, remission,
freedom and vacation from labors.

Saint Ambrose Ambros. tom. 3. Sermon. 1. de granosinapis, p. 225.
reproving the peoples neglect of Church on the Lords days, says; Whatsoever
brother is not present at the Lords Sacraments, of necessity he is with God a
forsaker of the Divine truth. For how can he excuse himself, who preparing his
dinner at home on the day of the Sacraments, contemns that heavenly Banquet,
and taking care of the belly, neglects the physic of his soul?

The same Father in another place Id. Sermon. 33. page 259. tom. 3.
says: Let us all the day be conversant in prayer or reading; he that cannot
read, let him ask of some holy man, that he may be fed with his conference:
let no secular acts hinder divine acts; let no Table-play carry away the mind;
let no pleasure of Dogs call away the senses; let no dispatch of a business
pervert the mind with covetousness. True, this Father in this place speaks
of a Fast, but we know that a Fast and Sabbath are alike for the point of rest.

Saint Hieron. ad Rustich. Dominicos dies, orationi tantum and lectionibus
vacant.
Hierom also; On the Lords day, says he, they only give themselves to prayer
and reading.

Secondly, now for your contrary evidences, what if they also make for us? You
allege a constitution of Constantines, Iurge:

First, the same Emperors Constitutions found in Ecclesiastical Writers.
Eusebius in his life says:

Wherefore he ordained, that all that obeyed the Roman Empire, should rest
from all labor on the days that are called from our Saviors Name. Further,
he says of this Christian Emperor;

He taught all his host to honor this day diligently: those that partooke of
the Divine Faith* he gave them leisure to frequent the Assemblies, that no
impediment should hinder their attendance on prayer, but others that had no
savor of Divine Doctrine, he gave charge of them by another Law, that they
should go into the open fields of the Suburbs on the Lords day, and that there
altogether should use the same form of prayer to God, when asigne was given of
some one of them: for, said he, we ought not to use spears, and place the hope
of our affairs in weapons, and bodily strength.

Sozomen in his tripartite history testifies thus, That day which is called
the Lords day, which the Hebrews call the first day; which the Grecians
attribute to the Sun, and which is before the seventh day, he ordained that
all should cease from suites and other businesses, and should only be
occupied in prayers upon it Sozom Hist. Eccles tripert. l. 1. c. 10.
.

Behold Constantine against Constantine.

Secondly, your Constitution is read, Cod. l. 3. tit. 12 l. 3.

This Constitution was reversed by Leo the Emperor, and another made in these
words:

We ordain according to the true meaning of the holy Ghost, and of the
Apostles thereby directed, that on the sacred day wherein our integrity was
restored, all do rest and surcease labor; that neither husbandmen, nor other
on that day put their hands to forbidden works: for if the Jews did so much
reverence their Sabbath, which was but a shadow of ours, are not we which
inhabit the light and truth of grace, bound to honor that day which the Lord
himself has honored, and has therein delivered us both from dishonor and
from death? Are we not bound to keep it singular and inviolable, well
contenting our selves with so liberal a grant of the rest, and not incroaching
upon that one which God has chosen to his honor? Were it not wretchlesse
neglect of Religion to make that very day common, and to think we may do with
it as with the rest.

The title of this Constitution is this Justin. tom. 3. p. 459. Leon. Iraper.
constit. 54.
, Vt Dominicis diebus omnes ab operibus vacent: That all men should cease from
works on the Lords days. This Constitution of Leo is approved by Master
Hooker Hooker eccles. polit. l. 5. sect. 71. page 385.
, and that of Constantine called an overgreat facility under pretense of the
miscarriage of the fruits of the earth by unseasonable weather.

Yet this may be said for that renowned Emperor, he gave that as a
conc^ssory Law, which proves nothing, unless it be the hardness of men's
hearts. So Moses permitted men to put away their wives, and Aaron agreed to it,
and yet none can reason thence that they were not of Christ's mind in that
matter. Say the same for Constantine.

The Council of Laodic^a is abused by you in your Allegation thereof, for the
Canon of that Council according to the Greek is this:

(...). That Christians Council. Laod. Can. 29.
ought not to Iudaize, and to rest on the Sabbath, as they are Christians; but
if they be found to Iudaize, let them be Anathema from Christ, or with Christ.

The Annotation upon it, is this, (...) deest.

Of this Original I find three Latin Translations. The first; Quod non
oportet Christian^s Iudaizare, and ociari in Sabbato, sed operarieos in eodem
die, preferentes autem in veneratione diem Dominicum (si vacare voluerint) ut
Christiani hoc faciant: quod si reperti fuerint Iudaizare, Anathe ma sint a
Christo. Thus in English: Translat. Dionys^i exigui.
That Christians ought not to judaize, and rest on the Sabbath, but work on
that day, and preferring the Lords day in reverence (if they will be vacant)
as Christians do this thing: but if they be found to Iudaize, let them be
Anathema from Christ.

The second: Non oportet Christianos Iudaizare, and in Sabbatho vacare, sed
operari eos in eadem die, Dominicam preponendo eidem diei: si hoc eis placet,
vacent tanquam Christiani, quod si inventi fuerint Iudaizare, Anathema sit. In
English: Translat. Isidori Mercatoris.
Christians ought not to Iudaize, and to surcease labor on the Sabbath, but
work on that day, preferring the Lords day before that day: if this please
them, they may be vacant as Christians, but if they be found to Iudaize, let
him be Anathema.

The third: Quod non oportet Christianos Iudaizare and in Sabbato ociari:
sedipso eo die operari: diem autem Dominicum preferentes ociari, si modo
possint ut Christi^^os, quod si inventi fuerint ut Iudaizantes, sint Anathema
apud Christu^. Gentianus Hervetus.
That Christians ought not to Iudaize, and rest on the Sabbath: but work that
day: but preferring the Lords day, they ought to rest as Christians, if so be
they can, and if they be found as Iudaizing, let them be Anathema with Christ.

Here note three things; first, that the Sabbath here spoken of, is Saturday,
which was the Jews Sabbath. Secondly, that the last is by all acknowledged for
the worst translation: indeed they are all rather paraphrases and glosses, than
translations. Thirdly, the two first plainly carry this sense: that provided
they prefer the Lords day in honor and reverence above the Jews Sabbath,
and that they do not Iudaize; if this please them, they may rest the Saturday
too. And the last translation in my opinion, and according to the pointing
thereof, as I find it in the Author foundeth thus, preferring the Lords day
they must rest, if so be they can do it as Christians, not as Iudaizers. Now
how the Jews did rest on their Sabbath in those primitive times, is clear in
Ignatius and others.

(...). In English as follows:

Therefore (says that blessed Martyr Ignat. epist. ad Magnes.
) let us not Sabbatize after the Jewish manner, as rejoicing in idleness, (for
he that does not labor let him not ear, for in the sweat of thy face thou
shall eat thy bread, say the Oracles: but let every of us keep Sabbath
spiritually, rejoicing in the meditation of the Law, not in the remission of
the body, admiring the workmanship of God, not eating things of the day before,
nor drinking things lukewarm, nor walking measured spaces, nor rejoicing in
dancings and mad shoutings, and clappings of the hands and feet.

Now was it not needful to say, if they can, they should rest the Lords day
like Christians, and not like Jews in an idle, wanton, luxurious, and
lascivious rest, which was rather idleness and sloth, than rest; rather
madness like those that kept Bacchus Feast, than rest.

But this Alleager takes to the worst Translation, and fasteneth upon that
clause, which by no means will be admitted (...) to your Tenet, is no breach
of any divine commandment. What by freely? May he do it, so he do it with
reluctance? What by every man? Are some privileged? As the Tempter said to
Eve; Yea, has God said, Ye shall not eat of every Tree of the Garden. Some
need no privilege, for some will not labor any day, these need no such
liberty to work extraordinarily the Lords day, your liberty were their bondage
on any day; or may some freely profane it, though not every man? Or ordinary
labor in none will profane it? Or will ordinarily labor in some profane it,
but only extraordinary labor in other? How too shall one know this ordinary
and extraordinary labor apart? What mean you to say, ( Would I set at
liberty?) because, in your opinion, there is no command of God to bind;
therefore can you bind and loose?

Secondly, it is meet, say you, that all worldly affairs be abandoned that
day, and that it be dedicated wholly to the honor of God: What? meet to do
that which no Law of God, of Apostles, of universal Synods did ever require,
as you spoke but now? What? is it meet for a present purpose? To distill your
poison closely, which shall run like oil into the bones of Church and
Commonwealth, and none stay it: while the devout heart shall be put off with
this flappe, It is meet indeed.

It is meet that Christians should be as devout in rest and sanctity on the
Lords day, as the Jews on their Sabbath. That is all one as to say, (according
to what you have taught before,) that a man should be as devout in the commands
of his own heart, as in Gods command (for so you make it) and in the precepts
of men, as in Gods: what deifying is here of men, and vilifying of God?

Thirdly, but what an argument is here? The obligation of our thankfulness is
more than theirs, though the obligation of his commandment be less herein;
therefore the Christian should be more devout than the Jew. I had thought the
commandment had bound to Devotion, and the greater the more. I had thought the
Greatness of benefits (whence the debt of thankfulness is greatned) had
increased the obligation of the commandment, and our obedience to it? But now
you yield, his commandment some what obliges on our Sabbath, though less,
when before you utterly denied any breach of any divine commandment in
laboring that day, and so any obligation.

To strengthen this argument, you express your wish, that most religiously
with all abstinence, and all attendance it were kept. Do you wish this with
all your heart, and yet bend all your might to overthrow the commandment of
God? Would you, or could you think, that your wish should prevail more than
Apostolic truth?

Fourthly, have we in one breath these contradictory sentences: No
constitution of the Church obliging to the strict desisting from labor. And
the constitutions of some ancient Councels restraining that profanation.

Fifthly, you come in with the Edicts of Princes, as one that would have the
observation of the Lords day depend upon constitutions of the Church, and
Edicts of Princes only: and so not to differ from another holy day. Most
wicked, Popish, worse than Popish, and against all the famous lights ancient
and modern. Or do you mention Princes Edicts and Churches constitutions to
gloss with ours? Ours detest your Tenet, and you seek herein to wound Church
and Prince: for how they hold of the Lords day, that it is directly grounded on
the fourth commandment, appears in the Liturgy, in the book of Homilies,
and in the Statutes and godly Provisions for redress of prophanations. This is
the Doctrine of our Church Homil. of the place and time of prayer, part, 1.
page 125.
: By this commandment (speaking of the fourth) we ought to have a time, as
one day in the week, wherein we ought to rest, yea from our lawful and
needful works. For like as it appears by this commandment, that no man in
the six days ought to be slothful, or idle, but diligently to labor in
that state wherein God has set him; even so, God has given express charge to
all men, that upon the Sabbath day, which is now our Sunday, they should cease
from all weekly and worke-day labor, (...) of these laws, to reject their
commandments touching matter of work or service on the* Sabbath or any other
day.

Answer.
First, I might put off all this still, because it is upon this false ground
that the Commandment of God does not enjoyne our Sabbath with the like. But I
willingly go on with you, to see if there be one true stitch through your
whole Discourse. And here before we come to particulars Though the Laws of
men should not take hold of servants in this case, yet the Laws of God do.
, let all note, that that odious term and calumniating phrase of Servants
rebellion against their masters is your own, and comes from an evil heart,
and crafty head. We teach, that Princes unlawful commands are not to be
executed; yet we teach not, that any so commanded must rebel, but not obey,
and be so far from rebellion if it should be urged, that he suffer even to
blood patiently, without so much as reviling, judging, or the like, but only
committing his cause to him that judges righteously. But to come to your
matter you hold: First,

That the Churches Constitutions, and the Edicts of Princes never intended to
forbid light and labourlesse work, nor do their censures take hold on men
therefore.

Secondly, against this, what the Doctrine of our Church is, you heard before,
which taught, that God condemned all weekly and worke-day labor, all common
business, and to give themselves wholly to heavenly exercises, etc. The
doctrine of the Church of Ireland Articles of Religion in a Synod at Dublin,
1615.
is consonant hereunto, which teaches thus; The first day of the week, which
is the Lords day, is wholly to be dedicated to the service of God: and
therefore we are bound therein to rest from our common and daily business;
and to bestow that leisure upon holy exercises both public and private.

In a Council, Concilium Matiscon. 2. c. 1.
in the year 588. it was decreed, that no work on the Lords day be done, but
the eyes and hands stretched out to God that whole day, and that if a Country
man or servant should neglect this wholesome Law, he should be beaten with
more grievous strokes of Clubbes. For these things, says that Council,
pacify God, and remoove the judgments of diseases and barrenness. And
again, understanding while they sat in the Council C. 4.
, that some absented themselves from the Assemblies, they decreed under pain
of Anathema, that on all Lords days all both men and women received the
Communion.

In another General Synod there was made this decree Sancitum est, ut domini in
suis ditionibus diebus dominicis prohibeant nundi^as annuas, and s^ptimanales,
item conventicula in Tabernis, compotationes, alearum, chartarum and similes
varios lusus, concentus, musicorum instrumentorum usum, atque choreas. Synod.
general. Petricoviensis. Anno 1578.
: It is ordained, that the Lords in their several dominions do prohibit on
the Lords days the yearly and weekly Faires, also meetings in Tavernes,
Compotations (or Gossipings) Dice, Cards, and diverse the like sports, singing
in Concents (as now many in merry meetings have their singing of Catches and
their roarings, as they are called) the use of musical Instruments and Dancing.

In a Council at Nice it was ordered, that those who either kept Court, bought
or sold, or otherwise profaned the Sabbath, should be prohibited the
Communion, because that whole day we ought only to rest, and spread abroad our
hands-in prayer to God Toto hoc die tantummodo vacandum, quia toto hoc die
manus Deo expandendae.
.

Canutus Canutus lege 14. 15.
, a King in this Land before the Conquest, enacted in a Council at Winchester,
that Sunday should be kept holy, and Faires, Courts, Huntings, and worldly
works on that day should be forborne.

Guntramnus Praeceptio Guntramni ad Episcop. dat. in Council. Matiscon. 2.
, King of France commanded, that on the Lords day no bodily work should be
done, besides what was prepared to eat, to maintain life conveniently.

Secondly, you affirm that neither constitution of the Church, nor edict of
Princes, do free servants from their Masters power to command them to work,
or their obedience to work at their Masters command that day more than others.

Thirdly, what the Doctrine of our Church is in this point, is clear in the
Homily of the place and time of prayer, delivered in these words; Sithence
which time (meaning the time of our Saviors ascension) Gods people has
always in all ages, without any gaine-saying used to come together (...) ken
of? (which was the point of the Apostles doctrine I especially remembered you
of) That God I say, which commanded, and that doctrine which instructed
servants to disobey their Masters, and by depriving them of their service
caused their hindrance? The Apostle knew full well this was not the way to
propagate the Gospel, and enlarge the kingdom, of Christ, he knew it was
Christian meekenes and obedience, and humility, and patience that must do it:
and therefore he commands Christian servants to give their masters all
honor, to obey them in all things, and to please them in all things, that so
their masters seeing them more serviceable and profitable servants, and withal
more virtuous than others were, might sooner be drawn to like of the religion
that made them such, whereas the contrary would have bin manifestly a scandal,
and grievous impeachment to the propagation of the Gospel, and defamed it, for
a doctrine of contumacy and disobedience, and for a seminary (as it were) of
disturbance and sedition of families and commonwealths. And not only
alienated the affections of masters from their Christian servants: but inflamed
all men with indignation and hatred against the Christian religion and the
Professors of it. Such therefore* evidently is the importance and intendment of
the Apostles doctrine (as unpartiall men, whom prejudice or self conceit
leads not away, may soon discern) very far differing from this doctrine of
yours. Touching which point of the Apostles instruction given to servants for
this effectual and general obedience, you will not reply (I hope) as some
have done; that at first indeed it was permitted for the good of the Church,
lest the increase of it, and proceeding of the Gospel should be hindered by
offense given to the Gentiles. For would that have been permitted if it had
been unlawful? Or could the Church of God be increased by the sins of men?
His Church increased by that whereby himself was dishonored? Or would the
Apostles have permitted men to sin (as now Jesuits do) for the good of the
Church, (nay exhorted and commanded to it) who had himself expressly taught,
that we must not do evil that good may come of it? No, neither of both can
be, because either of both were a stain and derogation to the righteousness
of God: the intention therefore of the Apostles was simple, without all tricks
of policy to teach servants all exact and entire obedience to their masters,
touching all works that belong to the duty of servants, namely that were in
themselves honest and lawful, without excepting of any day.

Answer.
First, here you would prove your Tenet, for servants obedience to their
masters commands for work on the Lords day, even work prohibited, to be more
agreeable to the Apostles Doctrine, than the contrary: and to this end you
allege Texts to prove their obedience in all things to all masters, at all
times, and thence conclude the answerablenesse of yours, the unanswerablenesse
of ours thereunto.

First, object that you bring no proof of Scripture to confirm this your
universal obedience at all times, viz. on the Sabbath day: though you should
have done it, especially the doctrine of the Commandment touching cessation of
work lying so fully upon the servant. If you reply that there is no exception
of time: I answer, there is exception of obedience to unlawful commands, and
such are works, otherwise lawful; enjoined to be done on the Sabbath: and so
we have equivalent exceptions to that of time.

Your ground therefore which you lay, and say it is founded on Apostolic
truth, namely (that Apostles permit servants no point of liberty, but command
them obedience without exception of master, of labor, or of time;) we thus
impugn:

The Apostles Doctrine touching servants obedience does admit of three
limitations by themselves expressed;

First, it must be an obedience in the Lord; (...). Scholia.
that is, according to the will of the Lord, in all things in which godliness
may not be overthrown, in all things provided, that we admit of nothing
against the Lord. If the masters covenant should cross the covenant of the
servant, as he is a man and Christian to his God, it is sinful in the making;
(if such should be made) and worse in the keeping, and always void ipso
facto. The ground of this limitation is this, that all authority and
superiority is derived from God, and subordinate to him; therefore the command
of an inferior power binds not to obedience, when it is contrary to the precept
of the superior power, as Durand Durand. lib. 2. distinct. 39. quaest. 5.
well notes. That therefore of Gregory touching wives, must be held touching
servants for ever. Sic placeat uxor voluntati conjugis, ut non displiceat
voluntati conditoris.
Let the wife so please the will of her husband, that she do not displease the
Will of her Creator. This limitation excepts the servants labor in servile
work on the Sabbath, or Lords day.

Secondly, it must be an obedience wherein they abide with God in their
service, that is, in the observation of the Commandments of God, says the
ordinary Gloss; Glossa interlin.
and says Lyra 1 Cor. 7. 20, 24 Lyra.
as far as pertaines to those things which are not repugnant to the state of
Faith; thus also your doctrine is plainly condemned: for God has provided by
his unchangeable Law, that one day in seven the servants shall rest from their
labor, and with their master attend on God, with whom there is neither master
nor servant.

Thirdly, yea, but the master commands him to work then, otherwise indeed he
ought not? Nay, the Apostles doctrine has yet a third limitation; That they be
not the servants of men: Upon which place says Chrysostom? (...). Chrysostom.
tom. 3. in 1 Cor. 7. 23. page 362. (...). Ibid. page 363.
There are bounds set of God to servants, and how far they ought to keep
them, this is also ordered by Law: and they may not pass over them: for when
the master enjoyneth none of those things which are displeasing to God and
disallowed, he ought to follow and obey; but beyond this by no means; for
thus the servant is a free man. And if thou yield any further, although thou
were free, thou art become a slave. This therefore he intimates saying, be ye
not the servants of men. And not far after he briefly expounds it thus t,
Obey not men that command absurd things, yea, neither yield to their own
selves. Are not these Commandments of the masters for servile work, (...)
absurd and without place, and footing in Gods Word? are they not of things
displeasing to God? These, these are the servants limits, beyond which if he
pass, he is the servant of men, even of men's humors and a very slave;
because he has rejected the freedom of a freeman to God and Righteousness.
Could you see none of these limitations to restrain your boundless gloss.

Again, the Apostles Doctrine admits of this limitation; That the commandment
of the master, be of things possible, as well as lawful: and therefore
Abraham's servant puts the doubt, Genesis 24. 5. What if she will not come? And
is in that case set free. Yea, it admits also of another limitation; That it
be of things, though in their nature lawful, yet not exceeding so far the
strength of nature, that the servant so doing shall manifestly ruin his body:
as to toil night and day; to toil all days, and not have a day in the week
to take breath? Now tell me, does not the law of Nature bound the master in
respect of time?

And as it has these limitations, so it has this distinction: servants owe to
their masters subjection and obedience: obedience is limited to their lawful
command with the like; subjection reaches to submission, to their wrongful
and unjust corrections and usage, as in 1 Pet. 2. 18, 19. Be subject to your
masters -- for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. Even
where the servant may not obey, he must be subject.

Secondly, having thus cleared the Apostles doctrine, let us see what you say
to prove your Tenet agreeable, ours disagreeable thereto.

First, you take hold of the words in all things, to conclude, the servants
yielding to the masters exacting of labor that day, to be no sin; for then
say you, he would not command them to obey in all things, but would have
excepted that. I answer, by the same reason you may conclude, the servants
yielding to the master in any other unlawful commands to be no sin, because
he is commanded to obey in all things without exception of that particular. But
if you say, that is excepted in the former limitations; so say I, that this is
also as has been proved. Obedience of subjection the servant owes to his
master in unjust dealings with him, and the Apostles persuading servants of
those days to such things, shows that masters did wrongfully bind and
buffet for well doing. 1 Pet. 2. 19.
Tell me, was it for working, or truth and fidelity, and not for piety and the
worship of God? And therefore, may not I say with better probability than you
have spoken, that it was for intermission of labor on the times of the holy
assemblies? Will any correct their servants for performing the duties of the
second Table, or the secret duties of the first? It must needs be then, that
that wel^ doing was public worship of God, for which chiefly Heathen masters
buffetted Christian servants. And thus your very Texts have implyedly this
particular in them, that servants should not do ill, or leave the doing well
for the frowardness of the master, and not obey unlawful commands, but bear
wrongful stripes, for thereunto are they called: and for piety and the duties
of Gods worship submit to the stripe, rather tha^ quit the service of God.

Now in that you say, it cannot be that the Gentiles that did not believe
should respect religion so, as not to exact their servants work: I answer,
they certainly did in that point of the Sabbath through a special providence
of God and the inclination of soul to this law of nature, which is in part
written in the hearts of all men: for S. Austine De illis sane Iudaeis cum
loqueretur, ait cum interim usque eo sceleratissim^ gentis consuetudo
convaluit, ut per omnes jam terras recepta sit, victi victoribus leges dederunt
Mirabatur haec dicens, and quod divinitus agcretur ignorans, subjecit plane
sententiam, quia significaret, quid de illorum sacramentorum ratione sentiret:
ait enim illi tamen causas ritus sui noverunt, and major pars populi facit,
quod cur faciat, ignorant. August. De Civit. Dei lib. 6. cap. 11.
tells as much, who relating the saying of Seneca concerning the Jews and the
Sabbath has these words, truly when he speaks of those Jews; he says,
When in the mean while, the custom of that most wicked nation has so far
prevailed, that now through all lands it is received: the conquered give laws
to the conquerors. Speaking these things he wondered, and being ignorant what
was wrought of God, he set down plainly his opinion, in which he might
signify, what he thought concerning the reason of their Sacraments; for he
says, but they know the causes of their rites, and the greater part of the
people does that which they know not why they do it.

See how the Sabbath had prevailed among all Heathen; In Seneca's days who
lived in the time of the Apostle Paul, but what is that to the Lords day? Yea,
thence easily you may gather how they could well afford one day in a week to
worship: and Saint Austine in the same place says, that though Seneca reproved
the Jews for losing a seventh part of their time in keeping Sabbath, yet would
not mention the Christians to reproove their rites in any kind, lest he
should either praise them against the received custom of his Country, or
reprove them against his own heart. Note, it was (says this Father) a
special work of God, that the Sabbath should have that prevalencie amongst
Heathens. And for the Christians rites of worship, he could not speak of them
but in praise, unless he should have gone against his conscience, and
therefore silently passes them over.

But secondly, you affirm that their withdrawing of their obedience would have
caused the name and doctrine of God to be blasphemed. I answer, their modest
and humble refusal of the work, would adorn the doctrine and not dishonor
it, and if they should forsake the assemblies, they forsake their God and
religion, the Heathen well knew it, who were so observant in their
superstition. It may seem by the Apostles rules given to servants and wives,
that more of them were converted, than of masters and husbands, and the
assemblies of the Lords day more constantly frequented of all that had given up
their names to Christ. Now as the rendering a reason of the hope that was in
them to the Magistrate, performed with meekness and fear, honored God and
his Doctrine; so the rendering of an account how they worshipped God on the day
of assemblies, viz: the Lords day: (as may appear by the Apology of Justin
Martyr for them) who in that Apology, renders a reason of their worship of
God, and of the day spent wholly in that worship. What the Apostle says upon
the Christians readiness thus to give a reason of his hope, may rightly be
applied to the Christian servants readiness to yield himself wholly to God
that day, and to render the reason thereof with meekness and fear: And who
is that will harm you, if you do that which is good? 1 Pet. 3.

But this submissive withdrawing; you term by the odious name of disobedience
very wrongfully; for he is to be obedient to his lawful commands that day, and
to his unjust corrections for the Lords sake, which will break the heart of
any Master, and win him, but your course would take away the very practice of
religion in the servant; for where is religion, if the public worship be gone?
Nor will this deprive them of their service, but make them in higher esteem,
as Joseph was, and the famous courtier Daniel, for refusing to obey the king
decree: when Parasites shall be loathed and cast out. Yet if this should not
always be, the Spirit of glory and of God will rest upon him that suffers in
these cases. If this be the blasphemy, we must avoid, we all are undone,
while we are says Tertullian y, let his name be blasphemed in the observation,
and Tertul. de Idolat. ca. 14.
not the exorbitation of discipline, so long as we are proved, not reproved,
this malediction of preserved discipline is the benediction of Gods Name.

This would propagate the Gospel; as in Daniels case is to be seen, and in
the case of the three children.

This is absolute meekness, obedience, humility and patience, and such
servants for their virtue, and the profit that comes to their masters, by
their faithful service in the times and seasons due, and their unfeigned
respect, even when they receive wrong, shall carry in the eyes of the vilest,
high respects and praise; but if your course were held that the servant should
neglect the assemblies to do his masters work on that day (we speak of
works unlawful to be done on the Sabbath) and should carry an heart to God,
while his feet and hands carried him to his masters work; (which is all one,
as if one should swear with his tongue and think to keep his heart unsworne)
then where is the solemn worship of God? And that gone, where is Religion? And
that gone, what virtue? And that gone, what profitable service? Masters that
respect but their own lucre, can conne you little thanks for this doctrine.
Besides, this were the scandal and defamation of the Gospel for ever; that
whereas all Religions teach the followers thereof a time for piety with all
attendance of body and soul for that time; this Christian Religion should
teach that the servant has no time at all, nor does God require it of him, but
the contrary, if his master will but bid him work.

This can be no seminary of disturbance or contumacie, for he is subject to
his masters power for correction; so as not to resist in wrongful sufferings:
but yours shows it manifestly while it leaves a man in another hands
against two such principles, that when they have been by tyranny pressed to go
against them, rebellion has ever followed. The principles are these: First,
God must be solemnly and publicly worshipped, and that on some times weekly
in which he is to be attended upon without avocations. Secondly, that Nature
shows the preservation of it self. Now to go about to blot out sense of God
and religion, and to keep men to taskes of insupportable burdens, which nature
breaks under, while it bears them, this is the ready way to overturne all.

This alienates not masters from their Christian servants: let the experience
of all ages show it. In this nation the servants that make conscience of the
Sabbath are sought after by all sober and wise masters, that only are wise for
the world: for these are those that will not be night-walkers, nor drunkards,
nor filchers, with the like. I know none but choose such, and greatly affect
them, and for their fidelity otherwise and industry, give them great liberties
for Gods worship. True, I have heard of some of our Gentry that will by no
means have such a servant, especially to wait on their persons, or to be
their Clerks, but one may easily smell the reason, it is not for any matter of
Sabbaths labor or rest; but, first there is a divellish principle amongst
them, that it is for their reputation to have their men, such as will make the
servant of their neighbour-Gentleman. (...)

Answer.
First, that the subjection due to men in respect of obedience to execute their
commands extends only so far, as it may not diminish the empire of God,
has been sufficiently proved: but you call for antiquity to bear out the
servant in refusing his masters commands of servile work on the Lords day. I
showed you before out of Chrysostom, what he taught were the bounds which a
servant might not pass, namely, the commandments of God: if the master
command ought against them he may by no means execute his masters command.
Tertullian Tertul. lib. de Idolat. c. 17.
says, that if a servant do but by some word help the sacrifice, he shall be
accounted a minister of the sin of idolatry (he speaks of them as attending
on their masters, and that the place, Give to Casar the things that are
Caesar's, binds no subject to keep the days consecrated to idols, nor to set
up lights at their doors or Laurel branches on their door posts. And then
says further, Ibid. ca. 15.
it is well added, and to God, the things that are Gods. Unto which lay but
that which went before in Chapter 14. Ibid. cap. 14.
where he says, the Ethnickes have every festival day yearly once, the
Christian has his on the eight day, lay these together, I say, according to
the true meaning of that Author, and it is clear, that the servant might not
for his masters command keep a day in honor to an idol, nor any way be
minister of that sin, nor might he neglect the day consecrated in honor to
God, for his master. Clemens Alexandrinus Clemens Alex. stromat. l. 4.
has these words, Discipline is necessary to all sorts of men, and virtue,
since all tend to felicity. And after quotation of the texts in Ephesians. 5. Col.
3. and 4. He concludes out of these, Therefore it is manifest to us what the
unity that is of faith is, and is showed also who is perfect, wherefore the
servant and the woman shall profess philosophy, be any against it and
exceedingly resisting, although punishment hang ^ver their heads from their
masters and husbands. The free man also, though the tyrant threaten death to
him, though he be led to judgment and drawn to utmost torments, and run the
hazard of all his goods and fortunes, shall by no means abstain from piety
and the true worship of God, nor shall ever dissent from it: the woman likewise
which dwells with an evil husband, and the son, if he have an evil
father, or the servant that has an evil master, pursuing virtue with a
valiant and generous mind. But as it is comely and honest for the man to dye
both for virtue and for liberty, and for himself, so also is it for the woman,
for this is not proper to the nature of males, but of good folks. Therefore
both old and young, both woman and servant shall live, and if need be shall
dye, being faithfully obedient to the commandments, which dying were but to be
made alive by death; we certainly know both children, and women, and servants
to have been no less than excellent oftentimes, their parents, and husbands,
and masters being set against it. They ought therefore which would lead an
holy life, not to be of a less cheerful and ready mind, when they see some
to chase them from it: But it is meet much more that they contend and strive
stoutly, that they fall not off, as conquered, from the best and most necessary
counsels: for I do not think it may admit any compare, whether it be better
to be received into the fellowship of the Almighty, or to choose the darkness
of devils. Things which are done of us for others sake, we will always do,
endeavoring to have an eye to them for whose sake they seem to be done,
taking the measure to be, that which is acceptable to them: but things which
are done rather for our own sake, than for others, shall be done by us with
equal study, whether they seem, or seem not to please any man.

Secondly, it is neither of my ability, nor beseeming a work of this nature,
to allege all that might be cited here to this purpose, this shall suffice to
show either your wilful blindness or daring presumption, upon your great
reading. It is very dangerous to oppose the truth and to trust unto your
oppositions of Sciences falsely so called: no man ever attempted it, but God
polluted him in his gifts, in a just judgment. In this Treatise it may be
seen, and in this particular passage. For Clemens Alexandrinus Cle. Alex.
st^o. 4.
, Iustine Justin. Apel. 2.
, Augustine Aug. in Psalm. 118. Co^^io. 31.
, and almost all the ancients which published Apologies for Christians,
testify that among other causes why the Gentiles persecuted the Christians,
this was one, that they withdrew themselves from obedience to their superiors
under pretense of Religion. Now this was only in matter of the public worship
of the true God, wherein else did their disobedience (as they called it)
consist? They worshipped the true God on his day, and refused communion with
Idolaters on their days, dedicated to their idols: but this you could not
see. You know moreover, that the histories of the first three hundred years
are of little weight for their brevity, imperfection, and the iniquity of those
times through rage of persecutors, and malice of falsifying Heretics and
Seducers. Therefore your bold and large assertion herein is of little worth.

Thirdly, had you remembered that there is the same proportion in matter of
obedience in one sort of inferiors as in another, you might soon have known
what servants did in those times toward their masters: for all Antiquity
teaches, that it is perverseness to call that obedience wherein the obedience
to God is forgone to obey man, and that the superior of any sort is to be
obeyed in whatever he commands that is not contrary to Gods Command, not
otherwise: Thus taught Hierome, Ambrose, Augustine, Fabian Decret. 11. q. 3. c.
92, 93. to. 101.
, Basil Basil. reg. 7. ex brevi and 114. and 203. and 204. and de instit. Mona.
c. 14. and 16.
, Bernard Bern. Epi. 7. and li. de praecept. and dispensat. c. 12.
, and the like. But Saint Austine Sermon. 6. De verbis Dom. and Ep 166. and in
Psalm. 124.
chiefly is most notable in this point, both for his lively expressions and
instances, and for his reasoning from humane things to divine, where obedience
is denied to the inferior magistrate, when it is contrary to the superior.

Fourthly, I am sure godly superiors will never thank you for this doctrine,
which cannot will to be obeyed of inferiors, if they command ought against
Gods Law and reason. Heathen Princes have refused such an obedience and desired
the contrary, Antiochus the third wrote to the cities; that if he should
command by letters any thing repugnant to the laws, they would not care for
it, but take it as if it were written, he not knowing of it. Antigonus king of
the Macedonians answered a Flatterer, who said, All things were honest and just
for kings to do; They are so only to kings of Barbarians; but to us those
things only are honest which are honest; and just which are just. Pericles
answer is known, (...).
that a man ought to do for his friends but yet only as far as he may not
go against God.

Fifthly, the Papists can see, where the light did put out your eyes: they
teach Possevinus. lib. 3. de stud. cas. Consc. c. 23. tom, 1. p. 147.
that the father and mother of the household which have servants and maids,
sons and daughters, and do not see that they obey the precepts of the
Decalogue, or which is worse, hinder them from the observation thereof, and
work them so hard on the Eves, that on the Festivals and Lords days they are
by necessity of their own in a manner compelled to work, or that give them
not time to be present at the Assemblies, without promise of amendment they
shall by no means be absolved of the Confessor. Molina Molin. de inst. tract.
2. disp. 38. Col. 200. 201.
says, that the power of the master over the servant reaches not to his life,
and much less to his spiritual salvation, as if he might command him or
exact of him any thing that might fight against his spiritual safety. The
Magistrate in this case is to vindicate the servant; if the master shall impose
on the servants a necessity of sinning, the Bishops may deliver them from
servitude. And Antoninus affirms in such case, Antoninus 3. par. titulo. 3.
ca. 6.. 7.
the servant may lawfully flee from his master, if being admonished he will
not leave off. We know it is better to suffer hard usage, than to flee, but
see what master Breerwood might have known, to have set his heart at a stand,
in his so forward and eager proceeding.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Breerwood. Page 53, 54.
ANd therefore Sir, to draw to an end (for I grow weary, and have already both
dulled my pen, and my self) I would advise you in the Name of Jesus Christ,
whose Minister you are, and whose work you have in hand, to examine this
doctrine of yours, what foundation it may have in the Word of God, and what
effect in the Church of God; lest the foundation happily be your own
fantasy, not Gods Word, and the effect prove the poisoning, not the
nourishing of the Church. I know Sir, you are not the first that set this
doctrine abroach, nor the only man that draws of the vessel, although few
(as I am told) draw so freely as you. But I would advise you Sir in the Name of
God, to beware betimes and draw not too deep. It is all naught, it relisheth
already with them that have good tastes, like the water of Marah. It will prove
like that of Meribah, a little lower, and if you hap to draw to the bottom,
you will find the dregs to be nothing but disturbance and sedition, both in
Church and Commonwealth. But I say in the beginning, I would neither censure
nor divine of the evil consequence of this Doctrine: let them censure (if they
will) to whom the government of the Church and Commonwealth, and provision of
peace in both, does belong. And to divine (me thinks) there is little need;
the events are too evident, even to mean foresight, already to require
divination: for who (when he sees that seed sown) doubts what grain will be
reaped in heaviness? I will therefore neither censure, nor divine of the
fruits of your Doctrine, but omit both and make an end.

Answer.
First, now judge whether this Doctrine be the water of Marah, and besides all
that has been spoken, consider, that it teaches no forsaking of God, nor
disunion of soul from his fear; that were bitter Ier. 2. 19.
indeed, your doctrine does it. Consider, it teaches no neglect of
righteousness or judgment Amos 6. 12.
: but to yield subjection with patience, where it may not yield obedience, with
a good Conscience: but you make the Lords day, that day of rejoicing to all
Christians in the faith of Christ, with whom there is neither bond nor free, to
be the servants bitter day, who left under the commands of the master, not to,
but from the assemblies, lies under a bitter famine of the word, Amos 8. 10, 11
Whiles others have it; and vision falls to him, and his Sun sets at
noone day, whilst yet it shines in its glory to others: how will you escape
that woe in Esaias, Woe to them that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter
Esai. 5. 20.
.

Who those are that you say have good tastes I know not, the Publisher is one
it seems, but he was not then known to you, one may probably conjecture: how
ever he will not willingly be known to have this good taste; and it is not
unlike but many more are of this sort, that drink your sweet waters secretly,
and cry Master Breerwood was right for his judgment, but they would not teach
it publicly for a thousand pounds. This calls to mind the intoxicated fool in
the proverbes, Prove. 9. 17.
that says, stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant.

Secondly, and for your Meribah, this I say, if your writing were not intended
to this end, certainly the publishing is: It is no new thing to hear
Christian Doctrine charged for seditious, and disturbing both Church and state;
but it is much audaciousnesse and perverseness to charge this doctrine so,
which having been taught, and printed, and found in the hands of the whole
kingdom, (...)ley on the Sabbath. D^. Bownd. D. (...). M. Atte^s^l on Numbers.
never bred the least disturbance in any family. But you will not divine of
the event; no? You do both censure and divine, and then say you will not. You
would exasperate authority against painful and conscionable Ministers, you
would suggest hard things against the quiet of the land, you would cast
Iealousies causeless. You would do more than divine, if Divines were under
your power. I spare to say more, only I desire all to weigh whether the fruit
of your Tenet can be any other than disturbance and sedition: for;

First, it casts servants (and by the same reason all inferiors) under an
unsupportable burden, which has always (...) sons to let me have as few words
as you will, but direct and material arguments; For if they be light and have
but small force, they will not move me. If sophistical and have but seeming
force, I shall espy the deceit I think, and be able to discern betwixt a
vizard and a visage, both the one sort and the other of such arguments will but
prejudice your cause with me, and were better kept for some other disciple; but
if you find your self not able to establish and justify this doctrine,
wherewith I take my poor Kinsman to have been corrupted, then I challenge you
as you will answer it at the judgment seat of almighty God when your
accounting day shall come, to repair the ruin you have made in his
conscience, and (remooving his scandal which hinders him in his vocation) to
establish him in his former obedience to his Master. So fare you well, and the
Spirit of Truth be with you.

May 16. 1611. At Gresham house in London.
Answer.
This is your Conclusion, which has in it three things; a provocation to a
polemicke Discourse (if he be able to justify his Doctrine) urged, from the
duty of a Minister, which is twofold; to defend his Doctrine, to reduce his
straying brother; and from your challenge. Secondly, a request of two things in
the Answer to this his Treatise, ingenious reply to the force of his arguments,
and material arguments against him. Thirdly, an Adjuration (upon sense of the
falsehood of the Doctrine, or inability to justify it) to make up the breach of
his Kinsmans conscience, and restore him to his Masters obedience. The
provocation is sufficiently answered in the Letter, printed at the end of your
Treatise, which by the Publisher is termed, An answer to the Treatise: but he
might have well seen it was an answer only to this provocation. Here he
showed a spirit of calumniation, and a love of all devouring words, like a
false tongue. And how strong an answer that is hereunto all may judge, that,
(considering with what a spirit Master Breerwood has replied) cannot but know
with what an heart he both writ, and provoked that patient man to contend:
especially if all knew also what he wrote unto Master Ratcliffe, Alderman of
Chester, his Cosen, the ninth of June, 1611. One passage of which Letter I
annexe out of that Letter which I have with me, in the original under his own
hand. It is this: If I satisfy not Master Byfield, I would desire him to
satisfy me, by answering my reasons, and producing better to prove his own
conclusion. The one or the other must be done (now he has provoked me to
stir) or else some blemish will stick by him. If he answer my arguments
soundly, and there by effectual reasons establish his own Doctrine, I have
soon done, he shall satisfy and silence me, I will presently yield, and
withal both love and praise him: but if he be not able to do it (as I
suspect he is not) and will yet persist in the fancy, I shall both detest and
despise his pertiuacy, and perhaps displease him in the end.

The request was satisfied in an answer of Master Nic. Byfields, written to him
then, which had been published here if we had met with a perfect Copy; in the
mean while take this answer tendered to public view. The Adjuration savours of
strong and strange audaciousnesse, as shall appear by the occasion of all this
stir in this man's spirit, which in the beginning of the Treatise he lays
down, viz. the wound in the conscience of one John Breerwood, by Master Nic.
Byfield. First, it is evident, those works he stuck at, were never in
question. Secondly, it is manifest by the Letter of Master Breerwoods, written
to the abovesaid Master John Ratcliffe, that the servant confessed, that he
received the first touch at Master Bruens of Stapleford, but his conference
after with Master Byfield was it that resolved him. And yet it is clear, that
there was never any case propounded to him at Chester about servants work on
the Sabbath at Master Ratcliffes, and he never to that time delivered his
opinion touching it unto any. Thirdly, it is no less clear, that the occasion
was foolish and weak, as shall be manifest, by giving to all the world a true
information how the case then stood with this John Breerwood, which I give you
in the next Chapter for a conclusion to this first part of the book. Happy had
it been for him, if (...)

Answer.
For the occasion, three things will lively represent it to the world; a brief
relation concerning the condition of John Breerwood at that time: secondly, the
comparing of some passages in Master Breerwoods relation with the former:
thirdly, the beginning of Master Byfields answer to this Treatise, containing a
short and satisfactory answer to this particular.

First, this was the true state of things concerning John Breerwood at the time
while these things fellout. John Breerwood was servant and Apprentice to one
Master Thomas Shipton Grocer in Fridaystreet, in the Parish of Saint John the
Evangelist: He was employed by his Master on business to Chester; and going
down, he fell in love with a Maid that accompanied him down at the same
time. Whereupon when he returned (as was manifest by the consequents) he cast
in his mind which way to wind himself out of his Masters service. For the
attaining of his disordered desire, when yet he had not spent half the time
of his Apprentiship in his Masters service, he made therefore many scruples;
some about the Sabbath, pretending his conscience had been much wrought upon by
Master Nicolas Byfield in that his foresaid journey; some about his calling in
the week days. About the Sabbath, when his Master bade him fetch a pint of
wine, or see his horse have provender, or call the invited Guest to dinner, he
would refuse to do it: which thing his Master (supposing it had been indeed
upon some trouble of conscience) with joy related to the Minister of the
parish, M. Walker, and thereupon sought means to bind and retain him the
faster in his service: for his Master was a conscionable and religious man, and
careful of the Sabbath, and hoped that here would begin the discovery of some
good wrought in him, who before was many ways untoward. But this John
Breerwood saw, that this would take no place, he casts other scruples about the
works of his Calling, to get off that way, by his pretexts of the evils he saw
attended Trades in the City: and this turned not off his Master from his
desires to retain him, but rather increased them the more. Afterward,
perceiving that Religion pretended wrought against his intended plot, and not
for it, he fell to impudent and vile stubbornness. On a time, his Master, for
some stubbornness of his, gave him a box on the ear: then he found out this
project; to lay his Dagger under his pillow; that when the maids should find
it there, and relate it to their Master, he might conceive he had some intent
to play some vile part; and being a timorous man, might be moved to turn him
out of his service. After this, his Master upon his earnest desire, sent him
down again to Chester to gather up moneys; who there gathered up to the sum
of an hundred pounds, or thereabout, his Master fearing to lose it, gave way to
his motion to leave his service, and set up for himself in Chester, that so he
might get his money of him. This John Breerwood thus released, married the
former woman: and since, putting her to shift for her self, has been to and
fro beyond Sea, and has played many prankes.

This Relation was taken from Master Walkers mouth, March 30. 1631. as a brief
of those things that might be more largely set down: the Christian Reader for
his further satisfaction, if he desire it, may enquire of him who was very
well acquainted with all those passages.

Now consider with me some passages in Master Breerwoods Relation:

First, he says, the true cause of his distemper was a Case of Conscience
about works on the Sabbath; yet he saw, that at the first discovery of his
strange alteration, were discovered obstinate resolutions, by fair or foul
means to forsake his service. He is little skilled in the plight of a wounded
conscience, that can think such a conscience, and such obstinatenesse are
compatible to the same man at the same time.

Secondly, he talks of his Masters great offense; yet this was no other, but
that as one joyed to see he made some show of conscience in that thing, he
sought all means to tie him the faster to him and his service.

Thirdly, he talks also of his Kinsmans affliction: What? From such a man as
was so mild as his Master was?

Who can believe that this matter about his Kinsman was any more than an
occasion, no cause in truth of Master Breerwoods attempts? some thing there was
besides this, as rightly he acknowledges.

And to put it out of doubt, hear M. Byfield speak after long silence under
these injuries, beginning his Treatise thus,

LO (Sir) I am become at length a Writer. Your strange bitterness, and great
thoughts of heart, have wrung from me that resolution, which once I thought had
not been in the power of man to urge me to. The Lord make it prosperous, if it
be his will, or else give me more patience hereafter to forbear employment,
where I can go about it with so little hope of success. I write not while I
write: Partly because the discharge of my calling commands me to labor other
ways, and partly because my judgment is not every way resolved of the
expediency of an answer in this kind. One thing I am sure of, that I can be
contented to seal the Doctrine of the Sabbath, as it is now taught in the
Church of England, with my blood, and conceive there is as apparent reason for
it, as for any other point of Religion. Thus much I easily grant upon the
reading of your writings, that if your places of invention had been as sound,
as your form of elocution is fair, and the matter had been answerable to the
style, you should easily have had my voice for the Chair amongst the truly
learned: but when I consider of your assertions concerning the Sabbath,
unmasking them, and without the varnish cast upon them, I cannot but see cause
to lament, that such Talents and Gifts of God should be hidden in such earth.
One point of wisdom you have learned from the men of this generation, that
when your cause is too weak to endure any strong assault, you would help it
by choosing you an Adversary, whom you could contemn as many ways none of the
ablest, that so you might enter into almost all the degrees of triumph before
any field was pitched. But let not the Champion pride himself, the stones of
the Brook that refreshes the Sanctuary of God may smite the forehead of his
presumption.

In your writings I consider matter and manner. In the manner I find strange
scoffs, unchristian censures, confident, bold and swelling brags of the
clearenesse of your Conceits, with an unseemely deal of such unsavory stuff:
all this I wholly pass over as unworthy to be conceived in the breast, or
vented in the writings of any Scholar. The matter is both propounded, and of
purpose repeated many times over in several tricks of elocution, the better
to give a luster to opinion it self. The repetition I omit likewise. In the
propounding of the matter two things are principal, fact and opinion. In
matter of fact you are troubled, that your Kinsman should be seduced, and
ruined by the poison of ill advice sucked from my mouth. This you would be
answered in. And to this you have been answered, that it is a falsehood raised
by your Kinsman (if he affirm it) and magnified and blown to the highest by
your self. And you do well to hold fast the pretense of your opinion, that
such counsel was given, or else I cannot see so much as a glimpse of any
color, why you should in this spiteful manner use me, or any Minister of the
Gospel, when you have no occasion given you. And so you may be answered as
touching matter of fact.


Thus far Christian Reader, thou have Master N. Byfield^ Answer to this
Treatise, the rest had been printed, and I had saved my labor, if we had had a
perfect Copy: It is likely they that set forth Master Breerwoods have one,
which they conceal, and put in stead thereof a Letter written to Master
Breerwood, refusing on good grounds to give an answer, which they call, Master
Byfields answer. So indig^ely every way has that worthy man been used in this
business.

Out of this that has been set down, I leave every one to judge of the
occasion, and of the spirit of the man. (...) solution, they are abundantly
discovered: his knowledge, in those brief grounds for the Sabbath which he
has laid: his zeal that (sweetly guided) stifled that fire of contention
beginning to flame, so that it brake not forth; and therein no small measure of
charity to the soul of the Opposer, which being resty and set to contend,
wanted but one to answer, that matter might be ministered for him to work
upon: and to the souls of all, when these boisterous winds should be kept in
their dens of privacy, and laid with a short and grave repulse. What want of
zeal for the truth could there be in this case, when the opposition being
private, was dangerous only to the Opposer, and if he should make it public
would have raised an holy Army of defendants, in both the famous Cities and
other parts of the Kingdom, to the great impeachment of the Opposers
reputation, who disperseth his loose and Atheistical conceits upon an
occasion occasionlesse? Or what want of Charity? It never commanded to attend
the saying of every Prater, nor requires more than reprehension ^ Ioh. 1^.
of the error with arguments to confirm the truth; this is Direction. There
may be never the less zeal for the truth, where is wanting a zealous
affectation of quarreling about the truth: and there may be no want of
charity, where yet the erroneous person remains unreformed.

What impressions of excesses his letter contained shall be seen, God
willing, in time and place convenient. But this I say, your excesses not only
swarm in your Reply, but also in this Preface stand out to the view. For you
say, you are hopeless of him, and yet you will provoke him to give
satisfaction and to disclaim his error. Would not satisfaction and disclaiming
of an error answer your hopes? Or delight you to provoke to give that which you
cannot hope for, only that you might provoke? What? Hopeless if he cannot be
provoked, and hope enough if he be provoked enough? What? Nothing
satisfaction with you, but to call the truth error, when you call it error?
Again, you intend you say, to abate his stomach and high conceit: Would you
abate it by invectives, scoffs, Alehouse language with the like, such as is
scattered in this Reply? In this case therefore I hold it no way against just
and plain dealing to give an answer to your words that have any show of truth
and soberness, and by no means to put down verbatim your words Syllabicall
froth, before this my ensuing answer. For though while you seemed to seek
satisfaction to your arguments, I could afford you the first place, yet now
that you jeere at the person, and think to scoff out the truth held by my
dearest Brother, I can give you no place in my books.

The first Section of the Reply answered.
First, herein Master Breerwood being charged by Master Byfield, that he
opposed Gods Sabbath, cries out (Far be it from him: he acknowledges the
Sabbath of Jews and Christians to be both of them Gods Sabbath.) Compare then,
what he says here, with what he said in the former Treatise, and believe your
own eyes.

Here he says: I acknowledge on the Christian Sabbath the worship of God, and
vacancy from all worldly affairs which may impeach that worship, to be by the
moral Law.

Before he said, page 42. The celebration of the Lords day can with no
enforcement of reason be drawn out of the morality of the fourth
Commandment. Is not the Lords day the Christian Sabbath you speak of? And is
the celebration thereof any other than the worship of God thereon, and vacancy
from labor that may impeach that worship?

Page 37. To work on the Lords day, is no breach of any divine command.

Page 33. Only works of toil, and tending to gain, are restrained by the
commandment.

Again, he says, he never taught worse of Gods Sabbath (...) enjoy himself?
No, the c Lord rested on the seventh, that he might teach thee to rest the
seventh. Or did God ever consecrate to himself either day or place for any
other cause, than that he might b^stow sanctification and benediction on men,
when they did in an holy manner observe them?

Gods personal sanctification of the Sabbath, say you, was nothing else but
his resting in himself, that resting from creation was his Sabbath, that
resting in himself, was the sanctifying it, other institution or
sanctification will never be proved.] Tell me, why did you not go on in your
new interpretation, and show how he blessed it, and wherein that consisted? The
Text says, He blessed it also. Those that hold against the antiquity of the
Commandment of the Sabbath, that it was not given to Adam, yet give no such
interpretation of those words, God sanctified the seventh day. Not Master
Broad, not Doctor Pridea^x, not Gomarus, not Tostatus and Pererius, nor any
that I have met withal, but they make it an institution by anticipation, of
which afterward your self perceived it was too bold an assertion, to say,
that the ever blessed Creator laid down a Law for himself, with apromise of
blessedness annexed; and therefore confess, that both Gods resting and
sanctifying of that day were exemplary to men, though you would not they should
be obligatory, till the commandment in Sin and Sinai. But what then have you
done? If the Sabbath be instituted in Paradise, as you acknowledge from that
place in Genesis 2. and this be exemplary to men, as likewise you confess, how
can it be less than obligatory to men, though it be not delivered in a form
of words expressly mandatory. Gods action which he would have exemplary, cannot
be less than obligatory.

Secondly, but you say, this sanctification might be in destination ordained
then to holiness; but not to be applied till the time of the Law.] Was it
ordained then to holiness? It was not then at man's liberty to spend it to
other employment, than that to which it was ordained. Gods preparation of a
time to sanctification, 2000. years before it should be sanctified, is without
example, intimation in any Text, or solid reason. Had he ordained it then to
holiness? What God has sanctified, why call you it common? or how can you
think that Adam and the Patriarchs would make it common?

The word (...) (say you) signifies a preparation as well as an actual
application to holinesse] I could tell you that the word is used both in way of
praise and dispraise, as Rabbi David Kinchi observes; is it therefore to be
taken in dispraise here? But to close with you, the word signifies to prepare,
apply it now to the seventh day, and it notes that God blessed and prepared
the seventh day above other days of the week to be set apart to rest, and
the memory of the great work of the Creation, that so piety and religion for
ever among posterity, Gentiles as well as Jews might be nourished. Had this
been driven out of use among the Holy Seed as it was among the Gentiles, Satan
had soon thrust on them also, as he did on the Gentiles, the fiction of the
worlds eternity, and had blown away as all memory of the Creation, so also all
faith and true piety out of the minds of men. Now such a preparation which is
the actual separation of a thing to use, is not of destination but present
readiness, and such is the preparation this word signifies, as may be seen
in Rabbi Mardochai Nathans concordance. When this word concerns holiness (for
sometimes it signifies preparation in general, as in Micah 3. 5. to prepare
war) it signifies to make holy, Lev. 21. 23. to declare holiness, Ezekiel. 39.
27. to set a part to an holy use, Joel 1. 14. to command that it be
sanctified, Exodus 13. 2. But to destinate aforehand without present and actual
separation of the thing so soon as it does exist and is capable of that to
which it is separated (which must needs be your meaning) has no warrant of
Scripture or Author that I know of. For those places in Exo. 19. 10. Josh. 3.
5. and 7. 13. As they all mean by sanctifying, to sanctify by command that
they be sanctified, so they speak not of a Destination of them to sanctity,
or a preparation without actual application to holiness, but a present
sanctifying themselves that day that they might be the fitter for attendance on
the Lord: it is not read thus in Exo. 19. 10, 11. Sanctify them against the
third day, but, sanctify them to day and to morrow, and be ready against the
third day. So true is it also of the Sabbath, sanctify this Sabbath, and the
next Sabbath and every Sabbath. It is senseless to talk of a preparatory
sanctification without application, that were to separate to holiness, and yet
to let it lie common. Kades in Galilee Ioh. 20. was sanctified, that is,
separated for a City of refuge; was it only destinated, and not actually set
apart to that use?

Besides, all those sanctifications are of persons, not of times: was there
ever a set time sanctified, and the time not separated to sanctity actually?

But what do I fighting with suppositions; you say it might so signify, not,
it does so. How many interpreters ancient and modern do say, it does signify,
to command that it be sanctified?

Thirdly, you go on to a third evasion, and say it might be a command and
institution by anticipation, showing why, not when God instituted the Sabbath]
That cannot be, because Moses makes an Historical narration of the creation,
according to seven days time, and in every day distinguishes it by its proper
work, and coming to the seventh he says, that was Gods resting day, which
was not inferior to any of the six, because God wrought no eminent work of
Creation thereon, but extolled above them, because it was not a day of empty
rest but enriched above the other, and advanced by Gods blessing and
sanctifying of it (that is) he ordained it a time of greater and more holy
works, and crowned those works with richer fruit, Esa. 58. 14. and did choose
it above the rest to an holy use. And that he then sanctified that day, both
the connection of the words shows, and the words of the fou^th commandment,
in six days he made all, he rested the seventh and therefore blessed it.

This Anticipation never came into any man's mind, who was not first anticipated
with some prejudice about the observation of the Lords day; the Jews never
dreamt of it; and in the new Testament, no such thing is taught or intimated.
The Authors of that opinion yield it is probable that the seventh day, was
observed from the beginning, Zuar. de dieb. festis. Moreover there can be
produced out of Scripture no example of such an Anticipation; there is an
Anticipation of the names of some places, with the like, but not an
anticipation of an institution. Besides the perfection of the creation on that
day, is twice joined with the Sanctification of it, in the same manner and
phrase, in which the creation both of man and of other living Creatures is
joined with the blessing of them, Genesis 2. 2, 3. with Genesis 1. 21, 22, 27, 28.
The new Testament confirms our Text which teaches that the people of God
partake in the Old Testament of Heb. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
a twofold rest in this life, the rest of the Sabbath, and the rest in Canaan;
but David speaking in the 45. Psalm. of a rest, speaks not of the Sabbath
rest, for that was from the beginning of the world, nor of that in Canaan, for
that was past; therefore of a third rest he must needs speak. Lastly, the
Prophet gathered a perpetual Rule and Law for marriage, from the first example
in the creation of married persons, Mal. 2. 15. Made he not one? And wherefore
one? Because he sought a godly seed. So here, did not God rest the seventh
day? but why the seventh? that we should sanctify to God the seventh. Yea,
but the Prophet made no such collection. Yes such a one, though not that very
one. And a greater than that Prophet, God himself puts into us that very
collection, when he says that he Rested, and that he blessed and sanctified
this his resting day.

Fourthly, you would make good your conceit, by showing the needlesnesse of
such a command, when there was no toil to the body nor distraction to the
mind, that called for Rest or sanctification one day in seven.]

There was labor in Paradise, Genesis 2. 15. And therefore there might be need
of a Rest. There was danger of sin in Paradise and therefore need of some
special time by Gods ordinance; and that time blessed of him, to uphold the
sanctification of the soul. If you reply, there was no such toil in labor; I
answer, it was no toil to God to work the six days, and yet God rested the
seventh.

Besides, God that knew man's estate, knew reasons for his commandment; and
therefore it is ill divining against the light of Gods truth.

And if it had been but a commandment of trial, man ought to have obeyed.

Fifthly, hitherto of the eversion of your Tenet; now for the Text in Genesis 2.
2, 3. That the true sense of the words is this; The Lord blessed the seventh
day; that is, he appointed it to be a Fountain of blessing to the observers
of that day: and sanctified it.] That is, Commanded it to be set apart by men
from common businesses, and applied to holy uses. That this, I say, is the true
sense, not only the Hebrew and Greek words do both give, but the universal
opinion of Divines, ancient and modern.

Cyprian writes thus Cyprian. de Spiritu Sancto sc. edition. Pamelianam.
Antuerp. 1589.
; This sacred number of seven obtained authority from the creation of the
World, because the first works of God were made in six days, and the seventh
day was consecrated to rest, as holy and hallowing, honored with the solemnity
of abidding, and entitled to the Spirit, the Sanctifier. Epiphanius speaks
thus of those words in the Gospel of Saint Luke; It came to pass on the
second first Sabbath Epiphan. advers. Haeres. lib. 2. tom. 1. contra Hares.
Anoet^n Haeres. 51.
, that the first Sabbath is that which was defined from the beginning, and
called so of the Lord in the Creation of the world, which returns by circuit
according to the revolution of seven days, from that time until now: but the
second Sabbath is that which is described by the Law.

Origin answers Celsus objecting against the History of the Creation, that
God, like some Artificer that were wearied, should need a resting and vacation,
in this manner Origin. contra Celsum, lib. 6. fol. 81.
: Truly this man sees not, after the creation of the world, as soon as the
world was made, what a one the day of the Sabbath, and of God resting, was, in
which both men rest to God, and keep this day a festival unto him, which have
dispatched their works on the sixth day: and because they let pass nothing
that is urgent, they ascend by contemplation to the feast day of the just and
blessed men.

Chrysostom unfolds the Text in Genesis thus Chrysostom. tom^ in Genesis sermon. 10.
sc. edit. Savilianam.
: What is this; and he sanctified it, he separated it? Then the Divine
Scripture teaching us the cause also, for which it is said, he sanctified it,
adds, because in it he rested from all his works which he began to make.
Now hence God gives to us darkely (...).
this instruction, that we set apart, and separate one day in the circuit of
every week to the use of spiritual things; for, for this cause did the Lord
finish all the fabric of the world in six days, and honoring the seventh
with his blessing, sanctified it.

Hierome was of the mind that the Hieron. tradit. Hebr. in Genes.
Sabbath was instituted in the beginning, who reprehends the Jews idleness on
their Sabbath and empty rest, in which yet they gloried, from the example of
God, who in the beginning wrought on the day which he blessed, and so brake the
Sabbath in the Jews sense.

Learned Mercerus upon this place, following the choice and greatest Lights,
says, I doubt not but by the first fathers before the Law this day was solemn
and sacred, God himself being their teacher, etc. That the people of God might
know that the Fathers observed it not of themselves, but as taught of God to
retain them in the exercise of Gods worship.

Athanasius Athanas. de Sabbat. and circumcis.
also gives his voice, Who shows that that seventh day had its observation
among all men of those generations from the creation to the resurrection of our
Savior.

Augustine was of this mind: When God (says he August. ad Casul. epist. 86.
) sanctified the seventh day, because in it he rested from all his works, he
expressed not any thing concerning the fast or dinner of the Sabbath.

The Fathers alleged by Gomarus, that plead the Sabbath was not kept by the
Fathers before Moses, as Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Irenaeus and Eusebius are
to be understood of the Ceremonial observation thereof, and so the Fathers
were no observers of the Sabbath as those ancients rightly maintained against
the Jews, and we readily subscribe unto it: and that they thus meant is
apparent by some passages in their foresaid books. Justin Martyr in his
Dialogue with Tryphon the Jew says, Neither think ye it grievous that we
drink some warm thing on the Sabbath, seeing God also governs the world on
this day in like manner as he does on other days. And Tertullian in his book
against the Jews says, That the temporal observation of the Sabbath cease,
as it is a type. Irenaeus also affirms in his book against Heresies, lib. 4.
c. 3. That the precepts spoken by Gods own voice receive not diminution but
increase by our Saviors coming, which precepts, he says, were natural,
liberal, and common to all. And in his 30. chap. of the same book he says,
That the godly Fathers had the substance of the Decalogue written in their
hearts and souls, and had in themselves the righteousness of the Law.

Beda therefore upon the sixth chapter of Luke, makes a distinction between
the observation of the legal Sabbath, and the liberty of the Natural Sabbath,
which till Moses time was like other days. See, he acknowledges a Natural
Sabbath under those first times of liberty.

Annexe to these the Jewish Doctors. Philo thus opens the Text; Philo de
mundi opificio.
After that this Universe was perfected according to the perfect nature of the
number of six, the Father added honor to the following seventh day, which
when he had praised, presently he vouchsafed to call it holy. For it is the
feast not of one people or Region, but of all universally, which alone is
worthy to be called a popular festivity, and the birthday of the world.
Broughton in his consent of Scriptures alleges Ramban upon Genesis 26. fol. 46.
And Aben Ezra upon Exodus the twentieth to prove that the Lord appointed the
seventh day from creating to be an holy rest, and that the fathers observed it
before Moses. Peter Matyr alleges Pet. Mart. ^o^. in Genes.
Rabbi Agnon for that same point.

Thomas Aquinas interprets it on this wise, q he sanctified it, that is, he
deputed it to sanctity; for he wills that the Lords day be kept holy of us,
and therefore that especially we be also vacant to Gods holy worship, and in it
and the memorial thereof, we call to mind the continual benefit of our
creation: and therefore in the old law it is commanded that on that day we
cease from servile works, that we may intend more freely God and his divine
worship, whence that day is called, Sabbath, which is the same that rest it.

Selneccerus says, that Nicol selnecceri. Com. in Genes.
God would by this very sanctifying of the Sabbath, institute a certain
worship, in which mankind even in innocence (that is, although Adam had not
falled) should publish the goodness of God, and celebrate worship acceptable
to God, when as other things on other days were to be looked unto. And then he
gives four causes or ends of the institution of the Sabbath, It was
instituted, First for rest. Secondly, for the excellency of man. Thirdly, for
the upholding of a certain worship. Fourthly, and for the testimony of
immortality. And here says he, Children may learn the answer of that School
argument: the Apostle in Col. 2. bids, that none judge in respect of the
Sabbath days: therefore we are not to keep a Sabbath. Answer the antecedent:
Paul speaks of the ceremony and the observation of external circumstances;
he speaks not of the general or the principal meaning of the precept, and
the final cause thereof, which is natural and unchangeable. This Author
calls our Sabbath, the Sabbath of Redemption.

Marius is full in this thing, Marius in Genesis 2.
He blessed, that is, he consecrated it to his blessing to be kept of men,
and sanctified it; not as if he estamped holiness on it, but because he
appointed it to his sanctification and praise, and to the holy conversation of
men. Because with the Hebrews, to sanctify is the same as to separate from
pollution: a day is said to be sanctified, in which we ought to be separated
from pollution. It was made presently from that very day of the World, as the
letter shows; a positive precept given to our first Parents concerning this
thing, which they passed over to posterity by tradition, as in the Church, the
celebration of the first or eight day is passed over: for since it is of the
Law of Nature that some time be peculiarly insinuated for the worship of God,
it was meet, that that should be determined in the very beginning by a
positive law, whence even among the Gentiles, the Religion on the Seventh day
was famous.

Beza affirms Beza paraph. in Job 1. 5.
of Job, That as often as his children had made an end of feasting one another in
their several houses, he sanctified them, and offered burnt offerings
according to their number, but notwithstanding there is no doubt but that the
daily worship of God was diligently observed, besides in this most holy family,
at least every seventh day was carefully sanctified, as God from the beginning
of the world had appointed.

This blessing, says reverend Calvin, was nothing else but Calvin. Com. in
Genesis ca. 2.
a solemn consecration, whereby God claims to himself the studies and
employments of men on the seventh day. First, God rested, then he blessed this
rest, that in all ages amongst men it might be holy: or he dedicated every
seventh day to rest, that his example might be a perpetual rule.

Moreover, we must know, this exercise is not peculiar to one, either age or
people only, but common to all mankind. Wherefore, when we hear that by
Christ's coming, the Sabbath was abrogated, this distinction must be taken too.
What appertains to the perpetual ordering of humane life, and what peculiarly
agrees to the old figures, that the Sabbath figured the mortification of the
flesh, I say was temporal: but that from the beginning it was commanded men,
that they should exercise themselves in the worship of God, deservedly it ought
to endure even to the end of the world.

Hereunto agree, Zuinglius, Iunius and Tremellius, Vatablus, Vrsin. Catech.
Bulling. in Romans 4 5. and Decad. Danaeaeth. Chri. l. 2 c. 10. Bertram. pol.
Iudaic. c. 2.
Vrsinus, Bullinger, Danaeus, Aretius, Piscator, Bertramus, Hospinian,
Chemnitius and Zanchy: who after this sense given upon the words of the Text in
Genesis, delivers his opinion of the manner of keeping the first Sabbath. I
doubt not (says he) but that the Son of God Hospin. de orig. templ. li. 2.
c. 14. Chemnit. loc. Theo. de lege Dei. Zanch. de hominis creat. l. 1. c. 1 sub
finem libri.
taking on him the shape of man, was busied that whole seventh day in most holy
colloquies with Adam; and that he did also fully make himself known to Adam
and Eve, and did reveal the manner and order which he had used in creating of
all things; and did exhort them both to meditate on these works, and in them
to acknowledge their Creator, and to praise him, and that by his own example
he did admonish them to employ themselves in this exercise of godliness,
setting all other business aside; and also that they would so instruct and
teach their children. To be short, I doubtnot but that in that seventh day he
taught them all Divinity, and did hold them busied in hearing of him, and in
praising God their Creator for so many and so great benefits. To this
interpretation I am led by these two reasons: The first, taken from the
Sanctification of the Sabbath which God has prescribed in the Law: the second,
because Adam ought to understand this sanctification of such a day: therefore
it is probable that the Son of God did open this unto Adam and Eve, both in
plain words, and by his own example. For even God also is said to rest upon
that day, and in Exodus, he does exhort to the sanctification of the Sabbath
by his own example: therefore he did sanctify it with Adam and Eve. Of this
the Son of God gave us a show: for having finished the works of our
re-creating or Redemption, being raised from the dead, he conversed with his
Disciples, appearing to them through forty days space; and speaking the things
that concerned the Kingdom of God, and fully instructing them, and teaching
profound Theology; not so much with words, as with the efficacy of the
Spirit: He so rested from both works, that he ceased not yet to teach men,
and instruct them in the true worship.

The time would fail me to tell of our English worthies, famous Western
Lights, that teach all this Truth, as Willet, Perkins, Greenham, Babington,
Bownd, Gibbens, Dod, Scharpy, Esty, Williams, with many more: Behold what a
cloud of witnesses do compass us about.

For further confirmation, consider that place in Exodus 16.

For first, before all mention of Moses Law concerning the Sabbath, it is
storied that the People gathered on the sixth day twice as much bread, two Omers
for one man; which Verse. 22. 23.
thing was observed by the Rulers of the Congregation, who came and told Moses
of it. To what end was this, but that they might apply themselves wholly to the
observation of the Sabbath the day following?

Secondly, the very phrase and words of Moses, in giving admonition about the
Sabbath in verse. 23, is such as clearly shows that Moses spoke not of the
Sabbath, as some new thing unheard of; but calls to mind the ancient
sanctimonie of that day, which they had been compelled to neglect of late in
Egypt, through Ph^raohs cruel taskemasters. This is that which the Lord has
said: Tomorrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord.

Thirdly, the very command of Moses appointing them for after times to gather
twice as much every sixth day as they did other days; and giving this reason,
on the seventh day which is the Sabbath, in it there shall be none: Verse. 26.
29.
shows that Moses himself was mindful of the Law of the Sabbath, delivered
from Adam to the Fathers. Out of this Text then it is evident, that the Sabbath
was from the beginning.

The third Section answered.
Unto the Argument of Master Byfield, for the mortality of the Sabbath, taken
from the manner of giving this Law, by lively voice on Sinai, and by divine
ingraving in Tables of stone, by the finger of God, and therefore differenced
by the Lord from a ceremonial Law, which were all given mediately by Moses;
and from Gods own testimony by Moses, that it is one of the Ten words, or
Ten Commandments: you make here such an answer as does not once come near
the force of the argument. It became say you, one of the Ten perpetual words
then, when it was given on Mount Sinai; for the moral part perpetual, Thou
shall sanctify the Sabbath; for the ceremonial part not perpetual, Thou
shall sanctify the seventh day for the Sabbath. If it became so, because
engraven by the finger of God in Tables of stone, then that part, thou shall
sanctify the seventh day for Sabbath, is so, because so engraven. If it became
so but then, that suffices us that have lived ever since, and those that shall
arise after us to the end of the world. But this that you affirm, that then,
when it was delivered on Sinai, it became one of the perpetual words, has no
warrant in Scripture, allege the place: nor in reason; for as the other nine
Commandments became not then first perpetual, though then first delivered in
form of laws, no more did this. Were they perpetual, because written in
Tables of stone, and not rather, because perpetual, so written? This also is
strange, that you say, that the moral part of the commandment, Thou shall
sanctify the Sabbath, (as you will have it) became but then on Sinaia
perpetual word. Was not obliging from the beginning, and written in the heart,
that there should be a vacant time for the worship of God? If you deny it; See
your own confession in page 24. of the Treatise.

The fourth Section answered.
That place in the fifty sixth Chapter of Esaias, verse. 4, 5. Verse. 2.
affords a strong argument against you; for there the Christian Sabbath is
prophesied of, as that which every mortal man, every son of Adam, that would
be blessed, must keep in obedience to God. It is therefore an ordinance of
God, charged in the fourth Commandment, and no Command of men. The strangers
and Eunuchs there spoken of, were not such as became proselytes under the law,
but Christians under the Gospel. You object that the privilege of Sons and
Daughters was not tendered to strangers, and so Master Byfield mistook the
Text. This is but a cavil, the intent of the Prophet is to show that the
legal rules about strangers and Eunuchs shall not, in Christ's Kingdom where
they are abolished, hinder their election and choice into the number of his
people; but any of all sorts are accepted with God, that thus take hold of his
Covenant: The Prophet expressly pronounces them blessed, v. 2. therefore it can
be no wresting of the Text, to say the stranger shall be a Son, and the
Eunuch made joyful in the house of prayer; nay if you take the Promise applied
in v. 5. to the Eunuchs exclusively shutting out the stranger, how does it
answer so well the strangers objection, who said, The Lord has utterly
separated me from his people, verse. 3. You object further, that the burnt
offerings and sacrifices mentioned in verse. 7. have no place in the New
Testament; therefore the Text must be understood of the time of the Old
Testament. You might as well say that that place in Malach. 1. 11. is not
spoken of the New Testament, though it be said, Gods Name shall be great
among the Gentiles, from the rising of the Sun, to the going down thereof.
Because it is added, In every place incense shall be offered, and a pure
offering. Christians have their burnt offerings and sacrifices, Romans 12. 1.
Heb. 13. But you say, that then all the chapter must be understood in a
mystical sense, and so of a mystical Sabbath. This consequence is utterly
infirm, as may be seen by that Text in Malachi forecited; and that conceit of
a mystical Sabbath cannot have place here, for these are made distinct, to
keep the Sabbath from polluting it, and to keep the hand from doing any
evil. verse 2.

To speak fully, there is no one word in Scripture that speaks of a
mystical Sabbath: for what is spoken of a Heb. 4.
Spiritual Sabbatisme concerns our rest in Heaven, and not a Spiritual
Sabbath on earth; and to say that servile works condemned in the fourth
Commandment are no other than sins, or sins at all, is nothing but an
Allegorical sporting with Gods Word; for sins are not unlawful on the
Sabbath only, but always, and in all places: nor does the fourth Commandment
intend to give a prohibition of all sins; though it is true, that in some
sense sins receive an high aggravation when they are committed on so holy a
day. Esai. 58. 4.

Now how this mystical and spiritual Sabbath of yours should serve to this
purpose which we intend, I know not, they are words of a disjoynted mind.

The fifth Section answered.
Concerning the authority that translated the Sabbath, you say it is certain,
that the translation thereof was actually and immediately prescribed by the
Church. Deal ingenuously, and show me where; if in Scripture, then I answer
that it was not immediately prescribed by the Church; for the Apostles were not
Authors of the institution, but Ministers of Christ, and penmen of the holy
Ghost. If in Ecclesiastical writers; I answer they all refer us to the
Apostles and the Scriptures. This opinion therefore is so far from certain,
that it is certainly false. You say again, that certainly Christ never gave
his Apostles particular charge of Instituting a new Sabbath, either while he
conversed with them on Earth, or afterward by Revelation. How know you this?
The Apostles delivered many things that the Evangelists did not set down, nor
themselves expressly say they received them from the Lords mouth; that they
concealed Christ's Command from the Church, that is, this particular expression
in so many words, that Christ commanded it: this makes to prove it was given
them in charge by Christ, for else when the Apostles enjoined it, they would
have said of that their injunction, as of other things, 1 Cor. 7. 6. 12. 25.
We speak this by permission, not by commandment: we have no commandment of
the Lord, but we speak our judgment: Herein speak we, not the Lord. This
institution then (to use your own language of a new day of solemnity, in
stead of the old Sabbath) was of the exigence and necessity of the Apostles
commission, not of the liberty. The Apostles did nothing in ordering the
Church, but from Ioh 14. 26.
and by Christ; either by precept, or by example, or by divine inspiration. It
is out of question, they had special warrant from Christ in express charge,
when you compare together their precept and practice with those two Texts,
Math. 28. 20. Act. 1. The first enjoining the Apostles to teach what he
commanded, and to teach and baptize, in which ordinances teaching such things,
he would be with them to the worlds end. The latter declaring that Christ
spoke the things pertaining to the kingdom of God, to his disciples in those
forty days before his assension. For all that you say therefore, it is
certain the Sabbath was translated by the same authority that first commanded
it?

The Sixth Section answered.
First, concerning that place in Matthew. 24. 20. first, you affirm that it is
understood by all Divines of the old Sabbath; by all the ancient without
exception; by all the latter for ought you know.] Could you know the judgment
of the Ancients to be such, because they held that there was a transgression of
a law, in hasting their flight on the Sabbath? Did they hold, think you, that
the fourth Commandment was in force then, for the sanctifying of the Jews
Sabbath? Or was there any other than the fourth Commandment, which could be
transgressed by flight on the Sabbath? Hierome says, That our Savior bid them
pray that their flight might not be in the winter, nor on the Sabbath day,
because in the one the extremity of cold forbids to go to the wilderness, and
to lie hid in mountains and deserts: in the other, there is either the
transgression of the Law, if they be willing to fly, or imminent death, if
they abide. Thus runs also the ordinary gloss; and what a vain boast is
this concerning the judgment of the Ancients, when they all almost give no
other interpretation of that Text, than what is Allegorical? as Origin,
Austine, and others.

Many later Divines by Sabbath understand all inconveniences of flight caused
by the necessary and enjoined attendance on Gods worship. This little favors
your opinion, and most understand the place of the Christian Sabbath.

And that this is the proper sense of the place, will be manifest to him that
observes three things: First, the persons to whom these words were spoken,
viz. to the Disciples privately, and apart on the Mount of Olives, verse. 3.
Secondly, the time, immediately before his death, he spoke of that which
should fall out forty years after. Thirdly, the intent of our Savior, which
was to show the great evils should then come to pass, and the miserable
exigents the enemies should put them to. Now, if it be not spoken of the
Christian Sabbath, what force could there be in our Saviors speech saying,
pray that your flight be not on the Sabbath; who hereby intended to signify
that it should be a singular grief to them to fly on that day. If the
Sabbath had not been in force, what vexation had it been to the Disciples to
fly on that day more than any other: nay, it had been an argument of comfort,
and our Savior might have showed them then, that it was a singular mercy of
God to them in such straites, that now they were rid of the obligation to the
Sabbath, and so might fly on that day, as well as any of the rest; otherwise
they had more need to have prayed for knowledge to see their liberty in
Christ, than to pray that they might not fly on such a Sabbath, as should
bind them but only in their own conceit.

Christ in this place acknowledges this day as His: for it is manifest that
this flight happened about forty years after, when the Jewish Sabbath was
gone: As therefore when God gave to the people the Law of the Sabbath on Mount
Sinai, He said, Remember the Sabbath day to keep it Holy; so the Lord Jesus in
the Mount of Olives, commands that they should studiously remember even in
their Prayers, the Christian Sabbath many years before, lest when the calamity
came, its holy rest should be intercepted with the noise of warlike tumults,
and with a tumultuary slight.

Secondly, you say, that to fly far off on the Lords day in case of
necessity was never held unlawful, but on that Sabbath it was.] If it were
not unlawful to fly on the Lords day in such cases, does that make that it is
not inconvenient, and a grief to a Christian heart, to be forced that day to
forgo the worship of God, and miss the Lord in his ordinances, and to taste
that day of his heavy wrath, in which he expects and uses to taste of his
comforting and satiating blessings? It was not unlawful to fly in the winter,
yet it was needful to pray, that this flight might not then be; and was it
ever unlawful in case of danger to fly on the Sabbath? Have you forgot all
while you eagerly pursue your own fantasy? The Jews hold that being set
upon by Thieves or enemies, it was lawful to fly that day, as Rabbi Thanchuma
teaches in Ilmedenu. 83. 4. the old rule amongst them is known to all, Peril
of life drives away the Sabbath; and as well known is their practice in the
Maccabees.

The Sabbath-dayes journey, was not an allowance in case of danger, and a
stinte set, beyond which if they went, their judicial laws condemned them to
death; as you ignorantly avouch.

Thirdly, you say that the name of Sabbath was never applied to the Lords day,
by any Apostle or other Christian, for many hundred years after Christ. The
Apostle in Heb. 49. doubted not to apply the name of Sabbath to the Christian
people and our rest, saying, That the People of God, have their Sabbatisme left
unto them.

Yet admit your strong conceit had bin as strong a Truth, what would follow
thence? That our Savior intended our Sabbath in that place of Matthew, because
the Apostles call it the Lords day? In no case. For to use the name of
distinction in times of the Church, wherein the Saturday was called Sabbath,
cannot either make the Apostles faulty, or the name of Sabbath incompatible to
that day.

The seventh Section answered.
First, that at the time of the siege of Jerusalem all ceremonies Zuares de
l^gib. l. 9 c. 19.
of the old law were deadly you deny, and we affirm: (for if our Saviors
death be not the time of the ceremonies deadliness, you confess you lost your
labor to the one half of your Reply hereto; indeed St Hierome sets that for
the period, but you have not answered one of his arguments: but (to let that
pass) the term prefixed is this; Look when the Ceremonial law was dead
throughout the whole world, it began at the same time to be deadly also
through the world: now the ceremonial law was dead when the Gospel was
published, for that obliging the other ceased to oblige, and that published,
the other was utterly evacuated: Therefore in that point of time in which a
sufficient promulgation of the Gospel was accomplished, instantly the old law
was deadly. This you partly saw; when you said in this Section; and not only
dead they were, but deadly also (I confess) to Christians, to whom he was
certainly revealed to be the Savior. This time was before the eversion of
Jerusalem as the Apostle testifies in Col. 1. 6. that the Gospel was come
unto and brought forth fruit also in all the world, and proclaims to the
Churches that the Ceremonial law was deadly both in that Epistle to the Col.
2. 20. 21. Gal. 5. 3, 4. and 4. 9. 10. 11.
Colossians and in the Epistle to the Galathians.

Secondly, for your assertion about the old Sabbath, that it did remain and
was observed in the East Churches three hundred years and above, after our
Saviors death: it is utterly false, that it was observed either Iewishly, or
as a Sabbath, or in Obedience to the fourth Commandment. No: such observation
was Anathematized in the Council z Ignat. ad magn.
of Laodicea, and Ignatius charged those Christians to work that day. If you
mean this observation was the performance of some religious duties publicly,
then you might say every day in the week was observed religiously by them: for
that is known that many of the Greek* fathers, as well as the Latin,
preached every day, and Aug. Ianuar. Ep. 11^.
Augustine tells of diverse customs in the Churches, Some communicated at the
Lords table every day, some some certain days, some on the ancient Sabbath
and the Lords day, some only on the Lords day. But you must needs intend the
Jewish observation of the Sabbath, for these words you add: all ceremonies
therefore, and particularly of the old Sabbath at the time by you mentioned,
were not deadly.

Thirdly, and when you say that the name of Sabbath was not given in the Church
to any other day than the Jews Sabbath for more hundred of years than three
hundred, Augustine says Sermon. de temp. 251.
, So we also sanctify the Sabbath: the Lord saying, Ye shall not do any work
therein.

The eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh and twelfth Sections answered.
In the eighth Section you set forth slanderous reports of Master Byfield,
which you took in by retayle, some about his Doctrine concerning late
repentance: of this the Church of England knows his wholesome propositions,
imprinted in his books on the Coloss. and on the first Epistle of Peter.

Some about his Discipline, as you term it, but those in and about Chester
know his goings in and out then among them.

In the fourth page of the Treatise, you tell of Rebellion against men's laws
and mischiefs to the commonwealth; and in the 53. page, that few drew so
freely of this vessel as he; all which cannot agree to a resolution of a
private case: and those words wherewith Mr Byfield charge you and you deny,
viz. that this doctrine tended to the corrupting of the estate where your
kindred and acquaintance and your self had lived, are express in a letter
written, June the ninth, 1611. Therefore he justly charged you for charging him
unjustly in these respects, and did not calumniate you. And whereas you say
that the doctrine of the Sabbath which you opposed, was not for pulpits but for
Corners, you might have known it has sounded in pulpits, and is in print by
diverse Divines. This of the ninth Section. But what do I? indeed these nor the
other Sections contain nothing worthy an Answer. The hands are joined with
scorners, and the replies borrowed from wicked men, let them alone.

The thirteenth Section answered.
That you did adjure Mr Byfield, which yet you deny, will be manifest if your
form of speech in the end of your Treatise, and the nature of an Adjuration be
compared together.

Zauch. in tertium precept. de adjuratione.
An Adjuration is an action in which in the Name of God, or by his Name either
we require an oath of any one whereby he should bind himself to do or not
to do something: or we bind him to it by command or entreaty without an oath
exacted, and that our desire may be more surely obtained, we interpose the Name
of God.

Your words are these, I challenge you as you will answer it at the judgment
Seat of Almighty God, when your accounting day shall come, to repair the ruin
you have made in his Conscience. True, here you require not an oath to bind
him to this: yet you require it with an interposition of the Name of God, and a
denunciation secretly of Gods anger, if he do it not, and so you fall under
the second kind of Adjurations.

The fourteenth Section answered.
Here begin Mr Byfields reasons, why he would not yield to answer the Treatise
though adjured: Mr Breerwood would refell them.

Take M. Byfields words together and they are a sufficient reason, for every
strangers vain challenge ought not to be answered. Now this challenge of M.
Breerwoods was vain, because the Injury was but a Conceit, no Reality, and the
doctrine of M. Breerwood abundantly answered in Writers at his hand. Thus all
M. Breerwoods words are to no purpose, and a mere beating of the Air.

By the way note M. Breerwoods Parenthesies ( no man less curious or
inquisitive of other men's affairs) (neither was I ever greatly inflamed with
ambitious heat) they contain in brief large justifications of himself, but
how rightful, this Treatise and Reply do manifest; let one instance serve,
here he requires a reason for the injury and harm done to his Nephew and him
for vexing his Conscience, and to confess the error and injury, and in page
95. he confesses and retracteth his own error in judgment and manners for
provoking Mr. Byfield about this point.

The fifteenth Section answered.
To this reason that Master Breerwood sought more victory than truth, Master
Breerwood replieth that victory will attend truth. I answer, it will, but one
that seeks victory more than truth, will run over truth to reach at victory:
and that in your writing it may be seen you sought victory more than truth,
appears, for else you would have answered the arguments found in the writings
of Divines in these cases about the Sabbath. And whereas you ask, If Master
Byfields zeal to truth, be not as fervent to truth as your affection to
victory, if it should not, it is no more than that which is found oft-times in
the best, but his zeal was at least as fervent, though not attended with an
itch to mispend it.

The sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth Sections answered.
Master Breerwood undertakes to give him warrants to warrant him in this work,
which Master Byfield pleads he could not find; To which I answer, All his
warrants warrant not a Minister to leave the Instruction of his charge to write
confutations of a private opinion, that infecteth neither his charge nor the
Churches of Christ, no, not where the contending party lives: the case is
altered, now this Treatise has broken prison.

Master Byfield was no lover of contention, neither by nature inbred, nor by
custom purchased, and the Woe to them by whom offenses come, is the woeful
portion of them that give the offense. The Doctrine of our Savior was an
offense to the covetous, envious, proud, hypocritical and blind Pharisees; but
yet no woe, I hope, to him for that: Herein this Worthy man was conformed to
Christ, and yet is now more conformed. Gods Children suffer not all their
afflictions while they live. Both these reasons therefore are good and
reasonable.

Furnishing with gifts is not always enough to make an inward calling to a
particular action, there must be the seasonablenesse of the Action, the
evidence of good to issue from such an Action, some sufficient notes of Gods
separation of that man to that Action; for all that are able are not presently
inwardly called to an action, and in a word, Recte facit animo quando
obsequitur suo; quod omnes homines facere oportet, dumid modo fiat bono Plaut.
in Anplitr. male respondent coact^ ingenia. Senec. Psalm. 31. 18.
a man's inclinations which may not be forced, and if they spring not from a
corruptroote ought to be heeded next to abilities. Master Byfield then, though
able might not find himself inwardly called.

How far M. Byfield was from Enthusiasmes (with which you charge him proudly,
contemptuously, and falsely, as always lying lips can speak grievous things
against the Righteous) let all testify that knew his preaching, and yet may
see it in his writings: no man ever so exact in keeping close to the express
Word of God, so free from ventring or upholding matter of opinion.

The nineteenth Section answered.
Master Byfield pleads needlesnesse of his Answer, and refers Master
Breerwood to Master Greenham: he replieth Master Greenham impugneth not any of
his Conclusions. No does? Let us try the matter.

Master Breerwood teaches our Sabbath day to be an ordinance of the Church.
This Master Greenham impugneth as the Doctrine of the Papists, page 129. Master
Breerwood teaches that light works were never forbidden on the Sabbath, and
that the rest for strictness was ceremonial. Master Greenham teaches that
light works are forbidden in the fourth Commandment, as light oaths are in
the third. page 162. (sl^ight in keeping the Sabbath and full of slight
oaths) and that the rest of the Sabbath is as needful for us as for the
Jews, page 136. Master Breerwood teaches that servants have not the
Commandment given to them, and that they are for labor equal in subjection
unto beasts. Master Greenham teaches that no lawful calling) and such is the
servants) implies any necessity of forgoing the worship of God on the Sabbath:
and that to make the servant equal to beasts on the Sabbathis to have to hell,
not thinking whither they are going, page 163. your reasons also are answered
most of them in that Treatise of Master Greenhams.

That weak, shall I say, or wicked taxing of Mster Gareenham, that his
affection was better than his judgment, abundantly testifies the pride of
your spirit. But this is usual with the loose Atheistical. spirits of our
times, to account of all they call Puritanes, for no great Scholars.

The 20. and 21. Section answered.
These give sufficient testimony of Master Byfields modesty and wisdom, and
of Master Breerwoods bold brags and rash censures, and therefore I turn them
over.

The 22. and 23. Section answered.
That Master Breerwood would disquiet Gods people, (as Master Byfield charge
him) was apparent (though he gainsay it) for he sent the Treatise to Master
Ratcliffe of Chester unsealed, with these words in his Letter with which it was
sent: I have left the Treatise unsealed, that you might, if you please, read
it and after make it up, and as soon as you can deliver it. And afterward in
that Letter he gives him instructions in the reading of it, to read with
leisure and attendance, with the like: I have the original of this Letter,
dated June 9. 1611.

And that Master Breerwoods opinion is private, is clear, because no man ever
so interpreted the commandment touching servants, save himself; and how ill
it agrees with the renour of the commandment, let the indifferent judge by
the answer I have given to this Treatise. When you say therefore, that those
determinations of yours have every where resounded in the Church of God, this
is false, unless the Papacy be the Church, or Anabaptists and Familists: For
what if Master Broad, and two or three more make a clamor, is that sufficient
to make the Doctrine public. The public Doctrine of the Church of England I
have showed out of the book of Homilies and the Communion book, and all other
famous Lights in our Church. For my pains I look not for thanks from your
side, much less such a reward as a 1000. of books worth a 1000. French Crowns.

The 24. Section answered.
Master Byfield would that Master Breerwood should should have spared his
verdict about the fitness of Doctrine that should be taught till he had
charge of souls, Master Breerwood says not so, Ordination conferreth outward
ability to exercise the function of a Pastor or Doctor in the Church, but no
inward ability: This is somewhat of truth, but not all the truth, for it
causes more advised thoughts for the peoples edification, it conferreth a
special interest in Gods promises to ministers, in the discharge of their
function, which are not few, or of small effects.

The 25. Section answered.
What a childish exception is this, Lastly after finally. Could not you sue
that finally ends the reasons against your demand and challenge of an answer,
and lastly concludes the letter? Your spirit would not have spared Paul but
have given him a jerke if he had stood in your way. In the Epistle to the
Philippians he says finally my brethren, chap. 3. verse. 1. and again, finally
brethren, chap. 4. verse. 8.

Why charge you him of singular boldness to Deceive others, when yet your
self never saw but one soul infected, namely your kinsman, page 80. And there
too your sight failed you, and your self acknowledged it a little before in
page 95.

And where is your zeal or charity to hide such a precious truth as you
thought this to be, and not to impart it to others for their good?

The conclusion of the Answer to the Reply.
But it may be the Publishers zeal and charity was great and good, he would
not bury such a piece: His zeal, to the law to fire out one precept of the
decalogue, and make God a liar who said, with lively voice ten commandments,
he gave his charity, to servants that they might be under their masters, and
not under Gods command upon the day of the Dole of Gods grace and blessings
chiefly spiritual. His zeal to the Lord Christ, so great as not to afford
him his right in and royalty over his own day. His charity to M. Byfield that
in such a distance of time found best opportunity to vent this hasty, yet dead,
rotten, and forgotten birth. His charity to the Church, that she should be the
Doner of such a gift out of a plenary power to elevate it to its Dignity, worth
and use, and then bestow it on the Lord. His zeal to his own promotion in the
Church, for can any think it some pure love to Master Byfield, and not rather
to his own ends? Balaams wages would guilt even Balaams way. But I hope he
will find no Balaks in this famous Church. His zeal and charity to Master
Breerwood, that would have none of his writings perish; no not this which
himself had buried in oblivion, or else entombed his own faith and promise
before himself was interred: for see, I produce thee here a letter of his own
hand writing, imprinted after the original word for word, which runs thus;

To my approved very good Friend and loving Cosen, Master John Ratclyffe,
Alderman of Chester, at his house in the North-gate-street, give this with
speed. At Chester.
GOod Cousin, I heartily salute you, and your Wife, and little Ones, and beseech
Almighty God to bless both you and them. I have received the money by Graunge
with your Letter. For the twenty pound I have sent my Mother an acquittance
here enclosed, which I pray you to deliver her. There was thirteen pound over,
which I delivered to my Nephew Robert, and willed him to have the like care of
your discharge. I heartily thank you for your care and pains in my behalf,
about the sending of that money. Touching my Nephew John, whether he justly
charged Master Byfield or no, (the one affirming, and the other denying it) let
the just Judge of all men, and of all causes determine, to whose sentence, and
the testimonies of their own consciences I leave it. Notwithstanding, I think
I had good reason to persuade me, it was as my Nephew I think he should have
believed Master Byfield, before his Nephew.
said; For, first, I saw he loved and respected Master Byfield very much.
Secondly, as it seemed, it came from him somewhat unwillingly, as if he was a
fraid to procure Master Byfield any displeasure. Thirdly, other Chester men
reported the like opinions to have grown in their servants, and they laid the
blame on him That vile aspersions were cast on Master Byfield at Chester by
many loose persons there, most unjustly and causelessly, is a thing well known.
. Fourthly, I perceived by Master Byfields late letter, his judgment was, that
works on the Sabbath (those at least that might imply breach of Sabbath,
whatsoever works those were) ought not be performed by servants, albeit their
Masters commanded them: Confounding, as I thought, many things unskillfully,
which should more carefully be distinguished. As first, the persons to whom,
and the persons of whom the commandment was given. Secondly, the works which
servants do of their own free motion, and those which they do by their
masters imposition. Thirdly, the Lords day (in relation to Gods commandment)
with the old Sabbath, as also the breach of Sabbath, with breach of the
commandment of the Sabbath, and the like. And although you remember not, for
your part, nor my Cosen your wife, the proposing of any such case at your
table, where he says it was done Those at the Table testified, there was no
such Case proposed and answered, yet Master Breerwood will by reasons persuade
himself there was.
: yet it is like he should best remember it, whom it nearest touched: that it
should, I say, have deepest impression in his remembrance, as it found deepest
impression (as it seemed) in his Conscience. Yet whether in truth the vexation
of his conscience, were the cause of that distemper, or he made (as you say) a
stratagem of religion, to cloak some other secret devise, I am not able to
determine, but must refer it to him that is the searcher and Judge of all
secrets. But yet I should be sorry he should add that horrible hypocrisy to
his other sins. And yet This that follows overthrows the force of all his
former reasons, and evinceth that Master Ratclyffs conjecture was more probable
than M^ster Breewoods.
as I dare not accuse him, so neither am I able perfectly to clear and excuse
him of it, for (notwithstanding the outward show and pretense, he continues
to make of religion more than ever he did) I saw withal his disobedience, his
disquietnesse, his impatience, his self-conceit, his contempt of his friends
and their counsel, not to be continued only, but increased: Evil ensigns
indeed as it seems to me, of a sanctified and religious heart, knowing, as I
do, the fruits of Gods spirit, to be meeknes, peace, longsuffering,
gentleness, and such like, which can not inhabit with the other in one soul.
Gods holy will be done in him, whose mercy I daily by my prayers solicit for
him, and in the infiniteness of Gods mercy alone is all the remainders of my
hope. Now touching the difference betwixt Master Byfield and my self, the
prosecuting whereof you earnestly will me to cease, you shall obtain of me,
Cosen, to cease, were it a greater matter, so there proceed from him no further
cause to provoke me. Evil I wish him none at all, not the falling of a hair
from him, although I have freely reprehended that, which I took to be amiss
in his Doctrine by my first letter, and in himself by my later, which I hope
Note his desire to have that base reply to come to Master Byfield, after he saw
cause to mistrust his cosins wickedness and dissimulation, and yielded to
cease the contention.
before this, you have received and delivered him. If my writing relish of too
much sharpness contrary to my ordinary disposition, the grief I conceived of
my Nephews misdemeanure, of which I know no other occasion, and his refusing to
satisfy me, where I had reason to require it, and his returning me in stead of
that satisfaction, hard language, were the causes of it. But seeing he has not
the mind, or (as you say) the leisure to yield me that satisfaction, which I
wished, and which I should have indevoured to have given him on the like
occasion; and withal I see you so desirous to appease the quarrel There would
then have been hot work if Master Byfield, would have given the second blow.
, I am content to leave all as it is. Let him satisfy himself, and I have
done. Yet thus far withal let me, if not justify, yet excuse my passion to
you Cosen, who have some Nephews of your own, and know the condition of my
Nephew, how hard it was to bring him into a good course, and how apt he was to
run into an ill, being withal a fatherless and motherlesse Orphane.
Imagine, I say, how the ruin, or great likelihood of ruin Suppose it had
been so indeed as you conjectured, how could his ruin have followed any way
serving such a Master as you have heard in the answer to the occasion. Chap.
36. and making conscience of such a commandment of God.
of such a One, having the like relation to your self, that that Youth to me,
and being left by his dead Friends to your care, would have affected you: or
how this case of this very Youth, would have affected his Father, or
Grandfather, if they had been alive. But howsoever, I remit all with all my
heart. Master Byfield h Note this speech*
shall never hear more of it from me. And so I would advise him also, to lay
aside all rancour and bitterness, and in the Name of God proceed in the
Ministry and service of God. As for me, he may without any impeachment,
notwithstanding this, or any other dislike of mine. Concerning the sending of
his letter back, out of which I charged him with some points; I must entreat
you to give me some respite to advise: for in my last letter to him, I have
charged him with these points, wherein, while I have the letter, I am able to
justify I have not wronged him: but if the letter were out of my hands. I
stand at his courtesy for the imputation of a slander, in charging him with
that, which I cannot (the letter gone) be able to prove. But this I will
promise and assure you Cosen, on my honest word, which I never have, for ought
I know, and never will by the grace of God break with you, that his letter shall
never turn him to any prejudice at all, and therewith I pray you rest contented
til I can otherwise determine. The other letter of my Nephews to your wife, I
am forced also a little to defer. Master Shipton cannot yet find it, yet he
is assured it is in his Counting House, and promises she shall assuredly have
it, on his next leisure to search it out. I am glad with all my heart of the
son God has given you: Whom I beseech to send you more, to increase your
comfort more, and to bless this he has now given you, with long life, and
with the grace of his holy spirit, which may ever grow up with him. To Gods
goodness I commend you all, in much haste, July 27.

Your ever true and assured loving friend, Edward Breerwood.


M. Breerwood kept his word: but the more has this Publisher wronged him. He
showed in truth neither charity nor zeal in venting this book so long after
the decease of these two learned men, and in this striking at the repute of a
grave Divine, that through indignity cast on his person, vility might steal
one his writings, which will prove more lasting then pillars of Marble, and in
essaying to overthrow the Authority, and so the duties of the Lords day. What
reward shall be given to him, that durst presume to remove the Churches old
land-markes? Shall not these learned men deceased, rise up in judgment against
him, as against one that raked in their ashes, who in their life bare, the one
of them, strange provoking, with such modesty and wisdom; and concealed, the
other of them, wrath and contention, and quenched it when it began to fire in
his face.

FINIS.

