^ VERY Perfect Discourse, and order how to know the Age of a HORSE, and the
Diseases that breed in him with the Remedies to cure the ^^me as also.

The description of every Vain, and how and when to let him Blood, according
to the diversity of the Disease: as has been proved by the Author L. W. C.

Imprinted at London by VV.VV. for Thomas Fauier. 160^

diagram of horse anatomy ^he 2 Templev ^he 2 ey v ^he 2 forehead ^he 2 pallet
v ^he 2 neck ve ^he 2 plate ve The 2 fore shanck v The z side veyn The Shanck
The houf The taie veyn. The hanch ve




In this Discourse is first showed how, and when, a Horse should be let blood,
and to what end, and by what sign a man may know whether it be requisite or no
Secondly. in how many Veins he may be let Blood. Thirdly, how to know his Age.
Fourthly, where all kind of diseases do grow, and how to cure them.
How and when a Horse should be let blood, and to what end, and by what sign a
man may know whether it be requisite or no.
FIrst, to preserve health, it is good to let him Blood four times a year.
First in the Spring about the beginning of May, because the Blood begins to
increase.

Secondly, in September, because the blood being then inflamed inequally, may
euaporate or break out.

Thirdly, about the midst of December, to let out the gross and knottie
Blood.

Fourthly, about the midst of March.

But I would not with you to let a Horse blood but once a year, and that in
the beginning of May, within a fortnight after his putting to grass: for then
you shall let out the gross and old blood, and the new will come in his place.
Except it be upon great need, I would wish you not to let him blood at all: for
often letting blood, causes debslitie in the Horse, it hinders the sight, and
makes the blood to resort inwardly, which cloyeth the Heart and Intralles, and
leaves the outward parts destitute.

In how many Veins an Horse may be let blood.
IN the first 2. Veins are the Temple Veins, which be the principal Veins
in the Head.

In the 2. Eye Veins, which are easy to find in the face of the Horse
somewhat beneath his eyes.

In the 2. Pallet Veins in the mouth.

In the 2. Neck Veins.

In the 2. Plate Veins, which are in the Breast.

In the 2. Forehead Veins.

In the 2. fore Shanke Veins before.

In the 2. fore Veins before.

In the 2. side Veins, which may be called ye Scanke veins.

In the Tail Vain.

In the Hanch Vain.

In the Hoof Veins.

In the 2. fore Shanke Veins behind.

So by this account, an Horse may be let Blood in 31. Veins: all which Veins
are easy enough to know, because every one lies in a little gutter, which you
shall find by feeling with your finger.

If your Horse be payned with any grief in his head, heaviness Fransey,
Fawling evil, or such like, then it is good to let him blood in the Temple
Veins with a Fleme.

If his Eyes be waterish or Blood-shotten, or greened with Pin or Web or
Haw, then it is good to set him Blood in the Eye Vain with a Fleme.

If he have any weariness or heaviness of Body, or be diseased in the Throat
with the Stranglings or Squiansy, or swellings of the Artires either within or
without, then it is good to let blood in the Pallet Veins in the Mouth with a
Coruet.

If he be vexed with an Ague, or with any other disease universal hurting his
body, then let him blood in the Neck Veins.

If his grief be in the Lunges, Liver, or any other inward part, then let him
blood in the Breast Veins: which we call (before) the Plate Veins.

If he be grieved in the Soulders, then let him blood in the Fore-feete Veins
above the knee with a Lance, and that very warely: for that place is full of
Sinniewes.

If he be grieved in the Joints, then let him blood in the Shackle Veins, and
that very warely: for that place is full of Sinniewes also.

If he be foiled in the Fore-feete with Foundring or otherwise, then let him
blood in the two Veins (make way first with your Drawer to come to your
veins) in the Fore-feete.

If he be diseased in the Kidnyes or Reins, Back or Belly, then let him blood
in the Flancke Veins.

If he have any grief in his Hippes, then let him blood in the Tail Vain or
Hough Vain.

If his hinder Legs be grieved, or Joints, or Feet, then let him blood on
the Shackle Veins, and on the 2. Veins behind on the hinder feet.

To know the age of a Horse.
A Horse has xl. Teeth, the xxx. Month after his fooling he loses two above
and two beneath: in the iiii. year he loses two above and two beneath: when
he is five he casts all the rest both above and beneath. Those that come
first above are hollow: when he is six, his hollow Teeth are filled up, and in
the. vii all the rest are filled up: then you can no longer judge of his age by
his Teeth.

To know where these Diseases do grow about a Horse.
Bags, is in the weakes of the Mouth.

Barbe, be two Teates growing under the Tongue.

Bottes, do grow and breed in the Maw and Guts.

Blisters on his body, comes through heat and cold.

Camer, is in his Mouth venomed, and will make his tongue to have cliftes and
scabbes in his upper Lips underneath, and are full of black Wheales or
Pimples, so that he can hardly eat his meat.

Coult Evil, is by rancknesse of Water and Blood, it will cause his Belly and
Yeard to swell.

Cloying, is in the Hoof of the Feet.

Cords, is a slack Sinniew in the Legs before.

Curbes, is a swelling Sinniew behind the Hoose.

Crotches, is a ruff scurffinesse above the Fetter-lockes.

Interfeering, is striking on the Joint about the Pastorne.

Farcion or Farcie, is a Scabbe or Knobbes breaking in diverse places of his
body, and comes chiefly in ye Veins.

Fever, is a sickness taken with cold, and will cause him to shake.

Thistula, is an old rotten Sore in his Body.

Foundering, is taken in the Body, and Feet also.

Fraying, is taken in the Body, and Feet, and Legs, which is a stiffness
coming only with cold.

Frounce or Pimples in the Pallet of his Mouth, Gawling, or other hurt, and
come especially by eating of frozen grass or dust.

Gigges or Flappes, are Pimples or Teates on the inside of the Mouth.

Glaunders, are Curnels under his Jaws, and when they are ripe, they will
run at his Nose, and so break out.

Gorge, is a swelling of Blood in the Legs.

Graueling, is taken in the Feet.

The Web in the Eye or the Haw, which is a Grissell growing on the Felme,
which scowreth the Eye.

Hyde-bound, is when the Skin cleaves to the Flesh and the Ribs.

Hoofe-bound, is in the pinching of the Hoof.

Itch in the Tail, is by excess of Blood.

Lampas, is the Flesh in the Mouth nie the upper Teeth.

Mange, is taken by some Scabbe or biting.

Mallander, is a Scabbe in the bone of the Knees.

Molt-long, is the pinching of a straight Hoof.

Mourning of the Chine, is a wasting from the Back, or broken Winded.

Navel galled, is a sore on his Back against the Navel, or an Impostume sore.

Pains, is a soreness about the Hoof, or Foote-lockes.

Powle-euill, is on the nape of the Neck, and breeds by stripes.

Pin or Web, which covers the beard of the Eye.

Rume, is taken by cold, and so his Teeth will wax loose and seem long, and
then he cannot eat his meat, but it will lie in lumpes, and about his Jaws.

Ring-bone, is a hard Gristle about the Hoof.

Quinasie, is a soreness in the Throat.

Sclander, is a Scab on the Hammes on the hinder Legs

Shackle gawled, is on the Pastorne.

Spauen, is on the Joint in the Hoofes behind.

Splent, is a splend Sinniew above the Fetter locks.

Staggers, is a doosinesse in the Head, breeding of cold, and of the Pellowes.

Stranglings, is a swelling of the Throat.

Sto^e in a Horse.

Surbating, is under the Sooles of the Feet on the further side.

Viues, is a certane Curnell under the Ears, or a Canker in the Mouth or
Throat.

Windgalles, are Bladders above the Fetter-lockes.

Yellow, is a kind of Iaundies, and will cause the Eyes to look yellow, and
other parts of the body also.

APPROVED REMEDIES FOR THE CVRING of any kind of disease, hurt, maine, or
malady, in Horses.
For the Gawling of a Horse.
TAke Butter, Vinegar, and Bay Salt, and melt them together, and lay on the
Horse back warm: then straw upon it Sutte, or the powder of a Clay wall.

An other for the same.
TAke ob. of Turmerace, bruise it: a handful of Bay salt, and a handful of
Sutte, with two handfulls of Oatemeale, mingle it with Urine, and make it into
a cake as well as you can, and then upon a hot harth bake it till it be burnt
black, then beat it into powder: and when you have washed your Horse back
with Lie very hot, or Chamberlie, then straw on the Powder: and when the
Powder is almost gone, then dress it as aforesaid.

If it be festered, take Yeest, Honey, the white of an Egg, and Sutte, mingle
them together, and make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to eat the dead flesh,
then straw on Verdegreace, and renew it once a day.

An other for the same.
TAke a Pottle of Vergis, two penny worth of green Coparis, and boil it to a
pint and a half: wash and search the hole therewith, then fill the hole with
read Lead, and so let it remain three days untouched: then wash it with the
same, and fill it again with the red Lead: and so every other day wash it
with that water, not made so strong of the Coparis, and lay thereon red Lead.
This will heal it though it be galled to the body.

An other for the same.
TAke of the strongest Beer a pint, put into it a quarter of a pound of Alum,
and half a handful of Sage: sees it to the one half, then take out the Sage
leaves: This will heal any Canker or Sore in a Horse.

To heal any Cut in a Horse.
TAke a quarter of a pound of fresh Butter, of Tar, and black Soap, half so
much of each, and a little Turpentine: boil them altogether (but the Soap) and
as soon as you take it from the fire, put in the Soap, and then use it.

For a Horse wrong in the Wales.
TAke Butter and Salt, and boil them together till they are black: then power
it in on hot, then take up a flake of Doung that is hot, and lay it on the sore
back, and so dress him till he be w^ole.

For Fretting on the Belly, which comes with gawling of the fore Gyrt.
THis comes with the fore Gyrt, and it stops the Blood which is in the
principal Veins, called the Plate Veins, which do run length ways: Take
Oil of Bays and Oil of Balm, two ounces of Pitch, two ounces of Tar, one
ounce of Rosen, mingle them altogether and annoint the four Bowels: then take
Floxe and lay upon it, and fear it with a hot Iron: but take heed it be not
too hot, for fear of burning.

For Thistulaes.
When you first perceive it to swell, then scalde it with Honey and Sheep
Shuet: but scald it very much: This will keep it from breeding.

Then take and slit it in the nether end of the Sore, and put as much Mercury
Sublimatum as a Pease, abate it with Sallet Oil, laying it on with a Fether^
after that take Verdegreace. iiii. d. worth, Vitreall ob. Lead.iii. d. worth,
beat these together, and every day wash the wound with Copris water made with
Copris and Elder leaves in Summer, and with the inner green Bark in Winter:
after the washing take the powder, and put it on the Sore, and after it drop on
a little Oil.

Another for the same.
TAke the uttermost green shelles of Wal-Nuttes, and put them in a Tubbe
strowing three or four handful of Bay salt upon them, some in the bottom,
some in the middle, and some on the top, and so keep them all the year: and
when you will use them, take a pint of them and a little Bay salt, and half a
quarter of a pound of black Soap, with half a sponefull of May Butter (and
for want thereof, other Butter) and incorporate them together, and then spread
it on the sore: But two hours before you lay it on, annoint the sore with a
little Venis Turpentine.

A Medecin to kill the Thistula clean.
TAke Vnguentum Egipsiacu^ which is made of Honey a pint, Vinegar di. a pint,
Alum a quarter of a pound, and Vergrece i. oz. di and sees them altogether
till they be thick and a tawwe color: this is called Egi^siacum: and to make
it the strongest way, is to put in Sublimat. i. oz. made in powder, and
Arsenicke two scruples, and boil it together.

This strongest is for Thistulaes, Cankers, and foul Soars: and the first may
be used in the mouth, but not that which is made of Sublimatum, and Arsenice,
for they are poison.

A Tent to put into the hollow place of the Thistula.
TAke of Sublimatum well powdered i. oz. the midst of well leauoned Bread
slack baked, iiii. oz. of N^^^n. x. drammes, mingle them together with a little
Rose water, and make Tents thereof, and dry them upon a Tile, and then take it
to your use.

To make Lie for the same, or Water, to kill it at the bottom.
TAke Lie, Honey, Roach Allome, and Mercury, and sees them together, and apply
it to the Thistula at the bottom thereof.

Also, to dry a Thistula, take red Wine, Goats doung, and Bean flower, and
sees them together, and lay it on: and this will dry it up.

To sink a Thistula.
TAke first and seere it, as with this mark, and then take Rosen, Sheep
tallow, and Brimstone, and boil them together, and lay it on very hot with a
cloth: this will sink it down again. This is good also for a Windgall: take
and prick it out (but beware of Sinnewes) and then lay it on, but not too hot,
but very reasonably, and this will keep it clean.

For a Thistula in the head.
TAke the iuce of House-leeke, and dippe a lock of Wool in it, and put the
lock of Wool in his ears and bind it fast: use this once a day.

An other for the same.
IF there be any Inflammation in the Ears, or that it grows to an
Impostumation in that place, you shall boil the roots of Mallows in water
till they wax tender, then bruise them, and strain out the water cleaner and
being warm, give it the Horse to drink.

To know the Bottes.
WHen you think your Horse has the Bottes, look in his mouth and smell to
his breath, for it will stink, and his mouth will be full of slyme.

To cure the Bottes.
TAke as much black Soap as a Wall-nut, as much Brimstone beaten, and a little
Garlic, and put it in good Ale, and give it the Horse blood warm: but for a
Mare with fool, then take Brimstone, Sutte, and Garlic, without Soap.

Take a handful of new Hens doung, and a quart of good stale drink, and all
to bray it with your hands: then take a good handful of Bay salt, and put two
Eggs to it, and bray them altogether, and give it your Horse to drink in a
Horn.

An other for the same.
TAke a pint of Milk, ob. of Saffron, ob. of Alum, beat them together, and
give it him to drink.

To kill the Woormes in the Maw.
TAke the Crops of young Broom, and of Sauen, and Grounsell, of each a
quantity: then choppe them small, and give it him with his Prouender evening
and morning: and let him not drink for a good space after.

If he have the long Woormes, take Milk, Brimstone, and Honey, and give him to
drink.

For Woormes in the Coddes.
TAke the Guts of a young Pullet, and cast it into his mouth fasting, and
make him to swallow them down: do this three morninges together, but let him
not drink or eat in five hours after.

Some use to give him fresh Broom in his prouende^ and salt Water, to drink.

Others do give him of green Willow, or green Reed, to eat: and in
disgestion of the meat, he shall cast out the Woormes.

An other for the same.
TAke the Garbidge of a young Hen or Pidgion while it is warm, roll it
first in a little black Soap, and after in Bay Salt, and force it down his
throat, and it will help him. Probatum.

To know when a Horse has Woormes.
TAke up his upper Lip, and you shall see many small blew Veins, greater and
bigger then the Woorme veins by a great deal.

For a Horse that has the Trunchons.
LEt him drink Hens doung. Myntes, Sage, and Rue: and let him blood in the
Nostrilles, or else give him Sauen or Sothernewood to drink, and it will cure
him.

An other for the same.
TAke ob. of Arment. ob. of Honey, ob. of Venycreke, ob. of good stale Ale,
mingle them together, and ^e up the Horse head on high, and give it him to
drink with a Horn.

For Blisters.
TAke the iuce of ground Iuie, with so much Brimstone, a quantity of Tar,
and so much Alum: put it all together, and lay it to the Blister.

For the Barbes.
IF they grow long, they will hinder his feeding: they do use to clip them with
a pair of Sheares, and then wash his mouth with Water and Salt, and that will
cure him.

For the Staggers.
YOu shall perceive them by beating his head, and he will be as though he were
blind.

Take Garlic, Rue, and Bay Salt and beat them grossly, and put Vinegar into
it, and put it into the Horse ears, and then wa^ Wool in this medecin and
stop his cares therewith and bind them close, and let it be so xxiiii. hours,
and then pull out his Tongue and wash it with Vinegar to make him have a good
stomach.

First, take a wispe of wet Hay and burn it under his nose, that the smoke
may go into his head, then take half a handful of Salandine, and as much
Herb Grass, three or four cloue^ of Garlike, and a little Baysalt, and
stamp them together, and put thereto four or five spoonefull of Vinegar or
Verges: then cramme it into the Horse cares, and tie the ears close that no
air may come in: let it continue in his ears a day and a night, and then let
him blood.

Or else take Rue and Salandine of each a like, and white Salt, and stamp them
together, and put it into his ears, and then bind them up for two hours.

An other for the same.
TAke Oil of bitter Almondes, i. Oz. di. of Ox gall, two Drammes of black
Ellabar stamped, ob. of Grames, of Casterum, of Vinegar, and of Varuice. v.
drammes: sees them altogether till the Vinegar be consumed: then strain them,
and put it into his cates.

For the pain in the Head, or stifeling.
Keep his Head warm, and let him drink warm Water mindgled with Wheat
meal or Fennell-seedes, and blow it into his nose with a quill, and some
powder of Ellab^r or Neesing powder, mixed together with some Pepper: then take
a pint of Malmesey, the whites and yolks of. v. new laid Eggs, one head of
Garlic bruied, small Pepper, Sinamon and Nutmegs beaten sine, and a quantity
of sweet Butters mingle them all together, and give to him to drink three
days after: but let him not drink in four hours after.

For the Wanders.
TAke half a bushel of Barley and set it on the fire in a yanne, and put
thereto running water, and ever as the water wastes put in more, so that the
Barley be covered with water, and let it sees till the Barley be broken: then
take a little Poake or Sack and put the Barley therein, and lay the same on
the Horse ridge on length from the Mane to the Cropper al hot, and let it lie
till it be cold, and there let it lie a night and a day, and put the Horse into
a green Yard some. xx iii. hours, and there he will wallow: and then take
him in, and he will be whole.

For the Yellowes.
YOu shall know them by the white of his eye, which will be yellow: or else by
his tongue, which will have yellow veins: or else put up his upper lyppe, and
you shall see the veins yellow.

Take two races of Turmeracke, and ob. of Saffron, and put it in a pint of
strong Beer or Ale, and warm it blood warm, and give it him.

An other for the same.
TAke Turmeracke a cloue et di. et di. a dosen ^hinnes of Saffron, one or two
Cloves, and six sponefulles of Vinegar or Verges: and put in each care three
sponefull, and stop his ears with black Wool: and then tie them fast, vii.
or.viii. days.

An other for the same.
TAke long Pepper, Graynes, Turmeracke, and Lycoris beaten into powder: put
them into strong Beer, and give it him to drink.

For the pains or Crotches which comes by heat and the sudden cold upon it.
THe pains appear about the Hoof, you shall know them by the hair standing
right up: you must take up the Shackle veins on both sides, then take the soft
row of a red Hearing, and Mustard, and black Soap, and boil these in Vinegar,
and make a Plaster and lay it to the sore.

There is no Vain between the Pastorne and the Hoof, but the Shanke vain:
and the vain which serves for the Crotches, must be taken up on the inside
and the outside.

Wash it first with warm Urine, then dry it with a cloth, and clip away all
the hairs on the Scabbie place, then rub and chafe it all over, and make
fast his feet, and rub the place grieved with Butter and Tar boiling
together, upon a cloute tied on a sticks end, and bath it well therewith: use
this once or twice a day till it be whole.

Butter and Honey molten together is good to annoint an Horse for Pains or
Crotches.

Take a pound of Hogs grease, i. d. worth of Verdigreace, ii. oz. of Mustard,
di. a pound of Oil de Bay, a quarter of a pound of Naruell, di. a pound of
Honey, di. a pound of English Wax, i. oz of Arsenicke, ii. oz. of red Lead,
half a pint of Vinegar: boil all these together and make an Ointment of it:
clippe the Horse leg bare, and lay this Medecin to it very hot.

For gourded Legs or Scratches.
TAke up the Veins beneath the knee, and let him blood as much as you think
good, then knit the Vein above and beneath, and annoint the Legs with this
Oil following.

Take Franckensence, and Rosen, and fresh Grease, and boil them together, and
strain it, and keep it to your use.

A Drink to raise a Horse, or for a Horse that is sick.
TAke two penny worth of Pepper, two penny worsh of Saffron, two penny worth of
Annis seeds, two penny worth of Turmeracke, a penny worth of long Pepper, two
penny worth of Treacle, a penny worth of Licoris, a good quantity of
Penny-royall, and Archangell: give him these with the Polkes of Eggs in Milk
to drink: And for Neat Cattle, give these in drink.

For a Surfeit Horse.
TAke a quart of Beer or Ale, and.ii. d. worth of Sallet oil, and as much
Dragon water, a penny worth of Treacle: make them warm upon the coals, and
put into it a penny worth of Horse Spices, and give it him.

For a Hide-bound Horse.
THis comes by over working, ill dyeting, and naughty dressing. Take Fenne
Creek, Turmeracke, Annis seeds, Bays, Lycoris, and Commine: beat all these
together, and give him one sponefull of all these in Ale or Beer blood warm.
This is also good for the Cough: This will also keep him from it, if you use
to give it him before the disease comes.

An other for the same.
TAke away some blood with a fleame, then give him some warm Mashes morning
and evening and give him Malt sodden in water together, or Branue and Water, or
some Wheat sodden with Barley in Water, and it will help him.

For the Hoof bound.
YOu shall raise the Hoof above from the top to the soole in four or five
places, so that the Water may come out: some do raise it round with a sharp
Knife, and along downward, and then rub it well with Salt once or twice.

For a loose Hoof.
TAke Tar three spoonefull, of Rosen a quarter of a pound, of Tansey, of Rue,
of red Mintes, of Sothernwood, of each half a handful, beat them all
together in a Mortar, and put thereto half a pound of Butter, i. d. worth of
Vergins Wax: then fry them all together, and bind it to the Hoof for. vii.
days, and it will cure him.

For a brittle Hoof.
IF your Horse has a brittle Hoof, it is because he is too hot or too dry,
and does stand dry in the Stable unstopped.

Take Ox doung and temper it with Vinegar, and bind it warm all over unto the
feet, and under the sooles of the feet: on the next day use him so again, so
use him for a week together, and it will help him: use to stop his feet
with Ox or Cow doung, or his own, and let him stand so a month.

Or, take the fat of Bacon, and temper it with Turpentine, and annoyne his
Feet therewith: which is very good.

A Medicine for the Cough, or mourning in the Chine.
Keep your Horse meatlesse over night, then take a pint and a half of Milk,
three heads of Garlic pilled and stamped, boil them to the half: give it
to your Horse, and some at his nose, then run him a quarter of a mile, then
rest him: and after that, run him three times more, every time resting him
then put him into the Stable and keep him very warm, and give him no Water
till after noone, then give him a good Meshe: and so use him with Meshes three
days, and give him no Water but always warm for three days.

An other for the same.
TAke Harehound, Licoris, and Anniseedes in powder, make Balls thereof with
fresh Butter, and give it your Horse.

An other for the same.
TAke Wheat Flower, Anniseedes, I scoris, being stamped in a Mortar, v or. vi
cloves of Garlic being bruised: mix all these together and make a Past of
them, and roll them in Balls as big as a Walnut: then pull out his Tongue
and cast them Balls down his throat three or four of them at a time, and
give two new laid Eggs after them shells and all.

For the Glaunders.
TAke Swines grease clean clarifyed, and as much Oil of Bay as a Wallnut:
give it him to drink with fair Water luke warm.

An other for the same.
TAke of Elacompana, Anniscedes, and Licoris, of each i. d. worth, boil them
in three pintes of stong Ale or Beer unto two pintes or less: then put into
it a quarter of a pint of Sallet Oil, and give it him to drink blood warm.

Then take Enforbiu^ in a quill, and blow it up into his nose, and within three
days after take Mustard, Vinegar, and Butter, and boil them together: put
thereto half an ounce of Pepper, and give it him to drink. Use the one
Medecin one week, and the other an other, and ride or work him easily.

An other for the same.
TAke a quantity of Anniseedes, Licoris, and Clacompana roots, long Pepper,
and Garlic of cach a like, with three Eggs and some Butter, a quantity of
Malmesey, and some good Ale mixed together, and make it warm, and so give it
him, and keep him warm.

An other for the same.
Sees a handful of pilled Garlic in Milk, and put a piece of Butter
thereto and some Ale, and stir them all together and give it him fasting, and
ride him softly a while after, and then set him up: but keep him warm nine
days after.

For the Strangles.
CVtte him between the Jaws, and take out the Kirnels and wash the place
every day wi^h Beer and Butter, and stop it up as long a^ you can, and give
him new Milk and Garliake to drink, and the juice of the leaves of Birch
withal, or in Winter the bark of Birch: also smother him with the gum of
Masticke or Franckensence.

For the Farsey.
TAke black Soap, Arsenicke, Unslaked Lime, Verdegreace, and red Lead: work
these all together, and lay them to the sore.

An other for the same.
TAke iii. oz. of Quicksiluer and put it into a Bladder, with two sponefull of
the juice of Orenges or Lemmons, and shake them together to cool the
Quicksiluer: then take half a pound of fresh Hogs grease, and of Vergis an
ounce: put all these in a Treene dish, and work them well together: then
annoint the knots with this Ointment till they rotte, then let them out with a
sharp knife, and annoint them still: and put into his ears the juice of
Ragg-weede, and they will dry up. Probatum.

A Drink for the Farsey.
LEt him blood in the Neck on both sides four fingers from the Head, and give
him this drink.

Take a gallon of fair Water, and put therein a good handful of Rue and a
sponefull of Hempseed, and bruise them in a Mortar all together, and sees it
till the half be consumed: and when it is cold, give it him to drink.

For the Farsey.
TAke black Soap, Mustard made of sharp Wine or Vinegar, and red Lead, mix
all these together, and annoint the Vein all along, rub it over with a hot
Iron made of purpose, but very thick: rub the Medecin much in with the
Iron, being red hot.

To destroy the Farsey.
TAke juice of Hemlocke a good quantity, and bray them together, and put it
into the ears, and prick the Knottes and put in Salt, and give him drink
with sweet Wort, Fennel, and Treacle.

For a Horse Foot that is wrounged in the Foote-locke.
Sees a quart of Brine til the foame rise, then strain it, and put thereto a
handful of Tansey, as much of Mallows, a sawcerfull of Honey, and a quarter of
a pound of Sheep Tallow: stir all these on the fire till the Herbs are
well sodden, and all hot, lay it to the Joint, and then lay a cloth over it,
and it will be whole an three days.

For a wrench in the Foot-locke.
TAke Pompilion, Naruile, and black Soap, of each a like, and heat them hot
on the fire, and then annoint him therewith.

For a Horse that is Stifled or Hipped.
TAke a pound of Bole-armoniacke, one quart of red Wine-vineger, vi. Eggs
beaten shelles and all, two penny worth of English Honey, as much Venus
Turpentine, one quart of Flower, one good handful of Bay salt, and put all
these in a pot, and keep it close one night, and the next day apply some of it
to the hurt, dressing it once a day for. ix. days together.

For a Horse that is Foundered.
TAke Verdegreace, Turpentine, and Sallet Oil, two or three sponefull of
Hogs great, and Bees wax i. oz. boil all together, and so dip Flax or Tow
in it, and stuff his Feet therewith, and let him blood in the Tooes, and he
shall be whole.

An other for the same.
Pluck off his Shoes and pare hollow his Feet nigh to the quick, then race
him with a crooked Lance from the Heel to the Too in two or three places on
both sides of the Hoof and let him bleed well, then clap two or three hard
Eggs to it as hot as he may suffer it: and as they cool lay on more, and then
lay hot Horse doung upon them and about his feet, and he will soon recover,
if you give him rest.

For a Horse that is Fowndred in his Feet.
TAke Tar, Neates-foote oil, and the Youlkes of Eggs, i. d. worth of
Verdegreace, and some wheat Branne, and boil these together, and bind them
under his foot very hot.

If he be foundered in his Body.
TAke ob. of Garlic, ii. d. worth of the powder of Pepper, ii. d. worth of
the powder of Ginger, ii. d. worth of Graynes bruised, and put it into a pottle
of stale Ale the best you can get, and give it him to drink, and lytter him to
the belly, and lay clothes on him as many as he can bear: and let him blood
on the sides.

For Blindness.
TAke two dry Tyse stoones and rub them together, and blow the powder of it
with a quill into his eyes three or four times.

For the Web in the eye.
TAke the lean of a Gammon of Bacon and dry it, and thereof make a powder, and
use the powder, and it will cure it.

For the Pearl in the Eye.
TAke the juice of ground ^uie, the juice of Salandi^ae, and Woman's Milk, and
put it into the eyes, and it will also cure him.

For the Haw in the Eye.
MAke a Plaster of the juice of Ground Iuie, and of Iuie Berries stamped in a
Mortar, beaten with Wine or Water: and Plaster wise lay it to the eye or eyes
evening and morning.

An other for the Haw in the eye.
SOme take a Needle and a double thread, and thrust the Needle through the
filme of the eye wherein the Crush grows, which pull out, laying it on your
fingers end, and holding the Needle and threede straight, and so cut away all
the hard matter a penny breadth. But beware you cut not away the fatt, which is
the wash of the eye: neither cut the Filme wherein the eye grows, but cut
between the Filme and the Crush, and then squirt in Beer.

For a Canker in the eye.
TAke Roch Alum and green Copris of each a like, boil them in three pintes
of running Water until the one half be consumed, then take it from the sire,
and once a day wash his eyes therewith being made luke warm.

For a stroke in the eye.
LAy thereto the juice of Smalladge, Fennel, and the white of an Egg.

For a Windgall.
TAke and cut the skin, then take a sponefull of Oil de Bay, one sponefull
of Turpentine, i. d. worth of Verdigreace, the white of an Egg, and a quarter
of an ounce of red Lead: boil them together and it will make a Salve, Lay the
same to the place where you did cut him. Probatum.

An other for the same.
FIrst clippe off the hair bare, then cut it the length of a Bean and let it
out, but beware of the Sinnewes that you cut not them: then have ready molten
Rosen, sheep Tallow, and Brimstone boiled together: then lay on this
Medecin, but beware it be not too hot.

For the Spauen.
TAke Mustard seed, and Oil de Bay, and Cow doung, the roots of Mallows, a
quantity of ^urpen^ne, di. oz. of Bole-armoniacke bear them to powder and
work them together, and bind them hot to the Spauen.

For the blood Spauen, and bone Spauen.
TAke up the Vain above and beneath the joint and let it bleed well, then knit
up the Veins, and annoint them with Butter till they be whole.

For the bone Spauen prick it with a sharp poynted knife, then take a piece
of Candle and lay a piece of brown Paper upon it and with a hot Iron melt the
Tallow, and after noynt it with Butter.

For Inflammation of the Coddes.
Boil Groundsell in Wine and Vinegar, and so has him therewith, and use to
ride him into the Water.

An other for the same.
TAke a quart of good Alewoort and set it on the fire, with the crummes of
brown Bread strongly leauoned, and a handful of Commine (or more) in powder:
make a Plaster of all these and Bean flower, and apply to the grief as hot
as may be suffered.

An other for the same.
TAke new Cowdoung and sees it in Milk, then make a Plaster and lay it to
the grief as hot upon the swelling as may be.

For swelling of the Coddes.
LEt him assail a Mare, and give him no prouender, and let him blood above the
great vain between the ^ippes, and lay thereto hard Eggs in his own doung
and make a Plaster of the same and lay it to the Coddes: and if it help him
not, let him stand in the water half an hour.

For the Strangulion.
TAke Bread, and Bays of Lorell, and temper them together with May Butter, and
give him thereof three days together, and he shall be whole.

For festering of the Sore.
TAke Lime and tough Horse doung, and temper it together with Pepper and the
white of an Egg, and lay it to the sore five days, and it will cure him.

A Drink for the Stone.
TAke a pint of white Wine, half a pint of Burre seed, and beat them small ii.
oz. of Parseley seed, half a handful of H^^op, half an oz. of black Soap:
mingle these together, and warm it, and give it him.

For the Stone Collicke and Fret.
TAke unset Leekes and stamp them small, and Soap, Milk, and Butter, and give
it the Horse, it will make him piss.

For a Horse that cannot Stale.
TAke a Nutmeg, and a handful of Parseley seed, beat them in powder, with a
handful of But^^^, and heat it in good Ale, and give it him blood warm, and
he shall stale at ease.

For the Stone and to make him piss.
TAke the seed of Smallage, Parseley, Saxefrace. the roots of Philu endula.
Cherry-stones kirnelles, Gr^unell seeds, and Broom seed, of every one like
much: make them in fine powder, and give it him in white Wine.

For a Horse that cannot doung.
TAke. xi. leaves of Lorell and stamp them in a Mortar, and give it him to
drink in strong stale Ale.

For a Horse that pisseth blood.
TAke Barley and sees it in the juice of Gumfolly, and give him the Barley to
eat, and the juice to drink.

Or else, take and let him Blood, and boil the blood with the powder of the
pill of Pomegranuts, and put in some Wheat: then strain it and give it him to
drink three or four morninges, but let him not travel.

Take the powder of Licoris and Anniseedes rould up in Honey, and give him three
or four balls of them at a time, pulling out his tongue and putting it in his
throat: It loses his breath, and sets his wind at liberty, and purges
the cold and stiffnesse, and expels the Glaundees.

Bruised Licoris, Anniseedes, Garlic bruised, a little Sallet oil and Honey,
given blood warm i^ Milk, cures very many diseases, and keeps him from
more.

For a Horse that is broken Winded.
TAke a Hedgehog and split him, and take out his guts and dry them up in an
Oven until you make powder of them, give it your Horse to drink in a pint of
good Ale, a part thereof, then make Bals of Annyseedes and Licorie rolled in
Butter, and cast them down his throat: and wash his Oats in good Ale or
Beer, then take Commin, Annyseedes. Licoris, and Sentatie, and make powder of
them, and strew threee sponefull in his Oats, being moist: use this
some.xiiii. days.

An other if he be Pursey.
TAke Moll ne or Longwort and make a powder thereof, and give it him to drink
with Water, and it will heal him.

Or, you may take the powder of Gensian at the Apothecaries, and that will
heal him also.

For a Horse pricked with a Nail.
TAke out the Hoof till you come to the bottom or Vain, then take Turpentine
i. oz. Tar i. oz. Pitch i. oz. Beef suet i. oz. and one head of Garlic:
boil them all together, and lay them to it so hot as may be suffered: And if it
chance to break out above the Hoof, then take the said Medecin and annoint
it.

To heal a Mangie Horse.
LEt him blood on both sides of his Neck, then cut the Skin in the midst
of his Forehead two fingers broad, then raise the skin on both sides, and
put in slyces of Angellica root, or Elacompana: leave them till it rotte,
thrust out the matter, but leave the roots, they will come out as it heals,
annoynting the mangie places with the powder of Brimstone and Verdigreace mixed
with Oil Ollife.

An other for the same.
TAke Lamp Oil, fine powder of Brimstone, of black Soap, Tar,
Barrow-hogges grease, and the Sutte of a Chimnie, of each a like, and then mix
them all together, and annoint the place therewith so hot as may be suffered,
and it will help him.

For the Mangie of a Dog.
TAke Vinegar, Gon-powder, black Soap, Brimstone, burnt Alum, and
Verdigreace: boil all together with Honey, and rub over the mangie place.

For the String-hale.
TAke up the M. Vain above the Knee, and underneath the same Vain lies a
String, cut it away: then cut him below in the Nostrilles, and take away two
stringes, and then annoint him with Butter and Salt.

For the Mares Evil.
TAke Milk, Otemeale, Mallows, Woormewood, Horehound, and Sn. allage, wring
these together with your hands, and boil them together till they be soft, and
lay it to the grief, which will bring it to a head: then you must lance it:
then take red Lead, burnt Alum, and Rosen, beat these to powder, and cast upon
it.

To take away Bones, Knobbes, or Ring-bones.
TAke a pound of Strong Lie and Soap, a quarter of Vitreall Roman, i. oz. of
Salarmonick^, as much of Roch Alum, and boil them together till they are
thick, and so use it for an Ointment.

Gipsiacum the strongest kind, lay it on with Cotton three or four times, will
take it away. This is good also for a Splint: and though it he a Thistula in
the Crown it will sink it.

For the Powle Fuill: which comes of a bruise behind the Ears.
TAke a hat Iron, but first take up the hair all the whole compass, then
fear it with the Iron, and then take red Lead and black Soap, and mingle them
with Water and make it thick, and annoint him withal, till it be whole.

To make a Water for the same.
TAke a quart of Water, half a pound of Roch Alum, iiii. d. worth of
Mercury, a quarter of a pound of Verdigreace: and when you see the Horse rub
his head, wash him with this water.

An other for the same.
LAy a Plaster of Hogs grease on to ripe the place, and when it is ripe,
lance it, and thrust through a hot Iron, if it be very deep, and keep it open
with Tents made of a Sponge, and dippe it in Hogs grease: use this for four
days, then take Turpentine, and the yolks of Eggs, and Saffron, and mingle
them well together, and dippe your Tents of Spung therein, and be sure they
go to the bottom, and plaster it with Hogs grease: and this will cure him.

For the Camer.
YOu must take out his Tongue and let him blood in five or six places, and
likewise on his upper Lip, that he may bleed well, and all berubbe his Tongue
and Lips with Salt: then the next day wash his Tongue and Lips with
Vinegar, and rub it again with Salt, and give him warm drink and new Beer
a day or two.

For the Coult Evil.
TAke the juice of Hemlocke and wash his Pear^ and Coddes therewith.

An other for the same.
TAke Beaneflower, Vinegar, and Bolarmoniacke, and work these together, and
lay it to the Coddes.

An other for the same.
YOu may wash his Shed with warm Vinegar, and draw forth his Yard and wash
it also: then ride him into the water, let him swim, and there toss and
turn him: use this two or three weeks.

For the Cloying.
IF he halt, pull off his Shoo and open the place pricked with a knife, and
power in Turpentine, Wax, and Sheep suet being molten together: then close
it up and set on the Shoo again: let him rest, and come in n^ wet ground.

Some do use to burn the hole with a hot Iron when they have pult out the
Nail, and some do power in boiled Butter in the hole once a day, and it has
cured it.

An other for the same.
TAke a handful of Nettles, of black Soap, of Vinegar, of each a spoonefull,
and three times so much Boares grease or Bacon grease, then stamp them well
together, and stop the sore therewith and it will not rot any further, but
heal, although you labor him.

Some do stop up the hole when they draw forth the Nail, with Tallow and
Horse doung, and then set on the Shoo.

For the Cords.
THe cure is to slit it, and with a Buckes horn to take it up, and tie it in
two places, and cut it away.

An other for the same.
TAke Mustard, and Aqua-vice, and Sallet Oil, and voyle them on the Coals,
and make a Plaster and bind it hot to the Place. It is good also for any
Strain, so it be new done.

An other for the same.
TAke the grounds of Ale, and being made warm, bath his Legs therewith, and
wispe him with a May rope.

An other for a Spraine.
TAke smallage, and an Herb called Oxeye, and some Sheep suet: choppe them
all together and boil it in men's Urine, and bath the place therewith, and wet
a Hay band in it, and roll up the Leg therewith. Prob.

For the Curbes.
FRet his Legs with thy hand, and then take red Colwort leaves, and Burrage,
and bray them together, and lay it thereto v. days.

Against stiffness of Sinniewes.
Sees a pound of black Soap in a quart of strong Ale till it look like
Tar, and annoint the Sinniewes therewith, and it will supple them, and bring
them to the right course. It is good for a Man if he be stiff in the Joints.

For Enterfeering.
He may be much helped by shooing with a skillful Smith: But if the skin be
off, Take May Butter, with a quantity of yellow Rosen, as much Marvel, then
fry them together in a Pan, and let it stand till it be cold, and put it in a
Pot, and put to it a little new Cow doung, and make Playsters thereof and
bind it to the place. This will heal also the prick of a Nail.

For the Navel galled.
TAke Sutte of a Chimney and Yeest, mixed together, and plaster it on; but
shift it once a day.

An other for the same.
TAke Nettle seeds, and mix them with Sallet Oil, and annoint the Sort or
Chasing therewith.

Some do use to wash him with warm Water and then annoint the place with
Grease and Salt mixed together.

An other for the same
TAke herb Bittonie, Brimstone in powder, of Ebborie Pitch, and old Grease,
and stamp them together: and when you have washed him with Chamber Lie,
annoint him with this Medicine.

A Water for a Gawled Back, or any foul Sore.
TAke a pottle of Varnice, iii. d. worth of green Coppris, and boil it to the
one half or more, and wash the Sore with that, and then fill the Sore with
read Lead, and let it not be dressed of three days, and then dress him
again as you shall see cause.

^cene Wound.
TAke white Wine and make it warm, and wash the Wound therewith, then take
Turpentine, Mell Rosap and a little Wax, and melt them together, being stirred
continually till they are well mixed, and then use it. If it be a Cut, take
Cow and dippe it therein, and fill the wound with it: If it be a hole, make
Tents for the place.

An other for the same.
TAke Hogs Grease, and Venus Turpentine, and melt them together: and if it be
a Cut, take Cow and dippe therein, and fill the wound therewith: If it be a
hole, make Tents, and dress it therewith.

For a hot Impostume in any outward part.
STmpe Liuerwort, and mix it with the grounds of Ale, Mallows, and Hogs
grease, being made hot, and laid thereto.

An other for the same.
Bruise Lettis seeds, and Poppie seeds, and mix them with Oil of red Roses,
and plaster wise lay it to the sore.

For a cold Impostume.
TAke the herb Balm stamp^ and mixed with Hogs grease, and plaster wise lay
it t^^^

An other for the same.
Sees white Mintes in Wine or Ale, with Oil or Butter, and lay it hot to the
place.

To ripe any Impostume.
Sees Mallows roots and Lilly roots, and then bruise them, and put thereto
Hogs grease, and Linseede Meal: and playsterwise lay it to it.

For the Rume.
LEt him blood in the Vain under the Tail, and rub his Gummes with Sage tied
to a Sticks end, and give him for a while the tender croppes of Black Briars
in his Prouender.

For loose Teeth.
Prick the Gummes with a knife, and then rybbe them with Honey, Sage, and Salt,
beaten together. The Sorrel Horse is most subject to this disease.

For the Fever.
LEt him blood in the Thigh in the middle Vain shire fingers under his ^uell:
or else take the Vain in the Nerke, and give him a drink.

An other (...).
TAke Water and (...) of (...) Gum, Dragane^, and (...) in powder, with a few
of Dammaske R(...) them all together, and (...) him to (...)


