A True Historical discourse of Muley Hamets rising to the three Kingdoms of
Moruecos, Fes, and Sus.

The disunion of the three Kingdoms, by civil war, kindled amongst his
three ambitious Sons, Muley Sheck, Muley Boferes, and Muley Sidan.

The Religion and Policy of the More, or Barbarian.

The adventures of Sir Anthony Sherley, and diverse other English Gentlemen, in
those Countries.

With other Novelties.

AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purfoot for Clement Knight, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Holy Lamb.

An. Dom. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sir Robert Cotton, of Cunnington Knight.
SIR, I entreat you, patronize this small Treatise, if in your judgment it can
either pleasure, or in small measure profit, by being divulged to the open
view of the world: If otherwise, lay it by you as a bundle of waste paper. In
so doing, I shall think my self much obliged unto you: if in suppressing the
original, my weakness may rather take a private check of a friend for being
too bold, then an open scorn of a multitude, for being too foolish. Thus
relying wholly upon your wonted favor, discreet and judicial censure herein,
I rest ever

At your service, To. C.

The true Historical discourse of MVLEY HAMETS rising to the three Kingdoms
of Moruecos, Fes, and Sus.
Cap. I.
How the Kingdom of Barbary came to Muley Hamet Xarif, the late deceased King.

THE Family of the Mareines being Larbies, were long times Kings of Barbary:
until a plain Haly some hundred Any one which is not of the tribe of Mahemet
is so termed. Or Dravve.
years ago, calling himself Muley Hamet Xarif, came out of the country of
Dara, (lying beyond the mountains of Atlas) with a great number of Montaniers,
called in their own language Brebers: these with their strength got Moruecos
from the Mareins. And going forward following the fertilnes of the soil,
drove the Mareins out of Fes: getting into his power all the flat countries
comprised under the titles of Sus, Moruecos, and Fes, from the hills of Atlas
to the straits of Gybraltar. Being thus grown great, be would prove himself a
Xarif, one of the kindred of the Prophet Mahome^, desiring his birth might be
held answerable to his new acquired fortunes: But within a little time after
this his sudden invasion, Sus rebelling, refused his government, wherefore he
sent to the bordering Turks for aid, who fulfilled therein his request. Aided
with these turkish auxiliary forces, he set forward, and at his entrance into
that kingdom, y^ turkish soldiers through treason killed him, and cut of his
head; sacked Taradant, and running over the whole country, spoiled it by the
space of two months, which done, they would gladly have returned to
Trimasine: yet fearing their own strength to return the same way Hamet had
brought them; it was held their better course and shorter journey, to pass
over the Mountains: but the Montaniers knowing this their new done bloody
fact, and seeing them have good store of pillage, set upon them, so that few or
none escaped their hands, but were all slain. After this Hamet Xarifs death,
who reigned some eight years, succeeded his brother Muley Abdela, having all
his life time great war with the Mareins, to keep that his brother had
conquered: he having reigned some fifteen years died, leaving behind him
thirteen sons, the eldest Muley Abdela (who at his entrance to the kingdom,
commanded all his brethren to be killed:) but the second brother Abdelmelech
fearing hard measure, fled presently upon the death of his Father into Turkey,
and so saved his life. The third brother Muley Hamet of whom we are hereafter
to entreat, being held a great Church man, simple and humble spirited, not
any way addicted unto arms, was spared alive as less feared. The other ten
were all put to death in one day at Taradant in Sus, where they were kept in
their Fathers life time. This Abdela reigned forty years, and dying, left
behind him three sons, Muley Mehamet, Muley Sheck, Muley Nassar. Muley
Mehamet being King, his two younger brethren ran away into Spain, the elder
whereof named Muley Sheck is yet living, and there turned Christian. The younger
brother called Muley Nassar returned into Barbary, in the fourteenth year of
Muley Hamets reign, who died last. At this Muley Nassars landing in the country
of Fes, much people favored him and his title, and two thousand of Muley
Shecks soldiers (who now lives, and then governed Fes, for his Father
revolted from him to Nassar, insomuch as Muley Sheck was in mind to have fled
unto his Father. But that Alkeyd Hamet Ben lau, being a very wise Captain, and
there placed to help Muley Sheck by his council, who was very young,) kept him
from running away: and Muley Nassar with a dilatory war, with whom if the
soldiers had stayed, he might peradventure have gotten the country. But their
Lent approaching, the soldiers told Nassar, they would go keep their Easter
at their own houses. Whereupon Nassar, thinking if they were once gone, they
would never return to him again, would give present battle, and so was this
Nassar slain. Abdelmelech being second brother to Abdela, got such favor in
Turkey where he lived, as entering Barbary with four thousand Turkish
soldiers, he got the kingdom from his Nephew Mehamet the eldest son of
Abdela, and their reigned two years. Muley Mehamet thus deprived of his
kingdom, fled for succor to Sebastian then King of Portugale, who came in
person into Barbary to help him with thirty thousand men, giving battle,
the Mores fled, and the Christians retired, hoping the Mores would return,
that so the Christians might make the greater slaughter of them. According to
this expectation Abdelmelech with his army returned, and the Christians
charged the foremost of their horsemen very hotly, who would have fled. But
such was the abundance of Abdelmelechs horsemen, following the foreward which
were disco^^ted, as they could not have field-roome to fly, but were forced to
^ght it out. This was a bloody battle wherein three kings lost their lives,
Don Sebastian King of Portugale: Muley Mehamet unto whose aid Sebastian came
over: And Abdelmelech who came out of Turkey being second brother to Abdela*
This Abdelmelech left behind him a son yet living at this day in Turkey,
whose name is Muley Smime. After the death of these two, Abdelas third
brother, Muley Hamet Xarif, was made King, reigned about twenty seven years
in great peace and felicity, until he went to take his son Muley Sheck at
Fes, where the Father dyed, whose death has caused all these wars, as yea
may read hereafter.

Cap. II.
The course of Muley Hamet Xarifs government, during his 27. years reign.

OBtaining the Scepter, he first provided himself of the grauest men he could
find in his Kingdoms, to be Counselors of estate; then of the most
experienced, and valiant soldiers, for Commanders over his camp, and Garrison
towns. And whereas he was Monarch over two Nations, the Larbies, and Brebers,
he found it requisite to use a two-folde government. The Larbies dwelling in
the best plain champion Country of his three Kingdoms, Moruecos, Sus, and
Fes, were easily governed, being of mild and peaceable nature, given to thrift
and tillage of the ground, sought no alterations, but receiving from him a due
form of justice executed by his Ministers: protecting them from the Montaneirs
which are robbers, willingly obeyed his Regal authority, and yearly paid
their tenths toward their Kings maintenance. As for the Brebers, or
Montaneirs, being of an untamed and fierce disposition, speaking the Tamiset
tongue, which is as much different from the Larbee, as Welsh is from our
English, dwelling in places by nature defencible, and almost inaccessible: He
could not so well govern, neither had ever such absolute power over them, nor
received the fifth penny of profit from them, as he did from the Alarbeis.
Therefore he sought by all means to diminish their strength of people,
drawing them always into foreign expeditions, especially into that war,
against the Negros, which continued a long time, thereby extending his Empire
so far that way, as by Camel it was six Months journey from Morruecos, to
the farthest parts of his Dominion. Likewise, he used this people to go with
the Carabans to Gago, to fetch A company of Merchants going together for
trading, with a great number of Horses, Camels, and Mules, laden with
Commodities.
home his yearly tribute and custom, whereby many were consumed in
travailing over the Saharas: for any offense or robbery committed by them,
his sword should punish severely, that the rest might fear: dividing their
Country into several divisions or Cantons, in every which he placed an
Alkeyd, with soldiers to suppress any sudden vprores, must like our
Lieutenant set over our several Countyes, but that the Alkeyd is continually
resident, and has greater power in executing Marshall law. And lastly, as
pledges of their loyalties, he would get their chiefest men's sons into his
hands, bringing them up in his Court to a more civil and delicate kind of
life. He was always of mind to keep peace with Christendom, with Spain,
who was his next potent neighbor, but above all loved the English Nation, and
admired the late Queens happy government, willing to entertain trading with
us, witness his many letters, written to that worthy Lady of happy
memory. And his Embassage sent unto her, Anno. 1601. performed by Abdala Wahad
Anowne, and Hamet Alhadg, their great trauailer to Mecha, and other places.

Toward his subjects he was not too tyrannical, but sweetened his absolute
power and will, with much clemency. By diverse ways he got excessive store of
gold. First, by seeing his tenths truly paid from the Larbees: Secondly, by
trading with the Negroe, taking up the salt at Tegazza, and selling it at Gago,
having from thence return in good gold. Thirdly, by husbanding his Maseraws,
or I^genewes, where his Sugar Sugar gardens.
Canes did grow, (though now all spoiled with these wars,) for it is
sufficiently known, all of them about Morruecos, Taradant, and Magador, were
yearly worth unto him, six hundred thousand ounces at the least. I omit his
love he took in entertaining foreign Artisans, the reedifying of his house
in Morruecos, getting Italian Marbles, the richest that could be bought for
money, and workmen hired from thence at great wages. His sumptuous provisions
for the Saraile, The place where his women are kept.
and maintenance of his women, not so much delighting in the sin, as his
predecessors had done before, as to show his glory, because the fashion of the
Country is such, to show their riches and greatness upon that frail sex,
and their attendances. For his chiefest pleasures were to see the gallantrie of
his kingdom, managing their good Barbarian Steedes, and the Falcons upon their
wing, making fair flights after the Heron: for these sports he was provided,
no man better, from which he was recalled by certain discontents, which as
clouds forerunned his own Sunset.

Cap. III.
The number of Muley Hamet Xarif sons, their behauiours, the beheading of
Mustepha.

MVley Hamet Xarif the late deceased king and father of these three brothers
now living that strive for the kingdom, at the time of his death left five
sons alive. The eldest Muley Mahemet, commonly called Muley Sheck, a title
given always to the eldest of the kings sons: The second Muley Boferes,
which two sons were both by one woman, a Negra, one of his concubines: The
third son Muley Sidan whom he had by one of his wives: The fourth son
Muley Nassar who was about the age of Nineteen years: And the fifth Muley
Abdela about Fourteen years old at the time of the old kings death, and these
two last were not legitimate, but the sons of two several Concubins. This
deceased King in his life time, had placed his three elder sons in several
parts of his kingdom, to govern for him in them, to Muley Sheck his eldest he
had given the kingdom of Fes, which kingdom has in former times continually
been allotted by the late kings of Barbary to their eldest sons: Muley
Boferes he placed in his kingdom of Sus: to Muley Sidan he gave the province
of Tedula, which lies in the midway between Moruecos, and Fes: his two
younger sons Muley Nassar, and Abdela remained with him in his house, whom by
reason of their young years, he had not as yet placed in any part of his
kingdoms. The eldest son Muley Sheck in his younger years governed Fes, and
those parts of Barbary, with great approbation of his father, through y^
counsel of Basha Mustepha a Spanish Renegado: which Basha in continuance of
time, grew into such favor with him, that the whole government of the
kingdom of Fes was wholly by Mu: Sheck put into his hand^: Whereupon y^ Alkeyds
of the country that were natural borne Mores, and continual attendants upon
the old King, envying the greatness of the said Basha, raised diverse accusations
against him: Complaining to the King that he learned Muley Sheck to drink wine
(a thing unlawful to the Mores, being forbidden them by their Prophet Mahomet)
and that now having the whole government of the kingdom of Fes in his hands,
under the kings son, he purposed after he had possessed himself of Muley
Shceks treasure, to fly, and carry it with him to some parts of Christendom.
Which accusations the old King upon some probabilities and likelihoods
conceiving to be true, these Alkeyds procured at last with him, that he should
send to his Son Muley Sheck, commanding him to send the head of the said
Basha, which command howsoever Muley Sheck (who greatly loved, and favored
the said Basha) at the first delayed to perform, yet after diverse messages,
the old King sending at the last a principal servant of his to see the
execution done, he was forced much against his will, to see fulfilled.

In these younger years of Muley Sheck whilst this Basha was alive, none of
the Kings Sons was more dutiful to their Father then he, neither any of
their actions so contented the old King as his; insomuch, the whole kingdoms
hope for a successor after the old kings decease, was only in Muley Sheck.
Whereupon and by the Kings voluntary motion, all the principal Alkeyds, and
men of Command that were in his kingdoms, by solemn oath vowed allegeaunce
to Muley Sheck, after the old kings decease. And at that time Boferes the
second Son, by reason of the great plague in Sus, and other discontents he
received from that rebellious people, stayed not long there, but returned
again to his Father in Moruecos, where he stayed with him until his Fathers
departure to Fes in September 1602. Muley Sidan the third Son continued in
Tedula, (a province fruitful and situate in the flat of Barbary, the midway
between Fes, and Moruecos, as I have told you,) who governed those parts in
great peace and quietness, even in the chief times of the tu^lts that were in
the bordering Dominions of his eldest brother Sheck (whereof you shall read
hereafter) insomuch that he was generally commend ed and liked both of his
Father and of all the kingdom for his government, being strict in seeing the
execution of justice to be done in those parts that he governed, not sparing
his kindred or nearest followers in those cases: From his infancy be naturally
hated all manner of thieves whatsoever, especially th^se which robbed by the
high ways, and without any favor or mercy severely punished them. Howsoever,
he carried himself very dutiful to his Father, whilst he was living, yet
from his Childehoode he was always of an aspiring and ambitious nature, which
could never be brought to subject it self to give any awefull respect to his
elder brethren, but to hazard his whole estate in obtaining the Kingdom,
accounting himself his Fathers lawful heir, in that he was his Fathers
eldest Son, which he had by any of his married wives: In this point not
regarding the custom and law of the Mores, who in title of inheritance or
succession, respect not the mother, whether she be married Wife, or Concubine
bought with money, so that her son be the eldest in birth.

Cap. IIII.
The misgouernment of Muley Sheck, which caused his old Father to visit the
Kingdom of Fes: the taking of Sheck prisoner: the death of the Father.

BUt to return again to Muley Sheck the Kings eldest Son, who after the
death of his Basha Mustepha, (beheaded by his Fathers command,) soon showed
unto all men the want of Government that was in him; for in his latter times,
giving himself over to drunkenness, and other detestable vices, which amongst
the Mores commonly accompanies that sin, regarded not at all the government
of his kingdom, but suffered his servants, followers, and soldiers to do
what they would in robbing and spoiling the the goods of his honest minded
Subjects, without controllment: And through want of Justice duly executed, his
whole country in a short time swarmed so with thieves and robbers by the high
ways, that there was no traveling through his dominions, but in Caffilas or
companies of 300 and 400 persons at a time, and they hardly sometimes escaped
the hands of thieves. The Alarbies, who continue to this day in tribes and
kindreds, being the husbandmen of the country, living in the fields in tents,
by ^illing of the ground, and breeding up of cattle, when as they could not
quietly gather in, and peaceably enjoy the corn and fruits of the ground*
denied to pay the King their accustomed duty: and in the fields followed the
courses of Muley Shecks servants in the city, in robbing of all passengers
that came within their power. And such was his la^ishing manner of spending and
consuming of his Treasure, that in his humors, he neither regarded what he
gave, nor to whom: in so much, that a Jew who was a Musician, and used to play
before him in his drunken fits, (what with the gifts given him by the Prince,
and what else he got out of his house) had gotten together in money and
jewels, (in the space of four or five years) to the value of Four Hundred
Thousand Ducats, which is about forty Thousand Pound sterling. This dissolute
life and careless government of Muley Sheck, grieved the old King not a
little, especially to see such a change or alteration in him, whose forwardnes
in former times had been the stay of his age, and had moved him to cause the
Alkeyds of the kingdom, by oath to confirm their allegiance after his own
death. Many ways he sought to amend what was amiss in those parts, and to
draw his Son to a more stricte course of life, and more careful kind of
government, as well by his letters, as by sending diverse principal Alkeyds to
be Counselors unto him. Yet such was the small account he made either of the
one or the other; That the old King in the end seeing no amendment, but the
estate of that Kingdom to grow daily worse and worse, determined to go to Fes
in his own person with an army, as well to displace his Son who had denied
to come unto him, upon his sending for: as also to put in order all matters in
those parts, which through the ill government of his Son, were all out of
frame. And so about the beginning of October 1602. he set forwards from
Moruecos with an army of Eight Thousand shot, and some five Thousand Horse
toward Fes, leaving his second Son Muley Boferes to govern Moruecos, and
Sus in his absence, until his return; making such speedy iourneyes, that he
was with his forces within one days journey of Fes, before his Son Muley
Sheck was certainly advised of his setting forth from Moruecos. Who, when he
understood of his fathers being so near, and himself every way unprovided to
resist him. Would have fled toward Tafilet, but being followed by Basha
Mustefa, he was* constrained to take sa^uary, with five hundred of his best
soldiers, being very good shot and well provided. The old King the Father,
seeing his son take the pr^ueledge of the place (which is much respected in
that country) willed him to come forth, and submit himself to his mercy: But
Muley Sheck refused either obstinate in not obeying, or fearful he could not
render a good account of his Twenty Five years government in Fes. Wherefore
Muley Hamet commanded Mustefa a Basha of Sidans, though then in the old
Muleys service, to take three thousand men* (...) perforce to enter the place,
which he performed, bringing Sheck prisoner, and the rest of his company which
were left alive after the conflicte. The old man would in no wise admit him
into his presence, but committed him to the charge and custody of Basha Iudar,
one of greatest place about the King, who carried Sheck to Mickanes a strong
Garrison town, and there remained until the time of his Fathers death, which
was some five months after.

The old King in his journey to Fes, against his eldest son, passed by the
Province of Tedula, and from thence took along with him his third son Muley
Sidan, whom he commanded to remove his household to Fes, from Sidania, (a City
which he had begun to build in Tedula, and called it after his own name)
intending to leave him Uizeroy of those parts, in the room of his eldest
son, whom he purposed to carry with him from Mickanes, where he was
prisoner, to Morruecos. Which he had also performed, if he had not been
prevented by sudden death: For in August 1603 he having set all matters in
order in those parts of Fes, providing for his return to Morruecos, put out
his Tents without Fes gates, but being abroad he suddenly fell sick, and his
sickness so sore increased, that on Thursday falling sick, on Sunday morning
being the fourteenth of August 1603. he died.

Cap. V.
Muley Sidan proclaims himself King in Fes. Muley Boferes in Morruecos.
Muley Nassar would have done the likein Taradant, but is hindered. The death of
Nassar.

MVley Sidan, by reason his Mother Lilla Isha governed the old Kings house,
understood of his fathers death, before it was noysed abroad, whereupon he
presently went forth into his fathers camp, and tents, from whence he carried
away all such Jewels and treasure as he found there. And after his fathers
death, he caused himself in Fes to be proclaimed King of Barbary, as lawful
heir of his deceased father. Lilla Iohora, mother to Muley Sheck, and Muley
Boferes; seeing her eldest son in prison, and void of all means to help
himself at that instant, was not unmindful of her second son Boferes, whom
the old King had left to govern Morruecos during his absence. To whom she
dispeeded presently letters by one of the kings Eunuchs, who made such have,
that in four days he came from Fes to his Tents, which were some two leagues
from Morruecos, where he had lien all the Summer* before to avoid the infection
of the plague, which had been that Summer in Morruecos, and with him was his
younger brother Muley Nassar, and his eldest brothers son Muley Abdela. Muley
Boferes understanding of his fathers death, presently entered Moruecos, and ga^
possession of the Alcasaua, his fathers house. Before the news of The King^
house.
his fathers death was noysed abroad, and generally known, fearing how the
Alkeyds, and people of Morruecos might stand affected unto him, and knowing
that if he had once possession of the Alcasaua, and of his fathers treasure, he
had the best part of the Kingdom. And the next day after his entrance, he
caused to be published generally through the whole City, the news of his
fathers death, and withal himself to be proclaimed king: Writing letters to
the Uizeroy of Sus, to do the like in Taradant, the chief City of that
Kingdom, the which he accordingly performed.

Muley Nas^ar the fourth son of the deceased King, having been all the
Summer abroad with his brother Boferes; when now he understood of his fathers
death, followed his brother a far off, as though he meant to have entered
Morruecos with him. But coming to the gates of the City, in company with
Muley Abdela his Nephew, being son to Muley Sheck, with whom he was
familiar, conferred with him about their flying into the Mountains, persuading
Muley Abdela that he might no ways put any trust in Boferes, since his father
and he were the chiefest impediments, that hindered Boferes from claiming the
Kingdom by course of justice, his father Muley Sheck being the old Kings
eldest son, and he the eldest son of his father: Besides, his father being
in prison so near Fes, where Muley Sidan was, it was to be doubted that Muley
Sidan had already gotten him into his power, and it might be, had made some
agreement with him already, to join both against Muley Boferes: which if it
should so fall out, would cause Boferes to deal more cruelly with him. But
these persuasions moved not Abdela, who rather chose to enter the City, and
follow his Uncle, on whose courtesy he would rely. Though Nassar fearing how
Boferes would deal with him, with all speed fled into the Mountains to the
kindred of his mother, from whence after a few days with some eight hundred,
or a thousand of those people* whom he joined together, he passed into the
plains of Sus, sending to the Alkeyd in Taradant to proclaim him King, or
else to suffer him quietly to depart. But the Alkeyd having already proclaimed
Muley Boferes, withstood him, and he having no means wherewith to pay his
soldiers and people that he had gathered together, was soon left of all, and
so returned again to his mothers kindred, and lived privately there about seven
Months, and then dyed of the plague, or as some reported, secretly poisoned,
was brought to Morruecos, and there buried.

Cap. VI.
The revolt of Alkeyd Hamet Monsore. Muley Sheck prisoner, delivered to
Boferes. Muley Sidan rayseth forces against his bother Boferes. And the like
does Muley Boferes against Sidan.

BUt to return to Fes and those parts: after the death of the old King (Sidan
being now proclaimed king in Fes, Boferes in Morruecos, and Sus; and Muley
Sheck prisoner in Mickanes, in the keeping of Basha Iudar) the soldiers being
abroad in their tents, without Fes gates, began to be in a mutenie, as well for
sixteen Months pay, which the old King owed them, as also about their return
to Morruecos, where the most of them had left their wives and children. To
appease this mutenie, Muley Sidan sent out of Fes unto them Alkeyd Hamet
Monsore, their chief Commander in the old Kings time, to promise them as
well content in payment, as also a speedy return to Morruecos with Muley
Sidan himself. But Monsore in stead of pacifying, labored to increase their
mutenous humors, and at last agreed with them, suddenly in the night to take
up their tents, and to march with him to Morruecos, alleging unto them both
the uncertainty of Muley Sidans pay, and the small likelyhoode of any speedy
journey he meant to take to Moruecos. And being to pass within a little of
Mickanes, where the Basha kept Muley Sheck prisoner, he wrote unto the said
Basha to know his intent, whether he would go to Moruecos or no, with him. To
whom the Basha came, and brought Muley Sheck with him, whom they brought along
as prisoner to Moruecos, and delivered him up to his brother Boferes, who kept
him close prisoner in his house some 4. or 5. months, until the coming of
Muley Sidan against him in battle, by this means thinking to have
established the whole kingdom to Muley Boferes: who now, besides the
possession of the city of Moruecos and his Fathers treasure, had brought unto
him y^ greatest part of his Fathers forces, (...) his elder brother put
prisoner into his hands. Muley Sidan being thus deceived by Monsore, and
likewise by diverse other principal Alkeids (who had secretly departed from
Fes, and left him) forthwith dispeeded one Mustefa a Reneg^do of his own whom
he made a Basha, with two thousand shot, and some companyes of horses to
Tedula, as well to receive from the Alarbies those duties which they always pay
unto their King: as also to stop and return to Fes, whomsoever he should
find flying from thence to Moruecos, keeping possession of that province for
his use. He made likewise great preparations both of horse and foot in Fes, to
be always ready, to accompany himself in person if need should so require,
having with him in Fes of principal Alkeids, Azus chief counselor to the
late deceased King, and Lord over his Bitlemel: Bocrasia, Absadiks, and diverse
others. Treasury.


Muley Boferes likewise in Moruecos, foreslacked no time in making preparation
to send forth against him, sending first Alcaide Gowi^ with some six hundred
men to make provision of corn and other victuals amongst the Alarbies, and
after he had certain ne^s of Muley Sidans forces to be in Tedula, he sent out
his Basha ^dar with five thousand shot choyst men, four Pieces of Artillary,
and certain companies of horse to enter T^dula, and to give battle to
Mustefa the General of Sidans forces, or perforce to drive him out of that
country. At whose coming thither, Mustefa seeing himself no ways strong
enough to encounter with Iudar, retired back again with his army out of
Tedula: and Iudar destroyed the foundation of Sidania, (which Muley Sidan at
his being in Tedula, had begun to build upon the river of Morbaie and called
it Sidania, after his own name) likewise wasted and destroyed the country
thereabout, at least so many of the kindreds of the Alarbies as he knew to be
friends to Muley Sidan, or those that would not acknowledge Boferes for King.
Sidan understanding what Iudar had done in Tedula, and likewise of the great
preparations that his brother in Moruecos daily made to send out against him,
forthwith put forth his tents, and joined together his whole forces, which were
some eight or nine Thousand shot, and some twelve Thousand horse, with two and
twenty Pieces of Artillery, himself in person going along with them. And
because he was altogether unprovided of skillful Gunners for his Ordinances, he
procured from Salie out of certain english men of war, who at that instant
were there, two english Gunners, to whom he committed the charge of his
Artillery, but by reason of much rain that had fallen, it being in the month
of January 1604. the ground in many places was so soft, that they could not
march with their Artillery so fast as need required. So that his Artillery
never came at the battle, which was thought to be a chief cause of his
overthrow.

Cap. VII.
Fokers sent to entreat of peace from Muley Boferes to Sidan. Muley Sheck set
at liberty. The battle betwixt Muley Boferes and Muley Sidan.

Whilst these preparations were in hand on either side, Muley Boferes sent
certain Fokers held of great estimation amongst Fokers, are men of good life,
which are only given to peace.
the Mores, to his brother Muley Sidan, to treat conditions of peace; howbeit,
after their dispeeding from Moruecos, he omitted no time and diligence in
sending forth new armies and fresh supplies, both of soldiers and provision
to Iudar Basha that was in Tedula, and understanding for certain that his
brother Sidan was in the field in person (because he himself had never been
in^red to travel, and knowing it would be no small discouragement to his side,
and encouragement to the other, that Sidan should be in perin the field, and no
other his equal in blood in his army to withstand him) he concluded a
colorable peace between himself and his eldest brother Muley Sheck, whom
until that time he kept close prisoner in his house, agreeing with him that
he should go forth into his army, and join with Iudar to fight against Muley
Sidan, whom if he overthrow in battle, he should enjoy the kingdom of Fes,
and so much of those Casterne parts of Barbary, as he enjoyed in their Fathers
time: On condition that at his entrance into Fes, he should proclaim Muley
Boferes King, and himself only Uizeroy, and so should still acknowledge his
Government there, as derived from Boferes: And to the intent Muley Sheck should
the better observe these conditions according to their agreement, he was to
leave his eldest son in pawn with Muley Boferes in Moruecos. On these
plausible conditions, Muley Sheck was set at liberty, a happy turn for
himself as he thought, who never looked for any better but perpetual
imprisonment with much misery. But the truth is Basha Iudar had secret
advertisement from his Master Boferes (yet not so secret, but it was known to
Muley Sheck, and closely carried of him by interception of letters betwixpt
Moruecos and the camp in Tedula:) That he should abridge Muley Sheck of any
command in the camp, or matter of counsel in ordering of the fight, only
show him to the soldiers under his canopy, that the Fezes who were the
strength of Sidans army, might know Sheck was in the camp of Boferes, whom
they loved in regard partly of his long ab^de amongst them, but especially of
his great liberality, or rather prodigality, formerly showed unto them, which
wrought much in their minds at the ensuing battle: And withal the Basha had
a special charge sent, and his Guard so to watch him, that (if he got the
battle) he should bring Muley Sheck in yrons as safe a prisonner from the
camp to Moruecos, as once he had done from Mickanes. But this being
discovered, Muley Sheck so shufled his game, that though Iudar won the field,
Muley Sheck escaped unto Fes, and was lovingly entertainted of the citizens,
proclaiming himself King of Barbary. But return we to the Fokers, treating
about conditions of peace in Fes with Muley Sidan, who by intelligence
understood from Moruecos of the fresh supplies of soldiers, daily sent out by
his brother to the Basha, whereby he greatly suspected those offers of peace,
to be but a devise to prolonge the time whilst his whole forces were in a
readiness, and then sudenly to have come upon him unawares before he should be
provided for him. And therefore he returned the Fokers with denials of the
^ffered conditions of peace, and himself thinking to take the opportunity and
advantage of y^ time before either his brothers new forces should come to the
Basha, or Muley Sheck his eldest brother be set at liberty. He caused with all
diligence to be gotten together some two thousand Mules and horses, and upon
every Mule to be set two soldiers with their furniture, and so (without any
stay for the rehalling of tents, or carrying along of his Artillery with him)
to be with all have possible sent and joined to the Almohalla of Alkeid
Almohalla, is a Camp.
Mustefa which lay hard by the river of Morbaie, in the sight of the Almohalla
of Basha sudar, the river only between them: He himself likewise in person
went along with some seven or eight Thousand of his horsemen, thinking by this
means to come with his best forces upon Basha Iudar, before the Basha should
expect him, or before y^ coming of Muley Sheck, who for his liberality and
bounty in former times, was greatly beloved of all the soldiers both of Fes,
and also of Moruecos. But this policy of his herein took no place, for Muley
Sheck after he was set at liberty, made such speedy iourneyes that he came to
y^ Almohalla of the Basha, before y^ Muley Sidan had certain intelligence of
his liberty, and yet he entered the Almohalla but on the Tuesday, the battle
being fought upon the Friday following. Muley Sidan understanding for certain
that his eldest brother was come into the Basha his Almohalla, thought it no
time for him to defer giving of battile, least it should be known amongst his
soldiers, (many of whom in former times had served the said Muley Sheck.) And
therefore on Friday the sixth of January 1604. the forces of each side met and
joined together, between whom there was no long fight, for upon the
discharging of four Pieces of Artillery, (which Iudar Basha had with him) some
3 or 4 times, a great part of the soldiers of Muley Sidan began to fly:
except some choice men which were in that part of the battle where the Muley
himself was: by reason of y^ resolution of their Commander, continued
somewhat longer, but in the end fled when as y^ canopy over Muley Sidans head
was shot down with a Piece of Ordinance. At which m^chance, and not before, the
Muley himself began to leave the field, who in the managing of this battle
was some thing to be blamed, for as he had used the celerity of a wise
General, coming with all speed to Mustefa after he heard Muley Sheck should
be set at liberty, setting two soldiers upon every Mule, and every horseman
for the speedier march, to take a soldier with his Piece up behind him, being
come to his Camp an hour before day, ^ee should not have delayed two hours
and more the present onset, gazing in his enemies face, and giving them time to
ready themselves to fight, whom otherwise he might have taken at the
disper^iew, and his Fezzes whom he half mistrusted, no premeditation to
reuolte or run away* On Muley Shecks side few were slain, and of Muley
Sidans side the greatest number was some (...) hundred men or thereabout,
neither was it ever thought that the battle would be sore or endure long, but
that the one side would presently fly.

First, for that they were all Mores of one country, and one religion* and
howsoever the Kings might be affected one to the other, yet between the
cominal^y of each side was no hatred only for their pay, came into the field
to fight one against an other.

Secondly, by reason of the old Kings death in Fes, there was almost no
Alkeide of Muley Shecks side, but had either his brother, Son, or chiefest
friend on the other side, as Alkeid Mumen Bocrasia was a chief Commander on
Muley Sidans side: and his brother Alkeid Gowie of the like Command on the
other side. Alkeid Absadok was chief counselor with Muley Sidan; his brother
was the like with Muley Boferes, to whom also was sworn Alkeid Absadocks Son:
Alkeid Hame^ Monsore was on Muley Boferes si^e, and his brother Alkeid Ally
Monsore on the other side* and so of diverse others.

Cap. VIII.
Sidans Justice done upon the Larbees forrobbing. His flight after the
battle lost, to Trimasine.

THe three brethren thus striving for the golden Ball of Sovereignty, justice
was trodden down. The Larbees robbed one an other, the strongest carrying away
all. ^uarrels betwixt Families and Tribes, which durst not be talked of in old
Muley Hamts time, came to be decided with the Sword. After this battle,
always were stopped with robbers, no trading from the Port^ Towns* to
Moruecos, without great strength of men. Muley Boferes (who had the imperial
seat) was neither so fit for action, or to do justice, as Muley Sidan who had
lost the day. And that the kindred called Weled Entid well knew, which
presuming upon the soft nature of Boferes, and their own strength which
consisted of Fifteen Thousand horse, ^oraged up to Moruecos gates, fore-closed
all passages for travelers, making Merchants goods* their prises: Whereas an
exemplary punishment executed upon them for their robbing in Fes by Muley
Sidan, whilst he reigned there, made them think the country too hot: For
Sidan commanded Alkeid German with Two Thousand soldiers in hostile manner
to fall upon the next Dwarre of tents belonging to that Dwar, is a town of
tents.
Tribe, to burn Man, Woman, Child, Kyne, Sheep, and whatsoever belonged to
them, not to spare it upon his own life from Fire and Sword, which fully
executed and so bloodily, that Muley Sidan ^ghed hearing the true report, yet
it made Fes the peaceablest part in Barbary. But return we to Sidans fortunes
after he lost the field, having the overthrow, retired back to Fes, and
forthwith was Alkeid Azus (the only man in the latter days of the old King,
favored by the whole country) dispeeded toward Moruecos to treat of a
peace, and himself began to make head again to resist such forces as should
follow him, but before he could bring his forces together again, news was
brought unto him that his brother Muley Sheck was near at hand with certain
companies of Horsemen, and that the whole Almohalla of the Basha was not far
behind. So that then he was rather to consider of, and to provide for his
escaping by flight, then any ways to resist: and having before put some Nine
Hundred Thousand Ducats in Allarocha, for the which money he had sent one of
his Alkeids after his return from the batta^; he thought it is his best course
to pass that way, and to take that money along with him, but he was followed
so hardly by Alkeid Abdela Wahad, and Alkeid Vmsoud Vmbilie, Boferes servants,
that he was forced to fly directly toward Trimasine, and to leave that
treasure behind him which was taken by his brother Muley Sheck.

In these his frowning fortunes, the most of his Alkeids left him, and amongst
others Mumine Bocrasia flying to Moruecos, in whom he put no small trust: and
more then the servants of his house, he had no man of account but forsook him,
only Alkeid Absadik, Had^ Tabid, and Mustepha; the two latter of them being
his household servants, and belonging to him in his Fathers time, left him not
in his aduerstie: So that any Alkeid of the Cassas or Castes in Barbary, he
had no more then Absadicke, who rather then he would leave him (although
allured by the persuasions of his brother Alkeide Abdela Wahad, and entreated
by ^he tears of his Son to return, both of them then b^ing in the pursuit
of Muley Sidan, and in a plain o^ertooke the said Absadocke, yet he left his
house an^ chil^ren at the mercy of Mul^y Bo^eres his Master an^ enemy. The
Alkeids who followed in pursuit of Muley Sidan, ^ollowed him so hard, that
besides the treasure of Allarocha, they likewise took much of the Muleys
treasure that he carried along with him, although with that small company of
Horses, which were no more then Twentye Horsemen or thereabout, he ^eturned
many times, and fought with those who pursued him, in person being still one
of the foremost in th^se s^shes, vn^ A^keide Vmbil^ who persued him, admiring
his res^lution, and pitying his miserable estate, req^ested ^is Majesty to
k^pe on his w^y and save himsel^e ^y ^ight, he not purposing to pursue him an^
further. And so the M^ley in this miserabl^ e^te forsaken almost of all) kept
on his way to Trima^e a town boro^ring upon the Turks, in the frontiers of
the king^ome of A^rs: and the Alkeids who pursued him, returned again to Fes.

Cap. IX.
Muley Sheck proclaims himself King in Fes. Sidan goes to Tafilet, from
thence into Sus. A skirmish wherein Mumine Bocrasia is slain. Peace concluded
between Muley Boferes, and Muley Sidan.

AFTER Muley Sidans flight, in this manner Muley Sheck entered Fes, where he was
joyfully received of them, proclay^ed (...) King, and not governor (...) his
brother Boreres. And it being in the time of ^ummadan, all Rumm^dan, is Lens.
the Almohallas of Moruecos returne^ home against the Pascua* from whence after
the celebration of the feast, they were sent forth to all parts of the countr^
aga^st the Larb^es: among whom were as great civil wars as among y^ br^thren,
for in this time of so many kings, they would acknowledge none, or pay duty to
any of the three brethren. Wherevp^on Hame^ Monsore with three Thousand
souldier^, was sent into Sus in the month of April 1604. but his men dying of
the plague (which was very hot at that time) and thereby the Larbies little
regarding his power, would bring him no vic^uals, so that with remainder of his
men, he was constrained to return toward M^ruecos. Diverse other A^mohallas
were sent abroad into several parts of the country, but in the beginning of
June, news coming of Muley S^da^ns return from Trimasine to Tafile^, they
were all sent for by Boferes to return to Moruecos, and be joined together
the second time against Muley Sidan: who having some few months lived about
Trimasine with some fifty soldiers, went toward Tafilet, about which part
lived the Cassa or cast of Alkaid Absadok (who was master of the hawks to
Muley Hamet) and brought to Sidan of his cast some twelve hundred Horses, with
which force he entered Tafilet: The Alkeid of Muley Bofe^es fl^ing to Dara or
D^aw with his soldiers. In Tafilet Muley Sidan stayed some fortye days, where
he understood perfectly of the estate of Sus, and had letters from diverse of
his welwillers there: understanding of Alke^d Hamet Mo^sores departure from
thence: And that the Sheba^es* which is the greate^t Cast in all Barbary and
the Casse or Cast of the Muleys mother, would not ^knowl^dge Bo^eres for King,
and likewise, how most of all the Casts in S^ desired his coming thither:
Wherev^on ^e prepared what forces he could there get* to go i^to S^s. Muley
Bo^eres upon the first news of his brothers coming to Tafile^, called in ^ll
his (...), and joining some four Thousand shot of them besid^s horse, sent
them from (...) to Dara under the Comm^und of his Son Muley Abdelmelech, with
whom went diverse principal Alkeids* as Alke^d Gowi^, Vmbilie, and Mumine
Bocrasia, who in the first bat^aile of Muley Sidan was a principal man of
command on his side, and after his overthrow fl^ from him to Moruecos, with
diverse others. The chief intent of these forces was to stop the passages from
thence to Sus, which Muley Sidan perceiving before the coming of their whole
forces, he passed by Alcatouy, where y^ horsemen on each side skirmished, the
^ootmen not being able to come up, and some slain of either side, but no man
of account save only Alkeid Mumine Bocrasia, who as some reported dyed with
thirst, being ouerheated (the battle being ^ought in the midst of July) or
as others reported being wounded, and returning to his tent, calling for water,
after he had drunk it presently dyed, whose death was little lamented or
pittyed of the Mores, they saying he was justly rewarded for being a traitor
to Muley Sidan his Master, who was not only contented to lea^e him in his
misfortunes, and to fly to his brother, but also to go forth into the ^eld
against him.

Muley Sidans forces were so small, that he was not able to match in strength
the forces of his enemies, and therefore was constrained to pass into Sus by
the way of the Sahara, and durst not pass by Draw: In which Sands for want of
water, both he and his whole company Sahara, the country or desert of Sands.
had almost perished, and after much miserey endured in that journey, he
arr^ued at Aca, where Sidie Abdela Imbark the great Foker dwells, the
friendship of whom obtained, he knew that all his brothers forces could not
dispossess him of the Kingdom of Sus, in such great reverence is that church
man held in those parts, that the people will obey none, but whom he
commands them.

He being come thither, the Foker by letters to Muley Boferes then at Moruecos,
procured that there might be a treaty o^ peace between the two brethren:
Whereupon in August following An. 1604. Alkeid Azus was sent to Muley Sidan to
Aca, where by the endeavors of the said Alkaid and the Foker, a peace was
concluded, between Muley Boferes and his brother Muley Sidan, this to enjoy
the Kingdom of Sus, and the other the residue of the Empire, whereupon Sidan
peaceably entered Taradant the chief City in that kingdom: upon whose
entrance thither, Sus which in all former times had been the most unquiet and
rebellious part of all Barbary, through his execution of justice, became the
only peaceable and well governed country of that kingdom, all other parts of
Barbary, that were under the government and belonging to the other two
brethren, as then remaining very unquiet, and full of all tumults: Neither was
his government any way to be misliked, but that scarce settled, he charged the
country with greater impositions then his Father ever demanded, insomuch as
Sedie Abdela Imbark, who was the only man that first brought him thither,
reproved his courses: And the Monta^ers of Atlas being good sou^iers,
excellent shot, and their dwelling by nature d^fencible, finding his yoke too
heavy* the (...) him or his power, which humor of theirs was nourished by
secret practices of Boferes, loathe that S^dan should either grow great in
friends, or treasure. But the inhabitants of the plain^ and lower regions felt
the smart of his rod, knowing their throats lay at his mercey, when as the
Montaniers defended themselves with open arms, and oftentimes gave the new
king his hands full.

Cap. X.
Abdela Muley Shecks Son, escapes from Boferes. Sidan is sent for, to go in
batta^le against Muley Sheck* he refuses. Abdelmelech Boferes son goes* His
bad success.

THE peace concluded betwixt Boferes and Si^an, by the means of Abdela Imbark,
an^ Azus, the wisest Counselor that Barbary has: w^e will leave Sidan at
Sus, seeking hi^ own end once more to become Master of Morr^ecos* and
return to Boferes, who was troubled which way (...) contriue the regaining of
Mul^y Sheck: who like (...) b^ de had broken cage and was flowne to Fes, making
a f^ pretense to goue^ne but as Ui^eroy, yet secretly pra^ised with foreign
states, either to make the^ his friends whereunto he might ^e, i^ Muley Boferes
by fo^ce should drive him out of Fes* or rather then he would loose^ ^ooting in
Affrike, determined to bring in ^orraine power, for ^is aid. Wherefore Boferes
fearing a christian storm which might ha^le Bullets, was careful to k^pe
Abdela* M^ley Sheckes eldest Son the safer to k^pe the Father s^rer from
doing mischief. But it happe^ed the plague was sharp in Moruecos, therefore
Boferes sent his son Muley Abdel^elch some five miles fort^ of Moruecos with
his tents, an^ Muley Sheck* Son with him* but either his keepers were
negligent and corrupted, or else young Abdela too wily, for one night he made
esca^e out of the camp, and ^auing horses ready l^yd, poasted to his Father at
Fes. This Gallant being at liberty, sought all means to defend his title,
being the eldest brothers son: his stirring spirit and youthful hope drue
all the min^s of the Fezzes unto him: inmuch as Muley Boferes sore afflicted
with his escape, but more with the news of his preparations, dispeeded Azus
unto Muley Sidan then in Sus, with request he would go personally to battle
against Sheck and Abdela his son: Muley Sidan well entertained this message,
and with all convenient speed drawing his own forces together, came within
half a days journey of Morruecos, there pitching his tents, but not
determining to hazard his fortune, or trust the price of his own head under
his brothers hands, yet daily he sent letters by his servants of great credit,
wherein ^ee was willing to undertake the charge of war against Abdela, so
that he might make choice of Captains and Commanders* and such proportion of
soldiers as he thought fit, to undergo an action of such import. This
proposition was neither liked of Boferes or his counsel, yet making fair
weather to Mus Sidan, letters passed from him daiof great love farced with many
complements, much mi^iking his brothers mistrust, not daring to ieopard his
person within Moruecos.

Muley Sidan meaning to prove what correspondency his Brother Bof^res heart
carried with his hand, fra^ed a letter which was sent as from the chie^est man
in those Mountain countries of Atlas, to Muley Boferes, full of duty and
services, offering withal to send him Sidans head, who was encamped within his
country at the foot of the hills. Answer to this letter was re^urned with
great thanks, and a large reward of gold promised, if a (...) of that high
and important ser^ice would be performed. When Sidan by this had construed his
brothers meaning, he raised camp* went to Tafilet, and remained in the country
of Dara, gathering in of money and men, after two months spent with his
brother to no effect at all* Boferes seeing Sidan departe^, and de^tute of his
help for Fes, committed his camp to Abdelm^lech his own Son, who was to be
advised by the counsels of Basha Iudar, Alkeyd Ha^et Monsore, S^dy Gowy, and
Alkeyd Bokerse (through whose hands passed all business of Christian Merchants,
so well ^ispatched and so good regard thereof taken, that he was well liked of
every man for his good dealing.) This camp being come within a days journey
of Fes, which is twenty days march from Morruecos, ther^ the Soldiers ^ell
to a mutenie, and three thousand of them revolted unto Sheck, ^rying openly,
Long line Muley Sheck. Hereupon Abdelmelech called a counsel of war, wherein
it was concluded, though their number were twice as many, to return without
blow giu^n back to Morruecos, perceiving indeed their soul^iers hearts quite
alienate^ from them.

Cap. XI.
Sir Anthoni^ Sherleys Embassage from the Emperor of Germany to Muley
Boferes, performed. Anno D^. 1605.

ABout this time being the beginning of October, arrived at Saphia sir Anthony
Sherley, as Ambassador from the Emperor of Germany* to the King of Morruecos:
his attendace was better then a private man, though somewhat wanting of the
person from whom he was sent few of note were in his company, being in all
about thirteen persons, of every Christian language one, because he would
be ^ted for interpretation of tongues. Amongst th^se was sir Edwin Rich, whose
behaui^ur was good and well spoken of in e^rie place were he came, not
strayning his credit to borrow m^ney, but well provided to serve his own
turn, answering to his birth, state, and bis^ursments for the time. Sir
A^thonie then taking the title of Ambassador, during four Months abode in
Saphia, kept open house, invited all Christian Merchants daily, both to dinner
and supper: to supply his own turn for money, he got credit of Jews to
take up money, and pay them in Morruecos, but at excessive rate, almost ^ftie
for a ^undred. he bought likewise of an English Merchants factor being at
dinner with him, at two or three words, a ship of a hundred ^xtie T^nne, with
all her lading being Wheat, paying him in hand two thousand oun^es, and if he
were not paid the rest of his money, within ten days after his arrival in
Morruecos* then the buier to l^se his earnest. But before he went up,
Abdelmelech returning from Fes* by reason of his soldiers treason, the ^ing o^
^es marched toward Morruecos some four days journey, and there gave s^ege
unto a port town called Sally, and took it, but the Castle he could not wi^.
So the Alkeyd of the Castle wrote to Muley Boferes, that though the town were
lost, the Castle he would keep for him, if he sent three hundred quarters of
corn to vitta^le his men, and a fresh supply of fifty soldiers. Boferes
loath to loose the place, and hearing sir Anthony had bought a Ship of corn,
writ to Saphie, and willed him to send his Ship to Sallie, and there to
vnla^e her corn for the relief of the Castellan, and his soldiers. Sir
Anthony, willing to do the King a fauo^r, sent for the Captain and Merchant
of the Ship, willed them to go for Sally, and paying them for three hundred
quarters, dealt so that thither they went, but the Castle being yielded before
they came, the Captain and Merchant landed neither men, nor corn, but
returned t^ Saphie.

By this time were sent for the conduct of the Ambassador five hundred men,
under the command of two Alkeyds: unto every soldier sir Anthony gave a
Turbith as a Livery of his love, which made them respect and honor him
exceedingly, insomuch as one of the two Alkeyds, not hastening to conduct the
Ambassador up to Morruecos, but to provide himself of corn, it being
exceeding dear at Morruecos, Sir Anthony destrous to set forward, and the
Soldiers willing to pleasure him, fell to mutenie, in regard of the Alkeyds
slacknesse, killing two of his men to hasten their master forward. After his
four Months abode in Saphie, wherein his bounty was extraordinary, not to
his Country men only, but to Flemish, French and Spanish, admired of his
soldiers, he was received into Morruecos with great state, having by the way,
as also during his abode in Saphie, diverse letters from the King, extolling
his honorable endeavors, and approved valiantness in his farr^ adventures
both by sea and land, not omitting any Courtship to win his love, or make him
doubt his welcome.

After two days stay in the City, the King mad^ preparation for his
entertainment at Court, whither h^ went, suting his follower^ as well as the
shortness of time could suffer, and his credit with the Christian Merchants
could afford, which was good, for two Spaniards were so rapt with admiration
of his worth, and by his speeches allured with so strange hope, that they fell
in emulation, whether should do him more services, or help him to more money:
reasonably attended, he r^de to Court, not lighting from his horse, where the
Kings Sons usually do, but rode through the Mushward, (which is the Kings
great Hall, wherein most of his Lords, Gentlemen, and chief sort of people do
attend, when they come to Court) which none but the King himself does. Being
come into the Kings presence, his Letters of credit were received, with great
show of kindness, and himself entertained with all gracious respect, not
only at the Kings hands, but of the principallest men in office or favor
about the Court, and so for that time was dismissed, the chiefest men attending
him back to the place where he took horse. Some five days after, sir
Anthony Sherley coming to audience, and thinking to have ridden in as he did
before a chain was hung cross the entrance of the Mushward, which he
perceiving only done to hinder his passage, would not alight from his horse,
but returned back very discontented. This being certified to Boferes,
presently three of his chiefest Alkeyds were sent to qualify the matter. But
sir Anthony took the disgrace not as his own, but his whose person he
represented, telling the Alkeyds, his master the Emperor, was able and would
requite the injury, neither did he fear, though now within the power of
Boferes, knowing the greatness of him in whose service he was employed, so
far surpassing the King of Morruecos, as maugre the proudest he would be
fetched from thence, and be fully renenged of the least injury done unto him.
The three Alkeyds laid the blame upon the Kings Porter, offering sir Anthony
the Porters head if he would have it, so spending an hour to pacify his
choler, and bring him back, the Porter before his face was sore beaten and
imprisoned, neither ever after was he hindered of riding through the Mushward.

During his abode in Morruecos, which was five months, Boferes and he had
diverse private conferences, as it was generally thought, which way to keep
him in the Kingdom against his two brethren, Sheck and Sidan; as also to give
the great L^ke a blow to drive him out of Argiers and Tunes. From Moruecos Sir
Anthony departed with great content to himself, and good liking of Boferes,
of whom he bought two Portingall Gentlemen for a hundred and fifty thousand
ounces, which amounts to some ten thousand pound sterling. These two had
been captines in Morruecos almost 16. years, the one, Son to the Uiceroy of
the East Indies, the other of a noble house in Portingal. The first had his
resgat thrice sent for to ransom him out of the East Indies, but twice it was
taken by the English, once by Flemings during our late watres with them: the
other, his brethren drive him of for his res^at, either to save so much money,
or not able to pay so great a fine. To accompany him from the Court to Saphie
was sent one of the Kings Gentlemen Ushers, to whom at his parting he threw him
his Hat which he wore, from his head, with a Jewel of great value, rewarding
largely all the Ushers followers. For his guard (the ways being then very
dangerous) was sent down with him, four hundred shot, under the command of
Alkeyd Abdela Sinko, a Portingall re negado, (which is a Christian turned
Moore.) This man, whether by persuasion, or voluntarily, desiring to see his
nati^e Country, in the night gat aboard of the Ship sir Edwin Rich was in, not
sir Anthonies, the Ship presently weying anchor made sail for Spain, but the
other remaining with sir Anthony in the harbor.

This dealing was taken in ill part, insomuch that ^ue of his men being sent to
shore for certain provision which they lacked, were cla^yed up in prison, and
sent in chains to Morruecos, but afterward released. Sir Anthony writing to
the King, both to clear himself of the fact, and desiring remedy for these
his new sustained grieuances, set a good show upon the matter, stayed four
days after the other Ship which had carried away the Alkeyd, and would have
carried until he had his (...) men again, but that he was written unto to
be gon^ from an especial friend a shore, aduising him he did not well to ride
so long in the port, diverse Flemish-men of war being abroad, and if any
should chance to come in there, as seldom it is without, they finding these
two Gentlemen as prize would sease upon them, and then was there lost Thirty
Five Thousand ounces, which a Merchants Factor had lent Sir Anthony Sherley to
clear him out of the country, for which the Factor had the two Portugales
bound to pay this debt at their arrival in Lisbon. Upon this advertisement he
departed, and the next day Boferes sent him a letter, to clear his men. And so
I return to the ^le of my continued history.

Cap. XII.
Muley Abdela goes in person against Muley Boferes; drives him out of
Moruecos; Puts to death Basha Iudar, and other Noble men.

MVley Sheck, putting his Son Abdela forward to the whole command of the
army, himself meaning to sa^ one, kept in Allarocha three Italian Ships,
purposing if matters prospered not well, with treasure sufficient to go to
Florence: but the battle not fought, his determination altered, ^or he e
presently seized all stranger^ ships which came either to Laratch, Salie, or
other parts, as also some Merchants ships of ^es, robbing them of their goods,
making the Mariners land their Pieces, and all the men either to serve him, or
else to have the iron given them. Hereb^ ^e ^tted himself of Captaine^ and
soldiers being En^sh, French, and Dutch, with 27. P^eces of Ordinan^e and shot
thereunto sufficient. And so ^red the mind of his Son Abdela, with hope of
winning Moruecos (being of himself drunken with the ambitions desire of a
Kingdom) that Abdela about the latter ^nde of November 1606. marched to
Moruecos with his troops being some ten Thousand horse and foot, besides his
christian Mariners, whose help won him the field, fought some six miles
southeast from Moruecos, on the eight of December 1606. Sheck bore his Son
company no farther then Salie, from whence three hours riding is a river
called Mamora, into which bay the Italian Ships put in: Sheck went thither,
and hard by the Ships upon the shore pitched his Tent wherein he lay, part
of his treasure being shipped, himself determining there to stay, and expect
the event of his Son, if it passed well with him, then Affricke should hold
him, otherwise to visit the great Duke of Thuscane, on whose courtesy he much
rested. But the christian Gunners so well observed their times of shooting and
placing their Ordinance, as they got Abdela the field, hoping thereby to have
obtained both liberty, and pillage, of which most of them poor men failed* as
afterward you shall read.

When Sheck heard Abdela had got Moruecos, he grew careless to send provision
or supply the wants of his three Italian Ships, wherefore they set sail
from Mamora homewards, taking such treasure for their pay as were in their
custodies. Boferes lost in this battle about Sir Hundred men, fled into the
City to save his treasure and his women, but for fear of being surprised,
durst not tarry to take his treasure away with him, but in all have poasted
toward the Mountains, willing the Alkeids and chiefest men of his court to
bring it after him, with the rich Swo^rd, the like whereof is not in the world:
committing also to their conduct his daughter, and the ch^isest of his women,
amongst whom was the wise of Ben Wash the Kings Merchant. At the entry of the
hills a kindred of the Larbies being five hundred horsemen, seized upon these
people, pillaged their cariages, rifled and dishonored the women, not sparing
Boferes Daughter, (whom Abdela determined to have married, but hearing diverse
Mores to have lain with her, and also y^ she was suspected to have lived in
incest with her father; after his entrance into Moruecos, he never enquired
farther after her. The Alkeids being well mounted by the swiftness of their
Horses, returned back to Moruecos, and there took sanctuarye. Abdela upon
their submission promised them pardon, on whose Princely word (they relying)
came forth, the Foker of the place presenting them: But Muley Abdela, whether
incited by envious counsel, or on his own bloody mind, puts them so
secretly to death, that sending all their heads in one sack to Fes, for a
present to his Father, Their deaths was not fully known in the City of
Mo^uccos, before their heads were set upon Fcs gates. Here was the end of
Basha Iudar a great soldier in old Hamets time, a faithful Commander during
his life to Boferes, accompanied with Sedy Gowie, Alkeid A^ his Son, Alkeid
Moden the Cassemie, and some four great men more.

Cap. XIII.
Muley Sidan comes against Muley Abdela; gets Moruecos from him; kills
Eight Thousand of his men; and upon cold blood causes 3000. Thousand F^zees
to be slain, yielding upon good composition.

THis tyranny of Abdela showed upon these valiant and worthy men; and the
spoil which the Fezees had made as well in robbing the Alkeids houses, as in
ry^ing the Citizens goods, and committing aloutrages which follow war, caused
many fly to Muley Sidan, and the rest which remained in Moruecos grew^
discontented, so that the Sunne-^hine of Abdelas happiness scarce lasted two
months: for Sidan resting in the half way between Moruecos and Fes, taking
opportunity of this vproare of the Townsemen, marched toward Moruecos on the
North side of the Town, determining to give present battle, hearing by the
scow^s, that Muley Abdela his camp was looged in the great Garden or Orchard
called the Almowetto, being some two English miles about. The first night of
Sidans approach, the prisoners were released and prisons broken open, so that
these men getting liberty, ran half mad up and down the City, crying long
live Sidan, which troubled the citizens not a little: And in this vproare,
Sidans faction let into the Citi^ (at a secret gate) many of his soldiers,
which made a sally upon the regiment of Zal^, meaning to have surprised Abdelas
camp, but himself coming to the rescue with two Thousand men, continued a
hot skirmish against the Sidanians, in which the christians fought valiantly
to recover their Pieces of Artillery which were lost, until the Sidanians were
forced to retire. The next day being the 25 of April Stilo nouo, Abdela
removed toward Muley Sidan who was encamped on the North side of the City,
not daring to come on the southside, for fear of the shot which galled his men
from the battlements of the Kings house. Therefore he hearing of Abdelas remove
and intending to venture his fortune upon a present battle, set forward to
meet him with a regiment of his best horse: Abdela perceauing this caused his
Canoni^ to march foremost* which could but place five Pieces of their Artillery
in a ^rest* because the Orchards and Gardens made the passages ^ery narowe and
straight where as the armies should m^te* Sidan^ horsemen gave (...) very
gallant charge, but the Canonier^ made them retire: Which Abde^ hors^* men
perceiving, being encouraged, and too eager of the chase, some Thousand Horse
galloped before their own Ordinance, and followed their enemy close to Sidans
camp, their Pieces of Artillary being drawn after them. Muley Sidan well
knowing the advantage of the place, seeing his enemies deprived of the benefit
of their great Ordinance, which he most feared, encouraged his men to keep
their ground, and bringing with his own person fresh supplies to second them,
gave his adversaries the Abdelians so hot a charge, that they were feign to
retire in great disorder, upon the mouths of their own Artillary. This dis
array perceived by the Christian Gunners, it put them in mind to discharge
upon their own men the Abdelians, holding it better to kill Five or Six
Hundred of their own side, then to loose the battle. But the More, who was
Captain over the Canoniers and other Commanders, would not suffer it:
Wherefore the Sidanians following in good order, and very close, fell to the
execution with their swords, surprised the Artillery, and flew the men. The
slaughter continued some four hours, betwixt seven or eight Thousand killed,
and few to speak on left alive, for what the soldiers spared, the Citizens
in revenge of their disorders, pillages, and villainies done to their women,
bereaved them of their lives, who being dead were not suffered to be buried,
but lay above the ground as a prey to the dagges and sowles of the air. Heavy
likewise was the Conquerors hand upon the Christians which took Abdelas part,
most of them for their five months service to Abdela, were either slain in
the fury of battle, or after had his throat cut. And this was the end of
them, who had lived in the streights of Gibraltar and the Mediterranean Sea,
not as Merchants by honest trading, but having committed spoil upon diverse
Seafaring men, felt the bloody hand of a barbarous Nation, (as a deserved
punishment sent from God) to execute justice for their manifold committed
wrongs and outrages.

This battle* being lost with the greatest bloodshed that any has been since
these wars began, Muley Abdela fled to Fes, a Hundred persons of his
whole army not left alive to bear him company: And Sidan Master of the
field, entered the City of Mor^uecos, having another task to take in hand ere
he could settle himself quietly in his own nest. For the Kings house being
Castle wise builded, and severed from the City with a defencible and a strong
wall, lacking no kind of munition for the defense thereof, had within it,
besides souldeirs of Morruecos, three Thousand Fezees who were not at the last
battle, but left there to guard the place for Abdela.

These presuming on their own valor and strength of the place, denied to
render it upon any terms to Sidan, though they were solicited, during the
space of two days, by all fair means thereunto: Sidan bringing his
Artillary to the walls, yet delayed as loath to deface a building so strong,
costly, and beautiful; So that in the mean time a Captain whose house joined
to the wall, by stealth with Five Hundred men, scaled and won the top of the
wall, crying, victory (...) Muley Sidan, which so amazed the soldiers within,
thinking the forces which were entered far greater then they were, without
more ado or offering to resist, they took Sanctnary in the great Church
belonging to the Kings house, every man with his Piece and furniture about him.

Muley Sidan upon this, sent Basha Seleman, willing them to deliver up their
Arms, with promise they should be pardoned, which presently they did, yielding
and delivering both swords and pieces. Thus disarmed, they seely souls came
forth, when presently after, message came from the King to butcher and cut the
throats of them'all, which was executed. A pitiful matter in my judgment,
so many men yielding upon good composition, after fury of battle, upon cold
blood to be made so pitiful a spectacle: it was bootlosse for them to allege
either law or reason in defense of their lives, such is the misery and
slavery of that people, whose goods and lives lies always in the will of the
King, either to save, or destroy at his pleasure. Some color Sidan had for his
tyranny, thinking these Fezees would never be woonne wholly to be his, but upon
fit time, and every little occasion revolt from him: Secondly, he meant to
requite Abdela lege Talionis, for putting so many commanders to death, prizing
every one of their lives, worth three hundred common soldiers.

Cap. XIIII.
Sidan sends great preparationsagainst Abdela: who afafter composition,
murdereth vorie near three thousand Sidanians. Sidans bloody decree against
the Shraceis for their offense.

NOw is Sidan settled in Morruecos but scarce secure, for the chiefest men in
the City wished an alteration, because their King to get their money and
wealth to maintain his own estate, began to pick quarrels with them, making
some who began to speak and repine at his doings, lose their heads, Quoniam
Ganis mortuus non latrat. The common people whose natural condition is always
to desire novelties, wished for a new King, feeling his oppression, and the
famine whereof many dyed, grew careless of peace, thinking every change
would bring a remedy, when indeed it was like the incision of an unskillful
Surgion, not ouring the malady, but making the wound wider, gangrend, and
incurable. Sidan purposing to purge this malecontented humor of the
Comminaltie, rat^ed an army of twelve thousand foot, and six thousand horse,
determining to take Fes. The chief men of command over thi^ army, were
these, Basha Mus^efa, Alkeyd Hamet Benbreham, Alkeyd Ally Tahila, Alkeyd Gago,
and Alkeyd Hadoe Tobib, with diverse others: Muley* Sidan not going in person
with this army, least in his absence Morruecos the seat of the Empire should
revolt. Muley Sheck hearing these news, went to Allarocha, there took a great
Flemish Ship from the Merchant, with all the goods in her, therein shipping his
tree asure, determining to run away, ichis Sonns Abdela should lose Fes. Abdela
omitted no time to gather new forces, so that in small time he thought
himself sufficient to meet the Sidanians in open field, and so he did near
to Mickanes, where the people on Sidans part, missing their King in the field,
or any one of the bloo^ royal refused to fight, and in stead of striking, fell
to parl^y; That if Abdola would pardon them, they would yield, and so they did,
yet most of them ran away, except three thousand Morruekyns, who presuming
upon Abdelas gentle nature, stayed with him, hoping kind entertainment into his
pay, in stead whereof, Muley Abdela commanded all their throats to be cut,
granting them only this favor: first to be stripped for fowling their
clothes.

Thus we may see, merciless Sidan butcher poor souls at Morruecos*
pitiless Abdela murder these unfortunate slaves at Mickanes, both verefying
the old proverb, Quicquid delirant Rog^s, plectu^tur Achiui. In this battle
were taken betwixt thirty and forty English men, who served Muley Sidan as
Canoniers, yet not any of that company which served Abdela at Morruecos when
he lost the City and field, but other voluntaries, part of these fled with
the body of the army back is Morruecos, part were taken, whom Abdela
spared, as well in regard of former services the Nation had done him, as also
for the present use her was to employ them in This expedition of Sidans coming
to so unlooked a disaster, made him send forth his Commanders with diverse
companies, to the Alarbies, for fresh supply of men and treasure: amongst
which as chief was dispeeded Basha Seleman master of the old Kings horse for
Tastlet, there to govern the country, carrying with him some fifteen hundred
shot, of which six hundred were Shracies, people of the King of Chaus, or
Coucoes country, who has always wars with Algers or Argiers. These Shraceis
were borne in the mountains of Atlas, being of a fierce and bloody nature,
not respecting the Turks might or government, no more then the Montaniers of
Mo^ecos, will acknowledge the soueraintie of the Barbarian. Some twelve hundred
of these had Sidan in his pay, half part whereof he kept at Monuecos, the
other was sent with S^leman. These amongst themselves sell into a mutenie,
neither for want of pay or ill usage, but in desire to do a mischief, by
force cut off the Bashas head, carrying it with them as a Trophie of their
victory, and a fit present to win Abd^las savor, who was then at Fes,
whither they went for intertainment. S dan here with moved made proclamation,
that for three Months what Shracee soever, soldier, or any other, were to be
found in Mor^uecos, or else where in his D^minions, should be put to the
sword, and to have it better and more fully executed it was proclaimed that
the man^eller should have the goods of the Shrac^ so killed. Many rich men of
this Nation or kindred res^ant in Mor^uecos, felt the fury of the sword, for
the folly and foul fault of their tribe: such as could get packing, ran away,
others of the better sort, their friends hid them in their houses, until Sidan
scared with (...) of Abdelas coming toward him proclaimed general pardon for
the remainder left alive, and free passage of trading or commerce for any
Shracee which would venture to Moruecos, yet few durst come upon these goodly
terms; or those who lay hid in Morruecos, if they were worth any thing* show
themselves in public, for fear this were a pretense to bring the residue
unto the halter. Those Shracees who were sole causers of this massacre, being
with Abdela at Fes, daily moved him to go toward Morruecos, vowing every man
to die in his cause, and for revenge of their wives children and friends, who
had smarted for their sakes. Abdela something animated with their offers, yet
delayed, knowing his forces far inferior unto Sidans, until still urged by
the Shracies which had brought from the mountains some store of their kindred,
very able and resolute men to his aid, he set forwards about the latter end
of August toward Morruecos, determining to give battle once more to Muley
Sidan. Of what strength Abdelas army consisted, the certainty is not known,
but ghessed to be very near fifteen thousand horse and foot.

Cap. XV.
Sidan flies: the death of the valiant Captain John Giffard, and diverse
English men. Abdela regaineth Morruecos.

MMuley Sidan was very strong, for beside his own soldiers, the Morruecans
aided him with eight thousand men, and diverse tribes sent supplies to augment
his forces. He had two hundred English, the most of them voluntaries, sixty
field pieces, with sufficient shot and powder. Over the English and all the
Christians was general Captain John Giffard a Gentleman of a worthy spirit,
and descended from the ancient and honorable stem of the Giffards in
Buckinghamshire. Upon his first entertainment and welcome into the country;
Sidan bestowed upon him a rich sword, valued at a thousand marks, and a scarlet
cloak, richly imbrodered with Pearl, sent as a present to Muley Hamet, the
Kings father, from our late sovereign of famous memory Queen Elizabeth,
besides many other extraordinary favors of good value, and often conuersing
familiarly, yea, sometimes visiting Captain Giffard at his own Tent. His
entertainment was twenty five shillings per diom, besides many supplies
proceeding from the Kings bounty. With him as secondarie men in charge, was
one master Philip Giffard, his near and very dear kinsman, Captain Jacques
a very valiant soldier, captain Smith one of the most exquisite enginers in
Europe, captain Baker an ancient Brytaine soldier, captain Tailer, captain
Faukes, captain Chambers, captain Isack, men every way able to undergo
their several commands. These were daily stipendaries at twelve shillings a
man, except the two sea captains, Isack, and Chambers, who had four shillings
a day, and every common soldier twelve pence truly paid them. These
preparations considered, Muley Sidan had small reason to leave the field, or
fear Abdelas forces, being nothing in respect of his. ^ut certain it is, the
Muley sending for his Wisards, Soothsayers, willing them to foretell that he
might foreknow the success of his embattailed army: their answer was, he
should loose the battle, be driven into Sus: within five Months: should
regaine Morruecos, and there during life enjoy the kingdom. Upon this answer,
the Muley giving great credit thereunto, as the nature of a Barbarian is very
suspicious, commanded Basha Mus^a with 3000. soldiers to convey away his
mother, wives, and children. To Alkeyd Hamet Benbreham and Hado (...), he
commended the charge of his treasure, who laded sixty M^les with gold, garding
them and the Muleters, with two thousand of his (...) shot.

These (...) ^ded, it may appear Sidan but honered, and would follow, yet the
battles met the 26. of No^. 1607. some sisteene miles from the City of
Moruecos, the Canoniers of Muley Sidan, part having in the forefront
discharged, there enemies being somewhat far off, but before they could
charge again, the enemy was with them. The Shrac^es did not once discharge a
piece, great nor small, but joining themselves close to the Abdelians, charged
the Sidanians very fiercely with their Sables, revenge of Sidans tyranny
showed upon their kindred, enraging their minds and courages, or their
faithful promise (which they sought to make good) to Abdela, made them put the
Sidanians to flight: or else it was Sidans fear that he should not make good
his Southsayers prophecy, which made his men to run away. For at the first
encounter, his Moors fell into a di^-arraay, and presently into a dishonorable
flight, whereupon Muley Sidan fled, sent th the English Captains to be gone,
and to captain Giffard a good horse to save him self. The English returned
word, that they came not thither to r^, but rather die an honorable death.
Captain Giffard encouraged his men, telling them there was no hope of
victory, but to (...) and die like men, like English men, and then asking for
his Iaq ues whom he loved dearly, and taking a (...) in his hand, thought to
have rode unto him, being told he was not sixscore from him, and to have died
together, but in the way captain Giffard being charged by eight Abdelians, one
behind him shot him through, and so was he there ^aine. Few of all the English
Nation were left alive, the number not exceeding thirty, and none of the
Commanders escaped except captain Isack and captain Faukes, of the Mores
were not slain in all forty persons.

Sidan being gone, as loath to tarry, spend blood, and win a field, Abdela
got the ground his enemies marched upon, but no great victory, entered
Morruecos without applause or rejoice of the Citizens, some yet feeling his
late done iniuryes, sorry for the loss of Sidan, who had proved a Tyrant, nor
welcomming Abdela upon hope of amendment, but with policy and patience fitted
themselves to the misery of the time: Abdela once again Master of Moruecos,
got the Kings house, but found no treasure to relieve his wants, great were his
promises to reward the Shraceis with bounty, and enrich his followers. When
the City was recovered, now he having it, there failed of his expectation,
and his soldiers lacking both meat and money: yet to keep them still in hope,
and so in government, it was bruited the young King had found a well full of
treasure within the house which Muley Hamet Xarif had laid up for a dear
year, but this good news quicklye vanished, the Well not yielding water to
refresh their fainting stomachs. Therefore the Shraceis having released their
kindred, recovered their wives and children, which had escaped the fury and
bloody decree of Sidan the last King, they took good words and kind vsages of
Abdela in lieu of payment, seeing Moruecos neither afforded them meat nor
Abdelas fortune further maintenance, and so Three Thousand of them departed at
one time. Muley Abdela with the restdue of his forces kept Moruecos, laboring
by all possible means to give his soldiers content, and keep them together,
so with much a^ he lived in Moruecos some two months, during which time Muley
Sidan was gathering a fresh army in Sus.

Cap. XVI.
Muley Hamet Bosonne comes against Abdela, and causes him fly to his
Father. Boferes like to be taken, flies to Salie. Muley Sidan comes against
Muley Hamet Bosonne: who flies, and is poysonned by old Azus.

BUT whilst Abdela and Sidan were contriuing their own ends, there arised a
storm in the Mountains which fell in the plaine^s of Moruecos, the tempest
driuer was one Muley Hamet Bosonne, cosine to the three brethren which have
striuen for the kingdom. This man gathering treasure, and temporising with
them all three, so played their game, that finding their weakness which these
quarrels had brought them unto, upon a sudden seeing his time went into the
Mountains to his mothers kindred, mustered very near 20. thousand able men,
the Muley being well provided of treasure, gave them due pay and large, winning
them to his respect and service, so that in less then two months space, he
got all things in readiness, descended from the Tessevon Mountains toward
Moruecos.

This news brought to Abdela was very unwelcome, yet (calling his wits and
council together) it was concluded considering the Shraceis were gone, his
remnant of soldiers feeble and out of heart, and the Moruecans daily fled to
Hamet Bosonne, whose vprising like a blazing star drew their eyes upon him,
that Abdela should travel to Fes, which he might well do without a guide,
having heretofore upon like necessities, often measured the miles: And though
he was determined so to do, yet a small occasion hastened his journey, for
some mile from Abdelas camp, upon a hill on the backside of Morruecos, a man
being seen with a spear in his hand, and a white linen upon it as a flagge.
Abdela thought Hamet Bosonne to be with his whole forces behind the hill, when
he was a full days march from Moruecos: Therefore in all have he took up some
of his tens, but the greater part left standing in a manner, being feared,
ran away. And afterward when this matter was discovered, which Abdela held a
token of his surprise, it was nothing else but a poor More washing his napery,
and for the speedier drying used this means which terrifyed Abdela from the
seat of his Empire, to Fes the safest place for his abode.

Lylla Isha Sidans Mother hearing of Hamet Bosonnes approach, was persuaded his
mouements were only to defend her Sons right, knowing Bosonne of late
favored Sidans title, coming into his pay, and in person serving the Muley at
the last battle when Sidan fled into Sus. Herevppon she sent diverse
captains, part of her own Guard, others of her friends and kindred to his
aid, thinking he would have taken Moruecos for Sidan. But Bosonne having
entered the City peaceably, proclaimed himself King, dismissed all Sidans
favorers, which were not willing to be his servants, who returned to their
Lady Mistress, certifying her error and their success: his treasure he
imparted largely to his followers, by strong hand desired no man's service, but
those who were willing* Some thirty english men remaining, weary of their
sustained misery, and the state of the country, he gave them license to
imbarke, and writ to the Governor of Saphia to give them their pass, notice
whereof being given to the Factor Marine, for the English he disparted them
into diverse Ships with all conueniency, though to his cost and charges
charity to help the distressed souls, and love to his native country, moving
him there unto. This Muley Hamet Bosonne during the time of his government was
a very good and just man, offered no discourteste, or took away any man's
goods, but paid the merchants truly for the same, who liked well his current
and true dealing.

Bosonnes Mother hearing her Son was settled in Morruecos, brought what
strength she could from the Mountains, and in her way knowing Boferes lodged
in a fortress, whereunto he was fled, not to be well guarded, she beset the
house, meaning to take the Muley prisoner, who being doyde of means to resist
in the night, made a hole through the wall and so escaped privately to Salie, a
Port Town within the jurisdiction of his Brother Sheck, where at this day he
remains.

On the morrow betimes, Bosonnes mother with her men entered the fort, mi^ing
Boferes, cut off the head of Vmsed Benbela one of his chiefest servants, and
Commanders: then went she forward to congratulate her Sons coming to the
kingdom, being then in Moruecos. But an Empire ill got, is seldom seen of
long continuance, for within less than two months, Muley Sidan came out of
Sus with a great army, for whose aid Lylla Isha sold her Jewels, and Plate,
to furnish her Son with Swords, Pykes, Horsemen, Staves, and other warlike
munition.

On the other side Hamet Bosonne prepared to welcome his cousine the Muley
Sidan; so about the beginning of April 1608. both their forces met hard by
Morruecos where a chief of a kindred one Grufe which came out of Sus, a great
wine drinker, always a favorer of Muley Sidan (though little valuing any of
the three kings) presuming upon his own strength and valor, desired the
honor that he might give charge upon the enemy with five Hundred Horse which
was his own regiment, and of his own kindred: Sidan refused to grant him his
request, therefore the Casima took his own leave and gave the enemy a full
charge upon the body of his army, which receiving him very bravely, the Casima
and his company were in great danger to be overthrown: but Sidan to relieve
him, sent five Hundred Horsemen of his own: so with these Thousand, the Casima
broke the ran^ of Bosonnes battalions, then with their sables fell to
execution, until the whole camp seeing the field lost, fled toward the
Mountains: thus Sidan without further resistance entering Morruecos, resting
there in quiet three months, until Hamet Boson recovering now forces in July
following, presented himself before the City, trusting as well upon his own
strength, as the love of the Citizens: hoping his good and gentle usage when
he was amongst them, would have bred a liking in them, of his mild and gentle
government: but either the servile mind of the multitude little respected his
fore-passed kindness, or the fear of Sidan made them loath to show any sign
of good will, for at his approach no man in the City was known to draw a
Sword in his defense. So on the eight of July Bosonne was discomfited with the
loss of some Thousand men, fled to the mountains, where within four days
after Alkeid Azus got him poisoned, hoping thereby to win the favor of Muley
Sidan.

This Azus is aged and subtle, by his long experience best knows the secrets
of that state, was brought up under Abdela, Muley Hamet Xarifs Brother, and for
his counsel to Abdela, willing him (...) or to put out the eyes of Hamet
Xarif, or cut his throat, was in danger to have lost his life when Hamet
Xarif came to be King, but the wisdom of the man won such respect with
Hamet, that of a prisoner, he made him his chiefest councellor, and master of
his treasury, during whose life time his behavior was such, as he won great
love among the Commons, Nobility, and many of the blood Royal. When old Hamet
dyed, he was in his camp near Fes, and after his death rested all his love
upon Muley Sidan (holding him the prime man and fittest of the three brethren,
to rule the Kingdom,) until both he and Sidy Imbark could not counsel and
rule Muley Sidan, for his own good and benefit of the common weal, being
headstronge, and would take no man's counsel but to his own liking and hurt,
therefore Sedy Abdela Imbark went to his contemplation at Aca: And Azus to a
castle in the Mountains, which he had stored with treasure against a storm,
or to refresh the winter of his age, from whence he will not come down, until
he see some hope of peace, having at this instant more treasure in his Coffers,
then all the three Brethren besides, and hops to keep it being in the
midst of his friends and kindered, and in a place as well fortified as any in
Barbary.

Cap. XVII.
Muley Sheck sends John Elyna into Spain (...) the Mores are against their
landing.

MVley Sheck seeing his Son Abdela returned to (...), his soldiers part
lost, the residue wearied with travels and out of heart, his treasure all
spent, nothing left: Sidan chasing Bosonne to the Mountains, who was there
dispatched of his life, recovering the City, and likely to keep it against
them all: Fearful lest Sidans ne^t enterprise would be to rowze him out of
Fes, fell in conference with an Italian Merchant named John Etina making him
his agent, to go into Spain* there to conclude, that if the Catholic King
would aid him with men and money to recover his right, there should be
delivered up into his hand^s, Allaroche, Saly, Alcasar, and other towns lying
fit for his mouth: This negotiation was well entertained. And John Etina was
promised for his labor in this business, and bringing it to effect, upon the
delivery of the Port Towns, to have yearly paid him Two Thousand Ducats
during his life. In June last past, this matter was first moved, since which
time in the latter end of August, as my author tells me, seven Gallions,
and the Galleys of Naples, in all a hundred sail, well manned with store of
pyoners to raise forts, went to Allaroche, thinking to be received, but
Thirty Thousand Alarbees came down to the shore, not allowing any such
neighborhoode, though they hold the Andelusian half their blood. It is
reported the Governor offered them the keys of Allaroche, if they would land:
but told them they came somewhat to soon before matters were ripe, or could
be effected as Sheck did desire for the King of Spaines benefit.

Thus are they returned missing of their designs, and for this year likely to
fail of making their Master the only Commander of both sides the streights
of Gybraltar. Whether Sir Anthony Sherley was ymployed in this service, it is
not certainly known* some are of opinion that he was induced thereunto,
because they have formerly heard the King of Spain has royally rewarded him
for his travails with Boferes, by giving him the places and pay of two
Captains in the Indies, made him Admiral of the Leuant Seas, and next in
place to the Uizeroy of Naples, having for his entertaynment Five Hundred
Ducats a month: without question he knows well the state of that uncivil
and barbarous Nation, having an apprehending and admirable wit to conceive
the disposition of any people with whom he shall converse, whilst he was
amongst them, he behaved himself very well toward ye better sort, winning
credit with them, and gayning y^ love of the poorer sort exceedingly, by his
larges (for if a More or slave gave him but a dish of Dates, he should receive
a reward as from an Emperor) and howsoever some may hold this a vice,
counting him a lauisher: yet by this means he came to the knowledge of that
which otherwise he never should have attained unto. The more credible fame is,
sir Anthony was not with this Fleet, therefore they sped never the better,
for had he been in company, and had command, he would either have taken
footing, or ventured all, scorning to return with doing nothing, and so be
laughed at. This may be a caveat for great men, not to undertake great matters
and exployts, but upon certain ground and weighty reason, for else the
envious eye of the world looking upon them, and marking their actions, will
deride, if they see them fail in their enterprises.

Now gentle Reader, must I with these Galleys return to the safe and calm
harbor of your favor and gentleness: seeing the Sun declyneth toward the
winter Tropike, the (...) will begin to run high and rough; if they should
^anshe further into the maine, perchance they might be weather beaten. Even so
for me to write without advise, is to sail at random, which would quickly be
found in your wisdom, how I ventured without my Sea-card, and might without
more directions, easily make shippe-wracke of my small burden, not valuable I
confess, yet will be better prised, if it pass your friendly censure.
Therefore here will I strike sail, leaving Sheck with his Son Abdela in Fes:
Boferes either at Salie, or upon the Sea coaste, redier to fly, then to
fight. Sidan holding the stern at Morruecos, hoping to guide his tossed bark
during the prophecy. Spain a great Monarch, desiring to take better hold in
Affrique then Tituan, having at this instant Muley Sheck (commonly called
Prince de Morruecos, the right heir in descent from the stem of Hamet Sheck
Xarif) in his safe keeping, who was the first man which got the Empire from
the Marines, and translated it into his own Family.

THE DAMNABLE REligion of the incredulous More or Barbarian.
THE false Prophet Mahomet, calling to counsel a Jew and a Friar to make his
law, extracted out of the old law what he found for his liking: and
likewise, preuerted places in the new Testament, which by a wrong and sinful
wresting, might seem fit for his purpose. Out of these two and the fancies of
his own brain, the Devil being Register, Mahomet compiled his Alcaron: to
please the Jew he told him Moses was Cillim Vlla, that is, the word of God,
because he spoke to the Israelites as God commanded him. To win favor with
the Friar, he confessed our Savior Christ was of great off eeme, calling him
Sedy Nysa, and with all said he was Rohala, that is, the breath of God, borne
of the Uirgine Marie after a strange fashion, whom he called Lylla Mariam, but
not incarnate: Confessed that of her was borne a Prophet to save the world, to
whom all should have given ear, and have believed. But the Jews (before he
had finished the work of our salvation) would not hear. but sought to
crucify him. Whereupon Christ seeing the Jews so obstinate, ascended up into
heaven, putting another man in his place to be crucified, whom Judas is the
man who they say was crucified in sted of christ: which error might grow of
this, that S^ Sireneus carried his cross.
they did torment, for which cause the Jews are at this day slaves amongst
them: that Christ shall come again, and at his coming all shall be one, and
gathered into one Sheepfold.

Their false Prophet Mahomet, whom they call Rosulla, that is the Messenger of
God, was but a Larbee as they were, but God gave unto him power and
understanding, to make an end of the Law, which the Jews would not suffer
Christ to do: and most blasphemously allege, that place in the sixteenth of
saint John's Gospel, to be meant of Mahomet, Expedit vobis vt ego vadam, si enim
non abiero, paracletus non veniet advos; si autem abiero, mittam ^um advos.
Images they disallow, either in churches or private oratories, holding this
principle, None can forgive sins, but God only. Other book of Religion then
their Alcoran none may use, neither any explains by writing the meaning of any
place therein, be he never so learned. Therefore if any doubt, he must go to
the Priest called Talby, and of him be resolved. Small learning makes a Talby,
which is only to learn the Alcoran without book, and it is thus learned:
First, he bath written him a lesson upon a board like unto a hornbooke, when he
has learned that Memoriter, then is it wiped out, and a new written, which
being learned without booke^, is again wiped out, so a third, so a fourth,
until he has learned it all, and then he may be made a Talby.

Circumcision they use, and a kind of Baptism, but at their own houses, not
in the Churches, because women used about the Lauature, may not enter the
Sinagogue: first, because of their often uncleanness, secondly, for their
offense, because Eve incited Adam to (...)* (the like custom for their women is
amongst the Jews) therefore the Moore when a son or daughter is borne, the
eight vay after their birth, the parents send for a Talby, and some old men and
women, where after a few prayers said, the women wash the child all over with
water, and so give the name, making a banquet according to the man's ability,
but it may be, the child shall not be circumcised of two, three, or eight
years after, according as the father does think good, for then he makes
great bankets: and usually to save cost, has a child married, or some of his
kindred upon that day.

They have four principal feasts. The Easter which is called Rumedan,
preceding this feast is their Lent, about the constitution of which, their
Prophet finding it hard to fast forty days together, abated them ten, so
they fast but thirty, yet is it very hard, for after day breaks, they take
no manerof suste^ance in the world, not so much as a sup of water before night
that the stars do appear, so strict are they when their Lent falls high in
the year, (which it must needs do, because their year is shorter than ours
by ten days, reckoning by the Moon, not by the Month,) as many grow faint
with fasting, and my Author says, he has seen diverse laid before the Church
door, ready to give up the ghost for drought, and some have died, holding it
(no question) something meritorious to die in seeking to fulfill their Law. And
once the same Gentleman travailing to Morruecos with certain Moors in his
company in their time of Lent, one of the Moors being thirsty with heat and
travail, went to a Conduit in the streets of Moruecos to drink a little
water: but the people so wondered at him, and reviled the poor slave, crying
out he knew not God, for breaking in public their Law, (though it does
admit one may break the fast for great necessity a day or two in his
travail, so he take upon his conscience to fast as many days as he has
missed, before the next Rumedan come again) that the poor slave seeing
himself condemned of his own people, and dishonored before the Christian
trauailers, in a desperate mind (which may be counted zeal) killed himself
with his own dagger. The Jews in that Country observe a Lent, in remembrance
of their forty years journey in the Wilderness, but divide the forty days
of this their Lent equally, into every month some.

Their second feast called Lidlaber, celebrated about our Whitsontide, is kept
in remembrance of Abraham's obedience, in sacrificing his son Isaac, therefore
the Moore be he poor or rich, for himself, and for every son he has, will
buy a sheep against the day, when every one must kill his sheep with his own
hands. And the King both the like, slaying one with his own hand, turning the
head into the East. The Jews in their Church or Synagogue, three or four
times when they are at prayers, ^o blow a sheep horn, in remembrance of this
feast, but not every one blows it, only the greatest Raby, or high Priest for
solemnity sake does it.

Their third feast is like to our Michaelmasse, called Lashour, which the Jews
keep as the feast of Tabernacles. The Moore celebrateth it after his Inning of
Corn and fruits. The King makes use of this positive Law, strengthening it
with his authority, as also with the habit and cloak of Religion and
conscience, thereby to make his subject, pay the tenths (due to be paid at
that time) of all his corn and cattle, both young and old, with greater
alacrity: All which comes unto the Kings coffers. Like wise at this time the
common people should pay the tenth of their money to the poor and Church:
something indeed they give, but if the King be paid, y^ oftentimes is winked
at, their Church having no command to compel y^ laity to pay their due: for
the temporal sword since Augustines time, who (as many (...) report has
preached in Morruecos, and not ^arre from thence lies buried) has beaten
down the key of the Prelacie, the beauty of which being taken from them, no
doubt is the greatest cause of their barbarism and slavery.

There fourth ^east is their Candlemasse day, called Lidshemaw, when every one
must have a Candle for him self, and for every son in his house. The King
that day has candles carried to him through the City, some like Maypoles,
other like Castles, six or eight men carrying one of them, they are so great
and heavy, made so ^ne with devises, as some are in making six months. That
night the king does hear all his law read, and the like is done in all other
Churches: Likewise, upon their good Friday in Lent, the law is re^ over, and
the Talby which can not read it over in one night, is held as insufficient for
his place and function. Many of their learned men sit up all that night,
because many of the denotest Moors will watch the ^ight through to hear their
law, not in remembrance of our Savior Christ is this meeting, but rather to
supp^e the sparks of Christianity in the minds of their own people, and
darken the remembrance of his most bitter death and passion.

The manner of going to prayer.
THey go to service ^xe times in twenty four hours, washing themselves
quiteouer before prayer, either post concubitum ^reum, or going to stool or
urine, so much respecting the saying, Wash and be clean: as by washing they
are persuaded to be cleansed from their sin.

Their first time of prayer is two hours before day, which is called Salie,
when the Sexton or Mouden cries from the top of the Steeple, Helo caber helo,
helelow hula, which is, O thou great God, and none but one God: then every man
awaketh, washes himself, and destreth God to send them the day. After this
cry, no man may touch his wife, but prepare himself to serve God, which he
may do by his bed side if he will not go to the church, but first to wash, or
his devotion is no way acceptable. Those which come to the Church, either at
the entrance must leave their shoes behind them, or carry them in their
hands. During their prayers, either they stand all arow, one row before
another, or ^t so: but they are held most denote, who prostrating themselves,
how their foreheads to the very ground. After their prayer, it may be some
desire to confer about some point of Religion. Then does the Talby sit down,
and his auditors about him in a ring or circle, to whom he declares what they
desire to be resolved upon, and within half an hour dis^th them: this being
all then have in stead of preaching.

2* Some two hours after when it is day, they go to Church again, thanking
God he has sent them the day, after which eueryone goes to his labor: and
this time of prayer is cati^ Subelhadl.

3* The third-time of prayer is at Noone-tyde, giving thanks the half day is
well passed, which they call Dehour.

4 Presently after four of the clock is Church-time again, desiring the
Sun may well set upon them, and this is called ^our.

5* Being twilight, they give God thanks after their daily labors, desiring his
blessing may prosper them: this they term Mogrube.

6* And two hours after this, is their time of prayer called Lasha ell Hara,
when some go to Church, but most say prayers at home, desiring God to send the^
g^d night and quiet rest provided alwayes-before saying of prayers they wash
themselves, though not stark naked, yet their hands, head, feet, and nether
parts between their legs: for which cause they hold it unseemly to eat any
meat with their left hand, or touch any thing therewith, but all with their
right hand, the other accounted as unclean. As we celebrate the Sabbath upon
Sunday, in Sabbath*
remembrance of Christ's resurrection, the Jews upon Saturday, so the Moors
upon Friday, who will do any work upon their Sabbath, only that day they go
more duly to the Church, then on other days.

Their Churches are not so goodly builded as ours Churches and their service.
in Christendom, neither have seats to sit in or decked up with any
ornaments, but all the floor is matted, and keept very clean, because no man
may enter with shoes or any thing to de^e them. Bells they have none in their
Steeples, but the Mouden or Sexton being a big voyced knue, chosen for the
purpose, stands in the top of the Steeple, and calls them to their Sallies
or Prayers.

Their Churchmen are very poor, and contented with a little, may have as
many wives as the layman, neither is there any Church of great foundation, or
rich in treasure, except the chief Church in Fe^, which is thought to have in
treasure a million of crowns, which may not be spent except the Christians
should come to invade. Their church service or Lethargy is nothing at all in
respect, nor in any set form not so long as the Lords prayer and the Belief,
therefore every one prays according to his own devotion. So I think our
men of the new learning, which would overthrow church service, have the
Minister live upon alms, and men's good wills forsaking their tenths, pray
according to the spirit, preach vt-dabitur in illa ^ora, hold ringing of Belles
unnecessary, wishing them turned into morters and great Pee^es, have the self
same chimeras in their heads, which the Devil forged in Mahomets.

Concerning Marriages.
THe More may have by his law four wives, Concubines as many as he will keep,
either captives, or slaves, bought with money: for being his own proper
peculium, they are to be at his disposing; but with these he may not lie
withal in the night, which the wives claim as their interest, unless by
stealth: if the husband have many wives, none-will loose their turn, so
nightly the husband by course must lie with one, then with another. If in this
case any be defrauded of her night, and the husband pleasure one more than
another with his company. The wife injured, complains to the Magistrate that
she is despised and neglected, whereunto the husband must answer, if the Judge
rest not satisfied, the husband shall be forced to pay the woman her dower,
and send her home to her Father. if he be alive, (marrying again if she will)
if not, to the next of her Fathers kindred, and this ^ill of divorce they call
a ^ill of Shyed. Though this liberty of Poligamie be granted, yet not one
amongst a hundred has (...), the reason is, the wives friends will never
suffer any to marry their kinswomen, without first they have a bill of dowry
sufficient, for the maintenance of her, therefore the great and rich men have
three or four wives, but the poor most but one ^ew two, because of their
disability to maintain: Also this ^ill of dower keeps their husbands in
great awe, and makes the women have the better life, which otherwise would
live in great slavery. First, because the woman's friends will be sure to see
she have a stay of maintenance, for fear of after charge to themselves:
Secondly, the Iusties of the country is so strict, if a man turn away his wife
without reason, he shall pay her tower, though he sell the clothes of his
back, otherwise every day for change of pleasure, and younger game, men would
turn away their wives faster then horscosers tainted ^ades. Their fashion of
wooing or marrying is thus, the man never sees the woman he shall marry, till
she comes to his bed, but hearing her to be a proper maid, beautiful, and
commendable, sends his mother, sister, or kinsewoman to see her: upon this
report the man's liking and affection rests, if he proceeds, then must he go
to the father of the woman to demand his daughter, they two agreeing,
presently two of their Talbies or learned men are sent for to write down her
portion, his endowment. So some half year after is the wedding day, which is
only a day of feasting, when the friends of the bride bring her home to the
bridegome, riding upon a Mule, enclosed (like a blacke-bird) within a cage
made for the purpose, covered over with ^ke, and great store of mu^ke going
before her: yet in such sort riding thorough the streets, as she is seen of
no body, no not of her husband until he bed her, for then were she held of
small account, and the jest spoiled. If that night the bridegroom find her a
virgin, then is there great joy of her friends, if not, the next day he
turns her home and by law may keep her portion.

Concerning Burial.
THeir manner of burial is in this sort, when one is dead presently he is
washed, and with all speed preparation is made to put him into the ground, for
the country being h^t, it is not possible to keep the corse above ground,
therefore with the kindred accompanied to the grave, (which is without their
City, for within their City or Synagoges, no person may be buried) he is
there again washed, and if he be a man of ability, is put into a C^ne, if
not, buried without one, the Talbie saying a short Prayer. Besides, the people
have a custom, the women of every kindred to meet by themselves at certain
convenient times, and there make memorial of such of their kindred as be dead,
making great lamentations in remembering the virtues and good dispositions of
the^ who are deceased, being persuaded this makes the living have especial
care of leaving a good name and fame behind them.

The Policy of Barbary.
Every kingdom consists of men, not of buildings, therefore the kingdom of
Barbary consists of bond and free men the natural bond men are such as are
descended either from Christians or Negroes; the free m^n are Larbies or
Brebers, which may be termed the valle^ and mountain men. Over all, as
absolute Monarch is the King, who maintains his seat by the Sword, and
power of Justice: the sword men according to their degrees are thus placed.

1 The Muleys, are the kings children, and all other who are of the blood
Royal, are termed by this name.

2 Bashas, are Captain Generalles over armies.

3 Alkeyds, be the Lords, set as well over Garrison towns* as countries, to
rule and keep the people in subjection.

4 Ferres, Gentlemen who carry arms, yet less Commanders than Alkeids.

5 Bahaia, Lieutenant to an Alkeyd.

6 Brakbashi, a Sergeant at arms.

7 Debushi, a Captain over thirty.

8 Romie, the common soldier of these men of war, there were kept in daily
pay in the old kings time, to y^ number of 50000. horsemen: part serving with
the Lance, others with the Spear called Spahaias, and some, especially the
horsemen of Fes, serve with the Crose-bowe on horse back, bending it as they
ride, shooting a strong shot and sure: and 16000. footmen, the Alarbies being
fitter for horsemen, but the Brebers the stronger footmen, most of them shot.

The chiefest men of command in the latter times, were these.
1 ALkeyd Azus, chief Counselor of estate. 2 Hamet ben Breham Sefiani,
Master of the Horse, and ruler over the Alkeids. 3 Sedi Hamet ben Bouker.
These two were Treasurers. 4 Sedi Abdela Wahad Anoune. 5 Alkyd Hamet, a Capatho
or Enuche, Governor over the women and Enuches. 6 Alkeyd Mustefa File Master
of the Or^. 7 Rishauan, Admiral over the Galleys at Saly.
NOte though these be enobled, taking priority or precedence before others,
yet is not this noblenes hereditary, for the Children of these men must claim
no honor by birthright, but what they get by their service and honor of
their sword, live unrespected unless they be valiant, and so proouing, the
King will take them into his service, whereupon by desert, the Son may obtain
his Fathers fortune and honor.

There is another title of dignity termed Sheck, attributed to the chief man
of every family or Cast, neither does the Kings eldest son scorn the
title, signifying that be is the prime or best blood of his royal kinddred.
These Shecks are much respected, because it is the nature of the people, the
whole kindred to follow their head: insomuch as one of these Shecks can bring
into the field Ten Thousan^* ^orsemen of their own Cast* or Kindred, and some
mo^e. So that it is a matter of great consequence, the King to have an eye over
such a man, and know how his effection rests toward him, either in love or
hatred.

Officers of Justice.
THe King once in a moves, on Frydaies in the afternoon after prayers, either
in his house or church sits to do justice, hearing complaints or appeals
from subalterne ministers, from whom the grieved persons do appeal to his
royal person: when the King sits the stranger shall hauer free access to
plead his cause before the King, then his own borne Subject.

All inferior Judges and Ministers are their churchmen or Talbies, and those
are soonest chosen into offices which are of stricktest life, being free from
avarice, and such other sins as may preuert and hinder the course of equity
and justice.

The chiefest man for judgment under the King is the Muftie, to whom the
party grieved may appeal^ from any other ordinary Judge. There be three of
these men, one in Moruecos, another in Fes, the third at Taradant in Sus.

The Muftie of Moruecos, fitteth with the King in judgment, and every Frydaye
in the afternoons by himself, to hear and determine causes of the Subject and
stranger, though he be in eminent place, he is a poor man, in respect what he
might be, if he would sell Justice and take bribes.

The ordinary Judge sits all the year long two^ hours before noone, and
two hours after noone: in every great town throughout the three kingdoms is
placed one of these Judges, to whom not only the inhabitants of euerytowne
and City do repair, but the country people or Larb^es upon differences come
thither to have their causes decided: every one must tell his own tale, and
plead his own matter. When both parties have spoken, then gives the Judge
sentence; so that in one day the cause is brought into court, and the same day
ended. If either part have witness to produce, then the Judge gives three days
respite to bring them in, which being brought, the adverse party shall have
other three days respite to disprooue them. And it he can prove the witnesses
either infamous in manners, or given to detestable sin, as drunkenness,
adultery, or such like: And can prove the witness says not his prayers six
times (...) in four and twenty hours, then shall he be utterly disabled to
bear witness, and thus in seven baies the longest suit shall be ended. If an
Obligation or rather Bill of debt be brought into Court, the Obligee must
either pay the debt, go to prison, or to pawn the value of the debt, or
better: which pawn may be kept in Deposito nine days upon great reason, to
see if the debtor can red^me it at the nine days end, if he does it not, then
is it sold, and the party who should pay the money, must sustain the loss.

As Coadiutors to these Judges, and next in place to them be the Scriuanos,
who upon death or other remove, are commonly made Judges. These are Talbies
which make writings between party and party, short and plain, without
multiplication of words, and they are of opinion, Abundans cautela nocet: in
their obligato^ie bills they put neither forfeit nor condition, having for the
making thereof two pence English, and no more. They use no long draughts in
matters of purchase, or these tripartite Indentures, with such large and long
implicit and explicit covenants, but thus the people deal in matters of
contracts and bargains. I buy of you a vyneyard, house, merchandise, at such
a prize, to be paid at such a time, calling two honest men, whereof one shall
be a Talbie if I can get him, to witness this our bargain. We four go to the
Scriuener, who likewise is a Talbie, and have this set down in writing, and if
our bargain be for twenty Thousand pounds, it is set down in ten lines, and
the Justice of the country will allow me my bargain with as great reason, as
if I had a great engrossed book of conueiance, as big as the map of the
whole world in the newest edition.

Next in this nature to these, be the Steryes, which have small fee^ to see the
execution of law and sentence of the judge fulfilled; these likewise fetch men
to answer their adversary, which would delay, and not come before the Judge,
either upon peruersenes, or ^adnes of their (...), or any other cause
whatsoever. Wherefore to be always ready, these are continually attendant in
the house of the Judge, and waighting upon him whethersoeuer he goes.

Muttiseb, is an officer to see true weights, and measures; if any be faulty,
all the wares in such a man's shop he gives to the poor, the party proclaimed
an unjust man, and sore whipped.

The (...) is the (...) M^rshall in every City, who judges ^ppon life and
death, as soon as (...) delinquent is taken, and his offense proved,
presently his throat is cut: murder there is death, so is manifest theft,
adultery likewise proved by very good witness: And some times it is death for
any man to wear a sword who is not an officer, yea though he be a soldier.
Other offenses according to the necessity of the time and pleasure of the King,
by proclamation are made death, which the Hackam must see executed upon loss
of his own head.

Muckadens, be Substitutes to the Hackam, seeing his judgment fulfilled, and
in his absence has his authority.

Fokers or Saints dwell in the best places of the country, keep great
hospitality for all travelers, whither any man may come for a night, and
begone in the morning: much good these do in the country by their example of
morrall living, and bestowing their own goods in their life time to help the
needy and distressed, comprimising differences betwixt parties, and repressing
all disorders, winning great love and respect, for their houses are held
sanctuaries, whose privileges the king will not violate, but upon great and
weighty reason.

The manner of fight.
THe King, Nobility, and soldiers desire to serve ^n Horseback, which most
commonly they do, for in any army there be three horse for one foot: y^ King
will feildome venture to fight out a battle, but as you may perceive by the
precedent, it was and is the usage amongst the three brethren, when they meet
in a field, whoseeuer gets at the first onset the advantage, makes the
other presently leave the field, and fly unto some place of strength: they
fight with no armor except a buffe ierkin, for the better sort, and a leather
hide tanned for the meaner, and some coats of male, their arms is a Horsemans
Staff, Target, and Sword, or a Horsemans Piece and Sword.

The Alarbies serve all upon horse, will fight sorer battails to mantaine
their deadly fewde, than in service of their King: Insomuch that upon loss of
any great Lord or chief man of their blood, cruel battles have ensued,
wherein Ten Thousand men have been slain at one time, and it is their
fashion, the fairest virgin to ride upon a Camel, with a flag in her hand,
decked in all po^pe to solicit her kindred to revenge, and goes foremost in
the field, encouraging them to follow; upon which incitement much blood is
spilt, her kindred as loath to loose their virgin, and not revenge their
injuries: the other side striving to win her and the field, holding that a
continuing glory to the seventh generation.

When a man is killed, his tribe seeks not revenge only upon the man which
killed the party, but the first man of that tribe he meets withal, him will
he ^ill if he can, and so thinks he has satisfied his kinsmans death.

The Brebers or Montaniers likewise maintain this fewde, who are most shot and
Sword men, upon the day of battle their women follow hard behind them,
with a color in their hands called Hanna: And if they see any of their side
offer to run away, or retire, presently they will throw some of this Hanna
upon their clothes, which will stayne, and the party ever after is held for a
coward and a dishonored Jew. For fear of this infamy few forsake the field,
but either conquer their enemies, or dye like men, who are presently stripped
and buried by these women which follow them.

The single combatte is performed with the short sword, lapping about the left
a^e his uppermost garment, which is worn lose. Seldom the field is appointed,
but either the men fight upon their falling out, or at their next meeting by
chance. If a man be set upon by more persons then one, he fights winking,
laying about him with all his might, not charging his adversary, punctum, or
after the Rapier fight, but cesim edgewise either in battle, or single
quarrel.

The trading of the Moors into Guinee and Gago for gold ore, or sandy gold.
MVley Hamet being at peace with his neighbors, at quiet with his subjects,
determined to war upon the Negroes, knowing the conquest easy, because the
people are undisciplined in war, and the profit would be exceeding great by
bringing their gold into his Country, exchanging for it s^lt, and other baser
commodities. And howsoever certain Miners had found rich mines of gold in the
hills of Atlas, yet he held it better policy to fetch his gold farther of,
then to dig that which was found in the center of his own Kingdom, fearing
if the Mines prou^ rich, the ^olden Ore would draw thither Christian Arm^,
therefore he cut the throats of all such as were the Authors, and gave the
masters of the works death for their hire. But to perfect his other design,
he chose Iuda^ Bash^, sent him with great store of Soldiers, who entered far
into the Neg^ country, depriving them of a great city called Gago, which
stands upon y^ river of Synega, three hundred leagues within the firm land,
builded there an Alpandeca for Barbarian Merchants, and a custom house for the
^ing. The Merchants make it six Months journey from Morrueros thither, of
which, two months they pass through the sandy Deserts, where no people dwell,
neither any road way, but directed by Pylots, as shipe at Sea observe the
courses of Sunn, Moon and Stars, for fear of missing their way: If they lose
themselves, they meet with famine, and die for lack of water, whose dead
carcasses consume not, but makes Munna, or Otema flesh, every way as physical
or medicinable, as that which comes from Alexandria. They never trauc^ under
two or three h^red in a company: it may be not meeting with water in twelve
or fifteen dayee space, but carry water by Camels, both for them and their
beasts to drink, which failing, to save their own lives, they kill their
Camels, and drink the blood. If the wind blow at North-east, they cannot
unlade their Cai^ (...) the sand^ should cover them. The Mar^dise ^rried from
Morruecos to the Negroes, is mu^ cloth, amber Beads, Coral, but the chiefest
commoditi^ is ^alt, which is bought at Tegazza, and other places for four
shilling^ a Ca^els lading, which is six hundred weight, (...) pays at Gago
five pound^ for custom to the King of Barbary, afterward sold ^arre within
the Country to a kind of deformed Negroes, who will never be seen in the
commerce of trading with the Barbarian, or any stranger: Wherefore they l^y
their ^lt in the (...) leaves it, then comes the deformed (...), and ^ieth
against every man's prizell of salt, as much of his gold as he thinks the salt
is worth, and goes his way, leaving his gold with the salt: Then returns the
Moore,, if he like the gold, takes it away* if not, ^etracteth so much from
his h^ape, as he will sell the to Negro for his gold. The Negro returning, if
he like the quantity puts to more gold, or else will not barter, but
dep^eth. Yet they seldom mislike, for the Moore makes a ^h return, and his
King a full treasure. Wherefor^ the ^formed Negro is praised for the ^uest
dealin^ man in the world: the gold which they have is not coy^ed, but like
small gravel or sand gathered after glut^ of rain, in the dry banks of
Mountains and rivers.

Of the Grasshoppers which come into Barbary from Guinee:
THe Grasshoppers come seven years together, and other seven years they come
not. Their coming is about the end of February, (from the parts of Benie, or
Genie, as the Country people imagine) in such abundance, that where they light
for five or six Miles compass, all grass and corn new sowed is eaten up.
And if they light upon a tree, they eat up all the leaves, buds and bark of
the smaller twig^, which is tender or green; Thus remain they in Barbary
until the end of March, when they spawne their young, then fly away (as is
thought) further into Turkey. Before spawning they are good meat, the poor^ of
the Country being relieved with them, yea, the people will come a days
journey, to fetch two or three Horse, Bull, or Mules laden of them. All the
night they lie on the ground, until nine or ten a clock in the morning,
because before their wing^ be dry, which are m^ystened with the euenings dew
they cannot fly, so that one (...) will gather of them fou^ (...) five bushels
(...) a morning. When they rise they (...) until four of the clock in the
after noone, so thick, that like to a cloud they hinder the light of the
Sun from you, carried they are with the wind out of the country, none but
God knows ce^nly whither, leaving behind them their young which they have
spawned, five times more in number the^ the^ ar^ (...) at their first (...) and
do more hurt then they han^ done for though the old have eaten the corn at:
their first coming, when it was g^ne, (...) is (...) not utterly destroyed,
for much of (...) t^ and (...) (...) but the young after twenty days that
they are (...) to (...), and corn then growing ripe, are more perilous to
destroy it, and so famish the country. Wherefore Thousands of people all the
day long do nothing but kill these young ones, putting them into sacks, but
cannot destroy them all being innumerable. The juice of these young Grasshoppers
is poison, therefore the country people take great ^are least the juice touch
man or beast, for if it should, all the skin would presently go off. These
young ones fly away forth of the country in the end of June, no creature
knows whither: Sometimes if a strong gale of a South* East wind take them,
they ar^ carried over y^ straits into Spain, making dea^th by destroying their
^rne. The 7 years they come into Barbary, ^orne is (...), the other seven
years most commonly corn is plentiful: In my Authors remembranc^ Wheat has
been sold for four pence a bushel, and barley for two pence. Insomuch the
country man would not bestow the labor of reaping his corn to have it, but let
his cattle eat it standing upon the ground, such plenty God does send, and the
fertilenes of the soil does yield them, being black in color as any garden
earth, much manured: and though the ground is not so often ploughed as here in
England, but once turned over or ploughed when they (...) it, yet it gives as
great increase either in Corn, herbs, or r^tes for man's sustenance, as the
(...) of any country in Europe whatso^uer.

Recreations of Pleasure.
HAwking with the long winged Hawke* of which they have greater store and
better then we have in these parts of y^ world: their game is the ^awde, a land
^owle like unto a Drak^, and so ryseth the Curwan, Tigernut^, which we have not
in England, the Bustard, (...) h^, Pl^sant, Partridge, Ducke, and Mallar^.

Hunting of the Stagge, Antilop, Koe-Bucke, Hare, Fox, Debe, half a Dog half
a For, wild Bore, Tiger, wild Cat, Leopard.

In the sandy countries, where the best horses are bred, which ordinarily will
drink milk, and can fast from water 4 days, there they hunt the Estridges,
marking when they come to water, which they do at set times in flocks or
companies, then the horsemen disperse themselves, and first one troop of horse
let upon yt heard of Estridges* which the birds perceiving, betake them to the
wing, not flying aloft from the ground, but making a running flight so fast as
it tries their horses in their full speed, and most commonly tyreth three
companies of horses, one after another, ere they be taken. The birds have at
the end of their wings a horn growing, which, in running and moving of their
wingges, in manner of a spur pr^cketh them, as it were to make speed, and
therewith are sore ^led, as may be perceived at their taking. These birds, some
hunt for pleasure, others for profit of their feathers, their carcasses not any
wise good to be eaten.

Of the Lion.
THe fairest for shape or noblest for courage is bred in the Monntaine and
woddy country of Barbary, toward the Atlantike sea. The Lioness has seldom
above two whelps at a time, which are in great peril of death when they put
forth their great teeth, whereof many die upon very pain of toothache. The
young ones may be brought up very tame as a mastife, and will continue so, if
you keep him from blood, but if he have once tasted thereof, he wa^eth angry
and cruel. The country people where the Lions most breed, when they meet with
one, looks sternly and angerly in the Lions face miscalling and rating him,
in so doing the Lion will run away like a dog. But upon the sight of the Lion,
let a man as afraid run away, he will make after and worry the party if he
once catch him. The country man kills the Lion with his Piece, by making a
pit near to the place where he thinks the Lion will resort to his prey, the
man standing in the same, having nothing open but a little hole to put forth
the end of his piece, and to take his mark to shoot at him. Others, who go
upon pleasure to hunt him with their horse-peeces, being well mounted, give
promise, one not to forsake another in extreamities, for our own country man
has sh^t a Lion and killed him, when 4 men have been slain out right, made a
buffe ierkin of his out side, not desiring Hercules fame for wearing the
Neemeian mantle, but to let y^ world know an english traveler takes as great
content and pleasure to wear the trophie of his own manhood, as a
milke-soppe gallant the favor of his amorous Mistres.

FINIS.

