A GENERAL DISCOVRSE Against the damnable sect of Usurers, grounded upon the
word of God, and confirmed by the authority of Doctors both ancient, and
new; necessary for all times, but most profitable for these later days, in
which, Charity being banished, Covetousness has gotten the vpperhande.

Whereunto is annexed another Godly Treatise concerning the lawful use of
riches.

Psalm. 15. Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, or who shall rest upon
thine holy-hill? etc.

He that has not given his Money upon Usury: nor taken reward against the
innocent.

Luke. 6. Be merciful, as your heavenly father is merciful. Ubi charitas,
ibi spiritus. Seen and allowed according to her Majesty's injunctions.

Imprinted at London for Andrew Maunsell in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of
the Parret. 1578.

TO THE HONOrable, and after God his most singular Patron Sir CHRISTOPHER
HATTON, etc. One of her Majesty's most Sacred and Secret Counsel, THOMAS
ROGERS wishes, as he is bound, health of body, comfort of mind, continual
favor of his Prince, good will of her people, love of all men, and life
everlasting.
CICERO (as in his second book of Divination appears) considering wherein he
might best consume his time and study to the profit of the Commonweal,
whereof he was a member, finds at the length, that he could not do better,
or bring a greater commodity, than to open certain ways to his fellow
Citizens, whereby they might become learned in the knowledge of good things.
For my part (honorable and most bountiful Patron.) I see not wherein I can
better spend my time, (till it shall please God t'appointe me too some other
purpose) than in bringing such things into a vulgar tongue, whereby the
ruder sort of people may learn their duties both toward God, and man:
whereby they may know that they are by nature men and not beasts, and by name
Christians, not Infidels; and therefore should avoid bestlines and follow
reason, and walk in pureness of life, as it becomes Saints, not wallowe in
wickedness like such as know not God.

And although I am not ignorant, that among the learned some (as among all
sorts there be, which, so themselves do game, care not how many be
undone) both think and speak much against the diuulgatyng of good things
into a common tongue: yet sure I am that nothing is more pleasing unto God,
more profitable for his church, nothing more t^ th'aduancing of virtue, or to
the rootyng out of sin than is the same after the preaching of his word.
For As I grant that VIVA VOX, or (as Saint Hierome said) the lively voice of
man does most forcibly enter into the heart, and effectually persuade, so can
it not be denied but that the wrightinges of godly men, through the secret
working of the holy spirit, do maruelously move, and many times convert even
from dissolute behavior to honest conversation, and from filthiness of life to
the fear of God.

This can they affirm to be true, which either in time of persecution could
not, or in this prosperous and peaceable time of the Gospel, what through the
gross ignorance of some, or the too intolerable negligence of other Pastors,
cannot be instructed, though greatly they desire, and pay full dearly for
the same. This can they affirm also (of any sort, or calling) which make it
their delight at idle times, to be conversant in the holy Scripture, and to
learn the counsel of the Lord in the wrightinges of good men. And this can
they affirm, which be^yng sometime in error, and abhorring the sight of
godly Preachers, yet (through the great mercy of God) by readyng secretly
the works of some, which they could never be allured openly to hear, have
been reclaimed to the flock of Christ, and are the very good servants of
God at this date. Whereby it is apparent, how injurious they are to their
brethren, how ungrateful to their country, how wicked against God, which
mislike, speak, inueigh against the bringing either of the word of God, or
the works of good men agreeable to his will, into a common tongue. As though
that either God could be too much honored, or godliness of too many
practiced: as though virtue could be too common, or for some kind of men to
be virtuous were not commendable.

But such dealyng of theirs, does evidently declare of what Religion they be.
Julian the Emperor did straightly forbid the works of learned and good men
to be perused of any Christian* But he was an Apostata, a reuolter from the
truth, an enemy to the Cross of Christ, a blodie persecutor. The Turks
allow no learning but their own: But they are spoilers of good men, and
sworn enemies to the truth. If these men were not either against true Religion
adversaries; or in conversation, wicked, truly they cold well abide the light
of the Gospel to shine over all. For there is no such token of a guilty
conscience as to shun the light. And therefore they love darkness, because
their deeds are evil. That policy of Julian did more abolish the truth, than
all his persecution: That practice of the Turks has destroyed more souls,
than any cruelty upon their bodies could have done: This deuilish counsel
of Satan's lyms has done more harm to the Church of Christ in England and in
other Countries, and may do more, if it should be followed, than any fear,
faggot, or force can bring to pass. But that Apostata Julian being wounded to
the death, could say at the length, Vicisti Galilaee, Christ thou doste
prevail: The Turks for all their tyranny have not their will: And in spite
of of the devil, the Gospel does and shall flourish everlastingly. The truth
may be oppressed; the mouths of good speakers may be stopped; the best
Preachers may be lothed; Wolves and hirelinges may come in: nay, though there
be, in many places hirelinges instead of true shepherdes, and good men
(peradventure for their own sins, or for the sins of the people
peradventure) be lothed, though the mouths of some through Mammon be stopped,
yet will the promise and purpose of God take place, his servants shall be
instructed, his enemies shall be told their faults, all shall know their
duties toward God, their Prince, their betters, their equals, their
inferiors, themselves, though not by words of mouth, yet by wrighting: that
both the godly may be confirmed in the truth, and the graceles converted in
time and be saved. And therefore does God in these days, more than at any time,
and in England (very strangely if it be well considered) stir up, and incense
the minds of some to wright, of others to translate: whereby as we enioie
external happiness more than many nations about us, so are we blessed with the
riches of the soul more than all the world again.

Hence it is (right honorable) that as other things I have done, so of late I
translated, and now have published this Treatise against Usurie. A vice as
horrible before GOD as hurtefull to a Commonweal: and therefore as necessary
to be known, both of subjects to shun it, and of Magistrates severely to
punish it, as may be. A vice which none but infidels will use, and no godly
men can abide. And yet a vice which Infidels detest, and Christians, so
called, in deed no Christians, delight in. A vice which among the Turks and
Indians is not allowed: and so odious among the Jews, as they use it not, but
toward strangers. A vice so unknown in times past, that to find an Usurer
in a City was a wonder: and if any were so diuelishlie bent as to take
Usury, he swear the giver never to descriehym. If but any probable suspicion
rose of a man to occupy that filthy trade, he was taken for a devil in the
likeness of a man: his house was called the devils house, all that he had was
counted the devils: and therefore while he lived of all sorts he was
abhorred: the Bays in the streates would not come nigh him, the men would not
deal with him, the women feared him, the Priests barred him from the holy
Supper of the Lord, and when he was dead, he was used like a Dog, he had no
Christian burial.

But good Lord, how is the World changed? That which Infidels can not
abide, Gospellers allow. That which the Jews take only of strangers, and
will not take of their own Countreimen for shame, that do Christians take of
their dear freindes, and think for so doing they deserve great thanks. That
which before time men durst not use but secretly, that in these da^es is
commonly used* That which before time brought men to shame, that in these da^es
brings men to estimation. That which before time was used of very few, that
in these days is practiced almost of all, and made an occupation. I fear me
that many occupiers in the world which can not live by their law full trade and
bear a countenance, do maintain themselves by Usury. I fear me that many
officers whose allowance is but very small, and their living nothing at all
besides, are iolie fellows, and that by Usurie. I fear me, that many
gentlemen whose revenues are but simple, can bring mighty things to pass, and
that by Usury.

I would this were all (although that were intolerable). But I would that among
occupieres many, which having good trades whereby they may live well, yet for
greedines of more gain, did not leave their lawful callinges, and live only
by Usurie: I would that among such as are called gentlemen, many which have
liuinges, and may keep good houses, did not either sell all, or forsake their
home to come into populous towns and live by Usury: I would that many whom
God has blessed with riches of this world, whereby they may procure good and
commendable trades to live by, refused not them to live by Usury. And when I
consider these things, I marvel with my self why such inquiry is made for
vagabondes, and none at all for these men, why poor wretches are straightly
examined how they do live; and these fellows come not into question: I
marvel, and sure I cannot sufficiently marvel, why that Roages are burnt in
the care, and Thieves are hanged, and yet these suffer no bodily punishment at
all. Roages leave honest ways of living, and that wilfully, and so do these:
Roages live by idleness, and the sweat of other men's brows, and so do these.
And therefore being as bad as Roages, they well deserve the punishment of
Roages. Yea, but Roages lack ^ dwelling place, which Usurers have, and
therefore more intolerable. But Usurers lack some honesty which Roages have,
and therefore more horrible. There is lightly no Roage, but either his
Raiment, or his talk, or his company which he keeps, or some one thing or
other, descerneth him from an honest man: But an Usurer is a Wolf in a Lambs
skin, a Mermaide with a man's voyc^, a Judas among good men, and is sildome
known till his bloody purpose takes place. Again, theft is unlawful, and
Thieves by good politic laws are put to death by hanging. Usurie is theeuerie
(as out of the word of God, and the learned books of good men hereafter shall
be proved:) and therefore Usurers like thieves deserve to be hanged. And
surely that is to good for them. For if simple thieves, which rob most
commonly for need, against their wills, in fear, in out places, secretly,
strangers, deserve such a death, how should they be handled, which have no
need, and yet will steal, and that impudently without blushing, in famous
places, openly, and from their freindes? Surely these two are so like, that
the one in respect of the other may after a sort, be pardoned.

And yet I would this were all, I would it rested only in particular men
(although it should be in none) I would it stretched not to whole companies,
and Parishes. But I certainly believe (so far is the Canker spread) if
diligent and secret inquiry were made, that the stock of many Churches would
be found out at Usury, and the poor relieved by that shameful gain: and
that the common Treasure of some companies does yerelie increase by this
deuilishe trade; and young occupiers, or other honest men fallen in decaie,
which should according to the wills of well desposed persons freely be
helped, pay dearly for the use thereof. A thing so against reason, and the
Religion which we profess, as, almost, nothing can be more.

But what is the cause of all these mischiefs? Truly nothing else, but (as the
honorable now for his authority, always for his virtue, learning, and love
of his country honorable Master Doctor Wilson in his excellent discourse
upon this matter said) the lack of penal statutes. O that it would please
your honor to think here of (as I hope you do, and will) and consider how
God hereby is dishonored; the glory of this country obscured; honest men
beggered; roages and thieves maintained; hospitality hindered; charity
extinguished, religion defaced, and withal consider upon some notable
punishementes for these rotten and unprofitable members, your glory should be
greater in bryngyng that to pass, than ever was the glory of Hercules for
killyng the Monsters of his time.

It was an old Prophecy among the Lacedaemonians, that the love of money
should bring the destruction of Sparta: and therefore to preserve that city
the better (as Erasmus notes) they appoincted that he should lose his life,
that brought any money into that Commonweal. Notwithstanding good laws
through wicked Magistrates in time were neglected; good counsel not regarded;
covetousness crept in, and Usury was so common, as richmen thereby became
beggars, and fre-men bondslaues. The which though many lamented, yet most of al
grieved Agesilaus (a noble capitain among the Lacedaemonians) and therefore
complained unto the King, and by suit obtained that the account, or notory
books of Usurers should be openly burnte up: which was brought to pass. A
notable punishemente for those coruorant Usurers. Cicero thinks (of whose
opinion I am) that it is a Prophecy not for Sparta alone, but for all wealthy
cities and Co^monweales: and it may be for certain, that that state is not
of continuance, where vice is embraced, and virtue banished; covetousness
crepte in, and care of godliness cast out; Usurie allowed, and lawful trades
of living not maintained. Now, Usury being grown to such a perfect ripenes
in England, as almost there is no man, but, if he have spare money, out it
must, whereby honest men become beggars, and (though not in such sort as
they were at Sparta) the virtuous become, in effect, bond slaves, to the
veriest slaves by Nature, which thing full many do greuouslie lament, if it
would please your honor (as noble a captain in England, as ever Agesilaus
was in Sparta) to procure a redress hereof, I doubt not, but as the realm
should be delivered from a marvelous slavery in the time present, so it
would be a cause that GOD should bless this land exceadyngly in the time to
come.

I wish not (honorable:) not that their books of accountes should be consumed
with fire, which the valiant mind of Agesilaus brought to pass; nor that the
principal should not be repaied, much less an overplus paid, which
punishemente Plato did appointe; nor that they should have a double punishment
more than thieves had, which the Romans did enjoin them; nor that their
gooddes after their deceasse should be confiscate to the prince, as they were
sometime by King Edwardes Laws; nor that their bodies should be banished, as
they were out of Asia by Lucullus; out of Cicilia by Cato; by Solon out of
Sparta; and out of England by King Edward the first (all which were notable
punishementes, and prove that Usurers be no members to be cherished in a
Commonwealthe) I prescribe no certain punishment, it were punishable
presumption in me, it becomes me not, only I wish that they may be most
severely punished, the manner how, I leave unto your wisdom. And that may
well be brought to pass, if you once attempt the same: the poor Commons, the
zealous Preachers, the better sort of inferior persons will assiste you,
with their devout prayers unto almighty God; others, like unto your self,
will aid you with godly policy; the noble and famous Earl of Leicester has
been already a favorer of this cause, and no doubt will further it to the
vttermoste of his power; the honorable Master Secretary Wilson has most
learnedlie to the vewe of the world, and to the great profit of many,
depainted these fellows in their lively colors, and would rejoice, I am
pers^ aded, exceadingly to see as fair a riddaunce of them out of England and
the Queens dominions as, God be thanked, there is of Wolves by the means of
King Edgar; finaly, her majesty, praised be God therefore, has been and is
vertuoslie inclined, and will graciously allow, what soever your wisdom,
with other of her Counsel and Nobility shall think meet to be established
for the profit of her people, and the glory of God.

Now that it ma^e be known, that, as Philosophers through the force of
reason; and the Prophets, with other godly men, through the Spirit of God,
in all ages have condemned Usury: So the Preachers in these days cannot, and
good Protestants will not allow the same, I have been moved once again after
many learned and zealous men, to publishe this treatise in our English tongue.
And besides that the wicked, and obstinate Usurers hereby (knowing both how
grievously they offend God, and hurt their Country, and yet persistyng in
their obstinate impiety without repentance) shall increase their pains in
the pit of hell: I doubt not, but as many as have any sparcles, or fire of
godliness within them, which shall read this book, even for the only fear
of displeasyng God, which has foretold that Usurers shall die (he means
they shall be damned) Ezech. 18; that they shall not dwell within his tabernacle
(they shall be excluded from the joys of heaven) Psalm. 15; that they must
lend freely, Luke. 6; though no punishment were appoincted by the
Magistrate, will from their hearts repent them, if they have been Usurers, and
utterly abstain from it them selves, and reprove it in others.

And because many, which delight in Usury, would avoid the same, did they
know the lawful use, from the wicked abuse of ritchesse, I have thought it as
necessary for me to declare, how that riches may both virtuously be gotten,
and used Christianly, as to show how shamefullie they are abused by the
impiety of Usurers. For which cause I have annexed hereunto another short
discourse, and have entitled the same The Lawful use of Riches. The which
though it be not a translation altogether, as is the former part concerning
Usurie, yet have I taken the same in effect (which I think good to
acknowledge, that the auctour may have his deserved praise) out of the learned
Commentaries of the famous divine Nicolas Hemingius.

Which treatises, both to show a public testimony of a grateful mind to
your honor ward, by whose encouragement I took them in hand, and what else
soever I have, or at any time shall go about: and also of good will to many,
I humbly present unto your honor, hopyng that you will accept them in as good
part, as you have done other things of mine, not generally so profitable.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable and his very good Lords, the most prudent Consuls and
Senators Of the Imperial Cities of high Germany in Nordling, Weissenburg,
Thonawert, Giengen and Poptingen, Grace and peace through Jesus Christ our Lord.
GOD requires of every man in his calling (prudent Senators,) both a
knowledge and a setting forth, a confession and a protection of the truth
especially because nothing is more excellent than the truth, and nothing
more pernicious than falsehode. Wherefore in as much as out of the word of God
I have learned, what may be thought of the exacting of Usury, I have labored
for my calling sake diligently to teach, and faithfully too admonish men,
that they take heed of the same. For nothing is more hurtful either to our
state in this world, or to our souls and bodies for ever; nothing is more
against the state of Commonweals, or sooner brings them to decay. And for
that I perceive, that, in these latter, and most perilous times of the world,
in which all things are inclined to deuouryng and scrapyng together, men are
so blinded, that notwithstanding the wonderful cleerenes of the Gospel,
contrary to so many, and so evident testimonies of holy scripture, contrary
to so many sentences of the reverend Doctors, contrary to so many laws both
of countries, and of nature, yea and contrary to the opinions of the very
Pagans, they allow, exercise, and contend that the profit by Usury is
lawful gain: I have proceeded so far in this matter, that in my confession
now extant, I have by evident testimonies of the Scriptures, of godly fathers,
and of the Law, proved, that Usury as a thing which brings to the soul
infection, to Commonweales destruction, to mankind the wrath of God, and makes
them subject to the tyranny of Satan, and eternal misery and destruction, is
greatly to be reprehended, and to be forbidden. Which my exhortation how it
has been taken, is so well known to al your honors, or at least to the most
of you, that I need not at this time to mention the same. In the defense of
which confession (which when time shall serve we will give out) this matter
shall more copiously be handled.

And that all wise, godly and learned me^ may perceive, that in the reproving
and condemnyng of the most filthy, shameful and pestilent exactions of
Usury, I shun not the light (howsoever the judgments of men will be of this
liberty) therefore, as once I published my opinion of Usury in the Germane
tongue, so now I do the same in another language, in the which, either
Germane, or as it is, if any find which does mislike him, let it only be
showed, and we will answer him truly and with Scripture. To reprehende, or,
more truly to speak, to cavil is no hard thing, but to show the error,
that is troublesome.

And for that both we ought to profit our country, and the rumor spread of the
Confession is well known unto your honors, I have supposed it most expedient
to publish the same under your mighty protection, that it may be known unto
you, both upon what foundations I stand in this cause of dispraising Usury,
and that I fear neither the authority, neither the subtilty of arguments. For
the holy Scripture serves me better to victory, than the plausible sentences of
all the world. I trust this my dedication will be gratefully accepted of you all,
because it was first begone, and is now finished for the profit of my country,
and for the propagation and defense of the truth.

The discourse of barganing I have therefore pretermitted, which I would have
the discrete reader to understand, especially because this matter of Usury
touches our profession, which I would take upon me to handle with wisdom,
deliberation, and judgment. For, as the learned know, to entreat of
bargaining is peculier to another faculty. Notwithstanding I allow all
lawful contractes agreeable to the word of God, according to the laws
written, and of nature, instituted, ordained, profitable, and necessary to the
conservation and maintenance of this present life. And who shall defend the
contrary thereunto, him let all the wise and godly accuse of filthy and
damnable heresy. Now if I shall perceive, this my doing to be grateful to
your wisdoms, as I hope it will, if by any means when opportunity shall
serve, I may pleasure or profit your honors, nothing of my part, God willing,
shall be wanting to the doing of the same. And I do counsel and beeseech you
in the fear of God, that you have the truth always in great estimation, and
that ye abhor, and punish all falshod and lying, even for his sake which is the
author of truth, and the hater and revenger of lies, and opprobrious talk.

Here I commend your Lordships into the protection of almighty God, whom I
beseech to grant you so to repent, and to govern in this life, that
hereafter you may reign for ever with Christ in the world to come. At
Gotingham in Saxony. Anno. 1569.

Your honors continually at commaundment: M. Philip Caesar,

Faults escaped in the book of Usury.
Fol. Page Fault Correction. 1 1 Sustantiallie Substantiallie 3 2 Increase
Exercise. 4 1 Brigelt Briget 4 2 Goodlinesse Godliness 5 2 Great sin Great
some. 6 Arist. Solit. Arist. polit In the marge.
9 in contents of the 5. capter. Estimation Opinion 10 2 Soueraintie. Society
14 1 Reap the Reap not then the 21 1 Pronowne Pronounce 22 1 I am sure I
answer 23 1 Gain rising Gayne-cessyng 26 For differing. Far differing.
Same Page Devour the father Devour the fattest.

IN THE BOOK OF THE lawful use of Riches.
Fol. Page Fault Correction 6 1 as one question as any question 9 1 to know
somewhat of thee to borrowe somewhat of thee.

THE PRINCIPAL Chapters of my Doctrine, and Confession concerning Usury.
1. ARecityng of the causes, wherefore Usury is found fault vvithall and
condemned. 2. A methodicall declaration of Usury. 3. Whether Usurie be
lavvfull. 4. Usurie what kind of sin. 5. A confirmation of the true
opinion, that Usury, as a deadly sin, is justly misliked and condemned. 6.
The judgment of the Doctors of the pure Church in all ages concerning Usurie.
7. Of restitution 8. Of Interest. 9. A refutation of certain objections. 10.
An exhortation to avoid Usury.
TO PROVE THAT Usury is unlawful, a learned discourse.
The 1. Chapter. A recital of the causes, wherefore Usury is found fault
withal, and condemned.
FOr as much as this case is burdened with great prejudice, and many both
overcome with custom, pricked with the spech of the froward people, and
bewitched with the glorious colors of Usury, do judge sinisterlie, and
wickedly report of such as set them selves against this Idol of the world:
it is both good and necessary before we enter into this discourse, to recite
the true and weighty causes, whereby plainly and sustantially it may be
proved and showen, that Preachers through a godly and commendable zeal, have
condemned Usury, instructed their auditors earnestly to avoid it, adhorted
usurers to repentance; and with severity of suspension, yea with the
Thunderbolt of excommunication (thereby to bring them to the acknowledging of
their wickedness, and to the doing of penance) have terrefied such as either
wickedly do use, or wilfully defend usury.

And although the vanity of these backbiters be sufficiently known and
manifest unto the godly: yet the honor of our profession is to be defended,
and our fame must be delivered from the eger invasions of these pestiferous
The reason why Usury is found fault withal.
sycophants, lest otherwise the simple be offended, and withdrawn from the
truth, fall into their opinion.

The first is the glory of GOD whereunto, as Paul 1.
The glory of God must be ad^a^nced.
does admonish, all our actions are to be directed. For God will be
acknowledged and glorified of us, even as he is. And therefore did he make us
according to his own likeness; therefore would he have us to be redeemed with
the precious blood of his only begotten sun, and therefore with his holy
spirit through the preaching of the word, and administration of the
Sacraments does he illuminate our minds and cogitations, that due and true
glory may be ascribed to him alone.

Now they, which put no a^^iance in the giver and bestower of every good
thing, but by their own forecaste and wisdom, yea by unlawful trades,
neglectyng the means which be ordained of God, provide for themselves,
attribute that glory which is due unto God, unto themselves, and their
usury. And so contumeliously they deal with God, for which thing, because he
should not That God may Have his glory, and the wicked their shame, Preachers
find fault with Usury.
so much as in word be abused, we reprehende and condemn usury, that the
glory of God by acknowledgyng of his benefits, and obedience unto his will,
may shine and be seen in us.

The second; The great, eternal, and straight commandment 2.
Preachers must rebuke ^l sin, and therefore of necessity must adhort
Usurers to repent. Luke. 24.
of God which is given and proposed to all the Ministers of the Church,
preach repontaunce. The preaching of repentance for that it is against all
sins, it must needs rebuke usury.

The third; The woeful commination, whereby God 3. ^f Preachers spare to
speak the w^ll of the Lord, God will not spare to punish them. Deuteronomy. 12.
Ezech. 33. Math. 5. Ap^c. 22. If the commandment or message of a earthly
Prince must faithfully be done: much mo^e must the will of God.
does threaten eternal damnation of all such as either diminishe his
commandments, or of a set ignorance ouerpasse his will in silence; or rashly
presume to ad unto his word; or carelessly neglect their callinges.

An Ambassador of an earthly prince being sent on business, if, without the
counsel of his Prince, he alter the form of his Commission, is judged to
have done wickedlie, and justly gets unto himself the anger of his Prince
and punishment for his presumption. Then what shall we think of those
messengers, what displeasure do they run into, what judgment do they
deserve, and what cruel punishment should they have, which being Ambassadors
of Christ himself, take such power and liberty upon them, contrary to the
will of their almighty and The reward of well doing is no temporal thing, but
eternal happiness. The punishment of Usurers, if they do not repent, is
eternal damnation in the pit of hell.
everlasting Prince, that they will change, peruerte and permit at their
pleasures, which are placed in his word to be believed, and to be obeyed? For
this controversy is not about an earthly kingdom, but it concerns the glory
of God, and the health of the soul; and respects that life, which in deed
is to be called a life, the loss whereof after this life cannot be recovered.

The four^h* The consideration of the great and wonderful 4.
profit which comes as well to the teachers as hearers by the reprehension
and condemning of Usury.

We the ministers of God shall attain this reward, if as What profit^
Ministers get by inueyng against Usury. The fruits of faithful preaching.
other sins, so we reprehend usury in all places, that, as faithful
fulfillers of the will of our master, we shall have his favor, and the testimony
of a good conscience, and joy, and comfort, and willingness to pray; yea and
in all the race of our life, and before the tribunal seat of the son of God,
we shall glory, that we have been faithful; and before him which is the
knower of all hearts, our very auditors, will they or nil they, shall confess
the same, where then we shall be adorned with a florishyng crown of eternal
glory.

And the auditors which are tuched with a care of the The profit coming to
the well disposed hearers of Gods word.
safety either of their bodies in this world, or of their souls in the life
to come, shall take such fruit and profit by this preaching of repentance,
that, being admonished of the contagiousnes of this plague whereby their
souls are infected and killed, they provide in time a medicine for the
creepyng diseases, lest otherwise the whole part be drawn, and least the
soul polluted with this vice, and defiled with that damnable sin, be cast by
the justice of God into everlasting torments.

The fifth; The consent of all the godly and faithful preachers 5.
in the Church, from the Apostles time until this Usury has in all ages
been found fault withal.
age, has an especial force to stir up not only a liberty, but also a
continual matter to accuse and condemn usury.

The sixth; Because it quenches charity, which is the ^*
principal chain of human society: it takes away the law of nature,
from whence the positive laws are taken, Usurers more severely punished than
thieves, among the old Ethnikes.
which also condemn usury. The Ethnikes being glorious by this light of
natural discernyng of honest from filthy things, have not feared to
pronounce, that usury is a thing detestable, and to be abhorred.

For they did rightly suppose that a thief with a double, but an usurer with
a fourfold punishment should be Cato. To be an Usurer was to be a murderer
in C^tos judgment.
afflicted, and that because he is a destroyer of nature. For CAT obeyng
demanded what was usury, having respect hereunto answered, that which
murder was.

The seventh; Because usury is heresy. For by the judgment 7.
Usury is heresy. Herisie what? An obstinate error striving against the
Articles of our faith.
of all the learned and godly writers, it is called Heresy, an obstinate
error striuyng against the foundation, that is, the Articles of our faith. The
confirmation of this definition is extant in the third chapter of the Epistle
to Titus in these words. After one admonition or two avoid an heretic, etc.

Now let us apply this doctrine, that it may be known Why Usury is called
Heresy.
in what respect usury in called heresy. By many testimonies of holy
scripture it may be proved, that usury V^hen Usurers after sundry
admonitions to avoid their ill dealing, stand in defense of them selves, they
become obstinat Heretics. Whether Usury be contrary to the Articles of our
faith or no.
is a deadly sin, as by that which follows shall appear. Now if this
sin after many admonitions be defended, and with sondrie colors be excused
and painted, and become pertinacie, then is it no more a simple, but is called
an obstinate error.

Then a question rises, whether Usury be contrary to the foundation of the
scripture, that is, to the Articles of our faith; But, the definition of an
Article of faith being considered, the answer is easy. An Article of
faith is any part of Christian doctrine, either in the old or new Testamente
which is delivered unto us, and proposed to be believed. For it is the
property of faith not to assent to a part, but to all the word of GOD
which is written and given out to be credited, according to that What is an
article of the faith. Psalm. 1.
of David, And in the law of the Lord (not in a part of the law) will he
meditate day and night.

Now many commandments which forbid the exactions of Usury, are as well in
the old as new Testamente proposed to be credited of us, that according too
that rule our life may be directed, and conformed by a good conscience in
newness of life to the honor of God, and profit of our neighbor. Therefore
the forbiddyng of Usury, is an article of our faith.

Wherefore they which embrace this error of Usury, and with an obstinate
mind defend it, and with contentious Obstinate Vs^rers, are to be accounted
obstinate Heretics.
words allow it, and being admonished, or by strong and evident places of
scripture convicted do continue therein, and are vpholders thereof, they ma^e
rightly be accounted and proclaimed for Heretics, as also the Civil lawers
do witness.

And for that to fall into heresy is very dangerous, and being in too come
out again is hard, it were good for all Usurers to provide and foresee, lest
they be spotted with the stain of Heresy, and so by little at the length
they slide into such a sincke, from whence few can escape and come out. And
what needs many words? Does not Christ and Paul call Coueteousnesse,
which is worse than Usury, as Luther witnesses, Idolatry? For Luther Tom.
7. Genesis page 388. fac. 1. 9. 4. and fac. 2. 9. 1. Math. 6. Ephesians. 5.
Christ says, Ye can not serve God and Mammon. And Paul, Know this, that
every Fornicator, impure person, or covetous, which is an Idolater, has none
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God. Let no man deceive you with
vain words. For, for such the wrath of God comes upon the sons of
unbelief. Be ye not therefore partaker of them. Even as the Manichees horrible
heretics did commend Usury, as Augustine writing of their August in Psalm.
132.
manners and customs says. They increase Usury, and openly defend, that to
be an Usurer is better than to be an housbandman, because an Usurer does
not break of the members of God which are in Trees, Herbs, Aples, and fruit
which an housbandman does. They being asked then why they feed of the fruit
and Aples, Answer, That they are the very elect, and are illuminated with
faith, and by chastity, prayer, and thankesgiuyng they purify their life on
this and send it again into heaven.

Finally, the odiousness of this sin, and the abominable 8.
and most detestable filthiness thereof, whereby not only the godly, but
also all which have any reason, The diverse names ascribed to Usurers.
ought to be terrified from this so beastly and poisoned wickedness. They
are called wasters, pollers, stealers of holy things, Thieves, Murderers,
Idolaters, cousins to fools, as ill as mad men, because contrary to the
nature of things they make that too engender, which cannot fructify; They
are worse then Pagans, which are without Religion, wicked, not beleeuyng there
is a God: To conclude, they are likened to poisoned serpents, to mad Dogs,
to greedy Worms, to Wolves, Bears, and to such other rauenyng beasts. Yea
Luther for their Luther Tom. 7. Genesis 7. page 389. fac. 2. Genesis 2.
deceit and malice, does almost think them to be very Devils. At one
word, they are like to vessels full of all Brigil Revel. lib. 7. cap. 36.
stinking carrion, and filthe. For so does S. Brigel wright of them in this
manner: The wicked are full of ambition, and covetousness, which do more
stincke in the sight of God, and his saints, than any filthe, in the eyes of
men.

And what else are all temporal things, than filthe? Temporal things in
comparison but filth.
The holy Ghost by the Apostle Paul does prove the same, where he says:
They which will be rich, fall into 1. Timoth. 6. The dangers which the
rich are subject unto.
temptation, and snares, and into many foolish and damnable desires, which
turn men to decaie and destruction: For the root of all evils is
coueteousnesse, which some desiryng, have departed from the faith, and have
wounded themselves with sundry sorrows. Finally, as filthy men they are
horribly polluted, and with the stains of sin not only contaminated, but
ouercouered; barred from the kingdom of God and Christ, and driven from all
grace and blessyng of God, and through the displeasure of the almighty
subject to the curse, to Satan, to hell fire. For what greater misery can
be to the soul?

Therefore they which well and christianly do think The conclusion with a
repetition of the fore mentioned causes.
that the glory of GOD is to be spread abroad, preached and protected; and the
commandment of the almighty, the great king, and Lord, our heavenly father
to be obeyed; that his threatenings are to be trembled at his anger to be
feared; the power of Satan to be detested; the bodily and eternal pains to
be shunned, the salvation of the soul to be greatly esteemed, sought for,
and accounted of, the favor of God, and blessedness to be loved; charity
too be exercised; the law of Nature to be observed, not destroyed; the
Heathens in honesty of conversation, and goodlinesse to be excelled; heresy
too be detested, abhorred, and avoided; thy will be so far from being
displeased with the reprehenders and condemners of Usury, especially with
Preachers and good men, whose office drives them to rebuke sin, that they
well judge them most worthy of good will, favor, and comme^dation for their
faithfulness. For the plainness and openesse of those grievous cases now
numbered, cannot choose but be seen, not only of the godly, but also of the
very wicked, especially in such a clear light of the Gospel reveled. For
the faithful servants of God take this matter in hand, not driven thereunto
by the writings Where faults are winked at, horrible sins are accounted
virtues.
of man, nor through ambition, or desire of revenge, but, by the straight and
severe commandment of GOD, and for the salvation of the Church, and their
own souls, are compelled thereunto: whereby in the preaching of Repentance,
they rebuke Usurers as well as other sinners; that either they may amend, or,
if they persevere in their obstinate malice, at the least that the preachers be
not accused for neglect of their duty; nor those limbs of Satan may have
any thing, wherewith to cloak their impiete.

The 2. Chapter. A methodicall or orderly discourse of Usury.
INiudgyng of controversies we must what this word Usury signifies
look to the fou^taines, that the mind of the searcher may be certified of
the undoubted truth, that in the explication the judgment wander not The
knowledge of tongues necessary.
from the true sense. The names of things are rightly called notes, which
being either altogether unknown, or not perfectly understood, it must
needs follow that the things themselves be very obscure. And therefore in
the iudgyng of controversies, it is very necessary and expediente thoroughly
to understand and know the kind of speech, which is used. The word of God
written in Greek and Hebrew. Usury what according to the Hebrew word.
Neschech usury. Proper similitudes applied to Usury.


The word of God, whereby God has manifested himself, is written in Greek
and Hebrew. The beginning therefore of the word Usury, is to be sought
especially in these two la^guages. In many places of the old Testament the word
Neschech is read which signifies Usury; it is derived from the verb
Noschach, which signifies to bite, to gnawe, and devour as Serpents, mad
Dogs, and greedy Mise do. For as a venomous Serpent by his bityng does
instill his deadly poison in Usurers like. Poisoned Serpents. Mad dogs.
Greedy Myse.
to the body, whereby the whole body is infected, and so, by and by through
the vehemency and deadliness of the poison, life is taken away: And as a mad
Dog does drive the body which he biteth into madness: And as a greedy
Mouse by gnawyng the bread, does cause the same oftentimes to be unmeet,
either to be eaten, or used: so Usury by an incredible suddenness does
devour substance; bring the body into worldly misery; and the soul into
everlasting torments. No doubt this name is given to Usury to show the
filthiness, and force thereof, which every godly and well disposed person
should consider diligently and with care, that so they may abhor that sin
more than either Dog (as they say) or Serpente; and with all study should
beware of the same, least otherwise they either consume their goods
lamentably, or come to them unlawfully, and so fall into the displeasure of
GOD, which with grievous pains will eternally tormente them.

And that the certainty hereof may be known, I will confirm which I have
said, by the words of Lyra, Lyra in enarratione Cap. 22. Exodus
who says: As a Serpente bityng secretly is not senseblie perceived at the
first, but afterward swells, and the effect of his little bite comes into
every part of the body: so the hurt by Usury though it be not known at the
first, yet at length it aspireth to a great sin, and deuoureth the whole
substance of man. So says Lyra. And therefore, Usury the daughter of
covetousness. Beza.
which is woorthe the notyng, covetousness, the mother of Usury, is
therefore called Beza. For it comes of the verb Boza, which signifies to
wound. For as Covetous men are cutters.
they which are wounded through the effusion of their blood, and peril of
that part of the body which is hurt, do fall into sickness, and danger
of life: so men circumuented by the evil dealings of the covetous, are both
expelled out of house and home, and compelled oftentimes through need to pine
away.

In the new Testamente these two names of Usury Usury what according to the
Greek phrase of speech. Daneilmos, Tokos, Usury.
are most common, to wit, Daneismos, and Tokos, the later of which derived
from the verb T^kto, which signifies to beget, or to bring forth, does
plainly show forth the nature and force of Usury: that, contrary to the
nature of money, which is a thing barren and frutelesse, it brings forth a
child. Thence is it called in Hebrew Tarbis, and in Latin Foenus, as it were
Tarbis. Foenus quasi foenus.
Foetus, the fruit of the womb.

Now consider how great is the blindness, or rather the madness of men in
these dotyng days of this Usury contrary to nature.
world, that to a thing frutlesse, barren, without seed, without life, will
ascribe generation: and contrary too nature and common sense, will make that to
engender, which being without life by no way can increase. And therefore
Aristotle an Ethnike, and without all Aristotle an Ethnike condementh Usury.
knowledge of Christianity, for this cause does pronounce Usury to be a
thing detestable, and to be abhorred. His words are these: By good reason
has Usury Arist. solit. lib. 1. Cap. 7.
come into the hatred of man, because money is only reaped, and is not
referred to the exchange of things, for which cause it was first invented.
For contrary to the course of nature, Usury does augment and increase money,
from which it is so called. Wherefore in this so excellent and wounderfull
clearenesse of the Gospel, let Christians be ashamed to judge that allowable,
which a profane Philosopher so highly did condemn Hitherto of the definition
of the ^ame Usury. For I thought to utter and show for the such names which
the Prophets and Apostles have especially ascribed unto the same.

Usury what?
Exodus. 22. If thou lendest thy money to my people which are among you in
misery, do not oppress them, neither put Usury upon them. Luke. 6. Lend,
looking for nothing again. By these testimonies out of the old and new
Testament, this definition of Usury may be gathered. Usury is a gain above
the principal, exacted Usury what.
only in consideration of the loan.

Many sorts, according to the sundry kinds of The kinds of Usury.
things used, might be declared of Usury, but I think it needelesse to make
any subtle distinction, when as in that one, whereof the scripture does
speak, all may be easily included. When, to wit, in the loan of anythyng,
Usury in Corn etc. as well as in Money.
either of money, or of corn, etc. we are content for the lendyng to receive
more than we gave, that couenaunte is called Usury, and is condemned in many
places of holy Scripture, as hereafter shall be showed. Whereof Bernard says
notably: Usurie is a Bernardus li. de cura ^ei familiari^.
legal thief, foretellyng before what he does mind afterward to steal. The
efficient cause of Usury, is the forcerie Efficient.
and bewitchyng of Satan. For even humane reason, not altogether quenched by
the Devil, does detest and abhor all such things as destroy nature, as
Usury does.

The material is money, corn, wine, and any other thing which we may
consume. Of usury the cause Material. Formal. Final.



The formal is the filthy snares, which are laid for temporal goods.

The final, or the end thereof is, that Usurers may enriche themselves, by
impouerishing of others; and that they may spend their days pleasantly in
idleness without pain; that such as stand in need, may be brought into
extreme poverty and misery, yea, and that multitudes having so undone
themselves may in grief, hunger, and wretchedness consume their days in this
miserable world.

Usury offends God, and, without repentance, Effects of usury.
purchases his heavy wrath and eternal damnation; it quenches charity,
diminishes substance; makes accursed; brings into the grievous slavery of
the ungodly; it is the deuourer of good men; the destroyer of all humane
society. And therefore Usurers be rightly called Noschim, that is,
Oppressors. Nehemeae. 6.


And hence it is that Cato likened Usury to a sword Cato.
made for the destruction and decay of life. For so being Cicero Officiorum
lib. 2. An Usurer, a murderer.
asked, What it was to be an Usurer (as reports Cicero) answered, That
which is to be a Murderer. It is greatly to be lamented, and with unfeigned
tears to be bewailed, that we, to whom the will of GOD through his
unspeakable mercy is opened and reueiled, we Christians should be surpassed
of the very Pagans in godliness, but without all controversy in his time,
God by the greeuousnesse of pains, will revenge this impiety. The things
contrary to Usury.


The things which are contrary to Usury, is the commandment of God; the
duty and obedience, which by an immutable order, the creature owes to his
creator; the threatenings of punishemente both temporal and eternal; the
love of our neighbor; the equity and equality ordained for conservation of
humane society: The law of Nature, and the positive laws.

The 3. Chapter. whether Usury be lawful.
Now, because the matter does so require, we will encounter with Usurers,
and deal with this question whether Usury be lawful, or no?

Seeing that Usury by the The end of man's creation, redemption, and
sanctification.
express word of GOD is plainly forbidden, there is no question but it is
unlawful. For man is according to the likeness and similitude of God created,
by the Sun redeemed, and sanctified by the holy ghost, that in him the
knowledge and glory of God may shine, and be seen, that obediently he should
serve God, that he should declare and manifest the gratefulnes which he owes
to his maker for all the benefits which he has received.

That God most straightly and severely has forbidden Usury forbidden by the
word of God.
the same, it is apparent by these testimonies which follow, collected out of
holy scripture.

Thou shall not steal. Exodus 20.


If thou lendest thy money to my people which are among Exodus. 22.
you in misery, do not oppress them, neither put Usurie upon them.

If thy brother be waxed poor, and fallen into decay Ieuit. 25.
with thee, thou shall relieve him, both the stranger and the soiorner, that
he may live with thee. And thou shall take no Usury of him, or vantage, but
thou shall fear thy God, that thy brother may live with thee. Thou shall not
give him thy Money upon Usury, nor lend him thy corn for increase.

Thou shall not hurt thy brother by usury of Money, Deuteronomy. 23.
nor by usury of Corn, nor by usury of any thing that he may be hurt withal.

He that lends upon usury, and takes overplus, shall Ezech. 18.
this man live? He shall not live.

He that has given his money to Usury shall not dwell Psalm. 15.
in the tabernacle of the Lord, nor rest upon his holy hill.

Lend, looking for nothing thereby When he says lend, Luke. 6.
he bids not to give, but he would have the principal to be restored. But
he does forbid that any thing should be exacted more than was lent And yet
borowyng in extreme necessity, the thing borrowed should be repaied.

Let not covetousness be once named among you, as it Ephesians. 5.
becomes saints.

Covetousness of Money is the root of all evil. 1. Timoth. 6.


These evident and plain testimonies not only of the old, but also of the
new Testament, drawn out of the most clear fountains of Israel, and
witnisyng of the pleasure of God, do approve to all men that Usury is
forbidden of God, and therefore unlawful.

The 4. Chapter. What kind of sin Usury is.
Since by so many plain, notable, and evident proofs out of the old and new
Testament it is apparent that Usury is unlawful, and forbidden by the mouth
of God, usurers will demand whether it be a sin venial or mortal? We,
omittyng all superfluity of words, in one or two arguments will
comprehend the whole state of this question.

No Idolater shall possess the kingdom of heaven. Every Usurer is an
idolater, because he is covetous. But every covetous person, as witnesses
Paul, is an idolater. The first argument. Ephesians. 5.


Therefore no Usurer (which per seuereth without repenting) shall possess the
kingdom of heaven.

Who soever does serve Mammon, cannot serve God.
Every Usurer is the servant of Mammon.
Therefore he is not the servant of God. The consequent is good.
For no man can obey two masters commanding sundry things, at one and the
same time, as witnesses Christ.

Whatsoever is done contrary to the express commandment 3.
of God, is a mortal sin, according to that, Cursed be he which does not all
things. Again, Math. 5. He which breaks one of the smalest commandments,
and shall so teach men, he shall be counted the least in the kingdom of heaven.

But the express Commandments of both Testamentes recited in the Chapter
before do easily prove, that Usury is forbidden of God. Therefore we pronounce
according to these testimonies of scripture, that whosoever does exact any
thing more than his own for the lending of his goods is polluted and defiled
with deadly sin. And I prove the same out of the word of God: because Ezech.
18. and Psalm. 15. eternal damnation is expreslie denounced to all which by
covenant do exercise the trade of Usury. Ambrosius lib. de bo^o mortis.
Hence does Ambrose say, if any take usury, he is a thief, and shall not
live.

Neither may Usurers, or the defenders thereof whosoever they are, strive, or
much contend with us. For we are Legates, as Paul says, and the dispensors
of the mysteries of God, called and sent of God to signify his will to all
mankind. And for that he has committed unto us a form or instruction (the
wrightinges of the Apostles and Prophets) containyng all those things which
he would might be showen to the counciles and assembles of mankind, it is our
duties, as Ministers, neither to omit, nor to add, nor pervert, but
faithfully, and diligently to signify whatsoever in Scripture by the singular
counsel of God is comprehended, and proposed to us. Let them be deemed
hypocrites whosoever do either for idleness, gain, favor, or transitory
preferme^t, either not touch this vice at all, or ouerpasse Usury is not to be
dispensed withal. Luther super cap. 13. Geneseos.
it slightly. When dispensation should be given, and when not, Luther does
notably show in these words: Know this notwithstanding* that these things are
spoken of our laws, and of this corporal life, not of the Law of God, of his
promises, or Sacraments: for there the words must take place according to
this sentence: He which loves either father or mother more tha^ me, is not
fit for me. But in those things which we are commanded to do, there is a
charity reserved to moderate the Laws, and all our actions, which ^especially
is to be respected. So that with our own laws we may dispense, but not with
the laws and ordinances of God. For God will have his decrees to be kept
inviolable. And therefore does he so often by grievous threats of intolerable
torments, and by notable examples of the pains of wicked men, terrefic from
the same.

The 5. Chapter. A confirmation of the true estimation, that Usurie is
unlawful, condemned, and damnable.
1. From the definition of Usury.
EVery gain, which, contrary to the The mayor.
express commandment of God, in respect of lending is exacted above that
which is lent, is unlawful, and to be avoided. Usurie is such a gain. The
minor.
Therefore is Usury unlawful, and The conclusion.
to be avoided.

The mayor, or the former part of this reason is proved by those testimonies
of Scriptures above mentioned.

The minor is manifest by those places taken out of Exodus 22. Leuit. 25. Luke.
6. So that the conclusion is strong and good. For if all unlawful gain be
forbidden; and Usury be an unlawful gain, it must follow that Usury is
forbidden.

2. From the kinds of Usury.
No kind of Usury by the word of God is allowed, or The antecedent.
granted, especially to the people of the new Testament, according to that of
Christ: Luke. 6. Lend, looking for nothing thereby.

Therefore neither the Usury of ten or five in the hundred, The consequent
is, etc.

The consequent is good. For if all Usury be forbidden: then the gain of five
in the hundred, or of one penny, yea of one Barley corn gotten by Usury, is
unlawful.

3. From the signification of the names given to Usury.
Names are significations of things. The mayor.


These words Neschech, Tarbis, and Techochin, do signify The minor.
a thing hurtful and forbidden. For Neschech signifies biting or gnawing. By
Tarbis is meant an ill increase, because Usurers make that to fructisie which
is fruitles, which by the witness of Ethnikes is contrary to nature. Techochin
notes that Usurers deal not simply like honest men, but with craft and
subtlety.

Therefore the thing signified by these names, which is The conclusion.
Usury, is hurtful and wicked.

The conclusion is good. For those arguments are most especial, which are
taken from the true sense and signification of words.

4. From coniugates.
Usurers are excluded out of the Tabernacle of the The antecedent.
Lord. Psalm. 15.

Therefore is Usury a thing wicked and detestable in The consequent
the sight of God.

The conclusion is good. For the forbidding, condemning, or punishing of a
thing by GOD in any person, shows that the thing it self is wicked and
unlawful.

5. From a division.
To forbid that which by the Divine, Humane, Civil, The Mayor.
and Canon Law, by many ancient and new ordinances of godly Princes is
condemned, is necessary, godly, and commendable.

Usury by all these is forbidden, and condemned. The minor.
Therefore the forbidding, and condemning of Usury is The conclusion. Though
the author does not sufficiently confirm every part of the minor, yet
whosoever will take the pains to oueruewe in M. Docto: wilsons discourse upon
this matter, the Orations of Ockerfoe, and the Ciuilian, shall easelie see that
it is true. The mayor. The minor.
necessary, godly and commendable. The proof of the minor may be found in
Deuteronomy. Cap. 22. 23. Leuit. 25. Ezech. 18. Psalm. 15. etc.

6. From the effects.
Impossible is it that the effect should wholly be worser than the cause.

The effect of Usury in respect of the giver are poverty, hunger, grief,
wretchedness, and beggerie, in respect of the receiver be goods gotten by
subtlety, or to speak more plainly, heaped together by theeuerie, the
overthrow of Commonweals, the vengeance of God, cursings, an evil
conscience, subjection to Satan, eternal damnation, and after the death of
the scraper of them, a prodigal or tragical wasting of these ill gotten
riches.

Therefore is Usury detestable. The conclusion.


The Minor is easily confirmed, both by authority of scripture: and by daiely
experience.

7. From absurdities.
That doctrine which has many absurdities and inconveniences, The Mayor.
cannot be true, certain, and sufferable.

That doctrine which allows Usury, has many absurdities The minor.
and inconveniences.

Therefore it m^^^e needs be a false doctrine, and is The conclusion.
intolerable in the Church.

The Minor is evident. For it is clean contrary to the manifest Scripture,
both of the old and new Testamente. It abolisheth the commandment of
Christ. Luke. 6. Lend, looking for nothing thereby; it quenches faith and
all neighborhood; it overthrows the law of Nature, Which you would an
other man should not do unto you, do not offer unto any; it breaks good
ordinances in commonweals, agreeable both too the law of Nature, and to the
word of God; it dissolueth human soueraintie by unequal dealyng, and
finally it banisheth an especial part of the ministry or Gospel of
Christ, the preaching of repentance.

8. From a necessity.
We are bound to obey the commandments of The mayor.
God.

But God does command us freely, without any hope The minor.
of lucre for the loan, to lend our money, or other things to our
neighbors.

Therefore his commandment is to be obeyed. The conclusion.


The conclusion is strong. For Christians are straightly bound to obey God,
according to that, Roma. 6. We are detters. etc.

9. From an impossibility.
It is impossible that a man at one and the same time, The mayor.
should have faith, and an evil conscience. 1. Timothe. 1. Roma. 14.

All Usurers have an evil conscience. The minor.


Therefore they want faith, and by a consequent it is The conclusion.
impossible that they should be saved; as long as wittyngly and willyngly they
persevere in that sin without repentyng.

The Minor is manifest, for wittyngly and wilfully they do violate the
express commandments of God: Ezech. 18.

10. From the lesser to the greater.
If theft deserve death The antecedent. The consequent


Much more does Usurie. The consequent is good. For Usurers without need,
continually, without ceassing do rape and scrape riches together. Thieves do
the same only in time of necessity, and many times driven thereunto by the
cruelty, and unmercifulness of them in wealth, which have no pity on their
misery. And therefore do Usurers deserve a greater punishment. Hence it is
that among the Romans Usury had a double punishment more than Theft.

11. From a contrary.
To help and to hurt are two things clean contrary The antecedent. The
consequent
as may be. Therefore at one and the same time they cannot be in one and the
same person. Therefore that gloriyng of Usurers, that in lendyng to their
neighbors in necessity they do them good, is a most impudente and
shameful untruth. For it is most certain that Usury does draw out one
part of humane society. For Usurers take more than they gave, therefore is
not Usury too be accounted courtesy, or friendship.

12. From things opposite.
Only two Kingdoms there be, of God and of the The mayor.
Devil, a third cannot be showen.

But in the kingdom of God no mortal, or any sin The minor.
has dominion.

Wherefore, since it has been proved that Usury is a The conclusion.
deadly sin: it follows that all Usurers are so long in subjection to
Satan, until by grace they repent, and be converted unto God.

13. From the nature of relatiues.
In lending there is no ware. The antecedent. The consequent


Therefore no price should be paid. For he which asks a price and gives
no ware, is a damned Usurer.

14. From a contradiction.
God does forbid Usury. The antecedent


Therefore does God neither allow, or permit Usurie. The consequent
The consequente is good. For it is impossible that two contradictories in
which rests no ambiguitie, should together at one time be either true or
false. Wherefore, since God has forbidden Christians too use the same,
certainly he does no way permit, much less allow it.

15. From an inuersion.
Usury is too be permitted least humane society be dissolved, and men
perish for want of releef.

Nay, therefore it should not be permitted. Because by inequality it
overthrows all humane society. For while one part is made rich, the other
comes to beggary, whereby both the poor through grief and honger do pine
away, and God is provoked with grievous plagues to afflict the whole state for
this unmerciful Usury.

16. From an example.
Nehemias did well and commendablie in abrogatyng The antecedent.
Usury.

Therefore godly Magistrates, which by wholesome The consequent
laws forbid, and by severe punishemente abolishe Usury, do well and
commendablie.

The consequent is good. For the reason is like. For both agree with the
commandment of God: too which every man in his place must be obedient.

17. From the authority of holy Scripture.
Neither the Prophets, nor Christ, nor the Apostles The anteceden^.
at any time did allow or permit Usury, but rather forbid that any thing
should be taken of Christians, and of their brethren, more than was lent.

Therefore in a foolish, and wicked boldness do they The consequent
violate the Scriptures, and greeuouslie offend, whosoever do either approve
or permit Usury, or for loan take any more than they lent.

The antecedente is confirmed by all the testimonies of Scripture above
mentioned.

These arguments I would have the great moneymongers, and patrones of Usury,
by testimony of Scripture, to dissolve. But if they cannot, let them
understand that to the truth of God they are poisoned enemies, and of an
hellishe opinion Deuilishe patrones.

The 6. Chapter. The judgment of the Doctors of the pure Church in all ages
concerning Usury.
THese being taken out of the Bowels of the holy Scripture, we will now
subioyne the judgments of the chiefest Divines both old, and new, in the
purest Churches.

And although faith does The Church when to be harkened unto.
not depend of any humane authority, but of the testimony and word of God:
yet this rule is to be observed, That the Church is so long to be harkened
unto, as it utters that doctrine which is revealed from God. For the Church
is a witness of the The Church may not alter the word of God.
works of the Prophets and Apostles. But as a witness may not alter the
narratio^ which he should utter: so is it not lawful for the Church to alter
the doctrine of those books. For she has authority from God, which adds
notable miracles to confirm the author. Therefore the Church has her honor,
neither is the confession of the true Church to be contemned, but this precept
must be kept: Try the spirits whether they are of God or no.

Now therefore let us consider what sayings of the Prophets and Apostles, and
what testimonies the Doctors of the Church in all ages have followed. If their
judgments differ from the wrightinges of the Prophets and Apostles, we are to
cast them away, and cleave to the word of God, as Paul does will: If an
Angel from Heaven teach another Gospel, let him be accursed. But since we
know that their opinions answer to the doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles, and to be the ancient and true teaching of the Church, the truth is
to be obeyed: and the confession of the wise does confirm the Godly minds.
So does Christ say to his Apostles in the last of Luke: Ye shall be witnesses
of these things. He will not have them to bring out any new doctrine, but to
bear witness to the doctrine of God.

I therefore faithfully recite the judgments of ancient and late wrighters,
that they agreeing together of the minds of so many notable men, and all
aunsweryng to Scripture, may confirm the minds of well disposed persons. But
as was Augustines of the wrightinges The judgment of the author concerning the
works of man.
of Cyprian, such is mine opinion, I plainly confess, of all wrightinges and
commentaries of all Divines, be they ancient or new. The words of Augustine
be Augustinus lib. 2. cap. 31.
these: We offer no injury to Cyprian, when sometime we distinguish certain
of his wrightynges from the Canonical authority of the holy Scriptures. For
with good reason is that profitable rule ordained, whereunto certain books of
the Prophets and Apostles do pertain, of which in deed we dare not judge,
and according to which we may lawfully give our sentence of any works,
either of the faithful, or Infidels. And in the 32. cha. of the same book: I
way not the authority of his Epistle, because I accounte the letters of
Cyprian as not Canonical, but I consider of them by the Canonical, and in
them whatsoever is agreeable to the authority of holy Scripture, with his
praise I receive it, but that which is not agreeable, by his leave I refuse it.

To the same purpose says Hierome: Whatsoever is Hierom. in cap. 23. Math.
spoken without authority of Scripture, may as easily be despised, as it
is alleged. And Cyprian himself says: Cyprian. Epist. 3 lib. 2.
If Christ alone is to be harkened unto, we should not attend what any
before us has thought good to be done: but what Christ which is before all
did first; for we may not follow the custom of man, but the truth of God.

Augustine of Usury says in this manner: If thou August. in Psalm. 3^.
have played the Usurer with a man, that is, haste lent him Money looking to
receive back again more than thou gave, not money only, but more than thou
gave, whether it be Corn, or Wine, or Oil, or any thing else, if thou
look to receive more back than thou deliueredst, thou art an Usurer, and in
that to be blamed.

Hierome wrighteth thus concerning Usury: Some are Hieron. sup. 18. Ezech.
Comment. lib. 6.
of opinion that Usury is only in money, which thing the holy Scripture
foreseyng does take away excess from every thing, that thou may not
receive back more than thou gave: Usury, or as the word of God does call
it, excess, is taken in feeldes of fruit, of Corn, of Wine, of oil, and of
other such like sort: for example sake, as in Winter we may give ten
bushelles, and in the Harvest receive fiftene, that is, the one half for
gain. He which thinks himself most upright, will take the fourth part
more; and they will reason thus and say: I gave one busshell, which being
sowed has brought ten bushelles, then is it not reason, that I receive half
a bushel more of mine, since by my liberality, he has got nine bushelles and
an half? Go not astraie, says the Apostle, God is not mocked. For let this
merciful Usurer make us answer in few words, whether he gave the same to
him which had, or to him which wanted? If to him which had, as he should not
give, but he gave as to him which wanted: Therefore why does he exact
overplus, as of him which had before? Some, for money put for the to Usury, use
to take rewards of sundry kinds: and they wot not that Usury is called
likewise superabundaunce, whatsoever it be if it be more that is received
than was given.

Ambrose says: Many to avoid the commandments Ambrose.
of God, when they have given their money to occupiers, exact Usury not in
money, but of their wares, as though theireape the profit of Usury, therefore
let them hear what the Law does say: Neither, says it, shalt thou take
the Usury of meat, nor of any thing else. Therefore meat is Usury, and a
garment is Usury; and whatsoever is more than that which is lent is Usury,
and whatsoever you call the same, it is Usurie.

Chrysostom does most fitly compare the pleasure Chrysostom cap. 5. Math.
taken of Money received by Usury, to the biting of an Aspe. For even as he
which is stong by the bit of an Aspe, as it were in pleasure falls into
sleep, and by the sweetness of that poisoned sleep passes out of this world,
because in sleep the poison spreads over all the parts of the body: so he
which takes Money of an Usurer, at the first as it were greatly pleasured,
does rejoice, but Usury running over all his substance, at the length
brings it into det.

Basyle also, and Bernarde in the vehemency of spirit Basile. Bernarde.
do inuey against this notable vice, but because our desire is to be short,
we will come to the Doctors of our time.

D. Philip. Melancth. in Epit. Philoso. mor. aedit. An. 1542.
Usury says Melancthon is a gain above that which was lent, exacted only
in respect of lending. This gain is Usury and unlawful, whereof we are
filled for our courtesy in lending.

In that place he proves by three reasons, that to exercise Usury is against
nature.

The first reason.
It is unlawful to exact Money when there is no exchange of anything, that
is, when for nothing one will exact money.

An Usurer keeping his stock does exact Usury for nothing, because his stock
is whole, but only in respect of lending.

Therefore to exact Usury is unlawful.

The second reason.
A thing by nature barren is not too be used as if it were fruitful.

But Money is by nature barren.

Therefore nothing is to be exacted for the same as a price, the stock
remainyng salfe.

The third reason.
The price should not be the ware.

Therefore Money should not be ware.

The Antecedents proof. Because at what time the price is made ware, there
does always somethyng above the price come to the Usurer, whereby for nothing
somewhat is gotten, and an inequality is done. So do a few Usurers bring the
wealth of many Cities to them selves: For the exchau^ginges cannot be
continual, where no equality is observed. Now since to exercise Usurie is
contrary to Nature, it is forbidden both by aunciente Laws, and godly
preachynges.

Therefore let us remember this rule: That to exercise Usury is unlawful: and
learn this lesson, That unreasonable gains, especially such as under any
wicked pretense do soake and consume other men's goods, is highly
unpleasant in the eyes of God.

And a little after.
The aunciente laws of Rome, as Cato says, did punish an Usurer with four
fold, but a Thief only with a double restitution. Afterward the desire of
evil overcame the Laws, and Usurers so crept abroad, that men in debte were
compelled to give their bodies into slavery. Thence at Rome sprange diverse
insurrections; and the Magistrate at Athens by Law did forbid, that for debt
or Usury any should come into bondage.

Melancthon in his Catechism, published. Anno. 1543.
Is it lawful to take Usury? It is not lawful. Because Christ says:
Lend, looking for nothing thereby. Usury then is practiced when in lendyng
we are enriched, and receive for the loan somewhat besides that we lent.
And therefore is Usury unlawful, because that is taken, which is no debte.
For he which repaieth that which he borrowed, owes nothing besides, and yet
more is exacted for nothing. So that equality is not kept, and this is the
cause wherefore Usury brings flourishing commonweales to decay, because Usurers
receive much profit, for which they gave nothing. And therefore such a
dealyng together cannot be continual, because there is no indifferent
recompense of each side.

Melancthon in Philoso. morali aedita. Anno. 1557.
Usury is a gain above the principal, exacted only for the duty of
lendyng. For when a detter has given a cause of loss, if he make a recompense
for the hinderance which his Creditor is come into by his means, such a
gain is not Usury, or unlawful. But that gain is Usurie and unlawful,
which is gotten only for the loan of lendyng, when no danger or hinderaunce
is come by the lendyng.

This definition would be known, and rightly understood, that so the laws
and reasons forbiddyng Usurie, may the more easily be perceived. For thus it
is expressly said: Thou shalt not put thy Money to Usury to thy brother.
Again: Thou shall lend to thy brother without Deuteronomy. 23.
Usurie. Again in the Psalm: He which has not given his money to Usury.
And Christ says, Lend, looking Psalm. 15.
for nothing thereby. For when he says lend, he commands Luke 6. Usury
forbidden by the law of God.
not to give, but will have the principal to be rendered. For otherwise it
were no lendyng. And the Gospel does not take away lawful contractes, but
the law is there repeated, which forbids to ask any thing above that
which is lent, in consideration of the lendyng.

These testimonies do show, that by the law of God the demanding of Usury is
forbidden. Now confirmed by such authority, let us consider natural reason.
Generally Usury unlawful even by natural reason.
in all necessary contractes God will have equality to be observed, lest one
part being drunk up and consumed, the other become fat. And for this cause
has God appointed an equality, to warn us, that in him likewise justice or
equality is. Now in Usurie equality is not observed, because that one party
does receive a great deal more than he gave, as the giver does mutually
receive the principal, and for nothing Usury besides, and that oftentimes
great Usury. Therefore equalite is not kept, but one part is drunk out, as
the proof shows, daily men are brought to beggerie, and sometime whole
Countries undone by such extreme exactions. For it falls out many times,
that when Usury is vnreasonablie exacted, one part is miserably consumed.

Melancthon in annot. in Math. aeditis. Anno. 1558.
But of lendinge we spoke last of all. Know you that this also is the
ordinance of God, which he will have to be faithfully observed both of the
Creditor, and of the Detter, that neither the Lender desire unlawful gains
inrespecte of his lending, nor the borrower retain any thing of that which is
due. And so therefore has God ordained that both creditor and borrower should
be contained within the bonds that he has prescribed.

The creditor which lends should not enriche himself by the couenantes of
Usury, neither demand more than he does lend, nor enrich him self by an
other man's goods. For the law of God says plainly: Fear God, Leuit. 25.
that thy brother may live with thee: thou shall not take usury of thy brother,
neither more than thou gave. And in the Psalm it is said: Who shall dwell
in thy Tabernacle, Psalm. 15.
etc. He which has not given his Money upon usury. Also in Ezechiel there
is a most bitter curse; He Ezech. 18.
which sins shall die the death, which is referred to the Usurer impudently
exacting more than he lent. Besides, Christ says, Lend, looking for nothing
thereby. Which Luke. 6.
saying should not so peruerslie or foolishly be understood, that one might
reason thereby, that the principal, or that which in lent should not be
repaied. For then it were no lending but a giving, if the Principal might not
be demanded. Therefore this is the proper sense, and true interpretation of
those words of Christ: So lend that you receive as much Money back again,
and for the lending hope for no gain above the principal.

Again, let him that borrows remember, and keep this Commandment, Thou
shall not steal. For if he refuse, Exodus 2^*
or do not study to repaie as much as he owes, he is a thief. And
therefore must he faithfully restore which he borrowed, or repaie which he
took. For God has decreed the same, and therefore does require duty on both
sides, both of lending liberally without usury, and of repaiyng faithfully
without detaining any thing back. For the contract of lending differs from
a gift, and is to Lending what.
help a neighbor by the forbearing of money, Corn, etc but with this
condition, that the debtor at a day appointed restore as much as he received.
Which if he shall faithfully perform, without hindering of his creditor by
breaking of day, it were against reason that the creditor shoud ask or exact
more than he lent, the other receiving nothing which should pay the usury.

And that finally in very deed, and properly is called Usury what.
Usurie, when a man of his courteous dettour, faithfully paiyng his det at the
appointed time, does shamefullie notwithstanding require somewhat besides his
due, and asks gain, that for his lending he may receive more than he gave.

Brentius in explicat. Exodus cap. 22. page 101. fac. 3. 4.
As strangers, widows, and orphans, says Brentius, so do poor folk lie
every where; and before men there is nothing more contemptible than the poor.
Therefore does God take these also into his own tuition, and makes a most
gentle law for them, and commands that the poor be not urged and
oppressed with Usurie. For the poor also be contained under the name of a
neighbor, and the more they are so, the more in misery theiremaine. And
therefore as we cherishe our selves, so should we make of them. In Deute. a
threatnyng also is added: Deuteronomy. 15.
Least he cry against thee to the Lord, and it turn to thy sin. So
Brentius.

The same Brentius in cap. 25. Leuit. page 125.

Also he says: There is also a contracte in lendyng, of which Moses does
ordain this law: Thy Money shalt thou not give to thy brother upon Usury,
neither thy meat too receive more back again. Usury is defined too be a
gain which comes for the lendyng, or when for the lendyng somethyng is
paid, besides the principal. To exact this gain in lendyng is against
equity: and because money was made for exchange, not that money should
increase money, as is done in Usury, therefore Usury a kind of theft.
is it well supposed to be contrary to Nature, and to be numbered in the
kinds of Theft and Rapine. And Usurers are the eues, no honest men.
therefore a godly and honest man, will talk as well of Usurie, as of Theft
or robberies. Lord, says the Psalm, Who shall dwell in thy tabernacle, or
who shall rest in thine holy hill? He which swears to his neighbor, and
does not deceive him; which gives not his money upon Usury. And here must
be noted, that Usury only is practiced in lendyng, and not in lawful
bargainyng. For lendyng is one thing, and buiyng is an other. In lendyng the
Law of Nature does require, that more than the principal nothing should be
received: and if it fortune that thy neighbor be oppressed with such
poverty and wretchedness, that he lacks not only wherewith to repaie thee,
but also famisheth for want of relief, there the charity of thy neighbor,
whereunto we are called by the law of Nature, does require, that not only
thou remit and forgive him his debt, but also that thou succor, and releive
him bountifully by the abundance of thy other goods, according to that
interpretation of Christ, Lend, looking for nothing thereby. But in buiyng
that is Luke. 6.
counted lawful, which the Civil laws according to reason and equity do
allow, which a godly man may use with a good conscience.

Hitherto Brentius in the foresaied place.

The same Brentius in explicat. Psalm. 15. aedita. Anno. 1565.
There is another office of a civil man, which is truly a member of the
Church: to deal with his neighbor plainly, and to aid him with money
without Usury. The Scripture does often, and greatly deteste Usury: yea, and
Ethnicke writers affirm that it is contrary to nature. For as one grain in the
ground does bring forth now thirty fold, now sixty fold, now an hundred
fold increase: so does one penny increase another. So Brentius.

Also the same Brentius in explicat. Cap. 6. Lucae.
Neither is it marvel though Usury of Money be forbidden by written Laws,
since it is contrary to the nature of Money. For one penie cannot by nature
bring out another, as can a grain of corn cast into the ground. But in Usury
one penie gets another, and therefore is Usury against nature. Then,
because Usury agrees neither with nature, nor the written law, it is said in
the Psalm. He which has not given his money to Usury, shall dwell in thy
Tabernacle. And Ezechiel, He which takes not Usury, nor receives overplus,
shall not dye, but live. Therefore he that receives shall neither dwell in the
tabernacle of God, nor live, but shall dye. For this punishment of Usurers
were tolerable, that such riches as by wicked Usury, and unlawful gain
they heap together, The grievous punishments appointed for Usurers.
might be accursed, and never do good. But this punishment is intolerable,
that by their cruelty they must leese the joys of heaven, and bring them
selves to everlasting torments.

Vrbanus Rhegius in suis locis communibus. Anno 1545. aeditis.
Luke. 10. Every man which is in misery, is our neighbor. Therefore, says
Vrbanus Rhegius, is it not lawefull to lend to any man upon Usury. Luke. 6.
Lend, looking for nothing thereby; give to all men in need. There is a place
in Ezech. chap. 18: A man that lends not upon Usurie, and takes not
overplus, he is upright, and shall live. Therefore if he give upon Usury, he
is not just. Therefore to exercise Usury is a sin.

D. Hieronymus Welleus in Comment. supra Psalm. 15. aedito anno. 1558.
Usury, says Wellerus, is a gain, which is gotten by the thing lent, or
when besides our own we receive some what for the lendyng.

The efficient cause of Usury is the covetousness, cruelty, and wickedness
of man. For natural reason does abhor Usury, because it is contrary to
Nature. The final cause of Usury is that Citizens or honest men may came to
extreme poverty and wretchedness; yea, that many may perish by the
enritchyng of a few.

A Question.
Is it lawful for a Christian to exercise usury?

The Answer.
Christ, Luke. 6. does plainly and expressly say, Lend, looking for nothing
thereby, therefore it is unlawful.

Hitherto also do the like sentences both of the old and new Testament
belong, which forbid and condemn Usurie. Yea and the Civil Law, and law of
nature do forbid the same.

Therefore, in as much as not only by the laws politic, but also by the
express commandment of God Usury is forbidden, it follows that a
Christian may not use the same.

An Objection.
The politic Laws are not abrogated by the doctrine of the Gospel.

The laws politic allow Usury.

Therefore Usury is not condemned by the doctrine of the Gospel.

The Answer.
The doctrine of the Gospel does allow no politic law or ordinances
contrary to the law of God.

Usury is contrary to the Law of God:

Therefore does the doctrine of the gospel allow no Usury.

And a little after says the same Wellerus.
Teachers and Pastors of Congregations are to be admonished, that vehemently
in their Sermons they inueigh against Usurers, and that they lay before them
the greiuous threats of God, and show how horribly a monster an Usurer is,
which is worse than any thief, robber, or murderer. And hitherto let them
aleage that fiction of three-hedded and devouring Cerberus, in whom Cerberus.
the Poets did paint the Image of an Usurer. For as the Jaws of Cerberus were
insatiable: so the greedy desire of an Usurer is no way satisfied. Also that
of Cacus and Cacus. Hercules.
Hercules. For Cacus is the Image of an Usurer drawing the riches of all the
Citizens to him self. The Oxen turned backward and so drawn into the cave,
signify Citizens oppressed, and brought into misery by the cruelty of
Usurers. Hercules is a pattern of a magistrate, or good prince, which does
deliver his miserable Citizens from the tyranny of Cacus the Usurer, and
punishes him. So Wellerus.

Hemingius in suo Enchiridio Theologico.
Nicolas Hemingius an excellent divine of Hasfnis in Denmark, says notably
of Usury in this wise: It follows that Usury may not be excused. For
usury is a gain of any thing above that which was lent, exacted in
consideration of the loan: hence does Ambrose say: That meat is usury,
apparel is usury, and whatsoever is more than that which was lent, is usury,
howsoever you call the same, it is usury. Neither is any distinction of usury
to be made contrary to the Law of Nature, and word of God. For there be some
which divide usury after this manner, and say that there is an usury
oppressing the Neighbor, and another usury pleasuring, not hurting, and
therefore lawful. And this division they think is confirmed by the Hebrew
word, whereby usury is called Nesec, which comes of biting. But for that
this is a plain Grammatical distinction, I answer first, that usury is not
only called Nesec of the Hebrews from biting, but also Marbith and Tarbith
from profit, or gaining. Leuit. 25. Thou shall not give thy Meat Marbith,
that is, upon usury. Also: take not of him Nesec and Tarbith that is, usury
and prosite. For by the latter word the former is expounded, to wit, any
profit or increase, which excedeth the principal. Secondly I say, that the
forbiddings of Usury are general. And therefore as this distinction is but
weak, so it cannot excuse or clear the conscience of an usurer. Therefore
much better did Aristotle think, who said: That usury is against nature.
Again, when more is received than was delivered, there is not Arithmeticall
proportion observed, which continually should be kept in lendings. Ezechiel in
his 18. chapter says plainly, that he is a just man, and shall live that
gives not upon usury, and does not take overplus. So by a contrary it
follows: that he is an evil man which does exercise usury.

But subtle men seek many shifts, and boaste that in lendyng upon Usury,
they benefit their neighbors, and so most impudently under the name of
virtue, they cloak their Usury, and account the same as a charitable deed.
They say, that a poor man is many times become rich by the money which he
borrows upon Usury. But God is not deceived by Sophistry, neither does he
allow wicked cloakes. And therefore if thou contemneste the law of God, and
of Charity, thou have altogether made Shipwreck of thy faith. Wherefore
against all the arguments of such as countenance this wicked dealings of
Usurers, set this rule: Of Usury we may not judge according to the profit
or hurt of him which paieth Usury, but according to the word of God; to
the Law of Nature; and to the affection of the takers. The word of God
should be the rule of our life, the same word calls the mind of an Usurer
a Thief, and shows that it is void of charity toward his neighbors.
Therefore the excuse of man takes no place here: for of sins we must judge
according to the word of God. For according to man's reason, who, I beseech
you, would have judged the b^tyng of an Apple to have been such a terrible
sin, except such a plague in mankind had ensued? And therefore let us
learn, that whatsoever the Lord forbids, is sin, howsoever the same may
seem excusable in the judgment of men. But let us keep steadfastly in mind
the saying of David. Psalm. 14. Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, and
who shall rest in thy holy hille? Among other things he answers: He
which has not given his money to Usury. Whereby whosoever gives his money
upon Usury, is evidently excluded from the Tabernacle of the Lord.

The first proposition of Iustus Jonas.
Usury, says Iustus Jonas, may be taken either largely, or strictly.

2.
Generally taken, it signifies profit, or as it were a certain price, and is
called a recompensyng Usury.

3.
Strictly understood, it is taken for that gain which is got by money lent,
and is called a gainyng Usury.

4.
Now because the holy Scripture does will us to lend, and to help our
neighbor freely.

5.
And money by Nature is barren.

6.
And the necessity of man, for the better exchange of things, brought in the
same.

7.
Usury strictly taken is worthily condemned by the law of God, of Nature,
yea, and by the Civil law.

8.
Yea, in that case, where the money received is put to honest use, paiyng
yearly or monthly somewhat.

9.
And Usury may be asked again, not only of the Usurer him self, but also
of his heir, although it nothing pertain unto him.

Hitherto may be reduced those positions against Usury, handeled in the
public disputation at Witteberge, when master Mordesius proceeded Doctor.

Hitherto also would be alleged that strong condemnyng of Usury by Luther,
and the wrightynges of the preachers of Mansfelde, with other testimonies of
late wrighters, but to recite them all at this time, I mean not. He which
thinks these not sufficient, will never be satisfied.

Again, here might be alleged the counsels of Albert of Blankenberge, of
Hierome Schurffius in the second Centurie, and the excellent discourse of
Conradus Paulus of Brunswike, wherein he plainly expounds what usury is,
and with strong arguments condemns the same: whereunto would be annexed the
testimonies of law, and of countries, which witness that by the light of reason
Usury is horrible, because it is against nature, and found out for the
destruction of many.

This can I say with a good conscience in this place, that traueling by that
notable Civil Lawiers house Doctor Luder, toward the Earl of Mansfielde being
sent for, he showed me in very many books of Lawiers, and of Papists
excellent, and learned places written against usury, of which a great part I
read and so marked, that I could not sufficiently marvel at the wickedness
The Papists will condemn our patrones of usury in the day of judgment.
of many Civil Lawiers, which do grant and allow usury, and persuaded my
self that the very Papists will at the day of judgment condemn our patrons
of Usury. Let Protestants in this light of the Gospel, of what calling
soever they are, be ashamed of their wickedness and security: we may well
pronoune with S. Paul, that their condemnation is just.

The 7. Chapter. of Restitution.
Since goods gotten by usury be no better than the goods gotten by theft, a
question rises, Whether they are to be restored or no?

Of this question that Rule of Paul is to be observed Ephesians. 4. He which has
stolen, let him steal no more. And he is a thief which wittingly and
willingly does A thief who.
deprive, or retain another man's goods by violence. This being so and
confirmed, it follows that a restitution should necessarily be made of
those goods which are gotten and attained by Usury, if the Usurer mind
unfeignedly to repent. For every man which Who does unfeignedly repent.
retains a purpose either to proceed, or to persevere in wickedness against
his conscience, he does not truly repent. Now will we allege proof.

Augustanae confessionis apologia.
Sometime wrighters, as it is in the Augustane confession, do bring the word
of satisfaction from the custom or thing seen, to signify a true
mortificatio^. So says Augustine: True satisfaction is to cut of the causes of
sin, True satisfaction what.
that is, to mortify the flesh: also to punish the flesh, not thereby to
buie out the pains of hell: but that the flesh draw not to offend. So does
Gregory speak of Restitution: That the repentance is fained, if we do not
satisfy them, whose goods we possess. For he does not repent that he did
steal, or theeue, which does as yet pla^e the thief. For so long is he a
thief or stealer, while he is an unjust possessor of an others goods. That
civil satisfaction is necessary, because it is written, he that has stolen
let him steal no more.

Touching restitution I recited the opinion of Luther in his confession written
in the German tongue, and therefore at this time I ouerpasse the same,
referryng the reader either to my confession, or to Luthers works.

Philip. Melancton in Philoso. morali aedita Anno. 1557.
Since it is unlawful, says Melancthon, to take usury, it is necessary that
restitution should be made, when it may be done: for as long as one wittingly
and willingly does retain another goods, so long does he remain a thief,
or stealer. And Paul says, he which has stolen, let him steal no more.
Hence is that rule taken, which rightly understood, is true, concerning making
restitution to them which have been damnified:

A sin is not remitted, except the thing stolen be restored.

Melancthon in suo Catechismo.
And again says Melancthon; is it a true rule; sin is not remitted, except
the thing stolen be restored? I answer. This rule is generally true in all
such as of set purpose wilfully detain another goods, and yet have
wherewith to repaie, or may restore, as Paul does say, he which has stolen,
hereafter let him steal no more. But he which has stolen, is so long a
thief, as he willingly and wittingly does detain that which is another man's.
Therefore when Paul does forbid hereafter not to steal, he will that
restitution be made, that so he which had the goods of another, cease to
be a thief. This general rule is to be observed, but the impossibility has
an excuse.

Contrariwise.
Satisfaction is not necessary. The Mayor.

Restitution is satisfaction: The Minor.

Therefore restitution is not necessary. The conclusion

I am sure, the Minor is false: because restitution properly and in deed is a
part of contrition, and is not that canonical satisfaction, which they
define to be works not commanded. An example: as not to forgive him which
keeps another wife, belongs to contrition: so to restore another goods
is a part of contrition, because contrition is a grief and sorrow for sin
with a purpose afterward not to commit any thing against conscience, and the
commandment of God.

That excellent and learned man, of famous memory, Erhardus Schenpfius.
my Master Erhardus Schenpfius, sometime in a Sermon of his did prove that
Usurers were worser than IVDAS the traitor. For Judas did acknowledge his fault
Usurers worser then Judas the Traitor.
and restored the Money: but Usurers cannot be persuaded that usury is a
deadly sin, and, to show themselves that they give credit to the testimonies
of holy Scripture, no words can move them to make restitution: and yet (as he
did plainly affirm) restitution is a part of repentance. And therefore in
that much worser than Judas the traitor. Of these his words I have many
witnesses and those of the better sort.

Now let these detestable. Usurers, and their favorers of what estate,
dignity, or condition soever they be, let them I say cry out with wicked king
Achab, that we the ministers of God in condemning Usury, and deniyng to
Usurers absolution for their sins, the Sacraments of the Lords supper, and
other offices of a Christian man, do trouble Israel: but we with Elias the
Prophet will answer: We are not the troublers of Israel, but Usurers and
their Patrons are they, for that they forsake the Commandments of God,
violate the law of Nature and of Countries, depart from the faith of the
whole Church, and in a wicked boldness seek after another God which is Mammon.

The 8. Chapter. Of Interest.
INterest is called a gain cessing, Interest what.
and a damage rising. Now what the judgments of diverse is about Interest, out
of the wrightynges of Luther and Melancthon it may easelie be seen.

Luthers opi^^on of Interest I would have to be read either in his own Tomes,
or in my Confession in the Germane tongue, to bring it in here I have not
thought good at this time.

Melancthon in Philoso. morali aedita Anno. 1557.
May any thing above that which is lent be demanded, says Melancthon, in
consideration of the hinderance had by the le^dyng of the same? I answer:
that is called interest which is due to a man, either because he is endamaged*
or because some gain is indeed lost by the lendyng. Therefore is interest
distinguished: for it rises either from damage coming* or from gain risyng.
For example: if one is bound to pay me twenty crounes at the Calendes of
May, and does not: if I through his disapointing me run into any danger,
as if I should have paid the same to another at that very time, here is it
meet that equality be observed, in that he gained by mine: but equality is
not observed, if he by my lending be made ritche, and I by his breaking day
be made poor: that is called Interest for the damage arising.

Also this difference is necessarily to be noted: One damage happens before
the day appointed for payment; another chances when the debtor breaks day.
Therefore let this be the first answer: The true and very Interest indeed,
which comes to the lender, is, when damage arises through not keeping day.
As if one should pay me twenty Crowns at the Calendes of May, and by reason
he does not so, I am damnified. Here the reason of equality does require that
recompense be made.

In such a case we pronounce that besides the principal as much is due, as the
creditor has lost through the damage arising, although no covenant have
passed about the Interest, that is agreeable to the law written, and to
natural equity. For he which gives a cause of loss, ought to make a
recompense. And therefore is it equity, that such Interest be paid. By this
case it may be seen what is true and good Interest, which the lender may take,
because it is due though no couenauntes be made. For it is manifest that
equality is not there observed, where gain is gotten by lending.

Concerning gain cessing after delaie, that is, when the debtor does not pay
at his time appointed, the same sentence is given* that Interest is due, as we
said it was by damage arising. But yet in this second case the same is
granted only to occupiers: which is good reason, for to hinder the trade of
occuping is to give a great cause of hinderance. This does Melancthon say.

And let there be such Interest. For, as Luther says: To recompense a damage
is not to give or take more than the principal: but it is an hurt which
comes to the lender contrary to his will, whereby he is compelled to ask a
recompense.

Here do I recite and condemn all vain exactions of Usurers, with what title
soever they be cloaked, or colored, over and besides the above mentioned case.

The. 9. Chapter. A refutation of certain objections.
NOw because in this matter of Usury, many things are objected of the
ungodly Usurers, ignoraunte in the Scripture, before I make an end hereof I
will by euidente and strong reasons confute certain objections. Not that I
more way the refutation of these foolish Usurers, than the defense of the
cause I have taken in hand: but that the vanity of the dotyng world being
laid open, and the iuglynges of Usurers full of all impiety and covetousness
detected and reveled, the godly with greater care may abhor this monstrous
vice, and by the plausible and flatering talk of some may take heed to come
from a godly and commendable kind of living to these wicked and horrible
exactions of Usury: and the mouth of others may be stopped, and have nothing
wherewith their impiety may be excused.

The first objection.
Whatsoever policies do permit, is lawful for a Christian. The Mayor.


Policies or Commonweals permit Usury: The Minor.
Therefore Usury is lawful, and allowed to Christians. The conclusion.
The Mayor they prove thus, because the Gospel does not abolishe Civil
government, but rather confirm the same.

The Answer.
Usury is not a thing politic, but diuilish. Therefore we must distinguish
between policies. They which remain in the ordinance of God, of them I
grant: Against the Mayor.
but they which swerve from the ordinance of God, in them I utterly deny the
Mayor. For the inferior has no authority over the superior. Now the
magistrate is inferior to God, because he is the minister of God, To. 13.
Therefore he can ordain, allow, or appointe nothing contrary to God, neither
is any law of his contrary to God or his word, of any authority, as
Symachus the Pope said very well. It is not lawful for the Emperor or for
any godly man to presume any thing against the commandments of God, neither
to do any thing which may Symachus cap. non licet, distinct. 10.
repugne to the rules of the Evangelists, Prophets, or Apostles. And in the
Acts, cap. 5. It is better to obeie God than man.

Now I deny the Minor: Because the allowyng by Against the Minor.
Civil magistrates is not to be understood of Usury, which all laws do
find fault withal, but of the contract of redemption.

If any are not satisfied with this our answer, those I Read that excellent
and godly Oration of the C^uilian in M. Doctor Wilson his discourse upon
Usury, and there shall you find very much to this purpose.
refer to the reading of Sessions of the Empire, where no Usury in bare
lending for bare courtesy of lendyng can be proved: and to the Centuries of the
famous Lawier Hierome Schurffius, in them a notable confirmation of this our
opinion may easily be found.

Therefore have I thought good to mention the Centuries of so excellent a man,
lest Usurers might think us altogether ignorant of the Law, though we have
in this our book alleged but little out of the Laws, which is done upon
singular consideration, not for lack of ability. For to what end should
testimonies of another faculty be brought forth, when our own has both their
and mutche stronger proof?

2. Objection.
Whatsoever by custom a long time has been confirmed, that is to be counted
for a law.

The exaction of Usurie by custom a great space of time has been received
and used:

Therefore it is to be accounted for a law.

The Answer.
This is a fallacy called according to no cause, as a cause. For custom
though it be very old, if it be contrary to Gods word, cannot be the cause
of a lawful action. For as a law not agreeable to the word of God, or law of
nature is to be taken away, and condemned: so wicked custom, contrary to the
law of nature and word of God, may and ought to be counted not for a law, but
for a destruction, overthrow, and infection of honest laws. And therefore
with good cause to be taken away and abolished: for custom cannot overthrow
the eternal and immutable will of God.

Hitherto does that of Augustine belong: In vain, says he, do some, being
overcome by reason, object custom unto us, as though custom were greater than
the truth, or that in spiritual things that should not be followed, which
is better revealed by the holy ghost. This is Decret. cap. frustra, distinct. 8.
also repeated in the decrees.

3. Objection.
Whosoever for the bare courtesy of lending does exact The Mayor.
more than the principal, they are subject to the wrath of God, and eternal
damnation.

The greater part of men for the bare courtesy of lending, The Minor.
exact more than they lent:

Therefore the greater part of men is subject to the The conclusion.
wrath of God, and eternal damnation.

The Answer.
I grant the whole argument. Because the multitude of heretics is no defense
for the error. Which thing the Ethnikes also did understand, as Plato said:
We must judge by the truth, and not by the multitude.

For as in building the Rule is not to be laid to the Against the multitude
wickedlie dis^^^^d.
stone, but the stone to the Rule: so the word of God is not to be brought
to the corrupt opinions of man in excusation of sin, but rather all our
actions are to be directed according to the rule of Gods word, thereby to
retain a good conscience, and to escape punishment. A learned man says: We
must not respect what the multitude or the world does, but rather what is
right, and what the multitude should do.

4. Objection.
Perils are to be avoided. The Mayor.


Lending is joined with danger of leasing the principal: The Minor.


Therefore if I lend not, I shall avoid that peril. The conclusion


The Answer.
I answer to the Mayor: Perils are to be distinguished. Perils of two sorts.
For some be rash, which may and ought to be avoided with a good conscience.
For God will have us to fly, and to fear them. Others are necessary, which
God will Christians are bound to lend to the needy.
have us to come into, and with a good conscience cannot be avoided, as are the
perils of our callinges and religion, etc. And such is this danger by lending:
and therefore neither ought the same, neither can be altogether shunned. For
although Civil ordinances compel no man to lend, yet the commandment of
God, the love of our neighbor, the reward which God has promised for the
same, both ought and can drive every honest man to lend to the needy, and to
succor the oppressed, and that cherefully and freely without hope of gain,
or condition of recompense. But if any be such an atheist, that he waieth not
the commandments of God, so hard hearted, that no sparkle of the law of
nature, or of Christian Charity, or of brotherly affection can appear in him,
or at a word so frantitike by a diuilish madness, that he imagines the
promises of God to be but a vain word, him without many words we commit to
the just judgment of God.

5. Objection.
Ingratitude is to be shunned. The Mayor.


He which borrows gains by the money which is lent The Minor.
him.

Therefore is he bound to give Usury for the declaration The conclusion.
of his grateful mind toward the lender, if he will avoid the odious name of
an ungrateful person.

The Answer.
The minor is not generally, or always true. For certain it is that in all
dealinges commonly, gain is joined with loss. Now if you desire to
participate of the gain, it is necessary that you take an equal part of the
loss: if any thing has been, or is received, upon your self. But for that
you only desire to get, and will sustain no loss if any be received,
neither yet will forgive any of the principal, though the borrower come to
extreme poverty, you may perceive that your words have a poisoned purpose
though they be adorned with a fair show.

A gain, what kind of love is it, not to pleasure thy neighbor frankely
without gains, because thereby he reapeth some commodity, when certainly
thou ought to help thy neighbor not thereby to augment, but to aswage his
misery.

6. Objection.
Those things which God has not forbidden, we may The Mayor.
salfely do without hurt of conscience.

To take Usurie of ritche men God has not forbidden: The Minor.


Therefore of them lawfully without hurt of conscience The conclusion
we may exact Usury for our lending.

The Answer.
I denic the minor: For it is plainly said, Luke 6. Lend, looking for nothing
thereby. If they be rich men, they have no need to borrowe. And yet we ought
to show forth our charity to all if need require. But if ritche men to
maintain their filthy prodigality or rioutousnes, will borrowe, and others
lend them for Usury, each of them offend.

Of which thing Pomerane does speak after this Pomera^us in Comment. suo id
Deuteron.
sort: When Princes for their prodigality would have money lent them, and
require many times mighty sommes. Here is a double sin. The borrower asks
for his filthy pleasure, and the giver lends for unlawful lucre. This
lendyng is not freindship, but naughty dealyng. For differyng from lawful
loan, and greatly swaruyng from honest contractes, because Usury is
contrary to Nature: for it takes away equality, and brings one part too
extreme beggerie. The lender synneth, even as does a Tauerner, which for
unlawful gain, cares not if baudes and whores use his house at
commandment: so he synneth, because against reason he asks Usurie, which
in deed is Theuerie. But poor men they cannot polle because such men lack
substance. And therefore they set upon rich men, of which when some are
eaten out of house and home, they devour the father. So that the word of God
must be judge, whereby all Vsuries are forbidden, and it must be harkened
unto without all excuse, seem it never so reasonable. Therefore let justice be
done, and let the world come to naught.

7. Objection.
Whatsoever is given ought not too be counted Usury. The Mayor.


Money given above the principal is a gift: The Minor.


Therefore not to be accounted for Usury. The conclusion.


The Answer.
I deny the consequent, and the reason is, because it is a fallacy of the
accident. For in the Mayor is signified a simple gift, in the Minor a gift
per accidens, such a gift as is given against the giuers will, driven
thereunto by need, for the keepyng, or continewyng of the Usurers favor,
lest by offering nothing, he have not wherewith to sustain himself against
future mischief. For it is not only against the law of Nature, but also
contrary to the common custom among men, that a poor and miserable man
should reward a rich man, or give vntohym which wants nothing.

8. Objection.
Whatsoever we would, or with great desire wish for, The Mayor.
that, if we obtain it, is not to be counted an injury.

Men willyngly and with all their hearts, promise and The Minor.
pay such a sum more than they took:

Wherefore they are not iniuried. The conclusion.


The Answer.
This argument is a fallacy, taken from a thing true in some respect, as
though it were generally. Therefore I thus answer to the Mayor. He which would
a thing simply, and that which is in his own power, is not iniuried, but a
borrower upon Usury does not simply bind himself to pay Usury for the
loan thereof. For he had rather keep that money to himself, but being in
poverty, he had rather forgo his gooddes, than his life, that is, to speak
like a Logician: He does promise and offer some piece of money for the
lending, not absolutely but in respect, that is, in comparison of two
^uilles, whereof he does choose the lesser, and will, like a waifa^yng man
beset with thieves in a wood, rather give his goods, than leave his life.

9. Objection.
Whosoever does pleasure his neighbor, does a charitable The Mayor.
deed.

Usurers by lendyng their money, do pleasure their The Minor.
neighbors;

Therefore they do a charitable deed. The conclusion.


The Answer.
I deny the Minor. For it is a fallacy of the phrase of speech. For to
receive more than you gave, is not too pleasure. Now Usurers will have more
than they gave, and therefore do rather hurt than profit their neighbor.
For as a waifaryng man acknowledges he is pleasured if Thieves spare his life,
though they take his goods: so does a poor man if he find any courtesy at
the hands of an Usurer. For it is such a piece of courtesy, as the Poets do
recite of Poliphemus, which Poliphemus.
promised Ulysses, first to devour his fellows, and afterward himself.

To these Hypocrites which under the color of aidyng and pleasuryng do
miserably spoil men of all their substance, and bring them to beggerie, that
bitter complainte of Andromaches, whom Menelaus had trecherouslie deceived,
does well agree. O you horrible Sophistes, to be hated of all men, you deep
dissemblers and masters of falshod, evil come unto you. Luther says: Luther.
To play the Usurer is not to pleasure, but to plague, and undo the
neighbors, as thieves and robbers do. And again, It is no courtesy, to
benefit a man contrary to the commandments of God.

10. Objection.
Whatsoever is promised by couenaunte, that is too be performed.

Usury is promised by couenaunte:

Therefore Usury is to be performed, or paid.

The Answer.
This is a fallacy called a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter.
Whatsoever is promised by that couenaunte, which neither violateth Religion,
nor hurts honesty, that is to be performed. But that covenant which is
against justice, honesty, and religion, is not to b^ observed, according to
that common rule: Things A rule concerning promises or vows. Things
unlawful, are neither to be promised, nor performed. An oath may not be the
bond of wickedness. How we ough^ to promise.
unjust are neither to be promised, nor to be performed, although they be
promised. And the Lawiers say well. No couenaunte of dishonestie can take
place. Again: An oath may not be the bond of wickedness. For all oaths and
couenauntes are too be made with two exceptions, that is, We may not vow or
promise any thing contrary either to Religion, or honesty. These common rules
should be well remembered of all men, but especially of magistrates, lest
being deceived through the religion of an oath, or binding by promise; they
compel their subjects to the observing of unlawful oaths, and promises. For
all couenauntes and vows which bind men to sin, are necessarily to be
broken. A certain godly man says, That is honesty, faith, and promise, to
obeie God, and to believe him. But that is contrary to promise, faith, and
honesty of a magistrate, not to break such seals, and to cancel such
bonds which are against the religion toward God, and honesty of
conversation.

11. Objection.
The strength, and maintenance of the world is to be The Mayor.
maintained.

Usury is the strength of the world, for without Usury The Minor.
the world cannot continue:

Therefore Usury is lawful, and not to be forbidden. The conclusion.


The Answer.
I allow the whole argument, being understood of the world which is the
company of the wicked. Certainly, Satan as much as lies in him does study
to maintain the same by sin, and extortion, that so it may be, and continue
his kingdom. In the world certain it is, Usury cannot be cut of, but in the
kingdom and church of Christ it is unlawful. One says, As neither Jew, nor
Gentill, so no usurer is in the kingdom of Christ, nor to be accounted any of
his Church.

12. Objection.
The means to get living be lawful. The Mayor.


Usury is a means to get food, and clothing for Widows, The Minor.
and Orphans:

Therefore they may use the same. The conclusion.


The Answer.
I answer: It is a fallacy called a dicto secundu^ quid ad dictum
simpliciter. Those means which are allowed by the word of God, not those
which are expreslie contrary to the scripture, may be used.

Secondly, I deny the Minor: For many widows and Orphans there be which
have no stock at all: now if Usury be a mean to prepare meat and clothyng
for widows and Orphans, how shall they do which lack money to put out?
They must needs perish for hunger. Again, this Usury is an enemy to our
trust, which we have in God. For since God is omnipotent, he can easelie,
without violatyng of his commandments, if we by the woo^kyng of the holy
Ghost, conceive a sure hope and confidence of his power, he can I say and
will with liberal hands, minister all such things as are necessary for the
sustentation of this present life, according to that: I never saw the just
forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread. Finally, what a wonderful
company of widows and fatherless is there, which having nothing of their
own, and yet are sustained? For that God which through his unspeakable
wisdom and goodness gave body and soul, will of his great clemency and
liberality provide food and nourishment without the craft of Usury.

Now therefore since such Usury is contrary to Gods commandment, and against
the faith which we should repose in him, no doubt it is unlawful for
widows and Orphans to use the same. We do not in this place reason of
exercising liberality and mercy toward such and all poor folks without
help, but we show what may lawfully be done. Let such as are the keepers of
Orphans with their Money, if any come unto them, buie ground, and the
revenues, let them bestow on the maintenance of the Orphans and Widows. Or
if that cannot be done, he which will take that same Money and convert it to
his own use, and reasonably of his accord distribute to their sustentation,
does like an honest man. But if a composition be made, and that be demanded
by covenant, each pollute themselves with usury.

I am almost werie in reciting the objections, wherewith Usurers come against
the evident testimonies of Scriptures, and other good laws to excuse their
Usury, and to defend their covetousness.

But as it is a vain thing to stop the holes of a Sieve: so to go about to
discover, refute and to refell all the cauilations of the ungodly, were
foolish. For the devil the Monarch and Prince of this world is a wonderful
framer of reproachful speech, and can turn his tale at his pleasure. Thence
has he his name. And he it is that stirs and drives his ministers to
invent sondrie shifts to cloak and excuse their wickedness, according to that
of Syrach. Chapt. 33. The wicked man shunneth correction, and as he list
inuenteth an excuse.

Therefore whosoever by Sophistry, or subtlety of arguments do study to
obscure, put out, and extinguishe this clear truth of the word of God, to
them without many words, as Paul did to the Jews, I answer: That the
condemnation of such men is just. Romans 3.


The. 10. Chapter. An exhortation to avoid Usury.
ALthough at my first taking this matter in hand, I knew very well, that my
labor would be greatly misliked of some: yet for that Paul in describyng a
good and vigilant Bishop, does require at his hands not only a knowledge of
heavenly doctrine, and a zeal and painfulnesse to preach the same, but also
an ability to gainsaie the adversary of the truth, I did think good, in
the delicate judgment of some perhaps more bold than wisely, to make this
treatise* and to show by true and good arguments, that Usury is utterly to
be condemned and cast of, which thing I trust is already so done, that it
needs no other demonstration.

Which being so, I heartily beseech all governors and Subjects, Preachers
and hearers, and all sorts of men, that the truth being uttered and known,
they would lay both heddes and hands together, too the rootyng out more and
more of this mischief from commonweales.

But first I humbly beseech you Magistrates, to consider An exhortation to
magistrates and governors.
to what purpose GOD has honested you with his own name, whereby you are
called Gods? Why is civil order called the ordinance of God, by Saint
Paul? Even for that cause that ye should defend Religion, see justice
executed, peace maintained, and virtue advanced.

Which thing altogether do Usurers, enemies too all good order, as much as
possibly they can endeavor to euerte.

For they perturbe, violate, and break all ordinances, not only of man, but
of God: they do not only walk every where full iocunde and merrily, but also
go about to molest the faith^^^ ministers of God, they fear nothing, wherein
though many shameful things be contained* yet nothing is more intolerable,
than that they work their mischief not by Thieves only, and beggarly
persons, but by you they trouble the good ministers of Christ* and Godly
magistrates they abuse to the punishyng of the innocent, and them whom neither
by stones, nor by sword, nor by faggot, whom neither their force, nor power,
not their strength can bring to death, these do they think by your
authority, by your zeal, and judgments to oppress.

For these being thrown out of their places, and removed from their charge,
and banished out of countries, suppose there is an entrance showed them to all
extortion, so that none dare set themselves against them, or control their
desire. For who knows not, that in their wicked attempt they raise sedition
against the Lord himself? For the word which forbids and condemns
Usury, is not the word of the ministers, but of God, committed to the
Ministers to be signified to the world.

And fearing not God, think ye they would reverence your power and authority
if they were able for strength to rebel? Nay credit me they would as well
drive you from all government, as they are bold to molest the ministers.

Which thing that it fall not out, it stands you upon to provide and see
that their greedy minds be bridled, and that their crafty and wicked
conspiracies take no place. The which will come to pass if carefully and with
all your endeavor you study that the word of God may be syncerely preached by
the faithful ministers. For therefore is peace established that in it the
people be instructed in the knowledge of God. And if that be done, I doubt not
but their bold speech wilbee suppressed, and through the hearing the pains
both temporal and eternal which they get unto them selves by usury, they
will return into the way of truth, and by hearty repentance converted, will
give unto God his due honor, to you humble obedience, and to every man his
own.

But if for the reprehension of usury you shall suffer the Preachers to be
troubled, tossed, and banished, your pains shall be great, and your bondage
miserable, which you shall procure.

For in breaking the law of Nature, and of Countries, which forbid Usury,
they go about to cut of the chief stay of justice. And because magistracy is
the defense of the law, who sees not that Usurers by little and little come
to that boldness and impudency, that godliness being despised, the laws
defaced, and all their strength overthrown, yea and riches, which are the
instruments whereby any thing is brought to pass, hourded up in their cofers,
they will rule the roast, and govern alone.

Finally, they disturb the peace and tranquillity, while they require more
than they gave, by which inequality one party is eaten out, and brought into
misery, the other is made fat: and so the public peace is broken, and humane
society comes to decaie.

So you see, into what perilles the Church, your selves, and the whole
Commonweal is like to fall into, if by public authority this vice of Usury
be not speedily abolished.

For the Preachers, without speedy remedy, are like to come in danger, and
be banished, which being gone, how will you learn to know God, to pray
truly, to comfort your souls, and to lead an honest life in the sight of God?
Your selves and your subjects are in peril, for the auoidyng whereof godly
Princes have suffered many, and grievous troubles sundry times, and the
gooddes of many are hazarded, which all in authority should see unto.

Which being so, why study you? why do you consulte? why linger ye? and
do not with speed by your authority drive away this deadly plague, and by
public commandment, whereunto a severe execution should be joined, banishe
it out of your Countries, out of your dominions. For it pertains to the
office of a Civil magistrate by law and penalties to forbid and root out
this scrapyng together. For the Magistrate is principally appointed of God to
these notable offices,

First, that he sound himself the ten Commandments, 1.
or cause them to be published, inculcated, and The duties of a civil
magistrate.
repeted in the ears of the people, that men be not governed by their own
imaginations, but that the law of God be the rule of all counsels, and
actions, according to which all works both good and badde may be
discerned.

Secondly, that the Magistrate be a vigilant keeper ^.
and executor of the ten commandments, and by the severity of punishment
maintain them, that he correct all Thieves, Pirates, Pollers and Usurers, and
defend the good, leadyng an innocent life according to the prescript words of
the law.

So Nehemias in the 20. year of Artaxerxes being Nehemias.
sent from Babylon to Jerusalem, when he understood 2. Esdras. 5.
that the ritcher sort did increase the misery of the poor by Usury, and so
by little brought all the welthe to themselves: he waxed wroth, and grievously
rebuking the Usurers he uttered the commandment of God: Thou shall lend to
thy brother without Usurie. Wherewith the creditors being terrefied, confessed
their sins, and promised to make restitution of all which they by Usury had
received.

And if Constantinus, and Theodosius be worthily Constantinus Theodofius.
commended, because they shut up and ouerthrewe the Idolatrous temples, and
forbad the public Sacrificyng unto Idols: certainly if you by public
commandment take away this most abominable custom of Usury, your praise
shall be no less in this world, and your glory as great in the kingdom of
heaven. For Paul names covetousness Idolatry, as well as false doctrine.

Yea, Pagan Princes, even by the light of reason seeing the hurt and confusion
which comes by the increase of Usury, have appoincted a certain measure to
Usury, as did in the Roman Commonweal Valerius Publicola, Valerius Publicola.
Marcus Rutilius Gemnitius. Hortensius. Cicero. Solon.
Marous Rutilius, Gemnitius, Hortensius, Cicero: and in Athens, Solon.

And if Ethnikes led only by the profit of this present life have moderated
and abrogated Usury, how much more ought we altogether to take away the
same, which know the will of God forbiddyng the same, whose commandments
if we do not obey, we are sure to incur the pains not only of this
present life, but eternal. CATO says: Our elders punished a Cato lib. de re
^ustica.
thief with a double, but an Usurer with a fourefolde recompensing: by which
difference of punishment they signified, how much a thief was better than a
usurer.

Now to come to you which are the governors of the Church. Whether I may call
it ignorance, or impiety Admonition to Churchemen.
of them which allow and defend Usury, I cannot tell.

If you pretend ignorance, you are much to be reprehended. For it is apparent
you never have read over the holy Scripture of God. And what is more boldness,
more unseemly for the gravity of a professor of divinity, than either to
judge amiss, or stoutly to defend that which he does not thoroughly
understand? We read that Alphonsus that most famous king of Spain Alphonsus
the king of Spain, and of Naples.
and of Naples, that he read the BIBLE over* 40. times, it may shame us which
are by profession Divines, and yet not once have perused the wrightinges of the
Prophets and Apostles.

But if such be your wickedness, that for the favor and profit of great men,
you will, contrary to the manifest Scripture, contrary to the judgment of all
true God be thanked we hear of no such Preachers in England.
preachers, and contrary to your own conscience, allow, and by your
authority confirm this vice of Usury, what worser men than you? Great men,
which will have Sermons framed according to their own fancies, you bring to
hell: (a worthy punishment, in my judgment, for such as delight in any rather
than in godly preachers). The simple people by your assentation you do
miserably seduce, and confirm them in obstinate sinnyng. And therefore at the
length what account will you make of your office before GOD in the day of
judgment?

Again if any of us, which would show our selves faithful as becomes the
ministers of the word, do set our selves against you, because we like not of
your opinions and behavior, esteemyng rather the glory of God the
commandment of Christ, the edifiyng of the Church and the testimony of a
good conscience, than your good will or favor, then spread you many slanders
against the truth against well governed churches, against the faithful
Preachers, and against those Commonweales which courteously receive us. What
should prattling contend with piety, and add besides contumelious detractions
of the well disposed? But this impiety without all doubt does highly displease
God, and all good men.

Wherefore I desire, and for Christ's sake I beseech you, that knowing,
according to the foretellyng of Christ, that in these latter days of the
world, covetousness, and a desire to heap together the goods of this life,
would especially have dominion, that you would with one mind with us condemn
Usury. For it is your office, if you will be faithful, to rebuke and
reprehende not one, or some, but all sins which are forbidden by the name of
the law, and pollute the conscience, and so procure the wrath of God and
eternal damnation.

Neither is there any cause why we, which have procured the hatred of men,
and are odious to all the world, for our reprehendyng of Usury, should
therefore blame the magistrates principally, or other men for our ill
entreatyng: because the cheifest cause thereof comes from you, which either
be patrons of Usury, or else do practice the same your selves. For if you
would join with us, as you should, and so with all your strength beset this
Idol, no doubt but we should less be slaundered, less injured, and the
authority of governors the better resisted.

But since one allows, an other condemns Usury, what men should like they
know not. But rather they suppose that Usury is a thing lawful and
sufferable, and that men inueigh against the same, either through ambition, or
envy, or vainglorie, or emulation, especially when they hear the reproaches,
wherewith the faithful preachers be unworthily afflicted.

O shameless boldness, and horrible impiety, that man created after the
likeness of God, and placed in such an high estate of dignity, should be so
spoiled of discretion, that for transitory commodities of this life, and
uncertain goods, he will reiecte the glory of his God, the admonitions of
zealous Preachers, and their own, yea, and others eternal salvation, and
wilfully cast them selves, and others by their example into perpetual
destruction.

Now you which are the faithful Ministers of God and fight courageously for
the maintenance of his truth against the idol of Mammon, you I counsel and
beseech, that ye saint not, nor be overcome by reuilinges, slanders, and
afflictions, but that you remain constant and persevere, strengthened by sweet
consideration of a good conscience for your faithfulness made manifest, and
stirred through an hope of attainyng a crown of glory, wherewith all which
under Christ in this spiritual warfare have fighten, in the latter day of
this world shall be adorned.

Finally, ouerpassyng others, with whom my words are of small force either for
their authority, wherbi any thing they suppose is lawful for them to do, or
for their obstinate impiety that they will not repent. I turn my speech to
you which are Citizens, and of the An exhortation to Citizens.
common sort.

For I doubt not but amongst you there may be found many which daily have
in mind, wherefore they are made, and brought into the possession of this
world, and are touched with a care of their souls salvation, which I hope
will have mine exhortation and words in some weight. The other sort, which
has no fear of God, but contrary to religion, justice and godliness seek
altogether the profit of this present life, I commend to the just judgment
of God: and yet lest they say they had no warnyng, I say thus much unto them,
by way of exhortation.

Our Lord Christ did foretell, that in the latter days of this world Satan
with all his power should raunge about, and by marvelous illusions enta^gle
all men, that if it might be, the very elect should be seduced, whereby he
counsaileth to prayer and watchfulnes.

And to omit for brevity sake the rest of Satan's subtilties, that practice of
his may not lighty be considered, whereby at this time he does violently
invade and beset the whole world, that by a filthy custom of getting and
heaping riches together he may draw men from godliness, and make them subject
to eternal torments. Wherefore I warn you to take heed, and diligently to
note and consider what goodness and truth is in this cause.

First place before your eyes the straight commandments of God forbidding
Usury, which are not idle imaginations proceeding from the brain of
Ministers, but severely proposed of God himself, for the better direction of
our life in this world.

And what a foolish boldness were it to resist the almighty God, and as it
were to contend in battle against him? In a common weal to contemn a
Magistrate and good statutes, is accounted intolerable presumption, and
therefore with great punishment is severely looked unto: and then with what
pains shall they be tormented, which contend with God, by contemning his
laws?

Again, consider that the chiefest part of our office is to preach
repentance, and that we may not, though we would, cloak, or keep secret
those things which are contained in the monuments of the Prophets and
Apostles, and have continually by the providence of God been observed and kept
in great alterations of Empires, thereby the better to be known to all
mankind, and be witness of his pleasure.

Likewise have in mind, that God will, yea and has straightly commanded,
that we love our neighbor as ourselves, and show unto him all manner of
courtesy, which thing he has promised to recompense as if it had been extended
to him self. But he which occupies Usury, does in deed prove that he
loves not his neighbor. And therefore an Usurer, as much as in him lies,
does take away and abolish the chiefest bond of humane society, and the
greatest argument and sign of faith.

The fruit of your well doing is the favor of God, the quietness of
conscience, and unspeakable happiness, which how great the same is, judge,
you.

Then how are you bewitched, and given over to wickedness, that will hate and
abhor them worser than a Toade, which faithfully execute their office, and
bring you both eternal and transitory riches?

And as the number of them is not small which condemn and reprehende Usury
in these days (as before we have declared:) so do the learned and godly in,
and after the Apostles time mightily inueigh against the same: which is an
argument of the certainty of my doctrine, and sufficient either for
confirmation of the truth, or confutation of the contrary.

And therefore be not ye moved with the ianglyng words of Sycophantes, which
to make our cause odious and to be abhorred, cry with open mouths, that
certain obscure and base persons, and those very few for number pricked with
selfeloue, ambition and envy, do raise I know not what tumultes and tragedies,
only to be known, and to get an estimation among men. For you se the word
of God, and the witness of the learned do easily prove that they be evil
dealers and privy slaunderers.

Moreover note, I beseech you, the inconstancy of Fortune, the brevity of
this life, whereof the oration of Jacob the Patriarche may admonish us,
which being asked by Pharao, how long he had lived, answered: The days of
the years of my pilgrimage are 330. years, few and evil have been the years
of my life, neither have they attained unto the days of the years of my
forefathers, etc.

And the man of God David does say: The days Psalm. 9^.
of our years be seventy years, or at the most eighty years, of which that
which is left, is greef, and labors, for we quickly pass away: and
therefore he says afterward, Teach us to know the number of our days, that
we may walk wisely.

And so does Cicero a wise man though an Ethnik, having learned the same by
experience, exclaim: O deceit full hope of man, and frail Fortune, and vain
cogitations of ours, which oftentimes in the middle are cut of, and in the
very course, before they can have a view of the haven are drouned.

And therefore what madness is it with care of gettyng goods for the
sustentation of this uncertain life, and that by unlawful means and gains,
and an evil conscience procuryng them, to consume your selves, and in the
mean while to neglecte all cogitations of Spiritual riches perteinyng to an
happy life, and thereby for transitory trashe to pollute your souls, and
your selves to subject to the curse of God?

Consider besides the infirmity of man, the notyng whereof ought to be of
sufficient force to extinguishe the flames of covetousness. For what tongue
can show forth every piece of our infirmity, whereof Esaie said very
well: All flesh is grass, and all the glory of the same as the flower of the
field. And the Ethnikes perceived the same through daiely experience. For so
did Pindarus say thereof: Men are but for a time, Pindarus Oda 4. Pithiorum.
and shadows of a dream, and so long florishe, as they receive light from
God. And to this purpose said Simonides rightly: That the change of man was
more easy than of a Fly, be it very swifte. For of man the life is short
and fleetyng: the body sickly; the form frail; the strength uncertain; the
honor vain; the pleasure vile; the wisdom small; the virtue weak: the
mind waiward. Be ye moved also in considering the subtle snares of the
Devil, which Peter in excellent words does painte out: The Devil like a
roaryng Lion goes about seeking whom he may devour. Therefore avoid Usury,
least while ye are contaminated therewith, the Devil suddenly eat you up
and devour body and soul. Forget not also to conclude, that Usurers are
violaters of the law of Nature, and that they are odious even to very
Ethnikes which abhor usury, by whose witness their pains in hell shall be
increased, which in so great light of the Gospel have remained impenitent.

Therefore, if ye think and persuade your selves that you are made to the image
of God, redeemed by the son, and sanctified by the holy ghost, that you might
glorify God, if ye like reasonable men think that obedience is due to the
commandments of God and good laws: if ye believe those things which are
published in the books of the Prophets and Apostles to be true, certain; and
the will of God not fables: If ye think that credit should be given to the
testimonies of so many learned men, if you suppose the world not to be made of
moates, as Democritus did, but to be governed by the providence of God, as good
Christians do: if ye think that all sustenance for this life is ministered
unto us by the liberal hand of almighty God: if ye think ye are created not
for this short life, but for an everlasting: if you persuade your selves that
eternal torments are prepared for all such as are impenitent, and turn not
to the Lord, but wittinglie and willingly persevere in ungodliness against
their conscience, and contrariwise, that such are heirs of perpetual
happiness, and eternal life which are penitent for their sins, no doubt you
will utterly not only fly, and shun it your selves, but also abhor it in
others, and according to your callinges will endeavor to cut of all shameful
exactions, lest the godly be carried away to wickedness by evil example: yea
and ye will, I am certain, judge them limbs of Satan, which do either
allow, or permit, or like, or exercise the same, to be worthy not only
corporal punishment with severity in this world, but everlasting torments
among the damned souls in hell.

FINIS.
A GODLY TREATICE CONCERNING THE lavvfull use of riches.

The principal points whereof may be read in the next Page followyng.

Psalm. 26. If Riches increase, set not your hearts thereon. 1. Timoth. 6.
Charge them that are ritche in this world, that they be not high minded, and
that they trust not in unconstant riches, but in the living GOD. Ubi
Charitas, ibi Spiritus.

Imprinted at London for Andrew Maunsell. 1578.

The Chapters of this treatice follovvyng.
1. Of riches and contractes in general. 2. Of the lawful use of riches. 3.
Of contractes. 4. Of Exchange. 5. Of bying and sellyng. 6. Of lendyng. 7. Of
Usury. 8. That Usury is forbidden, and wherefore. 9. The punishments of
Usurers. 10. The objections which Usurers allege for themselves. 11. The
duty of Preachers in reproving of Usury. 12. Necessary admonitions for all
dealers in this world. 13. Of Alms. 14. The kinds of Alms. 15. The causes
mouyng to mercifulnes. 16. Of the affection of the giver, and the manner of
dealing alms. 17. The ends and fruits of alms giuyng. 18. Of commodation.
19. Of lettyng forth to hire. 20. Of the contract of society. 21. Of Church
goods. 22. How hainously they sin which spoil the church of her goods. 23.
A question about the right use of Ecclesiastical riches.
THE LAVVFVLL use of Riches.
The 1. Chapter. Of riches and contractes in general.
FORASMVCH AS MANY good men through the blessing of GOD have great
possessions, and the state of mankind cannot be without contractes, it may
seem sufficiently evident to any reasonable man, that either to have riches,
or to bargain, in it self, is no sin. For it may not be thought that the
Gospel does either break the lawful bonds of humane society, or disanull
necessary helps to the maintenance of man. But, for that by experience we see
that many both in the gettyng, possessing, and using of riches, do offend,
and much ill dealing is in contractes: it will not be amiss to give out such
lessons, whereby the godly disposed person may know both how to attain riches
commendably without offense to God, and being attained to use them virtuously,
as becomes a Christian: and also to deal so in the contractes now used, as
neither himself shall be troubled with giltines of conscience, nor his neighbor
hindered, much less impouerished, by extreme oppression.

Wherefore first of all this rule of Christ must carefully A necessary rule
to be observed of al men. Math. 6.
be observed: Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and
other things shall be ministered unto you. This rule contains two things, to
wit, a Two things contained in this rule of Christ. 1. The commandment of
Christ.
Commandment of Christ, and a promise annexed to the obedience of the said
Commandment. The Commandment is, Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and
his righteousness. Whosoever obeys not this commandment, as he is not in the
favor of God, so is he a subject unto sin, a slave to Satan, whose end,
and stipende is eternal destruction. Therefore it behooves us principally to
obey this commandment, and to have a care of our salvation. The promise is,
And other things shall be ministered unto you. This promise does require 2. The
promise.
first of all, faith, whereby we may certainly persuade our selves, that
Christ is both true of promise, Faith.
and ready to perform if we obey his Commandment: and afterward though not
expressly, that every man do, through faith, diligently without Hethenishe
Diligence in our calling.
and worldly carefulnes, such things as by his calling he lawfully may. For
we may not think that the promise of Christ does commend idleness unto us.
Idleness unmeet for a Christian.


But lest any man should through ignorance doubt, whether his calling be good
or no, I will in few words declare what is necessary to a lawful calling.
Two What are to be considered in a calling. What callinges are lawful in a
Commonweal.
things generally are to be considered, to wit, the kind of calling, and the
discharge of the same. Touching the kind of calling this rule is to be kept in
mind. Every calling or office, making to the maintenance or furnishing of
the states ordained of God, as are the state of a Commonweal, of an
Householde, and of the Church, are commanded in the first and fourth
Commandment, as is the calling of Ministers, of Magistrates, of Officers
under Magistrates, of Householders, of Artificers, of Merchauntes: breefly, all
callinges which serve to the good ordering of the Church, of an householde,
or Commonweal, are both in themselves good, and also commendable in such as
lawfully are in them. And although it A difference between a public and
private calling.
be free for every man to choose the kind of life whereunto he feels himself
inclined, yet ought we to make a difference between a calling private, and a
public calling. Unto a public office we must come by ordinary calling. For
no man should take upon him a public A public office may not be taken
without ordinary calling.
office either in the Church or Commonweal, unless he be called thereunto by
ordinary auctority: he which does otherwise sins against God, and is
without all comfort of the holy spirit in time of persecution. Wherefore let
every good man beware that he rush not into any public office without lawful
calling. The Private calling.
private calling, any man, as him likes, may choose: although in this also the
good counsel of Parents ought not to be contemned. He may be a Merchaunt, an
Husbandman, an Artificer; according to his fancy, idle he may not be, if he be
a Christian.

In the discharge of the office or calling, many things What are to be
considered of every man in the discharge of his calling. The fruits of faith
and ch^riti^
are to be considered. First faith and charity should be the rules of all our
dealinges. Faith is wary of displeasing God, and does refer all things to
his glory: charity warns that no man be iniuried, but profited. Faith
defireth God to be an assister: charity makes us to love our neighbor in the
Lord. Faith keeps a worker in the fear of God: Charity keeps the same
man in the love of his neighbor. Thus if a man laboring uprightly in his
lawful calling beecome ritche, through the blessyng of God, he ought
singularly too foresee, that his riches become not snares and thorns unto
him, through his own sin. For welthy me^ have If riches aboud what then?
How rich men should be affected in their wealth.
instruments both to virtue and wickedness, according to their disposition.
Wherefore a godly man should first of all know how his mind should be
affected in his wealth. And this may notably be learned out of the words Psals.
62.
of David, and of Paul: David says, If riches abound, set not your hearts
thereon* and Paul says, 1. Timoth. 6.
Charge the rich men in this world, that they be not high minded, and that
they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living Lord. These two
sentences, put us in mind both of the mind of the rich, and of the use of
riches. The mind should not be altogether given to riches, and to
covetousness, neither ought a Christian to measure his happiness by the
deceiptfull measure of riches, but ought to use them rightly, lest he lay
snares for his own destruction. Now when the mind is thus affected toward
riches, it will have a care by and by how to use the riches well which God
has given. Wherefore I will adioine hereunto somewhat of the lawful use of
riches.

The 2. Chapter. Of the lawful use of riches.
Ischomachus, as it is (...) Xenophon, The opinion of Ischomachus about the
lawful use of riches.
being asked what was the lawful use of Riches, answered on this manner: I
ought with my Riches to honor the Gods mightelie: to succor my friends in
extremity: and not too suffer the glory of my country to be defaced, if I may
advance the same. This man ignorant of true religiun, makes a threefolde use
of riches. One part he ascribes to the service of God: another to the
succurring of his freindes in poverty: and the third to the setting forth and
adornyng of his country. And although this answer of the profane
Philosopher be Riches are to be used to four ends.
good and commendable, yet somewhat more distinctly I will show the true use
of riches which is fourfold.

The first and principal use of riches, should be to 1. The first, and
principa^l use of riches, is to advance the glory of God, and to maintain
the ministry.
maintain religion, and to set forth the glory of God. This use is confirmed
by the end of man's creation. For man was at the first made, and afterward
regenerated by the holy ghost, to glorify God. And therefore whatsoever gifts
we have, we should refer them especially to this end of our creation. Here
many being miserably The first end why riches are given, little considered.
seduced, offend. For some there be which give nothing at al to the maintenance
of the ministry. Others do wickedly pluck away that which devoutly was
given to the service of God. And others with their riches, increase the power
of tyrans, to the oppressyng of the Church, and abolishyng of Religion. Which
men had been in much better case if they had never been borne. For their
portion shall be with Satan, whose members they are. Therefore a godly man which
is blessed with riches in this world, should consider the end of his
creation, and bestow a part of his goods to this end that God may be
glorified, and true religion maintained. Let him set before his eyes the
examples of David. Josias. Ezechias. Constantinus. Theodosius.
godly men, as of David, Josias, Ezechias, Constantinus, Theodosius, etc. and
other good princes, and godly men, whose desire was in nothing so much, as in
aduauncing the glory of God, helping preachers and religious men, maintainyng
schools and good privileges, defendyng the teachers of godliness against the
cruelty of the wicked.

The second use of riches ought to be, to adorn 2. The second use of
riches, is to maintain the Commonweal.
the Commonweales wherein we are, according to our ability. For this cause
tributes are appointed, that by them, as it were by senewes the body of the
whole state may be strengthened. But here two sorts of The second use of
riches not regarded sometime.
men do greatly offend. One sort are some great men, which in the time of
peace, when any thing is to be paid for the use of the Commonweal; craftily
slip their own necks out of the collor, and make the poorer sort to smarte
for it, by paiyng more than oftentimes they well can spare. The other be
such, as not content with ordinary paiementes, put new exactions upon
their Subjects, which are condemned by the testimony of Ihon Baptist, because
they bring not forth the fruits of repentance. Christ says: Give unto
Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and give unto GOD, those things which
are Gods. But let Caesar Math. 22.
know that there is a certain rule which the Laws do prescribe unto him.
Which if he shall break, he is subject to the wrath of God. But, you will
say, is it not Whether a Prince may exact any thing above that which is
commonly allotted him to have, or no.
lawful therefore for a Magistrate sometime to exact somethyng of his people
besides the ordinary tax? We must put a difference between the time of
war, and of peace. In the time of peace let him be content with his
ordinary allowance, least he sin against God: in the time of war his
subjects do owe unto him not their goods only, but their bodies also, if
his war be just. And a godly prince may both demand How in the time
of peace a king may put his people to extraordinary charges.
vnaccustomable Subsidies, and also command their bodies to serve him in the
war. Also in the time of peace such occasions may be offered, that his
common allowance will not suffi^^ him. And then, good subjects ought to help,
and godly Princes may, require their aid. But such as bring the same into
custom to oppress their subjects, let them look to be punished like
infidels of the righteous judge, which also can tell how to yoke the necks of
the proud, and tyrans.

The third good and lawful use of riches is, that every 3. The third use of
riches to maintain our selves honestly.
man do keep himself according to his power honestly, and maintain his
household. But two vices are to be taken heed of, covetousness, and prodigality.
Covetousness Covetousness. Prodigality.
does greedily scrape riches together, unseemly for a godly man.
Prodigality does rashly consume wealth sometime upon bravery unmeet for our
calling. And therefore a mean, which in every thing is commendable, must be
observed here. Let the honest In medio virtus.
Citizen leave honor to the Nobility; and let the godly noble man leave
royalty unto his Prince. Let Preachers in schools and in Churches defend their
state modestly. And let no man go about that, which shall be for his calling,
or condition unseemly.

The fourth and the last use of riches good and commendable, 4. The fourth and
last use of riches, to relei^^ the poor.
is to releive the poor. For certainly God does suffer the poor among us, to
try both how willing we are to obey his Commandments (for he does bid us
to stretche forth our hand to the needy) and what pity we take upon the
members of God, the which if we contemn, we despise God. For it cannot be that
he should love the head, which punishes the body. But of this use more
hereafter, cap. 13.

The 3. Chapter. Of Contractes.
Now since we are so framed of God, that we must live in company, and our
condition is such, that without the assistaunce and help one of another, our
state cannot be maintained, certainly we have The necessity of contractes.
great need of contractes, whereby we may after a sort make an exchange of
our doings. Neither can We can not live without the help one of another.
we be without the commodity of bargains, no more than we can spare either
fire or water. Wherefore seeing that both the godly and ungodly are wont to
Bargaining as necessary as either fire or water.
deal together, and men through the corruption of their own nature offend in
bargainyng, it will be very necessary to prescribe rules to the godly,
whereby they may know how far they may wade without offense, that they may
do nothing either contrary to their own conscience, or against the
commandments of God. And although fully and at large to discourse of
contractes belongs to Lawiers, which by profession can wisely entreat
hereof, yet notwithstanding because politic laws do not always satisfy
the consciences of men, I think it good to prescribe a short advertisement
which the godly may safely follow in all his bargains. Therefore I will
first of all lay two The sum of the discourse following.
foundations, out of which all that I mean to speak, shall depend. And
afterward I will declare the kinds of the chiefest contractes, and show how
they agree to the foresaid foundations.

The first foundation shall be this, derived from the The first foundation to
be laid before any bargain be concluded. 1. Do unto another, as you would
be done unto. Do not unto another which you would not should be done to your
self. Math. 7.
law of nature: That which you would another should not do unto you, do not
unto another. And contrariwise, That which thou would justly have done to
thy self, do unto another. Upon this foundation Christ will have all
duties, yea and all dealinges and bargaynes to be builded. For so he says:
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even so do ye unto them. He
adds a reason of this foundation: This (says he) is the Law and the
Prophets, that is, this is the scope of the Law and Prophets, or whatsoever
the Law and the Prophets command, is contained in this common rule. This
foundation as in every bargain it would have plainnes, and excludes double
dealyng: so it requires equality between those which bargayne, according to
Arithmeticall proportion, which does measure, number, and weigh all charges
equally. So such a contract is both equal, and lawful: equal, because it
observes an Arithmeticall proportion: and lawful, because it agrees to the
law of nature.

The second foundation is this, taken from the nature 2. The Gospel allows
good politic laws.
of the Gospel. The Gospel does allow such politic ordinances, as a godly
magistrate does judge profitable for his Commonweal. This is thereby evident,
because the Apostles of Christ did, that we can read, never The Apostles never
set themselves against good ordinances.
change the form of the public ordinances where they preached, which
undoubtedly they would have done, had they been contrary to the Gospel. Hence
it follows, that as a godly man may use the civil ordinances of that
Commonweal, in which he lives, so is it lawful for a wise magistrate to
make necessary laws for his Commonweal according to which contractes, and
the callinges of this life may be directed, Bargains are commendable as long
as they agree to godly statutes in commonweals.
but notwithstanding no law is to be enacted contrary to the law of nature,
or commandments of God.

These two foundations I would have to be applied to all contractes, as it
were consultations, which may give sentence as often as one question arises
about bargaining.

The kinds of civil contractes, whereof we mind The kinds of bargains
spoken of in this book.
to speak at this time, are these. 1. Exchange of things. 2. Bying and
sellyng. 3. Lending. 4. Commodation. 5. Letting forth to hire. 6. The contract
of society. If there be any other contractes, they may be known in the
wrightinges of Lawiers, which may be embraced of a godly mind, as long as
they decree nothing either against the love toward God, or charity toward
the neighbor.

The 4. Chapter. Of Exchange.
CHangyng of one thing for another Changing of things the common trade before
money was found out.
before money was found out, was most usual and profitable, as without which
society of man could not be maintained. But after money was invented, it
became every where to be less used.

Exchange is made not when things are changed for How exchange is made.
money, but for other things: as when for Corn, wine, is changed, and Skins
for Butter.

This changing is then commendable, when it swarueth Exchange when lawful.
not from those two foundations, which we have laid for every honest
contract. Therefore in the exchange of things an equality is to be observed
without fraud.

Fraud may be used diversely, but cheifely three ways: How many ways deceit
may be used in exchange.
to wit, in substance, in quantity, in quality. In substance, as if we give
mingled wine instead of pure wine, and corn mixed with Cockell or Darnel
instede of simple corn, etc. In quantity, if there be not equality observed
of weight, measure, and number. In quality, when for good and sound, naughty
and corrupt things are thruste unto a man. Whosoever deals deceiptfullie in
these things, as he does break the foundation of justice, so if he do the
same wittinglie and of purpose, he sins against God, violateth the rule of
charity, and is guilty of the decaie of his commonweal. Many men flatter
themselves, and as it were tickle again for joy, when they can deceive a man
after such a sort, but it happens to them, as to fishes, which with the
bait receive their bane. For the gain is sweet, but caught with the devils
bait, their pain shall be grievous.

The 5. Chapter. Of bying and selling.
THat is properly called bying Bying and selling what.
and selling, when things are changed not for things, but for money. This
kind of bargainyng Bying and selling is not the most ancient trade of living.
is neither the most ancient, nor the most used. For both it was unknown to
the first inhabiters of this Bying and selling not used every where.
world, and is, at this day, in no use among diverse nations. But only
necessity found out the same. In this contract, he which receiuyng money does
translate his goods into the possession of another, is said to sell, and the
thing translated is called A seller who? VVare.
ware. Again, he which paying money receives ware, is said to bye. Here we
must regard not so much what A byer.
the money is worth in it self, as how it is valued by public The value of
money is known not by it self, but by the estimation thereof by magistrates.
Equality must be observed between the byer and the seller.
authority, custom, and estimation. For money is valued rather by law, than
by nature. And therefore equality must here be considered, not in the
substance of money, but in the estimation, or common use thereof. This contract
according to the foundations laid above cap. 3. does require an equality
without fraud beetwene the byer and the seller. Whosoever does of purpose
circumuent his brother in bargaining, contrary to the precept of Paul, has
violated the equality which 1. These. 4.
ought to be between the buyer and the seller. And therefore ought good men to
take great heed, that The duty of the seller.
they use no couen either in ware or price. Let the seller name the goodness
of his ware truly, or at the least according to his knowledge, without
dissimulation: The duty of the byer.
And let the buier give his due price: that a proportion may be observed
between the price and the ware. But What is a lawful price.
some will perhaps demand what I call a due or lawful price? I answer
simply, every price agreed upon between the buyer and seller, is not a due or
lawful price, but that which is either appointed by indifferent and wisemen
in authority, or paid according to the common estimation of the thing, at
such time as the bargain is made. He therefore which to day buyeth a
bushel of Corn, according to the common price for three shillynges, the same
man may sell the same at another time for six shillynges, if the price be
raised to so much. Contrariwise, if after certain months it be commonly
bought for twelve pence* he offends that ask three shillynges, although he
paid three for the same. For here a consideration must be had of time and
place, also of the plenty or scarsitie of things.

But there be three sorts of men which do greeuouslie Spoylers of the
market who.
abuse this trade: Ingrossers, which get as many commodities as they can into
their private hands, and so price things to their own fancies: Regraters,
and such as having plenty, will make no sale, except either they may have
their own askyng, or such a scaresitie does happen as they may price, and
receive money as they list. In which number are they which have abundance
of Butter, Oxen, wine, Corn, and other things from their own increase. When
any shall have need to buy of these men, they are enforced, will they nill
they, to give as much as they do demand. Whereby it happens many times,
that the seller, where there is no price published by the Magistrate, makes
other men to pay extremely for his ware. Now when other rich men shall
follow their example, that which otherwise perhaps would be uttered for
twelve pence, is sold for eight shillynges. But one will say to me, the
Against enha^sers of the price of things.
ware is mine, why may I not sell it as I list? Has not the buyer choice
either to buy, or not to buy? Do I offend in setting a price of mine own?
Cloak the same by what title you list, your sin is excedyng great. For
thou do not so much hinder the buyer, as thou dooest hurt the Commonweal,
which is in worser case thereby, than if thou should like a common thief
invade the same. For by thy covetousness many pine away in misery for want
of food. He which hurts but one man, is in a damnable case, what shall be
thought of thee, which bryngest whole housholdes to their graves, or at the
least art a means of their extreme misery? Thou may find shifts to
avoid the danger of men, but assuredly thou shalt not escape the judgment
of God. He cannot be deceived by any coulored shifte, nor carried away by any
show of person.

Buyers many-tymes are greatly to be blamed, which A fault in buyers.
either in consideration of days of paiement, or to purchase their friendship
of whom they buy, will give more than a thing is worth, and get up their loss,
by some other shifte which covetousness can teach.

The question about redeemyng a bargain, is answered Redeeming of bargains.
out of Leuiticus, where the Lord does commend unto his people the Law of
redeemyng. But then I judge this kind of bargaining to be good, when it
agrees to the foundation above declared: Do not unto another, which thou
would not have done to thy self. Upon this foundation the conscience of a
godly man may depend in this covenant of redeemyng, and in all other things.

The 6. Chapter. Of Lendyng.
LEndyng is a contracte, whereby Lending what.
one manne gives his right of a thing to an other, without any price at all,
but upon condition that the same thing in kind be repaied. Herein two things
should In lending two things are to be respected.
be considered of the godly, an Equality, and Obligation. Equality, to
restore faithfully Equality.
without fraud as-muche either in measure, weight, or goodness as was
received. The Obligation is of two Obligation.
sorts, Natural, and Christian.

The natural is whereby we are bound by the law Nature does bind us to
lend.
of nature to lend to such, as lack our help. The Christian Obligation is
whereby God does bind his Our profession does bind us to lend.
to lend to the needy, that is, not only to such as may do the like at
another time, but also to them which are unable to requite. For he says,
Lend, looking for nothing Luke. 6.
thereby. Here Christ does not speak of liberal giving, or of alms, but of
le^ding, whereby the borrower is bound to restore that which was lent him,
though not the very same, yet in kind the same faithfully without couen. This
law is contrary to the malicious minds How the Jews would lend.
of the Jews, and the corrupt interpretyng of Moses law. The law commanded
to lend: but the Jews took the same with this exception, Lend, but not
without respect to all, but only to such as may do the like again.
Therefore Christ does correct this abuse of the law, and gives all his in
charge, that they lend not to them alone which may lend again at another
time. But we will make this more plain with an example. There comes a man to
know somewhat of thee, thou think he can do thee as great a pleasure at
another time, upon which conceit thou do lend unto him, and thou do well.
For what does he offend which for a benefit does look for gratefulnes?
There comes another honest man having need, and craves thine help, but is
unable to requite thy courtesy. If thou lendest not being able, to this man,
thou art in opinion a Jew, in thy dealing ungodly, and declarest thy self to
contemn the commandment of Christ. And theref^^^ Christ does not bid in
this place, that The interpretation of that saying of Christ in the* 6. of
Luke, Lend, looking for nothing thereby.
thou should not hope to receive again which thou courteously did lend,
as some foolishly interpret this saying. For then he would not have said
Lend, but Give: but Christ has a respect to the persons, to wit, that the
godly lend to such as are not able to recompense them with the like. Which
interpretation of mine may easily be confirmed by the circumstaunce of the
place. For there does Christ correct the gross errors of the Pharisees in
their malicious interpretyng The Pharisaicall interpretation of the
commandment of God.
of the law of God, according to their foolish fancies.

For as I said above, they interpreted the commandment about lending after
this manner: Lend, but only unto him which may lend again when thou haste
need, or by some other way requite thy courtesy, and declare his
gratefulness. This restrainte does Christ take away by this foundation: If
ye do good unto them, ^^ke. 6.
which do good unto you what thank shallye have? And, if ye lend, of whom ye
hope to receive, deserve you any thanks? For even sinners do the like unto
sinners, to receive the like again, that is, to find the like at another
time, either altogether, or in some respect. Therefore the sum of the
commandment is, that we should lend not only to them which may do the like
at another time, but also to others which are unable to requite. Hethertoo
beelongeth that saying in the Psalm, Well shall it be with him that is
merciful, and lends. Psalm. 112.


And although the wicked lend sometime, yet ought The difference between the
lending of the wicked and of the Godly. How the ungodly do lend, and to what
end. The cogitations of the godly when they lend.
we diligently to note the difference between the lendyng of those, and of the
godly. The ungodly in lendyng respect their own profit altogether, but the
godly deal after this manner. First they have regard unto the commandment
of God, whereby they know themselves to be bound, and therefore they lend
willingly and cherefully. Secondly by their faith they behold the promise of
God, whereby he appoints a recompense for such obedience, as they see in the
Psalm 15.
Psalm: Who shall dwell in thy tabernacle o Lord? He that woorketh
righteousness. Last of all, the godly consider the obiectes, and behold that
the needy are the members of Christ, as well as they. And therefore they lend
that so they may cherish the members of Christ, whereby is known the
difference between the lending of a godly man, and of a wicked, which only
respects himself, and his own gain.

The 7. Chapter. Of Usury.
EXperience it self does witness that men Two s^rtes of l^^^ing.
do commonly lend after two sorts. Sometime with a covenant or condition,
that as much and no more in weight, measure, or n^mber be repaide, than was
borrowed Of which kind of lending we have spoken in the former chapter.
Sometime we lend with a covenant that somewhat more, for the courtesy of
lendyng be given than was received. The taking of which overplus is wicked,
because it is taken in respect of lending, whereunto every man both by the
law of God, and of nature, is bound. And it is called usury because Usury
what.
for the use of a thing somewhat comes to the lender besides the principal.
Neither should we think that Not Landers of money only are usurers.
the lenders of money only are Usurers. For look whatsoever is lent, if more
be received back for the bounden duty of lending, than was lent, that same
is usury. Even as the law of God does plainly show, and Ambrose witnesses
in these words: Meat is Usury, and a Garment is Usury, and whatsoever is
received more than was was lent, call it what you will, it usury. I call that
the bounden duty of lending, whereuntoo we are so tied both by the law of
God and of nature, that unless we lend to such as require our help and
stand in need, we offend against God, and break our charity which we owe
to our neighbor.

And although by that spoken in the former Chapter, it may be gathered what we
think of Usury, yet for the plainer conceiving thereof, we think it very
expedient to add somewhat touching the same. And that the more orderly we may
entreat hereof, these things shall be handled.

First we will show that Usury is forbidden, and 1. The thinge^ which are
handled in this discourse of Usury. 2.
wherefore.

Then we will note the punishments of Usurers, that the remembrance of them
may somewhat assuage their greedines.

Afterward we will show how the dispensers of the ^.
mysteries of God, that is, the preachers of the Gospel, should behave
themselves in this matter of Vsur^e, that so they may neither be partakers of
other men's offenses, nor go about any thing that may turn to their own
destruction.

Last of all, we will give certain admonitions, the 4*
marking whereof in all bargains, will be very profitable.

The. 8. Chapter. That Usury is forbidden, and wherefore.
THe prohibitions of Usury are ^oure, which being care^ullie and christianly
How many ways Usury is forbidden.
considered of us, we shall plainly perceiu^ what may be thought of Usury in
general. Wherefore I will orderly and distinctlie recite them.

The first prohibition is natural. For first even by the 1. Nature condemns
usury. Philosophers inueigh against Usury. Aristotle.
only light of reason Philosophers have condemned the same. Aristotle the
chief among Philosophers, teaches that Usury is against nature, moved
thereunto by this argument: Money by nature can not bring forth. Therefore to
take Usury by Money is unlawful* And therefore Usury is called of the
Grecians Tokos from bringing forth, as though there were a certain birth of
Money, that even by the very name it might become odious. Aristophanes calls
Usury a beast, Aristophanes.
which in process of time brings forth Money, and is every day more
fruitful than others. Plato does banish Plato.
Usury out of his Commonweal. For he says in his fifte de legibus: It shall
be lawful for any man which borrows upon Usury, neither to pay the
Usury, nor to repaye the principal. Plutarch by this argument does Plutarch^.
conclude that Usury is against nature: Of nothing can be made nothing. Cicero
does compare Usury to manslaughter. Cicero.
And therefore as it is against nature to kill a man, so is it to take Usury.

Besides inequality in bargainyng is against nature. Another reason why Usury
is against nature.
For it destroys nature. And therefore the gain gotten for due office of
lendyng, must of necessity be against nature.

Last of all, for that a civil society is most agreeable A third reason.
to Nature, Usury must of force be enemy to Nature, because it overthrows
humane society.

The second prohibition is divine. For God in his 2. The word of God
condemns usury.
holy Scripture does forbid the same* Exodus 22. If thou lendest to my people
being in poverty, which dwells with you, thou shalt not trouble him with
exaction, nor oppress him with Usury. Leuit. 25. Thou shalt not give him thy
money upon Usury, nor lend him fruit for increase. The cause of this
commandment goes before, That thy brother ma^^ live with thee, to wit,
not oppressed with Usury. Deuteronomy. 23. Thou shalt not exact of thy brother
Usury either of Money* or of Meat, o^ of any thing else, etc. Ezech 18. He
that has not given forth upon Usury, neither has taken increase is just,
and shall surely live. Hereup^on it follows in the contrary sense, that he
is unjust and shall die which has given upon Usury and taken increase. And
it is said in the 15. Psalm, That he shall not dwell in the tabernacle of the
Lord, which gives out his money upon Usury.

The third prohibition is Political. The ancient Romans 3. Politic laws
forbid usury. Romans.
neither used, nor allowed, but altogether abhorred, and punished Usury. But
in process of time their covetousness encreasyng with their good success, by
little and little usury crept in, and so grew on till a^ length it raised
sedition in the Commonweal. For which cause Usury though it could not be
utterly abolished; yet was it by laws repressed. The city of Athens
Athenian^. Solon.
gave Solon in commission to moderate the Usury wherewith the Athenians were
grievously oppressed* For sedition did arise because of the cruelty of
Usurers, which compelled the sons and daughters of their detters either to
be sold, or become their slaves, to satisfy the Usury: Solon at the request
of the people made a law, that from that time no free man should become a
slave either for Debt or Usury. And appointed this measure unto Usury, that
for an hundred crowns lent for a month, but one crown should be paid.

The Emperors have appointed to adventurers but Emperors.
twelve in the hundred, to other lawful occupiers but eight, to noble men
^oure, and to the common people ^^xe in the hundred.

The last is Ecclesiastical. I call the Ecclesiastical 4. Godly fathers
condemn Usury.
prohibition not by the decrees of the Pope, whom we acknowledge to be neither
the head, nor tail, nor any part of the Church, but by Statutes of holy
Synodes, and by the sayings of godly Fathers, which vehemently forbid
Usury. In the 47. Decrees there is mention made of the Canons of the Apostles,
which condemn Usury. The Counsel at Nice, at which were The counsel at
Nice. Gratian.
^18. Fathers, did also condemn Usury. And Gratian against the Usury among
Clergy men, does allege this out of the Decrees of the Nice^e Counsel:
Because many Churchemen through covetousness, folloyng filthy lucre, have
utterly forgotten the commandment of God, which says, he which has not
given his money upon usury; this holy Counsel has s^^ doun^* that if any
manne after this determination be found to take Usury, or by any such trade
to seek filthy gain, etc. he shall be cast out of the Clergy, and removed from
all Ecclesiastical living. Hierome says* To lend upon Usury, Hierome
against Usury.
to cousine, and to steal, do nothing differ. Lend to thy brother, and
receive that which thou gave, but take Augustine against Usury.
no overplus, because to take overplus is Usurie. Augustine says: What shall
I speak of Usury, which even the very Laws and Judges them selves command
to be restored? Who is the worser man, he which takes somethyng from a rich
man by theft, or he which takes a poor man's life from him by Usury?
These and such like are ill possessed. And I would they should be restored,
Ambrose against Usury.
etc. Ambrose says: Why do thou convert the industry of Nature into
deceit? Why do thou desire to make men miserable? Why do thou make a
dearth to be wished for of the poor; and dooest lamente the common plenty*
Thou do enquire where sear^iti^ i^* Thou call that industry, which is
the subteltie of Satan, and that which thou call a remedy, is the
policy of mischief. May I call Usury Theuerie (the times of Theft is
sought for, whereby like a cr^^ll deceiuer thou creepest into the bowels of
men) which makes Corn laid up in store to increase by Usury? Why do thou
wish evil unto Ambrose in another place.
all men? Thy private gain is the public hinderance. And in another place: He
^ighteth without a sword, which ex^ct^th vsuri^^ he does revenge himself
without a sword* Chrysostom for and against Usury. Here I ouerpass^ somewhat
for brevity sake, referring the reader to the former part of this book,
where this point has been more amply handled cap. 6. Page 13. b. The sum of
this chapter.
which i^ an Usurer. Chrysostom says: Lend, take Usury, lend to receive
again where no envy is, no accusation, no snares, no terror. Lend not upon
Usurie to the poor, but to Christ, which for thy sake was in p^uertie*
hungry, and nourishes all men. This Usurie prepares a kingdom, but the
other* brings to hell: this does proceed from godliness and pity, the other
comes from co^etousnes and cruelti^.

Hethero we have shown how many ways Usury is forbidden, and wherefore, the
sum where of is that Usury is therefore prohibited, because our neighbor
should not be damnified; charity among men not quenched; humane society
violated; the gooddes of private men devoured, both to the destruction of good
houses, and the decaie of Commonweals. As often therefore as we read that
Usury is forbidden, let us look upon these ends of the prohibition, least
otherwise under the pretense of unlawful Usury, we judge unwisely of lawful
contractes.

The 9. Chapter. The punishment of Usurers.
I Find that the punishementes Three kinds of punishments for Usurers.
of Usurers is of three kinds, that is to say, Political, ^. How the Romans
punished and conceived of Usurers.
Spiritual, and Ecclesiastical. The Political punishmente for Usurers among
the Romans, as Cato witnesses, was that Thieves should make a double
restitution, but Usurers should restore four times as much. By which sentence
no doubt the aunciente Romans did sufficiently enough declare, that they
conceived woorser of Usurers, than of common Thieves. And for that cause they
barred them from honor and public offices in the Commonweal. But alas, so
corrupt are the manners of Christians at this presence day, that such as
profane people accounted odrous, and more to be detested than Thieves, they
among Christians are preferred too The spiritual punishment of Usurers. 2.
honor, and sitto bear authority.

The Spiritual punishment of Usurers, although in deed it be most
intolerable, yet many do but laugh thereat. For he which exercises Usury,
is no doubt excluded from the family of God, and congregation of true
Christians. For how can he be a member of Christ, which is a killer of
Christ in his members? How can he be of the household of God, which is a
slave to Satan? Which makes a scoff at the word of God? Now they which
are not of the body of Christ shall have no portion in the treasure of
Saints, which is more precious than all the riches of this world. What
treasure more excellent than to possess Christ? What riches better than the
enheritance of heaven? This treasure, and these riches has poor Lazarus full
of soars, yet the servant of God, but the rich glutton shall lack them for
ever, and with him as many as castyng of the service of God, addicte them
selves wholly to sinful gain. For what is it I beseech you, if by Usury you
attain to the riches of Cresus, and yet loose your souls? O perverse opinion!
Thou haste a marvelous care of this life, which God knows is but short,
but of the life to come, which is everlasting, thou haste no care at all. I
therefore, if mine admonition may do any good, earnestly beseech you, and
as many as think there is a righteous God, and believe that a day of judgment
will come, and certainly persuade themselves of an other life after the
leauyng of this, that they will with speed repent, that when the Lord shall
come on the sudden before they are aware, he may find them apparailed with
the weddyng garment, not with a Devils weed procured by Usury.

The Ecclesiastical punishment of Usurers in old 3. The Ecclesiastical
punishyng* of Usurers*
time was this. First, they were rejected from the solemn Ceremony of the
offering. Secondly, they were barred from receiuyng the holy Communion.
Thirdly, they were excluded out of Christian burial. Which penalties though
they seemed very grievous, yet were they very necessary. For, first as
touching the Ceremony Usurers might not offer as other honest men did.
of the offering, or alms to the use of the Ministers of the Gospel, and
relief of the poor, it is to be known, that alms received of Usurers is
abominable The alms of an usurer is abomination before the Lord.
before God. For no Sacrifice (and liberality rightly conferred upon the
poor, is a kind of sacrifice) can please God, but such as are well gotten,
and proceed Liberality a kind of sacrifice.
from a pure mind, and lively says. For this is most true, that no work
of man can please God, before the mind does please him. And the mind cannot
What sacrifices please God.
please, except first by the Spirit of Faith, it humble it self before God.
And this is confirmed by the saying Our mind must please God, before any work
of ours can please him. How it may be known when the mind does please God.
^^aie. 66.
of Esaie: To him will I look, says the Lord, which is humble and of a
lowly spirit, and does tremble at my words. To kill an Ox (without
humility of spirit) is no better than to slaie a man: To sacrifice a Sheep,
as to cut a Dogs throat. By these, to speak in a word, the Prophet does
signify that all things are unclean to the unclean, and that nothing can
please God, which proceadeth not from the fear of him, and is justly done of
a righteous man.

Secondly, the barryng of Usurers from the holy 2. Usurers excluded from
receiving the holy communion.
Supper of the Lord, was grounded upon good reason. For what portion have
swine in the body and blod of Christ? what have they to do with the bread of
sons, which are bondslaues to Satan? Give not, says the Math. 7.
Lord, that which is holy unto dogs. Cast not Pearls before swine. What, I pray
you, have they to do at the table of the Lord, which being fat with the
food of Satan, that is, with Usury, are ever lusty? And therefore these
Ministers of God which knowing them to be Usurers, will give the most blessed
body and blood of the Lord unto them, do not only wickedly communicate in
their sins, and thereby shall receive such punishment as they do, but also
as much as in them is, they cast the body and blood of our savior into a most
filthy and detestable sink, for which let them be assured they shall receive
eternal torments in hell.

Finally, the punishment of burial was very wisely 3. Usurers had (...)
christian burial.
appointed by our forefathers. And that shall he perceive that will consider the
cause, wherefore we honor the bodies of good men with an honest pomp, at
their burial. But what is that cause? The hope of a glorious Of burial.
resurrection For it is meet, that such bodies be in semelie manner buried
which in time we hope shall be conformed after the glorious body of our
Savior Christ. For in beholding the bodies of good men Why Usurers are not
to be buried like Christians.
committed too the grave, we lift up our minds too him, which one day,
after the sound of the Archangel shall say: Arise ye dead. And being risen
shall beautify them with immortal glory. But now seeing the ungodly, among
whom are Usurers as chief, and the stipendaries of Satan, first of all shall
rise again, as Daniel witnesses, to shame and e^erlastyng confusion, what
good man can judge them worthy to have burial like the Saints of God? In
the 15. Psalm he is no^bred among the godly* Whom his eyes desp^seth a vile
person, and honors them that fear the Lord How therefore can be cause him
to be buried in a christian, and honorable burial whom he does abho^re?
Iere^te Iere^. ^ ^*
foretells, that a Tyran shall be buried with the burial of an Ass, and that
by the just judgment of God: What shall we decree by the same word of God
concerning Usurers, which are more cruel than any Tyrannes?

The 10. Chapter. The objections which Usurers allege for them selves.
BUT what have I done? what enemies have I gotten? Who will not speak against
this severe discipline of the Church? Who will not find gloses to color their
usury? Many will say (through the suggestion of Satan their Schoolemaister,
which deceived our first parents) that the Law of Moses has long since, by
the coming of Christ, been The first objection of usurers.
cut of, abrogated, and put away, and does nothing at all pertain to the
people of God, which are at liberty, and discharged quite from the
commandments of Moses.

These may seem to be plausible words, but sure The answer.
they are horrible to a good conscience. For they which paint their
couetuousnesse under this color, being deceived by their domestical Eve,
their corrupt Nature which was miserably seduced by Satan, wilfully destroy
them selves, and by their own Sophistry are deceived. For they do not
rightly consider the commandment of Moses, neither do they, as it would
beseme them, reduce the prohibition of Usury, to the Law of Charity, which
if they would, they should plainly perceive that if Usury be established,
Charity is banished, Where Usury is established, charity is banished.
which God will have to continue for ever. Now therefore in as much as Charity
neither in this life, nor hereafter shall be put away, as much as pertains
too the The law of charity has been from the beginning, and shall continue
for ever.
precept and will of God, and obedience evermore due to the same, who sees not
that Usury, which is clean contrary to Charity, is condemned? But for
answer this shall suffice, and the rather, because above Cap. 8. entreatyng
of the causes wherefore Usury is unlawful, we handeled this matter. And
therefore without all controversy, they shall be very naked which bring this
leaf to hide their filthiness.

But they will perhaps except again and say, No injury A second objection.
is done to him that is willing. He which humbly does request to borrowe
money of an Usurer, does promise to pay Usury, not compelled thereunto but of
his own accord, and therefore the Usurer which helps such a man can not
be said too violate the Law of Charity.

The principle from whence this reason is taken, is The answer.
doubtful, because it respects two meaninges, whereof one is true, and the
other fall. For every will is not voluntary, and of it self, as it may be
easily confirmed by examples. A wayfaring man, delivers indeed his Every
voluntary action is not without constraint.
treasure of his own accord unto thieves, which he would not do could he
escape their sword. A Mariner casts his goods into the sea, and that
willingly, but from whence proceeds his will? Truly not from a voluntary
election, but through fear of making shipwreck. For therefore does he cast
his merchandise into the sea, lest he and all should perish. Wherefore two
evils being proposed, he choseth willingly that which seems lesser in his
judgment. In like manner the borrower agrees to pay usury and that
willingly, and yet he would not so do, except necessity constrained him for
the avoiding of a greater inconvenience.

Moreover they object that families and Commonweales A third objection.
cannot be maintained without Usury.

I grant the same in this corruption of the world, The answer.
where all manlines is excluded. But from whence proceeds that profit,
whereby you say that families and Commonweales are maintained? From Usury?
Nay. For no goodness in deed can be gotten by Usury, Other obiectio^s you
shall find in the former part of this book cap. 9. pa. 23. b.
but rather a sea of discommodities. But if happily any good seems to come
by Usury, that should not be ascribed to Usury, but rather to lending, which
lending, if it were done without Usury, would more profit families and
commonweales.

But you will say, your words are spent in vain, in going An objection for all.
about to call Usurers, which are idolaters (for their money is their God) into
the right way. Though it be so (for like The answer.
Adders they stop their ears at the preaching of Gods word, and hear nothing
with such indignation as their Usury to be cried out upon. Their profire is
so sweet, that they had rather forgo heaven, than go without that. And
hereof it is, that many which might live well otherwise, forsake honest trades
of living to live in idleness upon Usury to the decay of many good houses,
and hurt of their commonweales) though they will not hear, I say, yet is it
our duties to admonish them, that at the least they may think that the day
of the Lord is at hand, and will suddenly come Remember the day of judgment
o ye worldlinges.
upon them then, at which time they shall render an account to an upright
judge, which neither can be corrupted with any excellency of person, nor
deceived by subtlety of reason. And then they will confess our counsel to
be good, and bewail their disobedience to the same.

The 11. Chapter. The office and duty of the Preachers in reproouyng Usurie.
AS it belongs to the Magistrate Preachers are to use the judgment of the
spirit in all their doings.
to punish, so is it the part of the preachers to reprove usury: to lift up
their voices like Trompets, and to blow abroad the horriblenes of this vice,
and the hurt it does unto commonweales. Yet are they to use the wisdom of the
spirit to their own comfort, the profit of the Church, and the better
advancement of the glory of God.

First the should earnestly inueigh against all unlawful 1. All unlawful
contractes are to be found fault withal. The Gospel favors no unlawful,
or cousening contract.
and wicked contractes, and show that no unjust or cousening bargain can
stand with true religion: among such the matter of Usury should not most
coldly or carelessly be handled, but zelously.

Afterward they should with all diligence beware that rashly they do no
reprove all contractes, which in 2. All contractes which may seem at the
first unlawful, are not rashly to be reprehended.
their judgment do seem unlawful, allowed by the magistrate.

Furthermore, let them, as much as they may, amend all manifest errors in
bargainyng by Ecclesiastical discipline, and that not through any private
malice, 3. Preachers must not reprehende through malice, but through the zeal
of God.
or affection, but with great counsel and deliberation, lest that untimely
correction do more hurt than profit.

Then, if they cannot reform all abuses, which they 4. What Preachers should
do when public reprehension can take no place.
shall find in bargains, let them take heed that they trouble not the
Church ouermuche, but commend the cause unto God, and beg of him that he
would set to his helping hand.

Last of all, let them with diligence admonish the ^.
rich men, that they suffer not themselves to be entangled How Preachers
should deal with rich men.
with the show of riches, and that they takeheede, lest being seduced by the
subtle arguments of the seducing flesh, they loose their faith, and fall into
the snares of Satan. And tell them withal that these words of Christ were
not spoken in vain: It is an hard thing for An hard thing for a rich man to
be saved.
a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. Likewise they should now and
then tell them what is the true use of riches, and how that Christ would
therefore have many of his members to be poor, and in respect of others,
miserable, for a trial whether that men love him unfeignedly, and are willing
to obey his commandments, or no.

The 12. Chapter. Profitable admonitions for all dealers and occupiers in this
world.
IT follows now finally, that we give (as we promised above, cap. 7.)
certain observations, which being diligentile considered of the virtuous,
will profit, by the help of God, very much.

The first, Paul says, 1. 1. The first admonition for occupiers in the
world.
Timoth. 1. The end of the Law is love, out of a pure heart, a good
conscience, and from a faith unfeigned. We said above (cap. 8.) that Usury was
therefore forbidden, lest charity among men should be broken. This rule of
Paul, first, will that charity The tutchstone of our outward actions.
proceed from the pure fountain of the heart. Therefore thou art to take
heed, lest while outwardly thou pretendest the love of thy neighbor, thine
heart inwardly be unclean, and so thy work be odious and filthy. Secondly,
it requires a good conscience, that is, that before GOD thou may truly
say, that in all thine actions thou do unfeignedly, and in deed seek the
glory of GOD, and the profit of thy neighbor. Therefore let this rule of
Paul be evermore in mind, and serve for a touchstone to examine all our
actions by.

The second: Abstain from all appearance of evil, 2. 1. These. 5.
says the Apostle. This is a most necessary rule. For it warns not only
to avoid those things which are evil in deed, but also that we abstain
from al appearance of evil, that is, that we shun from dooyng that, which
has any show or likeness of evil. Whereby all colored dealings are
forbidden, as well as manifest offendyng.

The third: Let your manners be void of covetousness 3. Heb. 13.
This precepte of saint Paul does not only belong to the mind, that the
same be not profaned with Idolatrous covetousness, but also to outward
manners. For it would have us to live so, that no man blame us No piety
toward God, where their is no charity toward our neighbor.
for covetousness. For where manners do accuse the heart of covetousness,
there undoubtedly is neither pity, nor faith. Wherefore it is a godly prayer
of king David: Incline mine heart o Lord to thy testimonies, and Psalm. 119.
not to covetousness. Here does David set obedience toward God against
covetousness, signifiying that He which loves mammon, little cares for
religion.
such is their Nature, that where one is, the other cannot be. If therefore
the heart be infected with the contagion of covetousness, there cannot be a
sincere Religion toward God. If the covetous man show any The covetous
Protestant, as but a dissembling protestant
obedience toward God, it is but mere hypocrisy. But contrariwise, if the
heart do burn, and be inflamed with the love of God, and of his religion,
covetousness can have no place. For what agreemente has the Idol of
covetousness, with the temple of God? Therefore I would have the godly to
bear in mind this precepte of saint Paul: Let your manners be void of
covetousness: and to pray with David from the heart, Incline my heart o Lord
to thy testimonies, and not to covetousness, which being dooen, as it should
be, I doubt not but less contention will arise about Usury.

The fourth: Paul would have all Christians so to 4. A shame for Gospellers
to excel the very Pagans in all wicked and unlawful dealings.
live, that the Gospel be not evil spoken of among the Gentiles. But certain
it is, that among the very Turks and all profane people, Usury is abhorred.
And therefore what will they say of Christians, when they shall hear that we
contend with the most ungodly nations under the sun, and surpass them in all unlawful dealinges? This undoubtedly should move the godly A good
Christian had rather al his life time to live in extreme poverty, than to
obscure the glory of his profession.
rather to live poorly, than to cause the name of God, and the Gospel of
Christ to be blasphemed of the ungodly. It would rather become us, through al
examples of well doing, and godliness to win them, that together with us they
might glorify God, and be saved. But alas what is don? Under the outward show
of Christianity, we hide all Turkish, yea and diuilish impiety.

The fifte: Paul bids us to avoid offense, lest 5. We may not offend
the weak consciences of any.
that the weak being offended at our dealinges, do fall. Neither is it his
mind that we abstain from things evil of themselves, but also from things
lawful. It was lawful for S. Paul through the liberty of a Christian to
eat flesh, but what says he? Before I will offend my brother, I will never
eat flesh. And therefore such is the duty of the godly in deed, that they
will not only beware of defiling themselves by any spot of sin, but also of
giving any occasion, whereby the weak may fall, and judge sinisterly of us.

The sixte: We should bring unto our minds the excellency 6. The name of a
Christian a glorious name.
of our calling. For certainly the name of a Christian is a glorious name. For
a man borne of a noble and famous house to go about servile and base business,
is shameful; for so he staineth his house and stock from whence he came: much
more shameful is it for the sons of God to defile themselves with things
unseemly, for thereby they shame their brethren.

The seventh: we should fear lest our posterity be 7. The children of the
covetous commonly prosper not.
plaged for our covetousness. For whosoever heapeth up riches for his heirs by
unlawful means, shall not escape punishment. For God, either does take away
their heirs from them, that they may see their wickedness Covetous Parents
have poodigall children.
and repent: or does punish the heirs by casting them of, suffering them to
rushe into sondrie vices, that such things as were unlawfully gotten, may
vnthriftely be consumed, to the certain destruction of the heirs.

Finally: Let this cogitation come into mind: I see ^.
many times the children of poor and godly parents to come to great honor,
and that without the help of riches, for they had none, through the benefit
of learning, wisdom, and virtue. Contrariewise, I see diverse which have had
great possessions left unto them by their predecessors, and yet are come to
extreme poverty, through their own fault: or, as painted tables,
unprofitable in a Commonweal, like the wooers of Penelope, and the Epicures
hogs, borne to consume the fruit of the earth. This cogitation will make the
virtuously disposed parents to leave their Children rather virtue and
qualities, than riches without virtue, which seldom comes to good.

The. 13. Chapter. Of Alms.
BEfore we come too the other sorts of civil contractes, I think it not
amiss in this place, having already spoken both of Godly, and also of
unlawful lendyng, to speak somewhat of Alms or free giving. A thing
necessarily required of every godly man. For it pleases Be merciful, as your
heavenly father is merciful.
God (as above in this book cap. 2. and in other places we have often said)
to send the poor among us, to try whether we love him like true children,
and make account of his commandments or no. And, a nota le argument is it of
unfeigned piety, if we take pity of the poor, the very members of Christ,
the sons of God, heirs of the joys of heaven as well as we. But for that I
see many causes, as the love of money, the ignorance of Gods providence,
hethenish mistrust, abuse of the blessings of God to vanity, vnprofirable
expenses, and a lamentable want of natural affection, whereby the poor are
not pitied, I think it good in this place somewhat largely to entreat of
Alms, both to show that we are bound thereunto, and that the more willingly
we may discharge our duties, and see unto the poor more cherefullie.
Wherefore I will first 1. Things to be considered in this treatise of alms.
of all show how we should begin to deal our alms, and what are the kinds
thereof. Afterward I will recite the causes, which may provoke the godly to
bestow 2.
their Alms. Then I will signify with what mind 3.
one should deal his alms, and withal I will prescribe a manner of giving
alms. Last of all, I will show what 4.
are the ends of true Alms, and the commodity redounding to the merciful.

The 14. Chapter. The kinds of Alms.
HE which would be merciful, How a man deals his alms upon himself.
ought to deal his alms first upon hym-self: secondly upon others. He
bestows his devotion upon him self, that repents his old and wicked life,
and turns unto God. For no mercy (so does the word alms signify) can
be extended of him, which is not as yet under the mercy of God. Hitherto
pertains that of Augustine: If thou will give thine alms begin with thy
self. For how can he be merciful unto others, which is cruel to himself?

The mercy, or alms which we must give unto others, How we must bestow our
alms upon others.
is of two sorts, spiritual and civil. The spiritual alms is to reclaim
him which wandreth from the The spiritual giving of alms.
flock of Christ, and reduce him into the right way to eternal happiness. No
alms is more excellent, more profitable, or more necessary than this. For as
the soul is better than the body, so the alms whereby the soul is
refreshed, is fare more excellent than the alms, whereby the body is
nourished. And as everlasting riches are to be preferred before all the
commodities of this life, which are but for a time: so the Alms which
serves to the attainyng of eternal life, is to be more esteemed than the
alms serving but while we are in this world. Saint James does generally
extol James. 5.
this alms in these words: Brethron, if any among you have erred from the
truth, and is converted by some, let him know that whosoever has converted a
sinner from going astraie, shall save his soul from death, and shall cover the
multitude of sins.

The civil alms belongs to the body, or this present A civil giuyng of
alms.
life, to wit, when we being touched with compassion, do succor the necessity
of any poor man.

To both kinds of mercifulnes Christ by the example We are bound to
cherishe and comfort both soul and body of the poor. Luke. 6.
of his father does adhort us, when he says, Be ye merciful, as your heavenly
father is merciful. Let every one bear this in mind, which thinks God to
be his father.

The 15. Chapter. The causes moving to mercifulnes.
THE causes which may incense the godly to pitt^c toward the poor be
many, especially these.

The first is Christianity 1.
it self, or the profession of Christian religion. For this does require that
we excel in all good works, and that we make of, and cherish one another as
the members of one body whose head is Christ. When this Good children will
imitate the virtues of their fathers.
is done through faith in Christ, we study for Christianity in the fear of
God, that is, to imitate the nature of God in deed. For because God, whom by
our profession How we are said to be imitators of God.
we are bound to imitate, is ritche in mercy, we imitatyng his mercy, are said
after a sort to be the imitaters of God himself. But as many as are not
exercised in Who are ^h^sonnes of God.
this imitation, they are Christians only in name, Bastardes, and no sons
of God. For none are the sons of God, but such as imitate the virtues of
their father. Malach. 1.
Hitherto belongs that saying of the Prophet: If I be a father, where is mine
honor? But the chefest part of honor, which children can do to their
Parents, is to imitate their virtues. Whosoever desires to be glorified with
the honor of a Christian, let him place before his eyes this cause of
mercifulnes and liberality, and take heed that he be not carried away
through examples of wicked men from this necessary, and due service of God.

The second is the commandment of God, whereunto 2.
all creatures must be obedient. Jesus the son of Eccles. 29.
Sirach makes mention of this cause, saying: Help the poor for the
commandment sake, and turn him not away because of his poverty. And a
little after: Bestow thy treasure according to the commandment of the
highest, and it shall profit thee more than Gold. All the Liberality the
chiefest part of charity.
testimonies of scripture, which commend unto us the love of our neighbor,
do above all require liberality toward the needy. For this is the chiefest
part of true charity. Hitherto belongs that of the Lord: I command Deuteronomy.
15.
thee that thou open thy hand unto thy needy brother. He which contemns
this commandment, Whosoever gives not unto the poor, loves not God. John.
3.
how can he love God? how can he fear him? For so says John: whosoever has
the goods of this world, and sees his needy brother, and shuts his
compassion from him, how abides the love of God in him? And Job: He Job. 6.
which takes away compassion from his neighbor, has cast away the fear of
the Lord. Whosoever therefore The duty of ^ Christian man.
does purpose from his heart to serve and fear God, let him think that he
owes obedience to God commanding. Of the which Micheas spoke after this
manner: I will show thee, o man, what is good, and what the Lord requires of
thee, namely to deal justly, and to love mercy, and to humble thy self to
walk with thy God.

The third may be the examples both of Christ, 3. The mercy of Christ
toward us miserable wretches.
and his men bers. Christ became poor too make us rich. And then again,
what do we owe to the members of Christ? especially when he does witness
himself that what soever is done to the least of his members, Math. 25. How
ready the holy fathers were to relieve the poor.
is done to himself? The holy fathers delighted in nothing so much, as in
cherishing the saints of God. Abraham does humbly entreat strangers to
abide, the better to extend forth his liberality. Lot inuiteth Abraham. Lot.
Cornelius. A notable example for courtiers to imitate.
Angels, supposing them to be poor traueilers. Cornelius the Courtier is said
to have spente his time in prayer, and giving of alms, which ascended into
the heavens, as the Scripture witnesses.

The fourth is the dignity and account which God 4. The account which God
makes of alms devoutly bestowed. Matthew. 9. Heb. 13.
makes of our alms devoutly conferred. Proverb. 21. To do mercy and
judgment, is more grateful to the Lord, than sacrifice. Christ himself
says: I will mercy and not sacrifice. The Apostle adhorteth that we forget
not to be liberal, and beneficial: for in such sacrifices he says, God
delights. Such is the excellency, such is the account before God of alms
godly bestowed. It Alms better than sacrifice.
is preferred before sacrifice: God is said to be singularly delighted
therewith. This account which God makes God is delighted with the alms given
by his servants.
of our alms, ought mutche to move the ritche men of this world, that they
endeavor, according to the counsel of saint Paul, too be ritche in good
works.

The fifte is our neighbor himself. Every man as 5. Who is our neighbor.
well the wicked as the godly is my neighbor, and that first by reason of
creation: secondly, because of likeness: 1. 2. 3. How many ways christians
are linked together in ^igh^^^ or neighberhode.
thirdly in respect of humane society. And although this triple bond,
whereby all men are tied together, is a great cause, why one should benefit
an other: yet is there a greater couplyng together of Christians. For there is
a common calling of all Christians, whereby we are called to the unity of the
spirit in the 1.
bond of peace. Secondly, by the same Spirit of Christ 3.
we are regenerate into the sons of God: whereby we have all one Father
which is God, and therefore are all brethren. Thirdly, we are members of the
same 2.
mystical body, whose head is Christ. Last of all, we 4. Al men are
detters unto God* and every one owes a duc^^^ to another.
have one and the same hope of everlasting life, and are all heirs of eternal
happiness in Christ our Lord. I say nothing of that bond, whereby all men
in this world are debtors one to an other. If this cause of liberality and
mercifulness were considered of many as it should be, they would use less
cousenyng, and unlawful gain, they would not so much spoil the poor
members of Christ, but make of, and cherishe their own flesh. And therefore
as often as we see any through misery crauyng our aid, let us I beseech you,
remember that saying of Esaie: Despise not thine own Esaie. 5^.
flesh.

The sixte cause, is the sondrie punishementes for 6. The punishements of the
unmerciful. 1. Eccles. 4. 2,
such as be hard hearted. The first is the wrath of God, Turn not away
thine eyes from the poor, because of displeasure. The second is cursyng: In
the same chapter of Ecclesi. it is thus written: The prayer of him whi^h^
curses thee in the bitterness of his barte shall be heard, and he will hear
him that made him. The third is 3.
to be rejected when thou praiest being in need thy self. He that stops
his ears at the cry of the poor, Proue^b. 21.
shall cry himself and not be heard^. An horrible punishment truly as may
be: and no marvel though God hear not him, because he hears not the sun
of God criyng in his members. The fourth is, to leese that 4.
wherewith God has blessed thee. For it is written: From him which has not,
shall be taken away even that Matthew. 25.
which he has. And he is said not to have, which uses not his gifts and
riches to the glory of God, and relief of the poor. Hitherto belongs that
saying: He Proverb. 3.
which despises the prayer of the poor, shall suffer poverty. The fifte is
the beggerie which the children of 5.
the covetous come unto, or their filthy and wicked life which is more
miserable than beggerie.

The 16. Chapter. Of the mind of the giver, and the manner of giving alms.
I Have spoken of the punishmente of them which are cruel toward the poor,
and that not out of Philosophy, which may err, but out of the word of God,
which can not deceive. He which shall contemn these, shall fall, ere long
be, into the severe judgment of God Now are we to speak of the affection or
mind of him which gives alms, and of the manner how he should bestow the
sa^^e.

A giver of alms should avoid two vices, as Christ 1.
A giver of alms must take heed of Hypocrysie.
wills, Math. 6. and they are Hypocrisy, and Vain glory. For these two
vices like the Plague, or poison are 2.
very infectious. Where hypocrisy is, there is no faith: Vainglory.
where vainglorie is, there can be no love, or fear of There is no faith,
where hypocrisy is. There is no fear of God, where vaineglorie does abide. The
affections that ought to be in a giver of alms.
God. Therefore we should in giving of alms carry with us a love of GOD,
charity toward our neighbor, simplicity and cherefulnes. For these
affections, as it were with a celestial salt, do make our alms to savor most
sweetly before the Lord. Besides, a merciful man should not be destitute of
faith, whereby he knows that his alms do please God, and also persuades
himself that the care of God is such over his chosen servants, that he will
not suffer them to want things necessary for this life. And because he
requires at our hands that we help others, and has promised a reward, we
ought even for Gods sake to do good, and again to look for help from God
through faith.

In the manner of giving our alms, we should consider 1. In the manner of
giving alms what (...) to be respected. Tob. 4.
first the quantity, according to the counsel of Tobias, which says: If
thou haste much, give plentifully: if thou have little, distribute
cherefully: Secondly, Equality, that thou of duty bestow thy alms on the 2.
The poor when they are releiued must be thankful. 3.
poor, and that he thankefully receive the same, with wishing well unto thee:
Thirdly, cherefulnesse of mind, as it is in the 2. Cor. 8: If thou haste a
willing mind, it is accepted, according to that a man has, not according to
that he has not: Fourthlie, a difference must be put between 4.
strangers, and those of the household of faith, as the counsel of Paul
is: While we have time let us Gal. 6.
do good unto all, but especially unto them which are of the household of
faith, that is, to them which by faith are the servants of God: finally
possession, according to the saying of Solomon: Let thy fountains run out,
5. Proverb. 5.
but be thou master of them.

The 17. Chapter. The ends, and fruit of almesgiuyng.
THE last thing that we promised too speak of in this treatise of alms, was
concerning the fruit and ends of seeing to the poor. And although both the
ends and fruit of alms devoutly co^ferred, may easily be seen by those
things which have been said, yet the better to stir up the minds of the well
disposed readers to this necessary, good, and holy work, I will allege
somewhat concerning the ends and fruits of such alms.

The ends are four. The first is to relieve our needy 1.
neighbor, and to refreshe the members of Christ. The The ends wherefore we
should bestow our alms.
second, to provoke others to mercifulnes toward the poor, according to that
of Paul: your zeal has provoked 2.
many. The third, to testify our faith, and fear of 2. Corinthians. 9.
God. For the works of charity are witnesses that we 3.
fear God, whose commandment we obey. The 4.
fourth to glorify God.

Diverse and manifold is the fruit coming by liberality The manifold fruit
which comes by liberality toward the poor. 2. Corinthians. 9.
toward the poor. Paul witnesses, that it will come to pass that such as
have been liberal, and relieved the poor, shall prosper in every good
work. For so it pleases the Lord, to recompense obedience toward him with
new graces. And this it is which the Lord says, God will reward thee
openly. Matthew. 6.


David says: Blessed is he which considers the poor Psalm. 41.
and needy, in the evil day God shall deliver him.

Solomon says: He which has mercy upon the poor* Proverb. 19.
lends unto the Lord.

Paul says: He which sows pentifullie, shall reap plenty.

Esaie says: If thou pour out thy soul to the hongry, Esaie. 5^.
and do replenish the troubled spirit, then shall thy light spring out in the
darkness, and thy darkness shall be as the noone day.

The Preacher says: Lay up thine alms in the bosom Eccles. 29.
of the poor, and it shall deliver thee from all affliction, etc. It shall
fight for thee against thine enemies, better than the shield of a Giant, or
Spear of the mighty.

All which places, together with this my discourse, as my self have noted,
and I wish the discreet reader diligently to mark, are to be understood of
such alms as proceed from an unfeigned faith in the merits of Christ,
otherwise it may be thought (which is farthest from my mind) that I agree with
the Papists which make alms meritorious without Christ, and without faith,
which is an error.

The 18. Chapter. Of Commodation.
COmmodation follows, which is Commodation what.
a kind of lending whereby a thing lent is not his own properly for ever that
has borrowed it, but for a time, and is afterward restored again. It is
called Commodation, Wherefore called Commodation.
because the thing borrowed does bring some commodity unto him which borrowed
the same. This kind of contract should be without fraud, as well in the
lender, as in the receiver, and should agree with the rule of charity.

The 19. Chapter. Of lettyng forth to hire.
THE contract of hiring, and letting What is to be considered in hiring and
lettyng out.
out for money, should be ordered according to the custom of time and place,
but so that it swerve not from the law of charity. He therefore which
lets out the use of his goods, or his labor, according to the cu^stome of
the realm, and other circumstances, may lawfully ask a recompense of him
which hireth it. And he which will not pay, deals injuriously.

Hethertoo me thinks belongs that contracte Implantation.
which the Ciuilians call Implantation, because they which hire barren
fields are bound too make them better by their labor, and pay to the Lords
a certain yearly rent for them, the title for all that remainyng to the letter
of them out.

The 20. Chapter. Of the contract of society.
IN the contract, which men call, of The contract of society what.
society, that is, where one lays out money only, another bestows only
his labor: or one money and labor, another either money or labor, or both put
their labor and money but not a like, this foundation must be diligently
maintained, Do not that unto another, which thou would another should not
do unto thee. He which contrary to this foundation will deceive his partner,
is unjust, and a breaker of the laws of brotherhood.

Therefore to conclude, the godly in this, and in all other A rule to be
observed in all honest contractes and bargains.
bargains may safely follow this rule: Every contract allowed by the lawful
magistrate, which has the chief authority, is to be used of Christians, if
so be it be not contrary to the law of nature, or commandments of God.
And therefore the godly may as well without any offense of God deal in them,
as they may enjoy the elements which are common to all, good and bad.

The 21. Chapter. Of Church gooddes.
IS it lawful for heirs to demand A question*
again the gooddes which their forefathers bestowed upon the church, fro
the celebratyng of Masses, the Masses being not used, but altogether
abolished? We The answer.
must as-well respect the mind, as the words of the Testatour. The last
words were that his gooddes or lands should serve to the maintenance of
Masses, which being wicked, are to the great commendation of godly Princes,
cut of. The mind was to maintain the service of God. According therefore to
the mind of the Testatour* which was good* and devout, the gooddes should
be transferred to the true service of GOD, which before were given to the
celebration of the Mass.

But they obiecte, that In many of their deeds, this An objection.
clause is expressed: If such custom of Massyng or Syngyng shall cease, let
the heirs have authority to take away those gooddes, or possessions which
their ancestors have given to the maintenance of Masses, etc.

They which gave such gooddes to the Church erred The answer.
in the particular, and not in the general. The particular is the celebration
of the Mass: the general is the honor of God. The heirs therefore having
learned a better lesson, ought to amend the faults of their progenitors, and
convert that thing to the due honor of God, which was bestowed to the
profanation of his divine service. Yea; rather I think it the part of
magistrates to do so, for the better avoiding the insatiable covetousness of
particular men.

Flora a notable strompet of Rome, bequethed her Flora.
substance (which was very great) to the maintaining of a goodly show every
year at Rome. But the same being abolished through the great wisdom of Cato
Cato.
the Censor, which could not abide the filthy behauour and unseemly gestures
used in the same, the heirs of Flora demanded again the goods which Flora
had bestowed. But the Senate of Rome did most wisely answer, that those
goods ought not to return to the heirs, but the mind of Flora should be
respected whose last will was, that her gooddes bequeathed, should serve to the
benefit of the Roman Commonweal. For Flora erred not in the general, though
she did in the particular. And therefore to observe the general, the Senate of
Rome did most wisely decree, that the gooddes should not be restored to the
heirs demanding them, though those plays were not used. In like manner
Legacies bequethed to the celebration of Masses, are not to be restored to the
heirs of the giuers, though Massyng do cease, but are to be converted to
the general, to maintain the Church of God, that is, to help the Preachers,
the Poor, the keepers and defendours of the Church. They should not serve to
the pleasure of men, but to the necessities of the Church. And that is the
judgment also of Bartolus, The judgment of Bartolus an excellent Ciuilian
upon this question.
an excellent Lawier, which in his Commentaries concerning Masses, upon the
law, About that which is bequethed to a City, has these words in effect: If
a Testator have left an hundred pounds for the singing of Masses, which Masses
cannot be song because of some prohibition, that thing given ought to be
converted to some other use. The general sentence he set down a little
before, in these words: If the Testator add a manner, or condition which is
impossible (by reason of the prohibition) for some lawful and honest end,
then if it may not be fulfilled according to his words, it is to be converted
to some other lawful use.

The 22. Chapter. The greeuousnes of their synning which take away the gooddes
of the Church.
THey which spoil the Church of Spoylers of the Church are breakers of both
tables.
her gooddes, do violate both the commandments of God. For they are against
God, wicked, and against the Church and the members thereof unmerciful. For
they both sacrilegiously usurp which was given to the service of God, and
cruelly bereue the poor Christians of living. Cicero affirms that he does
more grievously offend that robs the common treasurehouse, than he which
steals the gooddes of a private man. By which reason they are proved most
hainously to sin, which occupy the gooddes of the Church against all
justice. The Lord does condemn all them, which give not of their own to the
poor: and shall we think that such can escape, which take from the poor?
He is damned by the word of God which does not patiently suffer an injury,
then can he avoid a plague which does offer injury to the Church of Christ?
God is not deceived by Sophistry, nor will receive any wicked excuse.
Howsoever these Churcherobbers An exposition of the eight commandment.
turn themselves, they can never escape from gilte of the eight commandment.
For God in saying, Thou shall not steal, does forbid that we take any thing
from any person by violence under the pretense of equity. And although many at
this day do by violence Church robbers escape not scot^ree in this life.
enjoy Ecclesiastical liuinges, and possess them sweetly as they suppose,
yet they carry about them a conscience, which notwithstanding it remain
without any sense securely, as it were seared with an yro^, yet one day for
all that, in the hour of death awaked, as it were A guilty conscience as good
as a thousand witnesses.
out of sleep, it shall be instead of a thousand witnesses, and shall more
grievously afflict the heart, than any torment outwardly can do. Then they shall
well perceive that Esaie said not in vain: Woe be to thee which spoylest,
Esaie. 33.
shall not thou be spoiled thy self? and to thee which despisest, shall not
thou be despised thy self? when thou have made an end of doing wickedly,
evil shall come to thee.

These fellows think they are out of Danger, because they presently feel not
the heavy hand of God, The punishment of the Jews.
and yet they might by the example of the Jews, learn, that the lord will
punish their sacrilege at the length, though he suffer them a while, for their
amendment. The people of Israel contemned the words of the Prophets, but the
measure of their sins being full, they were utterly destroyed: In these days
the word of God The longer the Lord for bears from punishing, the more
intolerable is the punishment when it comes.
does sound in all our ears, and yet notwithstanding we sleep securely without
repenting, but our sins being ripe, the Lord will also pour out his heavy
displeasure upon us, and then it will come to pass which Jeremy did
foretell: Like a theofe taken in theft shall thou be confounded. Whereby the
spirit of God does signify, that it will fall out, that such shall sustain
everlasting torments, which, making but a sport at the preaching of the
word, think all things lawful which the lust of the flesh does like of.

The. 23. Chapter. A question about the right use of Ecclesiastical riches.
BEcause Ecclesiastical riches have been a long while abused, it is upon
good consideration demanded, what is the true and lawful use of them, and
upon whom they are to be conferred? For every one which wears an hoode,
and can buzze out a base in the Church, or can understand the Latin tongue,
is not worthy too enjoy such goods, as many have erroniously supposed a long
time. But we must harken to the holy Fathers, whose judgments have been
right in these matters. The judgment of Gratian concerning the right use of
Ecclesiastical riches.
Gratian alleging the judgment of Augustine, does witness, that the Rentes
and Riches of the Church should be distributed into four parts.

The first whereof should be given to the Bishop and his 1.
family, not to maintain pride and riot, not to buy chains, or ringes of
Gold, not to keep great horses, and courtly trains, but for a necessary
and honest sustentation, and for hospitality, least that he being deceived
and carried away by the vanity of riches, do forget his duty, as it is
well known has come to pass in this Realm. The second part should be
conferred on the clergy, 2.
whereof I make three degrees. In the first are teachers and learners, which
must be maintained lest through need they forsake their calling. In the
second are weak and old men, which must be relieved becaused they cannot
labor. In the third, are such as by their pains deserve to be maintained.
The Third should be reserved for the poor, such as 3.
are poor in deed, and have lived honestly, as for others they are unworthy
to be nourished with the goods of the Church. Let them beg. The fourth should
be employed to the repairing of 4.
Churches, and houses fallen in decaie.
This sentence of Augustine is a godly and a true partition of Ecclesiastical
riches. He will not have hounds and harlots to be maintained; he will not
have idle persons to be cherished; he will not have swarms of Monks, most
unprofitable drones, to devour up the welthe; he will not have trashe and
idle words to be sold for the treasure of the godly, but he requires a
just distribution according to the proportion of Geometry, which has
regard both of the office, and also of the labor of assigning stipendes.

And although I allow this judgment of Augustine Civil auctority belongs
not unto spiritual men.
about the bestowyng of Church gooddes, yet this I add upon good reason.
First, because civil auctority agrees not unto Bishops, it is lawful for
godly kings and princes to take to themselves Lordships, rule, civil
jurisdiction, trains of Bishops, so that they convert them to the maintenance
of the Church: that is, godly kings and princes may enritche themselves with
these things, that they may have wherewith both to defend their states against
their enemies, and show themselves liberal toward godly exiles, or such as
have deserved well of the Church and commonweal.

That Civil government is not meet for Ecclesiastical persons, it may be
confirmed by such places of Scripture as put a difference between the
ministry of the Gospel and civil government. As my father sent John. 20.
me (says Christ) so send I you. My kingdom is not Luke. 22.
of this world. The kings of the Gentiles reign over them, but ye shall not
do so. The weapons of our warfar are not 2. Cor. 10.
carnal. But the Papists object that certain provinces An objection of the
Papists. The answer.
were given to the Roman Bishop of Constantine. If we grant this to be
true, which is most false, yet though that power was given to Siluester, it
was not lawful for him to receive it being a spiritual man, and to deliver it
to his successors. Because every one ought to do the duties of his calling,
according to that of Paul: Study to be quiet, and to meddle with your own 1.
These. 4.
business.

The Bishop ought to preach, the King to govern, The duty of a Bishop.
The office of a King.
and to guide Armies, to provide quietness for the bodies of his people. These
things therefore are not to be committed to a Pastor, but let every one in
his Necessary rules to be remembered of all men.
calling be mindful of this rule: Look unto your own business. Again, Let
every one walk according to his calling. Again: do those things faithfully
which are committed unto thee. The saying therefore, but it shall not be so with
you, should not only be understood thus, that Christ gives not civil power
to the ministers, but also that it be not taken or exercised of him that is in
the ministry.

The Papists in obiecting the answer of Christ to An answer to an
objection of the Papists.
the saying: Behold, here are two swords, do sufficiently declare that they
deal sophistically, and subtilie. For when he answers that it is enough, he
shows the complaint concerning the two sorts of enemies. It is enough that
the swords both of the high Preests and of Pilate are drawn against you.
Hereof without all controversy is concluded, that Civil government is
unmeet for Bishops and Pastors.

Moreover, where as yet the revenues of the Church are plentiful, and where
they are well seen unto by them above mentioned, a godly prince or king like a
A godly Prince will not spoil, but maintain the Church.
faithful steward and Nurse of the Church, should have a consideration of
such gooddes as remain, and especially provide, that they be not wasted, or
possessed by idle fellows, such as neither have, neither can, nor will do
any good to their country, or Church. For as a king is the defendour of other
gooddes of his people, so ought he be the maintainer of Ecclesiastical
riches. And as it is the duty of a king, if a city do abuse their common
riches, to provide that they be more profitablie bestowed: so should the same
King convert such Church gooddes which were abused in superstition, to
other good ends. But yet let every one take heed, lest, under the pretense
of godliness, he convert such goods of the Church either upon vile persons,
or unto wicked purposes. Which God grant, to whom be all praise ascribed now
and for evermore.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by John Kyngston, for Andrew Maunsell.


