AN ADmonicion against ASTROLOGY IVDICIALL and other curiosities, that reign
now in the world: written in the french tongue by IHON CALVINE and translated
into English, by G. G.

Austen of the city of god. Lib. 5. cap. 7. It is not without cause that men
suppose that when the Astrologours do merueylously in their answers declare
many truths, the same is done by a secret instinct of wicked spirits, whose
care is to fasten and confirm in men's minds these false and hurtful opinions
of statrie destinies, and not by any art or connyng of the noting and beholding
of the birth star. For there is no such art at all.

Imprinted at London by Roulande Hall, dwelling in Golding lane, at the sign
of the three arrows.

To the Reader.
BEcause the judicials of Astrology ^^ casting of figurs to tell fortunes seem
rather childishe plays then weighty matters for grave me^ to be occupied with all. In so much as god himself threatens that he will send out his plages and
power forth his judgments upon the wicked, and their so thsaiers and
stargasers shall not know how nor when such things shall com upon them. And our
experience teaches us the same in the late famine among us, in the losing of
Calis, in the burning of Pouls and the destruction of other cities and
contreis. Therefore am I bold though I be but a child to offer to the world soch
things concerning the curiosity of that art, and the abuse of the same, as I
both learned at the mouth of master Calvin and red in his books: and the
rather because I do se that my former labor in the translation of that epistle
of Cicero unto his brother Quintus has not been rejected.

Now again if my labors may be profitable to any, I shall praise god, and give
my self to further studies that I may more admire gods glory, and according to
my small talent profit his church, which thing that lord that is the only author
of al wisdom and geuer of all goodness grant me to do always to my lives end. So
be it.

An admonicion AGAINST ASTROLOgye Judicial, and other curiosities.
SAINT PAVL Does admonish us of one thing very necessary to the which
notwythstandynge few take good heed: to wit, that they which care nothing
for the walking in a good conscience do turn away and wander from the faith,
for he does mean that they which do pollute their consciences in geuyng the^
selves over to wickedness are not worthy to be maintained in the pure knowledge
of God: but rather deserve to be made blind to ye intent that they may be
deceived by diverse errors and lies. And it is a wonderful matter that we set
so little by it: since ye every day we se so great experience thereof even before
our eyes.

This is certain that God does never take away his truth from them unto
whom he has given some taste thereof, onles it be for this cause that they
have not worthily received it, but have rather abused it to a folishe ambition
or to others carnal affections. In very deed seeing that those yt have some
portion of silver are so careful to keape it safely, it is also good reason
that this inestimable treasure of the Gospel (seeing God has bestowed this
riches upon us) be as it were surely closed up in a good conscience, ye which
is the right coffre (if I may so term it) to keep it safe and sure that it
should not be stolen from us by the malice of satan.

And what comes to pass in the seed hereof. The most part causethe the
word of God to serve the^ only to this purpose that they may have somethyng to
talk upon in company. And one sort are led with ambition hereunto, another
sort seek their own gayn, yea and there be some that abuse it to practyse
baudri thereby to get access to there women and ladies. Very many know not to
what purpose they should desire to understand it: save only that they are
ashamed to se others take hold upon it, and that they should be uespised by
their ignorance. In so much almost all a few excepted, do turn this doctrine
of salvation into a certain profane philosphy I know not how. The which this
is such a vilany that God can not suffer it: because that this his sacred word
is a thing more holy the^ that it should be thus abused. It oght to bellyuely
and of such force and efficacy that it should perce through, the herts, for to
examine and try all that is within the man even unto the mary of the bones as
the Apostle speaks. If a man be ashamed thereof and cause it to serve for a
pastyme: think we that God can suffer such a contempt of ye power thereof. It
oght to reprove man (as S. Paul says) to the intent that he may learn to
condemn himself and to give the glory unto God in humbling himself. If any
then turn it to boastyng and to vain glory: is not this an abuse yt deserves
grievous punishment. It ought to transform and change us into the image of God
and to reform that which is ours in us. If any take occasion under the cloak
thereof to mantain themselves in these vices, must it not come to pass, that
God will punish not only such an abuse yt turn the men into poison but also
such a sacrilege as causes ye rule of good life to serve as a license to all
evil. It needs not here now to ciphre out every particular of ye life of the
most part of them that say that they do know ye truth of the Gospel. For so
much yt a man may see in effect yt certain where as they should be amended
are become rather worsse. The residue keep still their old course, at the
least a man can perceive but small Amendment. Saint Paul speaking of the
change that should be in the Christians and of the fruyts yt should proceed
forth of their new life when they are reformed to the image of the son of God
says, that he that has robbed should rob no more. Whereby he means that if
we have followed any evil trade so soon as God has given us the grace to know
his will we must turn backward. But in the stead hereof those that at this
day count themselves Christians, dispense with themselves without scruple of
conscience, to be at the least like unto others, so that he which was
accostomed to be an adulter does yet still continue in his vilany. The plays
and pastymes yea the blasphemies ar as outrageous emongs them as they were
before time. The superfluitees and pompes are excused as things indifferent
although a man may see that they serve for nothing but for pride ambition and all
vanity. Moreover every estate will have his Gospel a part, according as the
forge it for their appetite, so that there is as great diversity betwixt the
gospel of the court and that of lawyers and Iusticiaries and that of the
merchants and common multitude as is betwyxt the money made of many diverse
coygnes: Save that they all have one mark a like (that is) that they are of
the world. Whereby they have no agreement with Jesus, who would separate us from
the world.

Therefore it is good reason yt they that thus dishonor the doctrine of the
Gospel should be confounded, and that God should set them forth as a mocking
stock unto eueri man seeing that they have been the occasion that his holy name
has been blaspemed. It is most right also yt he should make them folishe and
depryue them of all reason and judgment, seeing that they cold take no profit
of that wisdom which is had in admiration of the Angels of paradise. Behold
this day whence so many folishe opinions do arise, or rather dooting madness
which have nether color nor appearance and yet are they received as they were
revelations come down from heaven finally seeing that presumption is the very
root of all heresies wandering fantasies and of all false and wicked opinions:
it is no marvel thoghe God do let them fall into so mani folies which have
not kept the right rule how they should abide in the obedience of his truth:
which is to humble themself in his fear. And for so much as this vice is as
common now a days as ever it was: we see also what fruits it has: so that all
the errors which are abroad in all the world are no other thing but so many
punishements because that men have abused the holy word of God. But because I
do not intend to make a long rehearse of them all: for so much as the number
would be infinite. I will hold my self contented with one example alone.

There has been of long time a folishe curiosity to judge by ye stars of all
things what should chance unto men: and thence to enquire and take council as
touching those matters which are to be done. But we will by and by God willing
declare yt it is nothing but a devilish superstition. Yea and it has been
rejected by a common consent as perui^cious to man kind. And yet at this day it
has gotten the vpperhand in such sort that many which thynk themselves wytty
men yea and have been so judged: are as it were bewitched therewith. But
although ye God had not reveled in our time the sincere truth of his Gospel
(notwithstanding seeing he has raised up the human sciences which are apt
and profitable to the guyding of our life and in serving to our profit may
also serve to his glory) yet had he just occasyon (I say) to punish their
ingratytude which not contenting themselves with ye things which are
substancyall and grounded upon good reason do through an outrageous pride
desire to fly to and fro in the air. But now since he has given them both
unto us, to wit, both that he has set the arts and sciences again in
their perfection and especially since he has restored the pure knowledge of
his heavenly doctrine to bring us even unto him and to bring us in into his hie
and merueilous secrets: if it come to pass that any in stead of taking
profit thereof had rather wander over wharte the fields the^ keep themselnes
within ye bonds are not they worthy to be double punished? Which thing then
comes to pass in effect when they are so dull or rather so brutyshe yt they
will apply their hole study to a folishe abuse: wherein they do nothing but
torment themselves without any profit. I know well enough their goodly titles
wherewith they set up and painte out so folishe a superstition. No man can
deny but that ye science of Astrology is honorable. Therefore they cover
themselves with this cloak. They name themselves Mathematiciens which is as
much to say as professers of the liberal sciences. But none of this is new:
for their forgoers have also pretended the same to ye intent they might deceive
ye world. Yet when we have perceived and as it were seen with ye eye that there
is no ground in all their folly neither of Astrologye nor yet of any science
we have no occasion why we should be abashed at these masks unless it were
yt they would make litie children a fraide. But al those which have any
knowledge be it never so little have no great need of this my aduertisment to be
iustructed to beware how they mell therewith. Therefore this simple treatise
shall rather be for the simple and unlearned multitude which might easelye be
deceived, because they can not put a difference betwixt the right Astrology
and these supersticio^s of charmers and forcerers. Wherefore let us first
see how sarre the true Astrology does extend it self: which is the knowledge
of the natural order and disposition that God has set in the stars and and
planets to judge of their office property and virtue and to bring all to their
end and use. We know well enough what Moises faith: ye God has made the son
and ye moon to rule the days and the nights: ye months ye years and all
seasons. In the which he does comprehend all which touches either tilling of
the earth and. Husbandry or ciuille policye. And as touching that governance
and trule whereof he speaks it is most certain that the very ignorant have
some taste and feling but this science of astrology besides ye effects does
also declare the causes. As for example. The most rude and simple people do
plainly perceive that the days are shorter in winter then in sumer: that it is
whotte in sumer and cold in winter: but they come never so his as to judge how
or wherefore that comes to pass. All the world does know the eclipses of the
son and of the moon: but ye causes are hide unless one have learned them by
doctrine and science. We need not go to the scoole to see that there are stars
in heaven. But it is not for all persons to comprehend the measure of their
courses their reuolutions their aspectes and other like things: for that does
requir a special knowledge. Wherefore the Astrology does serve to discuss
the course of the planetts and stars, as well for the time as for their
situacion and order. I say that it serves for the times because we may know
what space of time every planet yea and the firmament also does require to
fulfill their course. Again it serves for ye situacion, to know how far
one is dista^t from an other to discern the mocions which are straight or
crooked or one against an other: further more to know why the son is rather
further from us in winter then in summer. and wherefore it tarieth longer over
us in summer then in winter. To know how to compass and measure in what sign
of the Zodiaque it is eueri moves what aspectes it and the other planets have:
wherefore the moon is in the full or in the weane according as she either
draws from the son or draws nere: how eclipses come yea it serves thus
far even to measure the degres and the minutes. This ground being laid the
effects which we se here beneth do follow the which by the means of Astrology
we know to come from above and that not only when they are come but also we
are advertised before they come. There is none but he hears the noise of the
winds and sees the rain hail and snow: but none knows the causes save
only by the means of Astrology: which as I have said gives also some
conjectures for the time to como. Although that we may not make thereof a
general rule I speak therefore of ye ordinary course which is not let by
other accedents or chau^ces coming from some other cause. But well this is the
matter which we have to entreat of: for our feined Astrologians do take a
principle which is true: to wit yt the earthly bodies and generally all
creatures which are under heaven are subject to the order of heaven to draw
from it some qualities Howbeit they apply it full il. And thoghe the case were
even so, the natural Astrology will show well enough that the bodies which are
here beneth do receive some influence of the moon, by that that ye oysters
are either full or empty as the moon is either in the full or weane. Likewise
that the bones are either full of marowe as ye moon is either in the full or
else weaneth. Likewise the phisicians do draw out of the true Astrologye all
the judgment yt they have to ordeyne blood lettings or drinks or pills and
other things in due time. Therefore we must needs confess that is a certain
conuenience betwyxte the stars or planets and the disposition of man's body.
And all this as I have said is contained under the natural Astrology. But the
shameless deceivers which would under ye cloak of the science have gone further
have counterfeicted an other kind which they call Iudicialle, which consists
in two princypall articles: whereof ye first is to know not only the nature
and complexion of me^: but also al their fortunes as they call them, yea and
all that they shall either do or suffer in there life. The second is what end
those matters shall have which they go about when they traffike and occupy
one with an other and generally of the whole estate of ye world But let us
first entreat of the complexion of every one according to his birthe. And as
there was never lie so great nor so impudent which will not borrowe some color
of truth: I grant surely that as touching the complexions of men and chiefly
as concerning the affections which are partakers of the qualities of their
bodies: that they partly depend of the stars or at least have some agreement
therewith. As to say that a man is of a more coloricke the^ flegmaticke
complexion or contrariwise. Nevertheless even in this there are many things to
be noted: Our Mathematiciens to whom I speak do found their judgment upon
the hour in the which one is borne. But I say contrariwise that the hour of
the generation is more to be considered the which for ye most part is unknown
for the mother has not allwais a time certain wherein she should bring for
the her child. And whatsoever they have to reply against it yet for all that
shall they be convinced by reason that the stars have not so great force to
prynt qualities in a man at his birthe as at his conception yea and I say more
over that put the case the stars did give us our qualities or properties by
their influence yt that does not come by our birthe for common experience
does prove it. Neither is it without cause that Persius says Geminos Horoscope
Varo Producis genio. which is as much to say as that under the same Horoscope
or ascendent two may be borne of diverse natures. Which is allways seen yea and
that in brethren which are twynnes which will so dyffer one from an other as
though the positions of the stars had been clean contrary I will not say that
to judge surely by the nativity, of ye nature of a man beside this ye he must
have all the degrees of the Climate well marked: moreover this genethliak and
teller of men's fortune by the stars must have his Astrolobe in his hand. For
to trust to the clock or dial is scant sure enough. For if one do miss but
a few minutes a man shall find great chaunges in the beholding of the stars.
But whether it be that one must judge by the conceiving or by the birth it is
no matter this I will ask if the sex of male and famale do not surmount all
the rest of the qualities which are in ye creature. But if this be true that in
one moment and in one belly a son and a daughter shall be conceived: yea and
in one moment one woman shall be brought to bed of a man child and an other
of a woman child. Whence comes this diversity which is the principal? but
that the stars and planets have no such power as those fellows would have
men to believe. If a man should make a comparison There is nothing more certain
the^ that the sede of the father and of the mother have an influence and virtue
of an hundredth fold more power then has all the stars together, yet
notwithstanding a man may see that it fails oftentimes, and the disposytion
also may be diverse. Let us take two men of contrary and diverse natures,
having either of them a wife likewise of a contrary complexion and nature, ye
do begett children in the self same hour and are brought to bed in the self
same hour: it comes commonly to pass that ye children will take their
complexion rather of their fathers and mothers then of the aspecte of the
stars which they both had like. And the reason is so evident that none of
good judgment will speak any thing to the contrary. What should we say then
of the influence that the stars of heaven give to men? I grant (according to
that that I touched before) that the stars have in deed some concourse to
form the complexions: and specially those that concern the body: but for all
that I deny that the principal cause comes from thense. I understand as
concerning natural causes even those which they call inferior causes. For the
seed, whereof the children are procreated and made does go before and is of
greater importance. Secondly I say that the Astrologians do make an evil
foundation, and are not of a sure ground when they will rather judge by the
natyuitye and birth then by the generatyon and conceptyon, but it is true that
the generatyon and conceptyon is unknown unto them, therefore have they no
certaynty of judgment. Thirdly I say that God works in many by a special
grace even in forming their nature, so that the constellation has no place at
all, or at the least is so there exting wished and put out, that it can not be
perceived of men. Thus much concerning the natural inclination.

But if we come to the grace that God gives to his children, at such time as
he reformeth them by his holy spirit, and changes them in such sort that
they are worthily named New Creatures: whereto serves all the aspecte and
respects of the planets? Is this it whereupon God has founded his eternal
election? if the Byrthtellers and castars of men's natiuities will allege this
yt a man may use these things as inferior means. This is a very folishe
cauillation. We do se how it has pleased God of set purpose, to draw us back
from such considerations, when he has caused them to be borne in ye second
place, whom he would prefer to the other: as we have in the example of Jacob.
For wherefore was it that Esau which should be rejected came before: but that God
in breaking the commune order of nature would lift our eyes more high?
Admonishing us hereby yt we must look up and fasten our eyes upon his will
only without tourning away to searhe other causes. Let us only rest upon this,
that God reformeth men in such sort, when he calls them unto him that they
become all together new It was spoken of saul when God would prepare him to be
king that he would make him far otherways then he was. This came by no
constellation, but God wroght in him far above and beyond the course of nature.
And if this come to pass in a man who^ he had chosen for the temporal
regiment: what shall come to pass as concerning them whom he has chose^ for
his children and heriters of ye heavenly kingdom? Surely it must needs be
that this does surmount all the firmament and the stars. And this is most
certain that whosoever does deny that regeneration is a work of God above
nature does not only show that he is a profaine man: but also does openly
renounce the faith of the Christians. Therefore we must limite the forse of
the stars by that which concerns the world and does apperteine to the body
and is one of the first inclinations of nature: excepting nevertheless ye
special gifts that God gives to one as well as to an other without the
ordinarye means: and specially ye reformation that he makes in his elect
reneuing them by his spirit.

But this bastardly astrology not contented to have disposed and set in order
ye complexion and manners of men: does extend her judgment further. Which is in
foretelling yt which shall fall upon them all their life long, and the time and
manner of their death. Wherein there is nothing but a rash boldness and no
reason at all. For at the most the stars may emprinte certain qualities in
the persons but they can not cause that this thing or yt should fall upon them
aftrwarde of other occasions. So now though yt a birth reader cold judge a man
to be pain full and dilygent to gather riches: yet can he not forsee that some
heritage shall fall unto him by succession, because that lies in the will or
condition of others and not of him self. Behold then wherefore it was said of
old, that these mathematician maskes are good to fill ye ears and to empty the
pursses: Because that when they tell of good fortune they feed the curious with
wind and vanity and draw forth of the^ what so ever they will after that
once they have bewitched them.

Well they can tell a man how many wives he shall have: yea, but find they in
their stars the nativity of his first wife, to know how long she shall live?
By this means the women should no more have their peculiar nativity because
they should be subject to their husbands nativity. To be short by this
means the Horoscope or ascendent in the birth of one particular person should
comprehend the judgment of the whole disposition of a country: seeing that they
boast themselves that they ca^ judge if a man shall have an happy marriage, and
whether he shall have good or evil chance by the ways and fields: into what
dangers he shall fall: whether he shall be slain or dye in his bed. Let us
regard now with how many men we have to do with all in our life time. If
the Sothsayers had not all their wylles, and their fortunes in their sleues at
commandment, what cold they promise us hereby? Therefore do I conclude that
all those that take upon them to know the fortune of one man by his nativity
ar deceyuers of the people, in so much as the causes are not in him whose
byrthes he casts, but in others. It should be to long to bring all the
examples that might be brought, but one only may suffice.

There dies many times in one battle three score thousand men, I do not
speak of ye most great discomfitures, but of such as are very common, now I
demand if that we must assign to all these that are coupled together in
their death the self same ascendent in their birth? When they will say that
one thing that comes rare may not be prejudicial to the common doctrine of
an art. This is but a shyfte easily to be avoided. For I speak unto them of a
common thing: the histories do testify that in twenty battles in Spain there
dyed about three hundred thousand men. And without further waydyng in the
matter, who can not easly judge yt these that dyed together, were far diverse
in nativity in the espects and respects of ye stars. So that in so great a
multitude Capricornus and the Ram and the Bulle did so iumble their horns
together that all was there confounded. Aquarius did power out his water in
such abundance that it was like a floode. The virgin had lost her
virginity. The Creuis went backewarde. The Lion stroke behind with his tail in
such sort that one could not perceive it. The twins called Gemini, did so
mingle them selves together as though they had been one. The Archer did shute
traiterouslye and before one were aware of him. The Scales or Balance was false.

The fishes did hide them selves under the water so that they could besene no
more. Neither had ye sting of Scorpio any force, unless it were the cause of all
this murder. Yea which is a great deal worse, they are not content to have
spread their wings so far abroad in man's nativity: but they do usurp the
judgment, or rather the sothsaying, and for tellyng of all enterprises. by the
present aspect of the stars. As for example, if a man have a journey of two
hundredth miles of, where he does dwell, master Astrologer will gaze and spy by
the heaven, to know when it will be good that this pore fool should depart to
find at.xv. days end his family safe and well disposed when as ye stars
which did promise him good succes shall be out of their reign and dominion. I
pray you if the stars had any power to conducte and gyde man's enterprises
should we not rather have regard to them which then bear rule when the
matter is a doing? What folly is it to say, if I ought to bye marchandies of a
man which is beyond the sea, that the star which rules at my departure
shall give me good success, and they which rule when the bargain is made can
do nothing. I remember the tale that they are wont to tell of the Cardinal
Farnesus who by the counsel of an astrologer was compelled to leave his dinner
to get on horseback: to the intent that he might have good succes in his
embassage. And if he had departed two hours after having dined at his leisure
and had come that night to ye same lodgyng: what would that either have
furthered or hyndered him? who is it that does not perceive yt the chiefest
point is to know the situatio^ of ye stars when we should end the matter? I
mean if there were any controuersitie whether we ought to believe them or no.
But we may easily perceive that all is but a mere abuse. I have heard tell of
certain fantastical fellows which are in honor which durst not get upon
their mules without they had before asked leave of the stars. Put the case it
were a counselor of some hie court: there is a certain time appointed to
assemble together there are twentye which are subject to one rule and law, and
yet for all that their stars are diverse, ye law calls the^ all together, what
shall they do? If men were ruled by Astrology they would be so far from ever
endyng any process and action that one should not be able to bring three Judges
together to here a man's cause. Therefore it must needs be that either the stars
must be removed to the intent they may otherwise agree or else that al policy
should be beaten down.

But we know that god does approve this order that there should be certain
hours appointed to keep justice to hear his word to receive the sacraments,
without having regard to ye opposition of heaven. If that in musing upon the
stars men do forsake the order which God has appointed, and that every one
go aside without accommodating him self to the common society of mankind:
should not God be contrary to himself? Where shall that incomprehensible
wisdom appear by the which he has so well ordered all things that it does
seem that he has made all by line and measure? If one can not obey him in
this one point, except he do contrary to the order which he has placed in
nature? A man may very well apply that merry taunte to this kind of men which
an ancient Philosopher heard of his maid, who whiles he marked over earnestly
the stars and the firmament, had no leisure to look to his fete, and so
stumbled and fell into a ditche. Then said his maid unto him, there is nothing
better then to think upon those things that are most near unto us. I would
not turn nor apply this taunt or mock to the true Astrologians whose
labors and pain which they have taken to make us know the secrets of heaven,
can never be overmuch praised: for so much as it was good both to glorify God
and also to serve us to our use and commodity. But for these speculatiue
fools which walk above the clouds, and in the mean season do not consider
whither God does call them, nor have regard of their duty, which (I say)
wander out of the way which God shows them and forget their duty which they
owe to their neighbors: is there not good cause why one should mock and
deride their vanity, and that God also should make them ignominius and
shameful and cause them not only to stumble, but also in the end to fall and
to break their necks?

After that these our good masters the Genethliaks which tell men's fortunes by
their birth, have brought every one of us under their particular jurisdiction by
Astronomy they usurp also ye same power over the universal estate of the
world. And surely I do confess, according to that that I have before said
that in so much as the earthly bodies have a certain agreement with the heaven:
we may well note that certain causes in the stars why things come so to pas
here beneth. For even as the influence of heaven does often times cause tempest
whirle winds and change of weather, and continual raines: so consequently it
brings barrennes and pestilences.

Therefore in that that we see an order and as it were a knotte and tying
together of the things which ar above with the things that are beneth: I am
not against but that one may seek in the heavenly creatures the beginning and
cause of the accedentes which are seen here in the earth. I take this word
beginning not as the first and principal cause, but as an inferior means to
Gods will: yea, and such a one as he uses as a preparation to accomplish
his work even so as he determined in his eternal counsel. How be it we must
not altogether deny but that there is sometime a certain agreement of a
pestilence which we see here and the influence of the stars which is known by
Astrologye. Yet this in no case can be general: for when the choice was left
to David which of the three rods of God he would choose and that he had chosen
the pestilence: we may not say that that did proceed of the stars. Likewise
when the famine was so great in Siria and in Israel in the time of Elias and
that the drought was there so long: it were a point of great folishenes to
seek wither the stars were there unto disposed or no, since it was an
extraordinary miracle.

Neither must we take this example as one among others very rare: since God
speaking generally in the books of Moses: says that all adversities that
come unto m^n are hid in his treasures: Whereby he does signify that he
powers them furthe, to punish man's sins: and that if man by his malice did
not provoke his wrath, he would shut them up as it were in a coffer. And
surely there is not any more common doctrine thoroughout all the Prophets
then this: to wit, that he will make the heaven and the earth as brass.

And seeing he assigns the cause to our sins, all influence of the stars
is excluded. As for the wars, there is less matter: why they should search
the cause in the stars wherefore they come, since they also are Gods scourges
to correct sins, which depend nothing of the stars.

God promising to Abraham that he would give the land of Canaan to his
posterity, says that the term is not yet come. He does not say that the
aspect of the stars does not bear it. What does he say then? He says that
the iniquity of ye Ammorities is not yet com to the perfection. Wherefore as
men use to gather the fruicte of a tree when it is ripe: even so our sins do
hasten Gods plagues. Now let us see whether man's wickedness and
transgressions do proceed from the stars. There have been of old time
certain fantastical fellows, which did imagine it: but this madness was justly
cast aside by the whole world yea, and was counted a deuilishe inuencion the
which all Christians ought to abhore: as in deed it can not be received but all
the holy Scripture must be overthrown and god blasphemed and liberty given
unto men to do wickedly. Therefore I take this article as concluded that the
contempt of god and the dissolutions which are committed in any country that
is in the earth have respect to the stars. Which if it be so, we must also not
attribute to the stars Gods vengeance that comes for such causes.

If they object that god can use the natural means to chasten men withal: I
do not deny it. But must we say that this is done by a continual order even
as the stars are thereunto prepared? No but contrariwise when God does dry
up the red sea and the river Jordan although he did vouchsafe to use the
wind proper to do it with all: yet it was not said that that wind was stirred
by any aspect of the stars: but that God did raise it up at that present.
Although I will wyllyngly agree with them in this point that when it pleases
him he does apply the nature and property of the stars to his service.
Only I say this that nether famines, pestilences, nor wars, come at any
time by the disposition of the stars: if it be not be cause god would declare
his wrath upon mankind. And contrariwise that ye abundance of good health and
peace do not proceed from ye influe^ce of ye stars, but from the blessing of
God, whether it be to exhort and bring us to repentance by such gentilnes,
or that he will cause us to feel his love when we obey his justice. But let us
conclude until these our counterfaite Astrologians have showed that the
stars either make us to serve God or do stir us up to be rebels and to
resist him: that they are neither causes of the good nor of the evil which
come unto us. For every one may see that the one follows of the other.

If I would gather all the examples which do agree with this matter the book
should have none end. And yet for all that there is none which may not easily
of him self mark them and find them out. Wherefore let us learn to stay
our selves on the promises and threateninges of God: which seeing they nothing
depend of the situtiation of the stars do teach us that we must not set our
mind upon the stars.

This is the cause that God by his Prophet Esaias did mock the Egiptians and
Caldeans, which for all that were the cunnest nations in this art that ever
were in the world: rebukyng them and laying to their charge that by all their
science they could not foresee the desolation which was nere to the^, because
it came not from the natural course of the stars, but of Gods secret
judgment. Neither can one object that he does rebuke the men which did
falsely boast they were conning in Astrology. For he turns himself namely to
the art, declaryng that it is nothing else but vanity.

For when he speaks to the kingdom of Egipte, he says: Isa. 19. 12.
* where are now thy wise men? that they may tell thee or may know what the
lord of hosts has determined against Egypt.

And yet there was no part of astrology but it was there. The Prophet does as
it were speak in despite against all them that meddle with it, saying that it
is not their office to know the things which come to pass as they make
profession. There are more expres words when he speaks to Babylon. * Isa 47.
13.
Thou art weryed in the multitude of thy counsels: let now the Astrologers,
the Stargasers, and pronosticatours, stand up and save thee from these things
that shall come upon thee. Behold they shall be as stubble: the fire shall
burn them.

The Chaldeans were most renowned in Astrology that ever were any: so that
all they which have thruste them selves into this curiosity, did borowe their
name from them. Wherefore we se how God reproves and condemns them: and
pronounces plainly that men can not learn of the stars the mutations and
falls of kingdoms: and that he will punish the pride of them which have
thruste themselves in to enterprise it. Therefore he says also by the same
Prophet that he does scatter abrod and bring to naught the signs of the
Sothsayers: and make Enchaunters mad: that he will turn the wise clean
contrary, and make their science folishnes. He does not rebuke the rashness of
them which are not well founded in the art: but he does overthrow their
principles and marimies: to wit this consideration of the stars whereof he
speaks in another place. Wherefore Daniell entending to expound Nabucadnezers
dream the which all the Astrologians and divines cold not once attain unto:
does not make him more wise then they in the art nor yet more subtell. But he
makes their science and the revelation of God, as it were, two contrary
things. The Astrologians, says he, and divines could not declare the secret
unto thee: for it is God which is in heaven to who^ this does appertain, to
wit to declare secrets. And to be short we see that this whole part of
Astrology which does serve for divination called judgment: is not only
counted of God as vain and unprofitable: but is also condemned as derogating
from his honor and diminishing his glory.

Wherefore if we will be of his people let us harken what he says in his Prophet
Jeremy: * Iere. 10. 2.
let us not be like the Heathen, fearyng the signs of heaven. I know well
enough the shifte that certain do bring: to wit, that we must not fear the
stars as though they had rule over us: and yet for all that they do not
cease to have a certain particular superiority under the hand and
governance of God. But there is no dout but that the Prophet would bring us
to the providence of God, ye which thing to the intent he might bring to pass,
he goth about to bring us from the vain care that the heathen men did torment
themselves withal: for as much as he speaks to the Israelites which were
provoked to give themselves to such follye by the example of the Chaldeans and
Egiptians. Let a man ask now a days a Genethliake from what spring their
art is come. They can not deny but Babylon was the fountain: and that that
which they know is but as it were little ryuers which run from thence.
Therefore since God has once forbidden his people to be like to these men's
predecessoures and masters: shall we do well if we be lieue these their
inferiers? Though there were none othere evil but this, that in attributyng the
causes of our prosperous success and afflictions to the stars and to their
influence, we put as it were clouds before our eyes to drive us away from
the providence of God: we may already see that it is a thing over dangerous to
meddle withal. But more over this follows that those men which wander
amongst the stars, do descend no more into their own consciences to
examine their life: although they know that they carye within themselves the
matter and cause of all evil, and their sins are the wood to kyndle Gods
wrath, for the which wars famine, pestilence, hayle, frost and other like
things do come.

Likewise they that look for good luck by the prediction of the stars restyng
fully upon them: do wythdraw their hope from God and become sluggishe to
demand it, as though they had already won that which they looked for. I am
not ignorant what they have to say against it and to cavil. They will allege
a saying of Ptolome, that the significations of stars are not like the
decrees of a parliament which should have their execution ready: because god is
above them. But when they have said all that they can this is but a shifting
hole: for seeing all the euylles wherewith the stars threaten us do proceed
from the order of nature: we must needs conceive this fantasy that our sins
are not then the cause.

I will let pass the absurdity and contradiction that is in their words: to
wit, that the order which God has appointed to be everlasting is changed by
causes that come by chance. As though god were contrary to himself. It is
enough for me that I have gotten ye mind of the Prophet which is that he does
set forth, as it were two contrary things the respect which the Heathen have to
the stars in imagining that their condition and estate of their life did
whollye depend thereon: and the knowledge on the which the faithful ought to
rest to wit, that they are in the hand of God and that he will bless them
if they serve him with a good conscience and ye all the evils that they
sustain are so many punishments for their sins.

Our Genethliaks think they have a great solution in that the prophet names
the stars signs, for thence they conclude that their office is to signify
things before they come.

And for confirmation of that, they allege that which is written in the first
chapter of Genesis to wit, that God created them to this end. But since they
make so great bragges of this word signs what will they say to that which is
written in Esaias * Isa. 44. 2
that God does destroy the signs of the diuiners? It is most certain that
he speaks there of the Astrologians. So if I confess to them that they may
have signs but that God will overthrow them: what have they gained?

Moreover this cauillation is over impudent to say that Jeremy does after a
sort confess that there is some signification in the stars, because he
calls them signs. Yea, and it is a common kind of speech in rebuking an
abuse, to use the words customable amongst them whom they will rebuke.

The scripture calls the Idols the heathen men's Gods. If any under pretense
of that name, would prove the Idols to be gods who is it that would not mock
his folishenes? Brieflye: the Prophet does admonish the people that they
should not be troubled nor vexed with this opinion of the Heathen: that the
stars should signify this or that. As also at this present we can not
rebuke this error, but we must say that we must not occupy our minds with
such significations.

As for the text of Moses they pull it in pieces whilst they will stretche it
to their folyshe phantasye: God has ordained the stars to be signs. But we
must mark of what things: how be it every one of sound judgment does well
enough understand that Moses would have touched that which I have heretofore
declared, concerning the true use of Astrologye.

Although the stars be signs unto us to show us times to sow or plant, to
let blood or to minister Phisike and to cut wood, yet for all that they are no
signs to know when we should put on new garments: whether we should his and
sell the Mondaye rather then the Twesday and other like things which have no
respect nor agreement with the stars.

Therefore as we do confess the natural signs: so as we detest the sorcerie
that the Devil has invented.

Wherefore it is an impudent slander wherewith they slander us, in that they
go about to make men believe that we do destroy the order which God has
established in taking away from the stars the property that they have to
signify things before hand: yea that we condemn a very excellent and
profitable science. All this cloak is taken away in one word: when we put a
difference betwixt the natural Astrology and this bastardly Astrologye which
the Magicians have feigned. I know that to know the course of the stars their
virtue, and that which is of this sort is not only very profitable to men: but
also does stir the^ up to magnify the name of God in his wonderful wisdom
which he shows there.

For although the very ignorant and Idiots can not lift up their eyes to
heaven but they shall have great occasion to glorify God: yet they which have
studied to comprehend the secrets of nature, which are not known of all men,
ought to be a great deal more styrred up to do their duty. But it is another
matter to speak of the right and moderat use, and to speak of the abuse and
excess.

If any man would in praising of Wine, allow drunkenness: would not all the
world rise by against him, because he should be a wicked corrupter of Gods
works? The same do they which do borow or rather steal the title of a good
and approved science, to color certain fantastical imaginations clean
contrary to the truth of the science which they do boast of. And surely I
prevented their subtlety in the beginning, when I made a protestation that I
would not only reject the art, which has her beginning in the order of
nature: but also that I do esteem it and praise it as a singular gift of God.

Therefore when the Genethliaks would have their gew gwaes and folyshe toys to
be of forse under pretense that it is a holy and good thing to consider the
works of god: let every one be warned ye he should bring them to this point and
not suffer himself to be carried out of the way by their far fetched
circumstances. But they do even as the Alchumistes which do insinuate them
selves by long prefaces of the temperature of the elements and of the agreement
which is amongst them and other like things which are true and founded on
good reason.

But after they have long gone about the bushe, at length they do nothing but
babble and give vain words: and then they have done.

And to be short since that the heavens should show forth ye praise of God, and
the firmament ought to be as it were a glass, to behold his virtue and
infinite wisdom therein: let us learn if we will make our profit well of this,
not to go wanderyng about in our imaginations which should bring us away from
God.

But our Mathematicians do object that Joseph, Moses and Daniell, were taught
in the scoles of the Egiptians and Caldeans: and that they did rehearse this of
them selves to their praises and not as a vicious and noughtye thing. As for
Joseph I answer that he does feign himself to be a divine, but he did that
under a color, as also every one may see that for ye time he does disguise
himself before his brethren.

Furthermore, when that he foretells the famine of Egipte, did he conjecture
that by the stars No but contrariwise he knew that by a wonderful revelation.
For lo the Egiptians which had soght even the vtmoste part of heaven to know
how they should foretell those things which were signified by the stars:
yet for all that knew nothing of this famine and might have been taken therewith
before they could have once thought on it. God does admonish Pharao by a
dream. Joseph does declare unto him that which was reveled unto him by God. Is
there any thing I pray you in all this which does favor them that make it
their Buckeler? As for Moses it is said that he was enstructed in all the
wisdom of the Egiptians: but must that be understood of their superstitions?

Now I place this curiosity to foretell things by the stars amongst the
worste superstitions that they had. But to the intent this dout may be taken
away, let us see whether Moses did help him self with this science in all
his enterprises. When he should bring the people out of captivity did he
take the stars for his guydes? Likewise when he passed over the red sea?
Finally in all that God did by his hand was he ever guyded by this science? He
was always ruled by the mouth of God having alwais respect to the promise of
the time of deliverance: and attemptyng nothing but that which was agreing to
that which was reveled him. Daniell also was skylfull in the art of the
Chaldeans: but we do not see that he did desire to know more then the
natural Astrology. And sure to make short there is no doubt but that GOD
when he speaks so often of these foretellers of things would have
expresselye condemned the supersticion as well of Egypt as of Chaldee by the
which the people of Israel might have been corrupted.

Therefore when the Genethliaks to the intent they may honor their science do
put forth this auncientie: this is all that they get by it, to wit, that every
body knows it is a curiosiotie which God reproves. and ye which he has
streitly forbidden his church to use. And moreover they do great injury to the
holy Patriarchs whom they will with false lies bring into their company.

They help them selves also with the sentence of our Savior Christ saying:
that there shall be signs in heaven to tell the day of his last coming. But
they speak of this as Clerks and Scolers do talk of wars: truth it is
that we should pardon them since it is not their wont to talk of ye holy
scripture, but to prattell of other things. Yea in deed we ought to forgive
them if they did abstain from defylynge it in the deprauyng of it as they do.

How be it this scripture does so little favor them that we may turn it
against them. For our Savior Christ does not speak there of any
constellation procedyng from the course of nature: but rather of an
extraordinarye thing which does nothing agree with it. Yea, and the Prophets
when they will declare how fearful the wrath of the Lord shall be do use such
kind of speeches: that the Sun shall be darkened and the Moon shall give
her light no more. It is most certain yt it was seen so to come to pass so
often as God did plague his church. And yet in the latter day which oght to
bring the perfection of all things there shall be visible signs, as well to
admonish the faithful as to make the unfaithful more inexcusable. But how so
ever the matter go this point ought to be as concluded, that the signs and
tokens whereof he makes mention there can not be comprehended by the course of
the Stars: since that God will send them as things properly and
perticularlye belonging to that time.

Yea, and moreover: that they will import change of this common order upon the
which the Genethliaks do pretend that they are founded.

The same ought to be said of the Star which did appear to the
Philosophers which came from the East. And it is a great mockage to attribute
that to the order of nature that the scripture does rehearse for the miracles.

Shall they say that according to their science there might a star arise
which should go toward Iewry, and then right to Jerusalem. Yea, and that it
should vanishe away, and that a little while after it should appear again,
that it should go to Bethlehem, and that it should stand upon one certain
house to mark it out? Yea and that which is more, that it should keep her
compass thereafter as the men whom it guyded were able to go? When they have
well sought the heavens they shall find nothing there, but it is either a fixed
star or else a plannet. It must needs then be above nature, and by consequent
above the nature of Astrologye. And now what is more co^trari to reason then
to draw a singular privilege to a general law? Who is it that does not see
their impudency so well that they mock them when they do argue after this
sort: God did by a miracle set a star to guide the Philosophers which came
to worship his son, and gave it a course agreeable to their journey, which
neither was like to the general mocion of heaven nor to the mocion of the
planettes. Therefore it follows, that the stars do declare the condition
and fortune of every one of us, and that by their influence all our life is
governed. We need not any great subteltie to rebuke such a beastlynes. And if
there were none other thing but yt yet one might see how stable the foundations
are where upon they lean.

But to the intent that eueryeone may better understand the wickedness which
here is hid as venim in the serpents tail: it is good to understand that
they make no danger to make all Christian religion as well subject to the stars
as men's bodies. For they undertake to render a reason wherefore. Mahomet and
his Alcoran has a greater dominion then Christ and his gospel: to wit,
because the aspect of the stars is more favorable to the one then to the
other. What an abomination is that? The Gospel is Gods Scepter by the which
he reigns over us: it is the virtue of his arm, which he opens, as Saint
Paul says for the salvation to all beleuers: it is his steadfast truth under
the which all the angels of Paradise ought to be humbled: the holy ghost is he
who makes it to profit geuyng it forse and victory against all that resist
it, against the Devil and the world.

But these fantastical fellows say that some corner of some sign of the
Zodiak does cause man to believe it. Contrariwise the sect of Mahomet as the
Scripture teaches us is a just plague of God to punish the ingratitude of ye
world. And yet they will make men believe that it is set up and advanced by the
disposition of the stars. To be short it is evident that all they which
mainteyne such madness know not what it is to speak of God and his religion, no
more then brute beasts.

But to the intent they might make all things serve them as men famished use
to do, they object the eclipses and comettes: and say that if they have any
signification then we may say the same of the rest of the stars. I answer
that as for the eclipses if they be natural they have no signification:
unless it be that they may engender rain or wind or a whirle wind, or such
like: according as we have before expressed. But we will suffer fools to
imagine that one may by them foreshewe what shall chance to kingdoms,
dignities: yea and to particular persons

Now we read that it was necessary sometimes that some skillful man in
Astrologye should warn the army of the Romans of the Eclipse of the Moon
which should be: to the intent that the souldiars which ignorant in those
matters, might not be troubled as with some evil sign or token.

We see then that the true astrologye does take away the superstition that
these mad men do go about to bring in again.* As did C. Sulpitius Gallus
tribun^^ militu^^.
As for the wonderful Eclipses, as that which came at the death of our lord
Jesus: I do not deny but that they have certain significations. But that does
so little serve for our deuiners that it is rather to stop and beat down
their bablyng. For if it be necessary that there should be an extraordinary
miracle to signify things aforehande, how will they find that property and
force in the common order? It is almost the like in the comettes although it be
not altogether so. For they are inflamacious which are engendered naturallye:
not at any certain time, but as it pleases God. Wherein one may see how much
the comets do differ from the stars: since that they are engendered by the
accidental causes. And yet nevertheless I will not agree with them in this that
their foretellyng are certain, as also very experience does show it. For if
a comet do appear and soon after some noble man die: the people will say that
it came to sommon him to appear. But if the death of no noble man do follow,
they will let it pass, and never speak on it. And yet nevertheless, I do not
deny but that when God will stretche out his hand to execute some judgment
worthy to be remembered in the world, he will some times admonish us by
comets: but that does nothing serve to bind men and their condition to a
continual influence of heaven.

Now it remains that we should answer to the examples which they allege to
us. And surely it would seem that their art were wholly approved by them.
But amongst all others, there is one that makes all them astonished that
read him: to wit, of the Mathematician called Ascletarius, which foretold that
Domician the Emperor should be killed. But Domician being angry with him,
called him and said unto him: that since he occupied himself so much in
divining of others, that he should divine also of himself. He answered the
hour of his death was at hand and that his body should be pulled in pieces of
the dogs. Domician makes him to be killed: and does command that he
should be burnt to the intent they might bury his ashes as they were wont.

But lo such a storm came so suddenly that it did put out the fire, and dogs
fell to eat the body. But within a while after, Domician was killed. Moreover,
that which they say of Julius Caesar and his Mathematician Spurina, is not
altogether so merueilous: although it come some thing near. For he did
admonish Caesar that he should beware of the first day of March. But the day
being come, Caesar said unto him: Lo the first day of March is com. The
other answered, it is not yet passed. And surely Caesar coming i^to ye senate
was there slain. Thus our Genethliakes think ye they have won ye field so
that none can resist them to wit, that they can show that there is a sure
truth in their art. But I will ask them if they think none other were borne
in Rome and in Italy the same day and at the same hour wherein Julius Caesar
was borne? And it is like that many were borne under one self same Horoscope.
The same may be said of Domician. But did they al therefore dye in the same day?
Or had they a violent death? No but contrariwise even as the same horoscope did
not make them all Emperors so likewise it did not cause that they should all
dye one manner of death. Therefore we may see yt there is neither reason nor
truth in their art: for if there were any it would take place every where. But we
se yt sometime.xxx. are borne at one time, one dies at twenty an other at
fiftye: one of an ague, the other in the war. Likewise before they die, every
one has his several kind of life, and his state does differ from every man's
estate.

And what has every one his own star in heaven, wherein he may learn what
shall come unto him? For if the constellacion could do any thing it would
be equal in every one. After the same sort that may easily be refuted which
they allege of Augustus the Emperore who having heard Theogines sai that his
nativity did promise him the Empire of Rome. And in remembrance of this he
coined his money with the sign of Capricorn under the which he was borne.
Who will doubt but that many poor wretches were borne under ye same sign, of
who^ some was a swineheard, another a netehard, and every one in such a kind of
empire and dominion? If the horoscope or the respect of the stars had given
the Roman Empire to all them which were borne the same time that Augustus
was: there would have been but a little portion left him. Whereof I conclude
that al ye diuinations which have been, were founded nether upon reason nor upon
science. They will object that yet for all that we see the truth by the issue.
I answer that that does nothing serve to prove their art lawful. But we do
only stand upon this poynct, that it is a wicked curiosity and reproved of
God: and not whether that divines did some times say true or no. Truth it is
that al which comes from the Diuill is nothing but lies: but God does often
times suffer that these deceivers do say the truth, when as he will by this
means punish the incredulity and unbelief of the wicked Let us take for them
both the example of the Sorceresse whereof Samuel speaks. For that which
she said to Saul came sure to pass. But shall we therefore say that she had
a science founded upon reason whereby she could foretell hid things? No for
God by his just vengeance did louse for that present the bridle to Satan to
the intent that that wicked king should be deceived even as he was worthy.
Likewise we ought not to judge that because she said the truth, that
therefore it is lawful for the children of god to use such means. For it is
not after this sort that God would we should know those things which are
expedient for us to know.

And of this we have a general rule in the.xiii. of Deuteronomie: where it is
said that if any prophet do foretell things which after come to pass: Yet
if that under the pretense that he has told the truth, he would bring us to
the service of strange Gods, we should not cleave unto him: because God does
prove us whether we love him or no.

Let us well wey this word, to wit, yt what color or appearance of the truth
so ever those things have which are contrary to God, and which he does reprove
by his word: yet that he which walks in a good conscience may well beware of
such things and that therbe none deceived by them but only the infidels and
hypocrites: because that as Saint Paul says 2. Tessa. 3.
it is mete that they which will not fellow the light should walk in
darkness. To be short, I do no more regard all the true things which the
Mathematicians have before told then the false miracles wherewith Pharaos
Magicia^s did resist Moses, and by the which Christ has foresaid that ye
world should be deceived.

But as it is a horrible and endless laboryng to be wrapped in all the follies
and superstitions in ye which men do wrap them selves after that they have once
let louse the bridle to their curiosity many light headed fellows having given
themselves wholly to divine and foretell things by the stars they do thrust them
selves yet further in to all kind of diuinations for after that they are once
entised withone there is no deceit of the deuel so great wherein they are not
delited, but to the intent they might make their diuelishe art to seem good,
they cover it with the name of Solomon as though he had been a sorcerer And
surely the scripture makes mention of ye learning which he had in ye deep
secrets of nature, but it does not say that he was adeuiner. And in very deed
we seethe general condemnation, that moses does so oftene pronounce against
al them which do occupye this art. Chiefly in the eightenth chapter of
deuteronomie: where it is said, look there be no deuiner which does divine and
fortel things be found amongst you: nor obseruer of dais nor that haith
respect to birds nor which, nor coniurer, which does conjure nor any which
does consulte and ask council of familiar spirits nor coniuring the dead: for all ye do so are an abominatio^ unto god. And for these sins he did destroy the
nations which dwelt in this land, let us allwais remember that doctrine which I
have before taught that God has respect to the Egiptians and condemns them
to the intent that he may bring his people from all their acustomed matters
wherefore he does condemn all the Judicial astrology which passes ye bonds
of the true science in deuining, and fortelling things and likewise all
witchecrafte, for somuche as that word does emporte the reuelacion of hid
things which is don by which craft, or coniuringe of spirits, or by other like
vanity. And let us note this that God did not content himself with on word
alone but seeing that man's nature is so ready to run hither and thetherin
vanities to ye entente he might better take away all refuges and startinge
holes he reckeneth all ye kinds which were then known: yea, and he uses
certain names which at that time were honorable as Rosem which ^s taken for
him that reueileth things, and somtymes is applied unto ye prophets which do
forwarne things that are yet hyd and secret. Again Chober, which signifies
to join together, and is spoken of him which can gather together and place in
order the conjunctions: whereby is meant without dout the Astrologians that can
drive the stars into their places, whether they be in direct opposition or
stand byas, to cause them to have their aspectes one to another. Also Idoni
which signifies one of knowledge or understanding. As we see how they take
upon them knowledge and publish abroad their folies, as though there were no
other Science: or knowledge in all the world: yet do we se what god pronunceth
thereof and the horrible thretning where with he does manace it, which ought to
make them al to tremble yt fear him. Now if every kind of divination be thus
reproved, what shall become of them that dare meddle with coniuring of spirits to
enquire of things unknown? For a man may see that to be a sorcery most evident
Notwtstanding there are some so shameless, that they do attribute their circle and
other enchantments unto Solomon, and also they do allege that seeing the spirits
are ordained to be ministers unto the faithful, there can be no evil in
coniuryng them to serve us thereby. But with what faith is it that they do wait
to be served of them in such forte, seeing that it is against the expres
commandment of god. For it is so unlawful unto us, to use any secret
coniuratio^s to cause ye angels to speak unto us, that it is cursed
superstitions to call upon them in what manner so ever it be: of the other part
who has sold or hired forth unto them ye devil to be their verlets and
servants? for the Children of God count them as their mortal enemies and oght
to fly them and drive them away from them, and in no case to desire or seek
for any acquantance with them much less to have any of them as a familier.
Those men then that will have them to be their servants shall find in the end
that they have played and bourded with their masters. Therefore let us conclud
according to the word of God ye all diuinatio^ and soth saying is wicked and
detestable sacrilege: for he compares the rebellion against his word 1. Samu.
15.
to sothsaying and ydolatry to condemn. Constantius and Iulianus.
it so much as is possible. Wherefore it is not without good reason that the
civil laws do so sore condemn the Mathematicians. Let no man consult a
sothsayer or mathematicia^, etc Suplitio ca petis feriatur, etc.
And we may not say that this is for the abuse of the disceyuers or yet that
the name was odious to the ignorant: for god as ye judge of the policy of
Israel: has made a law more strait against the^: that is yt al they shall be
put to death and all that has to do with them. Leuit.xx. But let us put ye case
yt this were a thing permitted by men: seeing yt we do perceive yt god so much
detesteth and abhors it, what folly is it thereby to go about to join it with
christianity as if a man would join fire and water together. And this is a
marvelous matter yt those of Ephesus which had been given to folish curiosities
as soon as they had received the faith, brent their books as S. Luke recites in
the acts: and that there should now be men so perverse, yt should think yt the
knowledge of Jesus Christ should serve the^ for nothing but to quicken their
appetites to search al light and unprofitable vanities: this is a mer^us great
diversity that the one sort so sone as they had the gospel, cast away all the
diuinations and sothsayings wherein they had been brought up al their life, and
that these others under ye shadow and color that they know the truth of God
should be stirred up to give them self unto it that never knew what it was
before. And that those upon who^ S. Luke speaks did burn their books to the
value of five. M. franks and that these men are so enchanted with a vain
imagination which they have now conceived that herevpo^ they will consume al
their substance. Yet here is to be noted that S. Luke says not that they were
wicked or diuilishe arts, but he names them Periarga which signifies light
and unprofitable curiosities. Although in very deed they are wicked, yet does
he speak thus to the end to stop their mouths that seek nothing else but
starting holes as we know yt the Mathematicians do: the which are so much worse
then their father Simon the Magician, as yt he seeing ye virtue of Jesus Christ
was so astonished that he did nothing regard his own art. And though he were so
wicked that he would with money bye the grace of gods holy spirit: yet for all
that he did acknowledge that the virtue of the son of god did darken ye
science yt he thought he had. But these having been lyghtened by God to know
his truth, do turn away their eyes and do cast them into deadly darkness and
had rather be in the darkness of their lies, then to enjoy the heavenly light
in the which we have salvation and life everlasting.

But what remedy is there for such evils? surely this that the sobriety,
which S. Paul does recommend to us should be instead of a bridle to keep us in
the pure obedience of god. And to ye intent we may do that let every one keep
that inestimable treasure of ye gospel in a good conscience. For it is most
certain that the fear of God shall be a good defense to defend us from all
errors. So that we have first this general rule to sanctify our bodies and
our souls to god and to serve him unfeignedly. And afterward that every one
look whereto he is called to the end he may apply himself to yt which it
becomes him to do. That learned men do give them selves to good and
profitable studies and not to folish curiosities which serve for none other
end then to make fools to muse at them. That little and great, learned, and
unlearned may think that we are not borne to the end, that we should occupye
our selves about unprofitable things: but yt the end of our exercises ought
to edify both our selves and others in the fear of god. And surely when one
shall well mark the matter: who are they that bring us this erroneous and
false Astrologye save only either proud parsons, or spirits, that are never
content or idle persons which know not of what they should talk, or in what
they should have their pastime?

Such as are the clerks and secretaries of ladies and other fine and denty
minio^s of the court. Not yt they are cunning in this art (if there may be any
cunning in madness and lies) but it is enough for the^ lightly to have touched
it, and to have been busye about it: and in the mean season they entangle and
wrap many pore souls in their deceytes.

And this is the cause wherefore I said that we must occupye our selves in
more profitable things: for who soever shall give him self to fear God and will
study to know what is his will, exercising him self in the practice of that
which the holy scripture does teach us and secondly shall apply his whoole
mind to that which apperteineth to his vocation or at the least to good and
profitable things: shall have no leaser to fly into the air to the intent he
might go hither and thither in ye clouds and yet for all that neither touch
heaven nor earth. I know well enough that they will not fail to use this
cauillation for they will say that the one does not hinder the other. To the
which I answer that no good science is contrary to the fear of god, nor yet
to the doctrine which he gives us to bring us in to everlasting life, so that
we do not put the carte before the horse: that is to say: that we have this
wisdom that we use these arts to serve us whether they be liberal or
handycrafte, whiles we pass through this world to have continually toward ye
heavenly kingdom. But here we have spoken and treated of a curiosity not
only superfluous and unprofitable: but also evil and wicked: saying it does
drive us away both from the trust and confidence that we ought to have in God
and from the consideration that he would yt we should have both of his justice
mercy and judgment and also of the duty which we do owe to our neighbors.

FINIS.

