A DISPVTE UPON COMMVNICATING AT OUR Confused Communions.

If I build again the things which I destroyed, I make my self a
transgressor. Gal. 2.18. Ye did run well, who did hinder you, that ye
should not obey the truth. This persuasion comes not of him that calls you.
A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. Gal. cap. 5. verse. 7.8.9. Remember
from whence thou art fallen, and repent and do thy first works, or else I will
come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of his place,
except thou repent. Revel. 2.5. As many as desire to make a fair show in the
flesh, they constrain you to be circumcised; only least they should suffer
persecution for the cross of Christ. Gal. 6.12. Printed Anno 1624.

CVrse ye, Meroz says the Angel of the lord: curse ye bitterly the
inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help
of the lord against the mighty, Judge. 5.23. Cursed be he that makes the
blind to go out of the way, and all the people shall say Amen, Deuteronomy. 27.18. Who
shall offend one of these little ones which beleev in me, it were better for him
that a millstone were hanged about his neck and he were drowned in the depth of
the sea, Matt. 18.6. Woe to the world, because of offenses. For it must needs
be that offenses must come: But woe to that man by whom the offense comes,
Mat. 18.7. CHAP. I. Of sitting at the Lords table.
IT was or ^^in^d in the g^nerall assembly hol^en at E^inburgh the year 1564.
Sitting at table, and distributing by the co^municants, was not a Church
constitution.
that minist^rs in ministration of the sacrame^^s should use the order set down
in our psalm b^oks. This order requires that the communicants sit at table,
and break bread with other. This order has been universallie, and
perpetually observed in our kirk from the first year of reformation and some
years before, not as an order depending upon the varieties of times, places,
persons, or the like circumstances, as do church orders, and constitutions,
but as most agreeable to the pattern of the first supper celebrated by Christ
and his Apostles, as may be seen in the first book of discipline, and in two
Rubricks in our psalm books. In the last of the two Rubricks it is said, that
Christ commanded, that the communicants divide the elements among th^ms lues In
the book of discipline it is said. That it is plain Christ Jesus sat at table
with his disciples, Christ and his Apostles kneeled not but sat at the first
supper.
and therefore do we judge that sitting at a table is most convenient for that
action.

Christ's usual gesture in blessing bread at table was sitting, as we may see at
Emaus Luke 2^. and when he was to work the miracle of the five loaves Matt.
14.13. while the disciples were eating, and consequently sitting, as the most
learned among the Jesuits themselves confess, Christ took bread, and after
he had given thanks, brake it. If they kneeled not at the thanksgiving, or
blessing, there is no likelihood, that they kneeled in the act of receiving. If
there had been any change from one table gesture to another, from sitting at
the paschal supper into standing about the table, as the Israelites did at the
first paschal supper in Egypt, would not the Evangelists have made mention of
it? far more, if there had been a change from all kind of table gesture into
kneeling a gesture of adoration, yea kneeling should then have been the only
lawful gesture i^stituted by Christ. For to what end also should the change
have been made. And so all that communicated sitting either in the primitive
kirk, or in the reformed should have sinned in so doing. When Christ gave the
bread he said, This is my body. The formalist will not utter these words to the
kneeler, when he delivers the bread. When Christ gave the cup to the
nearest, he badde them divide it among themselves. They could not then be
kneeling. For how could kneeling, a gesture of adoration, consist with
dividing, which is not an act of adoration. As it is clear that they kneeled
not, so likewise that they stood not, for how could they co^venientlie stand in
the places, where they sat leaning upon beds? Farther the Evangelists make no
mention of standing, but only say, that while they were eating, Christ took
bread. On the Lords supper 1. part. page 136
Even Pierr du Moulin says that the Apostles continued sitting at the table
to the very end of the action. Who ever said otherwise in any age til this
time?

Examples in setting down of a pattern serve ordinarily for direction in
times to come, Christ ratified sitting the ordinary gesture at religions
feasts.
if there be not some singular occasion of the same, which will not agree to
other times. But there was no singular occasion of sitting at the first supper.
The washing of the disciples feet, the putting on, and off of Christ's upper
garment preceeded the second service of the paschal supper, when as Christ was
not yet come to the celebration of the euangelical. The eventide, the
unleavened bread, the parlour, the number of twelve, and other like adjuncts,
and circumstances were but only occasional, and accidentarie to the
Evangelical supper, because the legal supper to which they properly belonged,
was celebrated immediately before, and the last act of it changed into this
supper. But sitting was not a table gesture proper to the paschal supper, and
so occasional, or accidentarie to the Eucharistical. It was the common, and
ordinary gesture used at all religious feasts both among the true worshippers
of God, and Idolaters. To the feasts after the sacrifices the Apostle compares
this Christian feast 1. Corint. 10. So, to speak properly Christ did not so
much institute this gesture at this supper, as ratify and approve the
ordinary, and usual. Ye will say, that if we ought to follow this exemple we
should sit leaning. It follows not. Their gesture was a kind of sitting
gesture, as Doctor Morton confesses. And not only the English translaters
express it by the word sitting but also the holy ghost in the holy language.
A man may be said to stand whether he stand upright, ^or l^aning to a wall, so
sitting. Our sitting, and the Turk^s, and their si^ting at the paschal supper
answ^re analogicallie to other, and the diff^rence is only national. Farth^r
to sit was the ordinary gesture at religious feasts, but to si^ lea^ing was
only occasional, and acciden^arie to the Euangelical supper by reason of (...)
canon which was made before the day^s of Ch^ st, wherein many diff^rences were
made betwixt the pas^hal feast, and other r^ligious feasts, and among ^he rest
to s^t forth the s^lemnitie of this feast above others, it was ordained that
they should sit after his manner a^ this feast, and not at other except they
pl^ased. Quod in omnibus noctibus tam edentes qu^m bibente^ vel sedemus, vel
disc^mbimus, or accum^imus, in hac autem omnes d sc^mbimus, or accumbimus. They
sat of old even when the cup of praise was carried from hand to hand, and the
cake of bread broken at the concl^sioun of the supper, And yet the conclusion
of the pasch^l supper where they did eat to the quantity of an olive, and
less then the quantity of an egg was as short, as the euangelical supper
whereunto it was changed. Christ led the Apostles from their sitting at table
to the consideration of their sitting upon thrones, whereby we may not only
collect that their gesture was a kind of sitting gesture, but also that the end
and use of their sitting at table with him, was to note their fellowshippe they
had with him, and the dignity, whereunto he had exalted them. Christ was as
Jerome says both Conviva and convivium, the food that they eat, and a
banqueter with them. By eating him as food is represented our union with him,
as food is united with the feeder, but by sitting is declared our fellowship
with him, as of ghuests with the master of the feast.

Howbeit sitting had not been the ordinary table gesture at religious feasts,
The Apostolic churches satt at table.
but a new example of Christ, and his Apostles, yet seeing it was an example
not occasional, or accidentarie but of free choice in setting down the
pattern, it is a direction for our imitation, and the Apostles themselves
took it so, they continued this gesture after the first supper as a gesture
most suitable with the form of a feast. When they call this feast the table of
the Lord, and the supper of the Lord, it may very well be collected, that they
used that gesture which was fit for a supper table. And beside that a table is
requisite whatsoever be the matter of it, a board, a bull hide, a plott of
ground, whether high, or low, round, long, or square. The love feasts conjoined
with the Lords supper could hardly admit the gesture of kneeling, says
Beza. The Corinthians fault was, Contra Ha^chium.
that neither at common meats, Obed. page 461.
nor at the Lords table they would sit together, but sorted themselves in
factions, and companies, Secund sermon page 61.
says Doctor Bilson Doctor Downame confesses sitting to receave the
S^crament to have been used in the churches in the Apostles times.

Howbeit the supper of the Lord soon after the days of the Apostles be ganne
to be defiled sitting continued after the days of the Apostles Calv. institut.
lib. cap. 17. Homil. 27. in 1. cor. 11.
with some rust, as Mr. Calvine observes, yet was this gesture continued in
many places, and at some times universally observed. Chrysostom makes
mention of sitting at Christ's table Augustine insinuates no less, Epist. 118.
where he says that some mixed this feast with their other repasts. M. Fox
thus writes of the Waldenses, whom Beza calls the pure seed of the ancient
church. Concerning the supper of the Lord, Acts, and monument 1. Volum. page
209. edit. 1610.
their faith was, that it was ordained to be eaten, and not to be showed, and
worshipped; for a memorial, and not for a sacrifice; to serve for the present
ministration and not for reservation; to be received at table, not to be
carried out of doors, according to the use of the primitive church, when they
used to communicate sitting. And this they prove both by an old chronicle,
called Chronica gestorum, as also by ancient Origin. When the manner of
celebration after the pattern of the first supper began to be neglected
almost every where, and, as Mr. Calvine says, was changed into a Jewish
form of sacrificing, it was appointed, that the supper of the Lord should be
celebrated according to the institution upon the thursday before Easter, which
the ancients called Caena Domini, and is now called Maundi Thursday because
upon that day the Lords supper was first celebrated. Al faithful Christians
(except offenders) were wont to communicate upon this day, De consecrat Did. 2
cap. 17.
as may be seen in Gratians Decree. In caena Domini a quibusdam perceptio euch.
tristia negligitur, quae quoniam in eadam die ab omnibus fidelibus (exceptis
ijs quibus pro gravibus criminibus inhibitum est) percipienda sit,
ecclesiasticus vsus demonstrant. Now the gloss upon that place that has these
words, Sic olim, modo sic est, sed monachi faciunt. It wont to be so of old, it
is not the custom now, the Monks only observe it. The monks specially of
Sanct Bennets order retain the ancient custom. The two thousand soldiers, who
were reconciled to the Emperor Mauritius about the year 590. by the travelles
of Gregrorius Bishop of Antioch, Euagrius lib. 6. cap. 12.
and had accepted again Philippicus to be their general captain, received the
Sacrament upon this day sitting upon the ground. Whereby we may see that this
custom continued to that time among the faithful, and not among the monks
only. Pope Vrbane the fourth about the year 1264. instituted the feast of
Corpus Christi to supply the defects, which had, escaped through negligence or
humane frailty in the celebration of the mass, and to make amends for any
miss: Quatenus in eo, Bulla Vrbani. 4,
quod in alijs missarum officiis circa solennitatem est forsitam praetermissum,
devota diligentia suppleatur, and fideles festivitate ipsa instante intra se
praeterita memorantes, id quod in ipsis missarum solenniis, secularibus forte
agendis impliciti, aut alia ex negligentia, vel fragilitate humana, minus plene
gesserunt, tunc attente in humilitate spiritus and animi puritate restaurent.
But as Hospinian justly taxes the Pope, the defects, or omissions should have
been supplied ratione a Christo praemonstrata, by that manner which Christ
himself had showed before, and not by carrying the Sacrament with procession
through the streets. It appears that the celebration of the Lords supper upon
Maundie thursday after the pattern of the first supper was appointed for the
same end, to wit, to supply all defectes and omissions, which had happened at
other times. For the Pope says, he was moved to choose this day for this end
rather the^ Maundy thursday, because that thursday was spent in washing of
feet, making of Chrisme, and reconciling of peniten s. In die namque coenae
Domini, quo die Christus hoc Sacramentum instituit, vniversalis ecclesiae pro
paenitentium reconciliatione, sacri confectione chrismatis, ad impletione
mandati circa lotionem pedum, and alijs plurimum occupata plene vacare non
potest celebrationi huius maximi sacramenti. Christ's ordinance behooved to give
place to every toy invented by man.

Sitting only is not sufficient for any to communicate with kn^elers.
The question is now, whether it being permitted to me to sit, I may
communicate with others, where some do kneel, and al do receive severallie,
and immediately out of the Ministers hand. It seems strange to many, that
this should be denied to be lawful. It seems as strange to me, that it should
be granted, what if all the rest with whom I communicate did kneel, is it
enough that I sit. Is this the communion of Saints we profess, not to have a
regard to the standing, or falling of others, the dignity, and honor of that
action, and the liberty of this reformed Kirk, whereof we stand members. I will
set down the innovations which are sensible to the eyes and ears of every
man, that the answer to the question may be the better understood in the
particulars, and it may be seen where we are either actors, or accessory in
communicating after this manner. Some things I must of necessity repeat
already treated at length in sundry treatises both in English and latin,
which I will illustrate, and whereunto I will add.

CHAP. 2. Of the distributing of the elements.
THe first innovation, is that liberty, The elements distr^buted by the
Apostles among themselves.
is denied to the communicants to divide the elements among themselves. Howbeit
it be permitted to us to sit. The cup after which Christ protested he would
drink no more, was the communion cup, or the last paschall cup, which was
changed into the Communion cup, and consequently one, and the same. It was
the custom of the Jews to abstain that night from tasting any thing after
the last paschal cup. Christ alluding to that custom changing this cup, into
the eucharistical, protested he would drink no more wine in this life. The
Evangelists Matthew, and Mark expressly subjoyne this protestation to the
communion cup. Luke inverteth the order, as the Jesuits themselves do
confess, rendering this reason, that the protestation of not drinking more
might be joined with the protestation of not eating more. Now Christ bad the
communicants divide this cup among themselves. And howbeit he had not
commanded in express terms, yet it may be collected of the form of his
speech, when he bids them, speaking in the plural number, drink al, of it,
and says not, take thou, drink thou; as if he had been delivering it to
every one severally. It was divided among the Apostles by themselves, reaching
it from hand to hand, as the last paschal cup, which was changed into this
eutharisticall, was carried from hand to hand. Fuit per proprias Apostolorum
manus ab uno ad alium delatus: Tom. 3. page 861.
says the Jesuit Swarez. It were ridiculous to set down the cup upon
the table, that the nearest might take it up, as I have seen some where done.
Nay, I should say superstitious, as if the cup were profaned, if it be reached
out of the hand of a lay man (as they call him) but a Christian Brother, as
they should call him, and that it were holy to take it from off the table. If
we will then divide the cup, as the Apostles divided it, and show our selves
neither ridiculous, nor superstitious, we must divide it by reaching from hand
to hand. The bread is not holyer then the wine, and Christ said in the plural
number, Take ye, Eat ye, as he said, Drink ye, Divide ye, and not take
thou, eat thou, as, if he had been speaking to every one severally.
Therefore rightly do Beza, Beza epist. 12. Tossan. in Mat. 26. Pisc. in Mat.
26.
Tossanus, Piscator, and others, gather that Christ gave only to the nearest,
and they to the next and so forth.

But ye will say, The objection of represe^tation of Christ's person answered.
the minister represents Christ's person, therefore he should give the
elements out of his own hands. It follows not: For as M. David Lindsay
says, He in whose name the command is uttered, is properly the giver, and
propiner, because by his authority it is given, and by the warrant of his word
it is received. When the King drinks to any of his subjects, Proceedings at
P^rth assembly. page 60. 61.
and sends it by the hands of his servant, the servant is not properly the
giver, and propiner, but the deliverer of the gift and propine. And therefore
concludes, that it may be delivered from hand to hand by the communicants
among themselves, which could not be, if the former sequel were good. It is
said, Genesis 39. that all that they did, Joseph was the doer of it, because what
was done, was done by his appointment. Pilate gave the body of Christ, that
is, commanded to be given. Mark. 15.45. Matthew. 27.17. Matthew says, that
Christ's Disciples gave the five loves, and two fishes to the five thousand,
Matt. 14 19. And yet the Evangelist Mark says 6.41. that Christ gave them to
the Disciples to set before them. Christ himself, whose person, ye say, the
minister represents, when he was present in person, gave not to every one
severally, but bade them eat, drink, and divide among themselves. The Apostles
at that last Supper represented not Christ's person, for he was there present in
person himself, but al faithful communicants to the end of the world.
Proceedings page 59.
The Apostles, says M D. L. were in that supper not as dispensators of the
mysteries of God, but as ghuests, as the faithful, as disciples, and as
communicants. But what Christ bad his Apostles do as communicants, when he was
present in person, he bids all c^mmunicants do, when there is another to
represent his person. It when there was so few communicants, he commanded them
to divide, what would he have d^ne if he had celebrate to five thousand? When
ministers are receivers among other communicants, they differ nothing from
other Christians. Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. hom. 18.
Nihil differt sacerdos a subito, quando fruendum est horrendis mysterijs,
says Chrysostom. They are not then ministers in actu exercito, but simple
communicants. The Deacons about Justinius Martyrs time, that is in the next age
after the Apostles, gave both the bread and wine to the communicants in the
quarters he remained, whereas before the Deacon carried only the vessels
wherein the elements were contained, as appears in the L^turgie ascribed to
S. James. They uttered no words at the delivery, neither were they yet made
half Priests, as they are now in the Popish and English Church. Now the
Deacons represented not Christ's person, but only the minister, or as he
calls him, the President of the brethren. It was not then thought necessary
that the Pastor should deliver the elements out of his own hand, which ought
to have been done, if none but he who represented the master of the feast
should deliver. Yea long after Justinius time the Deacons dispensed the wine.
Sometimes the Eucharist was sent to the sick by a Lay man, as we may see in the
history of Serapion. Eusebius. hist. In. 6. cap. 36.
The Monks of S. Bennets order retaining the ancient form of celebrating upon
Thursday before Easter, communicate sitting breaking bread, and reaching the
cup to other, Panem azy number frangentes, De origin exrorum circa coenam. cap.
and calicem in vlcem propinantes, and in totum veleris coenae vestigium prae
se ferentes, as testifies Bullinger. Friar Rainerius testifies likewise of
the Waldenses, of whom I made mention before, Rainerius in summa.
that as for the sacrament of the Euchar^st in conventiculis suis celebrant,
verba illa Evangelij recitant^s in mensa sua, sibique mutuo participantes,
sicut in Christi coena, that is, the Leonists (for so he caleth the Walde^ses)
celebrate the sacrament of the Eucharist in their conventicles (so it pleased
the Popish Friar to call the assembly of the persecuted) rehearsing the words
of the Gospel at their table, and dividing to other, as was done at Christ's
supper. Ye see then this superstition had not so far prevailed, but the Lord
had some who were not carried away with the stream, but kept in the Spoonke in
the time of darkness. To say that the breaking of the bread is a mystery, and
ought therefore to be performed only by the minister, it follows not: for
the taking, eating, drinking of the communicants are mysteries. And Augustine
says, that when the Wine is powered into the mouths of the faithful, the
shedding of Christ's blood is represented. Next it is to be considered, that
fraction or the breaking of the bread is not only mystical, signifying the
torments and renting of Christ's body, but also serves for distribution. And
because bread was distributed by breaking, to break in the Scripture signifies
to distribute by breaking, or to break and distribute, when the word giving is
not added. As Esaias 58.7. Break thy bread to the hungry, that is, distribute
breaking, or break and distribute thy bread to the hungry. Lament. 4.4. The
little children asked bread, and there was none to break to them, that is, to
break and distribute to them, or to distribute breaking, Mark. 8.19. Christ
says, When I brake the five leaves among the five thousand, that is, brake and
gave to the disciples to set before the five thousand to be further broken and
eaten. Hence it is, that in the Scripture to break is taken for to eat, or to
take food, as Ierem. 16. ver. 7. Neither shall men break bread for them, that
is, they shall not celebrate a funeral banquet for them, nor reach unto them
the cup of consolation. And Act. 2.46. They brake bread from house to house,
that is they celebrated love feasts. But many interpreters understand the 42.
ver. and Act. 20.7. of the celebration of the supper. And so after this figure
of speech is meant sometime, not only the act of breaking, but also the end to
distribute and eat. Siclyke the Apostle 1. Cor. 10. The bread which we break,
is it not the communion of the body of Christ? That is, the bread which we
break, distribute, and eat, is a sign, and seal of the communion of Christ's
body, as is well observed by the interpreters. Panis quem Frangimus, 1. Cor.
10.6. idem est atque inter nos dividimus. Glossa in Math. 26.
The bread which we break, that is, the bread, which we divide among us,
says Robertus Stephanus. Humbertus in his Book written against Nicetas a
Monk says, that in the Apostles times the faithful brake bread daily, and
had not a perfect mass two days in the week only. Quotidie perseverantes in
templo, and frangentes Panem circa domos. Ecce verax Evangelista testatur sub
Apostolis fidelis quotidie orasse, and panem fregisse. Et vos, qui estis, qui
dicitis duobus tantum diebus hebdomade missam perfectam fieri debere, reliquis
imperfectam? I will now retort the objection drawn from the representation of
Christ's person. Who ever saw a great Lord, or King inviting inferiors to his
table to sit with him, rise, and go alonge to serve, and minister. Christ
before he sat down to supper recommending humility to his Disciples aspiring
to preferment, washed their feet, but when he came to the table again he sat
among the^, and kept his place, as master of the feast: for now they were in
the act of feasting. When the minister comes from his own place, and goes
along delivering the Elements, how does he act in the mean time the person of
Christ the Master of the feast. There can be no reason for this guise, but that
the Minister must break order, and put off the person, which he should act in
his own place, and take upon him an other office, least the Sacrament should
be polluted by the deliverie of the communicants, or as if the cup had
greater virtue, when John who lay in Christ's bosom received it out of his
hand, then when Bartholemew received it from Thomas, or some other. In this
order then ye may see great misorder, and gross superstition. Justly
therefore was that ignorant woman rebuked by one of the Ministers of Edinburgh
not many years ago for striving to be nearest him, at table.

We have yet farther to consider, to wit, the end, The end, and use of
distributing by the communicanst.
and use of the distributing of the communicants. To drink of one cup
represents a communion in one common benefit, but not that communication of
mutual duties of love, and freindship, as does the reaching of the cup from
one to another. The ghuests of old intertaining others courteously at civil
banquets reached a cup of wine to other, which they called Phitotesia,
because it was a symbol of love, and freindship, which name a man may justly
impose upon the communion cup, says Stucklius. Antiqui. convivialium lib.
3. cap. 10.
Chrysostom records, that the communicants kissed one another, when the
Sacrament was celebrated. Osculum pacis porrigere, tempore quo celebrantur
Sacramenta, Lib. 1. de compunct. cordi,
in vsu ecclesiae est: and to embrace other, propterea and misterijs, alter
alterum amplectitur ut vnam multi fi^mus. Jerome making mention of kissing, and
joining of hands. Homil. 51. ad populum Antiochenum.
Quisquam ne tibi invitus communicate, quisquamne extensa manuvertil faciem, and
inter sacras epulas Iudae osculum porrigit. Paulinus also making mention of
joining hands, Tunc ambo nexi ad invicem dextras damus. Ad Theoph. Alexandrinum.
The kiss was the common form of salutation among the Oriental people as with
us the striking of hands, or embracing. The men kissed the men and women kissed
others at the communion. Paul corm ad Cithe^am.
This kiss was lest of, and in stead thereof has succeeded the kissing of the
Pax at the mass. Seeing signs and protestations of love were thought requisite
at this banquet of love, ought we not to be the more careful to retain that
sign which Christ himself has recommended to us at the institution.

Ye are guilty of this innovation for your part, howbeit it be permitted to
you to sit. The communicant guilty where there is want of the right manner of
distributing.
For ye concur with your Minister as actor to thrust out this dividing, and
distributing of the Elements by the communicants, and to bring in misorder in
turning the Minister out of his proper place, to uphold superstition in
deliverie of the Elements out of his own hands. The resetter intertaineth the
thief. The Minister gives, thou receivest, and both concur to spoil the
Kirk of her liberty, in this day of controversy, when she is striving to hold
fast her possession. When others shall be either moved by thy example, or
forced to quite this liberty, then shall the Kirk be spoiled of it, and the
posterity shall never recover this liberty again for any thing man can see.
Ye will say, your Minister will not give it other wise, but out of his own
hand. But I say again, that he would not give it at all, if he had not a a
receiver. What if he would not give it into your hand, but in at the mouth,
or clothed it with hoode, and belles, or a surplice, ought ye to receave it,
and follow your Minister, and assist him to bring in innovations into your
particular congregation, contrary to the received order of the whole church
which ye are bound to defend by your profession, and the confession of our
faith.

CHAP. 3. Of confusion of two Actions in the time of celebration.
Two exercises ar confounded in the assembly by the want of the old form of
distributing.
THe second innovation is a confusion of two actions, and parts of Gods worship
in one assembly and one time. The Reader is reading, the congregation
hearkening to the Reader, or following him in singing of Psalms in the mean
time, when the Minister hard beside is speeking to the communicants, and
delivering the Elements. If the like were done at the solemnization of marriage,
it would be thought an intolerable abuse. Ye will say, the people will
otherwise weary, and the action become graceless, and cold. It is true, and
late experience has let men see this inconvenience. But the right way to amend
it, is not to bring in confusion. For that is to cure a disease with a remedy
worse then the disease. Of the two the first stands better with reason. For
there is no reason, that when the Minister is speaking, De rebus eccles. cap.
22.
another voice should be heard in the assembly Walafridus Strabo says, We
believe that of old, the holy Fathers did offer and communicate with silence,
which we yet observe upon the holy Sabbath (or Saturday) of Easter. Chanting
was brought in afterward to keep the people from wearying. So now it is
restored to the same end.

To return again to the right way enters never in Men's hearts. Forward they
will go, notwithstanding of any inconvenience which rancountereth them, till
the angel of the Lord meet them in the way, as he did Balaam. The like remedy
is used in other Kirks, where the want of this manner of distribution is,
whereunto they never attained. And therefore cannot serve for a pretense against
us, and that comfortable manner of celebration, which we had. Christ's manner,
which we practiced, needed not such remedies. The hearts of all the hearers
were stirred up by comfortable exhortation, and speeches of the Minister, and
together, as it were with one heart, they applied themselves to the meditation
of that which was spoken joyntlie to all, whereas by this deliverie in
several, men's minds are withdrawn, and lose that fervencie, and constancy
in the word of apprehension, and meditation, as Master Fenner has well
observed, in his treatise of the Sacrament. Ye are guilty of this confusion.
in that ye are partaker in both the actions.

There is yet further to be considered, by reason of this confusion the public
communion is turned into a private. The public communion is turned into a
private by co^founding two actions,
The exercise of the congregation is public, but the exercise of the Minister
with the communicants is private. For it is not enough to make an action
public to perform it in a public place, or in sight of the congregation. If
a man kneel down at a pillar to his prayers in sight of the people, his
prayers are never the less private. Yea the congregation is not bound to
behold, when they can not hear distinctlie, what is spoken, but are bound to
sing or hearken to the reader. The minister may as well go to the end of the
kirk, as I know somewhere is done, or to some close I Will, or Consistory house
near by. Yea it were far more decent then to communicate in the body of the
Kirk, where the one action can not but disturb the other. Ye are not only
guilty of the confusion by partaking in both the actions, but also your
communicating is only a private communicating where there is such confusion.

The vtilities of distributing by the communicants.
Put the case Christ had not recommended the distributio^ which we practiced,
but had left it indiff^re^t, yet should that order of distributing better agree
with the general rules, whereby thing indifferent ought to be ruled, order,
decency, edification, and avoiding of scandal. For so neither confusion of
exercises on the one side, nor tediousnes on the other side, nor superstitious
conceits of the Ministers deliverie nor private communions would have pla^e. It
would be a bar also to hold out kneeling. For religious kneeling in
adoration, and dividing of the elements cannot consist together, where as now
by this communicating in several, there rests no more, but to persuade thee,
or compel thee to kneel. But suppose kneeling were never to be feared, yet the
abuses, and corruptions before mentioned are sufficient matter to move thee to
stand to the liberty of this kirk, if thou have any spoonk of zeal to Gods
glory, to the purity of his worship, and the beauty of his house. If any
kirk in Europe had enjoyed this precious liberty, as long as we have done,
would they have quite it so easily, as we are like to do. It is defection in
us to descend, although not in them who never ascended to this degree of
perfection. The question is not now, whether we shall quite the liberty, or
quite the benefit of the sacraments for ever. There is no such tyranny
professed. Quite not a certain liberty for an uncertain danger, do that
which is required on your part, and commit the event to God. The grace of God
is not tied to the sacraments. The Lord promised to be a little sanctuary to
the godly remnant of his people, when they should be scattered in other
countries, and want the benefit of the temple, and worship appropriated to that
place. Ezeck. 11.16. It is not the want of the sacrament, but contempt that
makes a man guilty, says Bernard: Non potest autem videri sacramenta
contempsisse, Epist. 77.
cui non licet ea ita percipere uti sunt a Domino constituta, and absit ut
ullos necessitatis casus imaginemur, in quibus liceat ordinationem Domini
violare, says Beza in his confession: that is, he cannot be said to have
contemned the sacraments, Cap. 4.
to whom it is not permitted to partake them, as they are established by the
Lord, and far be it from us to imagine any cases of necessity, by the which
we may violate the Lords ordinance. But what needs all this fear: for I am
sure, three, or four years abstinence would constrain them to restore unto us
our liberty again, and to suffer the communion to be celebrated after the old
form, rather then the people should be defrauded of it. This is the least duty
we owe. But we are bound further to defend, and oppone, if we did profess as
we avow in the confession of our faith. The meanest professor in the kirk o^
Scotland is bound to maintain this liberty, and possession Otherwise if he
quite, and r^^^er himself, he is a deserter of Christ's cause.

CHAP. IIII. Of the words uttered at the deliverie of the elements.
The sacramenta words are not uttered demonstrat^uely.
THE third innovation is, that the word of promise, This is my body, This cup
is the new testament, etc. is not uttered demonstratiuely, when the elements
are delivered to every communicant. It is not enough that the words of the
institution were rehearsed before by way of history narratiuelie, or
materiallie. This sacrament is an imitation of Christ not a recital of his
words, and actions, it is to do, as he did, and not to report what he did,
says Pierr du Moulin. Page 95.
The rehearsal does no more, but let us see what warrant there is to use
bread, and wine in the celebration of this sacrament, rather then any other
elements, and to assure us that bread, and wine in general are appointed to
this use. But it can not be said demonstratiuelie de individuo signato of this
bread, and wine in particular set on the table, that it is the body and blood
of Christ. For first it must be blessed, and sanctified by prayer, and
thanksgiving to this use, that the minister may say, Thi^, that is, this
sanctified bread is my body. The rehearsal of the word of promise even after
the sanctification serves only for a general warrant. The words then must be
uttered after the blessing demonstratiuely not to God in a prayer, or form of
oblation, as the popish or English priest does. For Christ uttered them to the
disciples. nor yet by holding, or pointing out the bread to the whole
congregation, saying This is my body, as in the bastard leiturgies ascribed
to Basil^, and Chrysostom, where the bread is holden up after the pronouncing
of these words, and the people answer Amen, or in the Ethiopian mass, where
the people answer Amen, Amen, Amen we believe it is the body of the Lord,
which were ridiculous, and has been the original of many errors. For what if
the elements be not delivered, shall they be sacramentally Christ's body and
blood; or the remains? This is a common axiom of the Divines Elementa extra
usum non sunt sacramenta. The elements out of the use are nor sacraments. For
howbeit it be not essential to bread to be delivered, yet it is essential to
sacramental bread to be delivered, taken, and eaten. Christ said not, This is
my body to all in general, and then to every one in particular take thou,
eat thou, as the papist and formalist does, but first Take eat, and then,
This is my body, or actu continuo both bade them take, and eat, and signified
what it was he was giving to them. The promise is annexed to the commandment,
as conditional. The promise has no otherwise effect then if the condition
take place. Si quis separat promissionem a mandato discedit ab institutione
Christi. In Mat. 26.
N^n aliter igitur habet effectum promissio, quam s^ condit^o etiam locum
habeat. says Robertus Stephanus It fares with the sacramental elements, as
with pawnes, and pledges in contracts, and bargains. A ring may be appointed
for a pledge in matrimony, yet is it not actually a pledge, without consent of
the other party, but only a mere ring. A stone chosen to be a sign of a
March is not actually a march stone, but in the use, when it is set with
consent of parties in the march for that end. So the elements are consecrate,
and set apart by prayer and thanksgiving, to this use, yet are they not
actually Christ's body, and blood till they be received and eaten. And
therefore a sacrament properly is defined to be a ceremony or action. By a
figurative kind of speech the bread may be called the sacrament of Christ's
body, because it is appointed to that end, as when Isaac said to Abraham.
where is the sacrifice, that is, the ramm or the lamb appointed for the
sacrifice. But Christ called the bread his body not in that sense, but in the
deliverie and use, when it was verily a sign and seal of Christ's body. It
follows therefore that the word of promise must be uttered demonstratiuely
only in the time of deliverie, receiving, and eating, and to every one
severally, if he will needs give severally. For otherwise he shall utter them
demonstratiuely to some, and not to others. The sacramental signs are like
seals hanging at the charter. The word of promise is the special, and solemn
clause of the Charter. If at any time it should be uttered, it should be
uttered when the seal is delivered, seeing the sacramental words carry the
promise, and refer the signs to their sacramental use. What would we think,
if the minister rehearsed Christ's command to baptize in name of the father,
son, and the holy ghost, but when he come to the sprinkling would not say, I
baptize thee in the name of the father, son, and Holy ghost, but utter some
other words of his own framing. What is the reason the formalist will not utter
demo^stratiuely the words when he delivers. It is not fear that the kneeler
apprehend Christ's body to be under the bread, or the accidents of the bread,
for he utters them not to the sitter, more then to him that kneeleth, and is
not affraide to constrain ignorant people to kneel, although he should
conceive Christ's body to be present under the bread, when he has uttered
other words. But here is the mystery of the matter, they place the virtue of
consecration in these words, as the Papist does. And therefore because he has
uttered them already, he will not repeat them again; least he should seem to
consecrate them again. For Mr. Lindsay says, That after the sacrament is made
by the sacramental word, the Pastor uses other words in delivering the
elements. Proceedings page 57.
Mr. Michelson says the like. And yet have they not uttered these words before
the delivery, but only narratiuely, or by way of recital, which, as I have
said, does only show a warrant in general. If demonstratiuely, it must be in
the time o^ prayer, after the Popish or English manner. For they confess they
utter them not demonstratiuely to the communicant. If consecration be taken for
sanctification, then it is placed in the prayer, or blessing. For by prayer, or
thanksgiving, the elements are sanct^fied and consecrated to this use. If you
will distinguish betwixt sanctification and consecration, as Popish Divines
do, then say we, that the blessing and sanctifying is but a part, and that
consecration, that is the making of them a sacrament, consists in the whole
action, as our Divines do well observe. For except there be receiving, eating
and drinking, they are not seals of Christ's body and blood. Sacramenta
perficiuntur usu. By the way I observe that as the formalists utter not Christ's
words demonstratiuely, so agree they not upon a prescript form of words, but
frame them as they please, whether in form of prayer or otherwise as they
think good. The communicant is accessorie to this innovation, because he
receives from him who changes the words, and gives the seal without the
word of promise.

CHAP. V. Of kneeling in the act of receiving the sacramental elements.
THE fourth innovation is the kneeling of some ministers, and some communicants
in the act of receiving. First we are to prove the kneeler guilty. Next, the
sitter communicating with him, although not in the same degree.

Suppose kneeling were indifferent, Kneeling in the act of receiving is
idolatrous.
yet the kneeler is guilty of scandal: for it is a show of conformity with
the Papists in a ceremony, which has been abused by them to the vilest
idolatry that ever was in the world, the worship of the bready God, yea
invented by the Antichrist to that end. The formalist can not produce one
authentic testimony for kneeling for a thousand years. The Papist is hardened
in his superstition and idolatry, for he thinks that we are drawing toward
him, and that our religion cannot be graced without his rites, or manner of
worship. The weak brother is offended, and stumbleth upon one sort of idolatry
or other. We see the outward gesture of an idolater, and who knows but their
intentions may be bad enough. Ye will say the offense is taken, not given. But
if it be a thing indifferent, as ye say, and not necessary, but may be
omitted, then the offense is given. For you are not ignorant into what evils it
may induce the simple and ignorant. You say the command of the Magistrate
takes away the scandal, and that it is better to offend a brother then to
offend a Magistrate. The word Offend is ambiguous. Better it is to offend, that
is to displease the Magistrate, for then I edify him, whereas otherwise I
should harden him in his course, then to offend, that is, lay a stumbling block
before the poorest soul in the kirk, and so destroy him for whom Christ died.
Romans 14.15. We are commanded to abstain from things in their own nature
indifferent, if the vveake brother shall offend with the use of them. Romans
14.15.21. The Magistrate has not power to abolish this law. Obedience to the
magistrate ought not to be the rule of my love to Gods glory, or salvation of
my brother, which when it is neglected, Gods glory is trampled under foot. You
will say, that we are bound to obey the Magistrate. It is true, we are bound in
conscience to be subject to the magistrate, but not to obey him but in the Lord,
that is, we are bound to passive obedience, but not to active, except in things
lawful. A scandal is not lawful. Further, know you not that the magistrate may
abuse a thing indiff^rent, as well as a private man, and make all Israel to
stumble, for he is a sinful man Know ye not that it often falls out
according to the old saying, Quo volunt Reges, vadun leges, the laws must sing
as will the King Know ye not that the Magistrate may hau^ his own private
respects, and under color o^ things indifferent bring in a corrupt religion I
need not insist upon this point, it is sensibl^ enough to men of mean
judgment. Say no therefore with Cain, Am I my brothers keeper The Lord will say
to thee, Thy life for his life if he be missing. 1. King 20.39. How careless,
alas, are many, although thousands fall at their right hand, and ten thousand
at their left, so that they can either win or retain the favor of their
superiors. But look how vile the soul of thy brother was in thine eyes,
thine shall be in the eyes of God, except thou repent and amend.

I am now to prove it idolatrous, Kneeling in the act of receiving is
Idolatrous.
first in respect of the public intent of our superiors: Next, simply,
wha^soever intent men can pretend. That we may know what is the public intent,
we are to consider the intent of the English Church: for conformity with that
Church is intended. Next, the act of Perth Assembly which is urged.

The kirk of England intends kneeling for reverence of the sacrament: The
public intent of the English Kirk is idolatrous.
for in the book of common prayer, whereunto they are bound by the statute, 1
Elizab. kneeling is enjoined upon this ground, That the sacrament might not be
profaned, but held in a reverent and holy estimation. D. Morton answers, Are
ye then of opinion, either that the sacrament cannot be profaned, or that the
Church had not reason to prevent, or avoid the profanation of this sacrament
of the Eucharist. And again, to stop the mouths of blasphemous papists
vilifying our sacrament with the ignominious names of Bakers bread, Vintners
wine, profane elements. Ale-cakes, and such like reproachful terms, did hold
it fit that we by our outward reverence in the manner of receiving the
Eucharist, might testify our due estimation of such holy rites, which are
consecrated to so blessed an use, as is the communion of the body and blood of
Christ, and that thereby we might repel the stain and ignominy which such
virulent and unhallowed tongues did cast upon them. The Replyer to Doctor
Morton refelleth this allegiance of stopping the mouths of Papists, Re^ly 2.
part. page 50.
and tells us, that some close dissembling adversaries did hinder the work
of reformation so much as they could, and that they have done so ever since,
and do so still to this day. Howsoever it is, ye see they kneel to testify
their due estimation of the holy rites. Mr. Hatton says, they kneel to put a
difference between the ordinary bread and wine, and these sacramental, to
which they give the more reverence, because it is more then ordinary bread and
wine. Book 2. ag^^nst the ^inisters of Cornwall and Devonshire.
What can be said more plainly. Master Rogers in his second Dialogue has some
words to the same effect. Now to kneel for reverence of the elements, because
they are more then ordinary bread and wine, or to testify our due estimation
of the holy rites, which are employed about the elements, is Idolatry.

The public i^tent of our Church is idolatrous.
We are next to try the public intent by the act of Perth Assembly ratified in
Parliament, the tenor whereof follows, as it is published after fining and
refining.

The act of Perth a^^nt kneeling.
Since we are commanded by God himself, that when we come to worship him, we
fall down and kneel before the Lord our Maker, and considering withal, that
there is no part of divine worship more heavenly and spiritual, then is the
holy receiving of the blessed body and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Like as the most humble and reverent gesture of the body in our
meditation and lifting up of our hearts, becomes well so divine and sacred an
action, Therefore notwithstanding our Church has used since the reformation
here, to celebrate the holy Communion to the people sitting, by reason of the
great abuse used in the Idolatrous worship of Papists, Yet now, since all
memory of bypast superstition is blotted out of the hearts of the people,
praised be God, in reverence of God, and in due regard of so divine a mystery,
and in remembrance of so mystical an union, as we are made partakers of
thereby, the assembly thinks good, that the blessed sacrament be celebrated
hereafter to the people humbly, The false and superfluous clauses of the act.
and reverently kneeling upon their knees.

We have here two lies enclosed in the parenthesis. It is untrue, that al
memory of bypast past superstition is blotted out of the hearts of the people,
as the country well knows, and the behavior of some ignorant people, when
they were kneeling, has already bewrayed. Next it is untrue, that the abuse
in time of papistrie was the only and principal cause of restoring the gesture
of sitting at the beginning of reformation. If they had aimed only at the
reformation of that abuse, they needed not to have restored sitting, standing
or taking en passant would have served the turn. Both sitting, and
distributing of the elements by the communicants were restored at the
reformation, because most agreeable, and near to the pattern of the first
supper.

We have three reasons in this act, wherefore we should kneel, as M. Lindsay
has analyzed it.

The first reason for kneeling in the act refuted.
The first reason in the narratiue is this, Since we are commanded by God
himself, that when we come to worship him, we fall down and kneel before the
Lord our maker. Relative to this in the conclusion we have these words.
Therefore in reverence of God, the assembly thinks good that this sacrament
be celebrated to the people kneeling upon their knees. For the confirmation of
this reason is alleged the 9^ Psalm verse 7. By this rude reason it is a sin
not to kneel in the act of receiving, Christ and his Apostles, and al who
followed their example since, have sinned. For if we be commanded by God, it is
a sin to violate his commandment. Next the word worship is not taken here for
any kind of religious, and divine service, or action expressed by the word
Cultus in latin, but more strictly for adoration, or rather that gesture of
prostrating the whole body. The people of God used four gestures of the body,
as signs of honor: first a bending or bowing down of the head, which they
expressed by the word Cadad, this was the least degree. Next a bending or
bowing of the superior bulk of the body, which they expressed by the word
Carang. The third kneeling, which they expressed by the word Barach. The fourth
falling down prostrate with their hands and feet spread, which they expressed
by the word Histachaveh. The last three are all mentioned in the 6 verse of the
95 Psalm. If there were any command here included to fall down, when we receive
the sacrament, we should be commanded not only to bow the superior bulk of
the body, as Pope Honorius commanded to be done at the elevation, or to
kneel, as we are now commanded to do, but ^lso to prostrate our selves upon
our face, with our hands and feet spread, for so do some interpret the manner.
But there is here only an ^nvitation and exhortation, not a commandment, not
to kneel, when they come before the Lord to worship, but ^o ^^me before the
Lord, that is before the arc, which is called the face of God, and worship,
that is prostrate themselves, kneel, and bow themselves before the Lord their
maker in token of thanksgiving. It is great ignorance to infer hereupon, that
we are commanded to kneel in the act of receiving the sacramental elements in
the act of preaching and hearing the word, which are al acts of divine service,
or worship in a larger sense. The words relative in the conclusion taken
simply are not true. For we are not bound at al times to kneel in reverence of
God. For affirmative precepts binds us ever, but not to practice at every
time. For then we should never be off our knees, because we ought ever to carry
with us reverence to God.

The second reason in the narratiue of the act is this, And considering with all, The second reason in the act for kneeling refuted.
that there is no part of divine worship more heavenly and spiritual, then is
the holy receiving of the blessed body and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Relative to this reason we have in the conclusion these words: And in
regard of so divine a mystery the assembly thinks good, that that blessed
sacrament be celebrated to the people humbly and reverently, kneeling upon
their knees. Mystery (says he) is not taken here for the elements, because it
is not said Mysteries, but Mystery, and by Mystery is meant the holy
receiving of the body and blood of Christ, which is mentioned in the narratiue.
When the act was first formed, the copies that we saw, had the word Mysteries.
It is now refined, and yet they are not a whit farther off. For what reason is
there to refer it to the remoter words of the narratiue, when i^ may be
referred to the nearer words of the coclusion, to wit the celebration of the
holy communion, and the words following, that blessed sacrament. But the truth
is, it is relative to all the three, as we shall make evident in the own place.
But admit his interpretation. If we should kneel, when we receive Christ's body
and blood in regard of so divine a mystery, then should we do it whenever
we eat Christ's flesh, and drink his bood. But so it is, that as often, as the
promises of the gospel are read, exponed, or in any part of the sermon
rehearsed, and the hearer believes, he receives and eats Christ's flesh, and
drinks his blood. But then we must be attentive hearers, and not speak to
God, when God is speaking to us. Attentive hearing, and the work of
apprehending, considering, discerning, trying what is spoken, ca^ not consist
with presenting our prayers upon our knees. Neither is kneeling urged in this
part of divine service. It is not then simply in due teg^rd of so divine a
mystery, as is the receiving of Christ's body and blood, that kneeling is
intended (for the spiritual, and inward receiving is common both to the word
and sacraments) but in regard of so divine a mystery, as is the receiving of
Christ's body and blood in the sacrament, or which is all one, in regard of the
mystical or sacramental manner of receiving, and consequently in regard of
the symbols or symbolical rites employed about the symbols. It is clear then,
that in the narratiue of the act, by the receiving of the body and blood of
Christ, is meant a sacramental receiving, and to that manner of receiving is
the word Mystery relative in the conclusion.

The third reason, says he, The third reason in the act for kneeling refuted.
is the correspondencie between the outward gesture of our body, and the
meditation and lifting up of our hearts, when we remember, and consider the
mystical union betwixt Christ and us, and among our selves, whereof we are made
partakers by the receiving of Christ's blessed body and blood. This reason
depending upon the former shall receive the like answer. Are we not made
partakers of that mystical union, when at the hearing of the promises of the
Gospel, we eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood? Many have been partakers
of this mystical union, who were never partakers of this sacrament.

But the words of the narratiue, The right meaning of the third reason.
and the conclusion cannot sort together after that manner. Therefore he
shunneth to set down the words of the narratiue, and of the conclusion relative
to them. For in the narratiue is no mention made of the mystical union,
neither is it said in the narratiue, that the most humble and reverent gesture
of the body well becomes our meditation, and the lifting upp of our hearts,
when we consider the mystical union betwixt Christ and us: but that the most
humble and reverent gesture of our b^dy in our meditation, and lifting up of
our hearts becomes well so divine and sacred an action as is the receiving of
the body and blood of Christ. Now this reason receives the like answer that
the two former. For it may be asked, why becomes that humble gesture of
meditation and lifting up of our hearts, the receiving of Christ's body and
blood, in the act of rec^iving the s^cramentall elements, more then in the
hearing of the promises of the gospel, if it were not in regard of the
sacramental elements. Next, what h^mble gesture is that, which is so suitable
with m^ditation. Men do meditate walking, si^ting, lying, but not kneeling.
For by me^^tation a man does speak to himself, holding a soliloqu^e in his own
soul. Again what humble gesture is that, which best becomes the lifting up
of the heart, s^eing the heart may be lifted up without prayer, and in prayer
kneeling does signify rather the submission and humiliation, then the lifting
up of the heart. The lifting up of the eyes or hands are the outward signs of
lifting up of the heart.

In the conclusion, the words which he makes relative to the former are these:
To remember is not to lift up the heart by prayer.
In remembrance of so mystical an union, as we are made partakers of by so
divine a mystery. In remembrance, that is, in memory: for so run the words,
In reverence, in due regard in remembrance. But least I should seem to cavil
at words, let it be in remembering. I^ there be any force in this reason, we
should kneel, whenever we remember so mystical an union. If this clause in
the conclusion were relative to the former in the narratiue, then by lifting up
of the heart is not meant prayer. For to remember, or as he adds, to consider
is not to pray. Howbeit there by pondering, remembering, considering, and
momentanie meditations, are ejaculations of meditation in prayer, as there are
momentanie petitions, and ejaculations of prayer, incident to our meditations,
yet to pray is not to meditate, nor to meditate to pray, nor n^ man of sound
judgment ever defined them so, but are two diverse exercises of the soul, and
require diverse employments of the body, diverse times, and diverse denomination^
from the principal work, and not from the incident ejaculations. So that by
the lifting up of the heart can not be meant prayer. For one humble gesture of
kneeling is not suitable both to meditation and prayer, both to speaking unto
God, and to our selves.

We are not directed by the act to meditate, We are not directed by the act to
meditate, or pray in the act of receiving.
and lift up our hearts, when we remember, and consider this mystical union,
whereof we are made partakers by receiving Christ's body and blood, but only to
use that humble gesture when we receive Christ's body and blood, which we use
in our meditation, and lifting up of our heart, although we be not then
meditating, or lifting up our heart. But put the case, that we be so directed,
and that by lifting up of the heart be meant prayer, yet it must be meant a
mental prayer, not a vocal: for that is a lifting upp of the voice. The
mental prayer must either follow the vocal prayer of the Minister, or must be
conceaved by the kneeler.

Mental prayer following the vocal of the Minister in the act of receaving
was not enjoined.
The Lords, over-rulers of that assembly meant not a mental prayer following the
vocal prayer of the Minister. For then they would have ordained some prayer to
be uttered by the Minister, or else that every Minister should conceave a prayer
as he thought good. But no such thing was done. Some, who are said to have
been penners of the act themselves, use not a form of prayer at the deliverie
of the Elements, nor yet any other, so far as I know. Every man was left to
his own free choice of words, whether in form of prayer, or otherwise.
Kneeling therefore should not be urged til in another like assembly they have
dressed all the appurtenances. They were so glad of kneeling, that they forgot
all the requisites, and so they brought forth a shapelesse birth, like the
bears whelpe, which wants eyes, and is a rude deformed lump when it is
brought forth, and must be cherished, and licked a long time before it be
brought to a perfect form. But suppone that a vocal prayer had been
ordained, yet is not kneeling enjoined in regard of any vocal prayer. For the
communicant kneeleth both before, and after the receaving, and the Minister
ends if he follow the English form, his wish, or request of three or four
words, a short ejaculation of the tongue sooner then the communicant can
address himselfs to his knees, and before he eat, the other ends his
prayer, bids him eat, and be thankful, which is an admonition, or
exhortation, not a prayer, and so leaves him, and goes to another. Next, if
kneeling were intended in regard of any vocal prayer of the Minister, then
where there is no vocal prayer at the deliverie, kneeling is not intended, and
they have greatly failed, who have kneeled. But that is done almost every
where, where there is kneeling. Thirdly, if in regard of the vocal prayer of
the Minister, then if a Minister utter demonstrativelie Christ's own words, the
communicant must not kneel, but if h^ utter the words of man's framing he must
kneel. So Christ's order must be overthrown that kneeling may have place.
Fourthlie suppose vocal prayer had been enjoined, and the communicant to
follow it mentallie, what can be the reason to urge kneeling in regard of that
vocal prayer, rather then any other, if there were no further intended, then
to kneel in regard of the vocal prayer of the Minister. At a convention
holden at Saint Andrews before Perth assembly, it was thought good that
people should either stand or kneel in time of prayer, at other times. What
need I insist upon this point, seeing there was no direction for a vocal
prayer, far less a declaration, that kneeling was intended in regard of that
prayer. The mental prayer of the communicants own framing not enjoined not
kneeling in regard of it.


If by lifting up of the heart could be meant the mental prayer of the
communcants own framing, and co^ceiving, it must be either a set and continued
prayer, or short ejaculation and momentanie petitions. The set and continued
prayer, which may be called Oration instructa, a prayer set in order according
to David's phrase Psalm. 5. Mane instrua^ coram te, and sum speculiturus, cannot
consist with the exercise of receaving, eating, drincking, and the mental
actions answering analogicallie to them. Either the mind must be abstracted
from meditation, and consideration of these outword rites, whereabout the
senses, and members are employed, or else it must be distracted, and divided
betwixt two exercises. A Prince would not be content to be so used by a poor
supplicant, to see him employed in another action, athough lawful and honest,
when he is preferring his petition to him. Did. 49. cap. sacer.
It is then the sacrifice of fools. Offer it now to thy Governor, will he be
pleased with thee, or accept thy person Malach. 1.8. Indignum est dare Deo,
quod dedignaretur homo. If we make petition but to some earthly Prince we fix
the eye both of body, and mind upon him, and scare least some incongruous, or
unseemly word move him to aver^ his countenance. Tot^m in cum menti^ and
corporis aciem defigimus, and de nutu ej^s tr^^ida expectatione pendemus,
C^llat. 23. cap. 27.
non mediocrit^^ f^rmid^ntes, ne quod forte incongruum verbum audientes
misericordiam avertat says Cassianus. The like incongruity of confou^ding two
exercises receaving, eating, drinking in time of set prayer, and adoration
upon our knees was never heard among the very barbarians, and I think would
never have been heard among Christans, if they had not imagined falsely that
they were eating the flesh, and drinking the blood of their God. Next, if by
lifting up of the heart be meant the set mental prayer of the communicant, it
will follow, that kneeling cannot be farther urged, then the set mental
prayer it self. But I believe that the communicant, if he be well exercised in
the mental actions, answering analogicallie to the outward, communicates
worthily, howbeit he conceave not a set mental prayer. Thirdly if kneeling be
enjoined in regard of set mental prayer to be conceaved by the communicant,
then a secret, or private prayer is commanded in a publ^^k assembly, without a
vocal, either of the Minister, or of him that prays, even then, when the
Minist^r, and congregation is not praying. He concurreth not with the
congregation, nor the congregation with him. And beside, the signs, and
gestures of secret, and mental prayer, where there is not vocal, should be
concealed in public, far less should they be extorted.

They may as well enjoin the communicant to lift up his eyes or knock on his
b^e^st, that we may know he is praying, as to enjoyne kneeling, if it were
intended in regard of this secret prayer. For kneeling, lifting up of the
hands, eyes, knocking on the breast, are natural adumbrations of the inward
motions, and passions of our soul, which ought not to be extorted. It must be
therefore for some other regard, that kneeling is intended, then in regard of
any set mental prayer. For whether he pray, or not, mentallie, he is urged
to kneel.

Kneeling not intended in regard of the eiaculations of the heart.
If by lifting up of the heart be meant the momentanie petitions, and short
ejaculations of the soul, that lifting up may very well consist with set
meditation, and not only with this action of receiving, eating, drinking the
sacramental elements, but also with the receiving of our ordinary and daily
food, eating and drinking at common tables. In a word, with all our actions
whether civil or religious, and may be incident to my passing by a Crucifixe,
at which time I may not kneel, howbeit I detest the Image. I may very well
passing by with neglect or contempt, groan to God for the blindness of the
people, or lift up my hand, or my eyes, because these gestures may well
express our inward ejaculations. But kneeling attends not upon ejaculations,
but upon set prayer, or thankesgiving purposely intended. It was therefore a
silly tale of one of our ministers, to say that we granted they might lift up
their eyes, but we envied the poor knee. Will any man infer, that I may
kneel at eating of daily food, because I may then lift up my eyes? These
ejaculations, and holy motions of the heart may be, and are often incident at
hearing of the word, and sometimes more fervent then at the receiving of the
Sacrament It is not therefore in regard of that lifting uppe of the heart by
short eiacalations of prayer that kneeling is intended.

What has been said against the pretext of prayer, The pretense of mental
and real thankesgiving answered.
let it be applied to thanksgiving vocal, or mental, set, and contined, or
iaculatorie, and momentanie. If they will say, that the action of eating and
drinking is a real thankesgiving, and showing forth of the Lords death, the
Apostle says not so, but requires a declaration by words of the Lords death
as often as we communicate. But put the case the Apostle had said, by eating and
drinking ye show forth the Lords death, yet is not the action a real
thanksgiving, but a real commemoration to speak so, of Christ's death and
passion, and consequently of the nature of preaching, and showing forth of the
Lords death and passion, and not of the nature of thanksgiving. It is one thing
to profess and publish Gods mercies before men for the redemption of man, and
another thing to offer up thanks to God by way of adoration. God may be
honored many ways, but every honor is not adoration. Praise and thanksgiving
differ. Augustine says, Homil. 26. Tom. 10.
Christum praedicari per linguam, per epistolam, per sacramentum corporis and
sanguinis ejus.

Having examined all the reasons of the Act according to Master Lindsayes own
interpretation, A question to discover the nakedness of the Act.
that the Reader may the better conceive how rude they are, I propone this
question. Seeing we receive the same benefit invvardlie and severallie, we
eat the flesh, and drink the blood of Christ as often as we believe the
promises of the Gospel read, exponed, or in any part of the sermon rehearsed,
and may have the heart then lifted up, yea sometimes more fervent motions then
when we receive the sacramental elements of bread and wine; Why are we
enjoined to kneel at the one time more then at the other, if it be not in
regard of the outward signs and rites, which is idolatry? Nay, I should urge
further. Seeing there was only a voice at the delivery of the word, and here
is a visible object set before the eye, howbeit it were urged there, wherefore
should it be urged here? Ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no
similitude, only ye heard a voice. Deuteronomy. 4.12. According to his private
interpretation I form another act mutatis mutandis like the act of Perth, that
it may be the better understood.

Another act f^rmed to discover the mystery and meaning of the ^ct of Perth.
SInce we are commanded by God himself, that when we come to worship him, we
fall down and kneel before the Lord our maker, and considering withal, that
there is no part of divine worship more heavenly and spiritual, then is the
holy receiving of the blessed body and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Like as the most humble and reverent gesture of the body in our
meditation, and lifting up of our hearts, becomes well so divine and sacred
an action. Therefore notwithstanding our Church has used, since the
reformation of religion here, to hear the promises of the Gospel read,
exponed, or in any part of the sermon rehearsed sitting, by reason of some
great abuse in former times; yet now, seeing all memory of bypast abuse is
blotted out of the hearts of the people, praised be God, in reverence of God,
and in due regard of so divine a mystery, and in remembrance of so mystical
an union. as we are made partakers of thereby, the Assembly thinks good,
that the promises of the Gospel being read, exponed, or rehearsed in any part
of the Sermon, that the people hearken reverently kneeling upon their knees.

Is there any reason in the act of Perth, which may not sort with this? Three
or four phrases in the Act signifying one thing.
May not the reader here perceive, that by receiving of the body and blood of
Christ in the narratiue, is meant a mystical receiving of the sacrament, and
relative to this phrase in the conclusion are these three following, the holy
communion, divine mystery, and blessed sacrament, so that all the four
signify one thing, and without correspondencie to other, they cannot cohere in
any tolerable construction of words. Let the act then be formed, as it should
run in right construction in manner following.

SInce we are commanded by God himself, that when we come to worship him, The
Act rightly formed.
we fall down and kneel before the Lord our maker, and considering withal,
that there is no part of divine worship more heavenly and spiritual, then is
the holy receiving of the body and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Like as the most humble and reverent gesture of the body in our meditation, and
lifting up of our hearts becomes well so divine and sacred an action.
Therefore notwithstanding our Church has used, since the reformation of
religion here, to receive the body and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ sitting, by reason of the great abuse used in the idolatrous worship of
Papists, yet now since all memory of bypast superstition is blotted out of the
hearts of the people, praised be God: in reverence of God, and due regard of so
divine a mystery, and in remembrance of so mystical an union as we are made
partakers of thereby, the Assembly thinks good that the people receive the
body and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ humbly and reverently
kneeling upon their knees.

By the word Mystery is meant the sacrament, or sacramental receiving.
May not any man here see evidently, that by Divine Mystery is meant the
receiving of the body and blood of Christ in the mystery of the Supper, or the
mystical and sacramental receiving which stands in signs and rites,
wherein it differs from the spiritual. By the word Mystery in the singular
number, as well as by the word Mysteries in the plural number, is meant the
sacrament very frequently among the ancient Writers. Dionysius Areopagita
entituleth the chapter of the Lords Supper, De eccles. Hierarch.
The mystery of the Synaxis or holy communion. Ambrose says, Indignus est
Domin^, qui aliter mysterium celebrat, quam ab eo traditum est, that he is
unworthy in the Lords account who celebrateth the mystery otherwise then he
has delivered it. In 1 Cor. 11
Oecamenius says, that the Apostle Paul calls the mystery of our master the
Lords Supper. Hieron. in Psalm. 47.7.
Jerome says, Licet in mysterio possit intelligi, tamen verius corpus Christi,
and sanguis eius sermo scripturarum est, that howbeit it may be understood of
the mystery, that yet more truly the words of the Scripture may be called the
body and blood of Christ. What need many testimonies? Exercit. page 550.
Casaubone says of this sacrament, Dicitur etiam antonomastice to mysterion,
aut numero multitudinis ta mysteria. In the English confession the bread, and
wine are called. The holy, and heavenly mysteries of the body, and blood of
Christ. In the service book the word Mystery is used in the singular number.
Master Lindsay himself uses some time the word Mystery, and sometime the word
Mysteries in his Resolutions. The word Mystery is often used in the singular
number because both the signs, and the rites employed about them are referred
to one Christ signified.

This act may pass among both Papists and Lutherans, The act of Perth may
pass among Lutherans and Papists.
this clause (Notwithstanding our Church has used, since the Reformation here,
to celebrate the holy communion to the people sitting, by reason of the great
abuse used in the Idolatrous worship of Papists, yet now since all memory of
bypast superstition is blotted out of the hearts of the people praised be God)
being blotted out, as justly it ought: for it is false, as I have already
said. It is superfluous. For the act is whole, and entire without it, the
conclusion answering to the narrative. And it is insert for a mock. For
immediately after, and before they condemn our Church for want of reverence
and due regard to this Sacrament, which ought to have prevailed above all other
respects, if their reason were forcible. This false, superfluous, and mocking
clause being blotted out, ye have the whole act, as follows.

SInce we are commanded by God himself, that when we come to worship him, The
Lutheran or popish (...)
we fall down and kneel before the Lord our maker, and considering withal,
that there is no part of divine worship more heavenly and spiritual, then is
the holy receiving of the blessed body and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Like as the most humble and reverent gesture of the body in our
meditation, and lifting up of our hearts, becomes well so divine and sacred
an action. Therefore in reverence of God, and due regard of so divine a
mystery, and in remembrance of so mystical an union, as we are made
partakers of thereby, the Assembly thinks good, that blessed sacrament be
celebrated to the people humbly and reverently upon their knees.

This act I say may pass among Papists, and Lutherans. C^^doration, or else
respective adoration of the elements is intended in the ^ct.
For they maintain that all the communicants, even the very wicked, and
hypocrites receave the very body, and blood of Christ in at their mouth, the
Papist under the accidents of bread, and wine, the Lutheran under or within the
elements of bread, and wine. For the Papist and Lutherane has beside the
spiritual receaving, which they grant only to the godly, a Sacramental but
essential, and real receaving of the very body, and blood of Christ in at
the mouth, which they grant also to the wicked. The act of the communicants
receaving is no otherwise expressed here, then by the receaving of the body
and blood of Christ. May we not therefore justly suspect the Sacramental
real receaving of Christ's body, and blood to have been intended by the first
penners of the act, wheresoever it was first forged, seeing there is nothing
contrary to this meaning in the act, it is damned as curiosity to enquire
after what manner Christ is present in the Sacrament of the supper. Yea it is
plainly avouched that Christ's blood is after a more sublime manner present in
the Sacramental wine, then it is in the water of Baptism. So in this sense to
kneel in regard of the divine mystery is to kneel in regard of Christ's body
reallie present, and the signs together, conjunctlie as the total object of
adoration, and so the signs shall be worshipped by way of coadoration. So the
Papists worship the body of Christ, and the species, or accidents together.
Non solum Christus sub speciebus existens, sed etiam totum Sacramentum
visibile, vt ex Christo and speciebus constat vnico latriae actu adorandum est,
says Swarez. And again, Tom. 3. disp. 65. sect. 1.
simpliciter hoc Sacramentum adorandum esse adoratione latriae absoluta, and
perfecta, qua per se adoretur Christus. coadorentur autem species, quia hoc
Sacramentum in re est vnum Constans ex Christo and speciebus. If no man can be
persuaded that there is any such intent, yet the other respect is at least
intended, to wit, to kneel in regard of the mystery, that is, of the mystical
rites, and elements, which is Idolatry. For to kneel in regard of the
elements, is to adore them. Because kneeling in Religious use is ever a gesture
of adoration, and sovereign worship, which belongs only to God, and by it is
designed some times the whole worship of God. Ipsam proskunesm, quae hominibus
propter analogicam cum Deo similitudinem legitime tribuitur, ita Deo propriam
censeo, cum Religiosa est, ut totus cultus divinus illa sol^ designetur,
Christus illam Diabolo, Di^put. page 233.
and Angelus sibi abjudicet, hoc argumento quod Dei propria sit, says
Arminius. Yet I cannot see how the word Mystery can be other wise taken in the
act, then for the receaving of the signs, and the thing signified together
Sacramentallie. It is true God offers the thing signified as often as the
outward signs are presented unto us, but the fail is upon the part of the
receaver, who wants faith and receaveth only the outward signs.

W^e have examined the public intent, which we find to be idolatrous. The
private intents of the co^municants examined.
And therefore whatsoever be the private intent of the communicant he must be
interpreted according to the publik intent. Otherwise a man may go to Rome,
and kneel. But we will examine also what the communicant can allege for his
private intent. The pretense of mental prayer, or thanksgiving we have
already discussed.

The pretense of receiving a precious gift, the body and b^ood of Christ.
First ye say, ye are receaving a precious gift, the body, and blood of
Christ. Will not any man do reverence to the king, when he receaveth a gift
out of his hand? This pretense has been already answered. For we receave the
same benefit at the hearing of the word. But farther it may be doubted whether
thou be receaving such a gift, howbeit God be offering it. Next the manner of
the offer is to be considered, to wit, not immediately, but mediatlie by the
Ministry of the word, and Sacraments. Thirdly we must not imagine that
Christ's body is offered unto us in the Sacrament, as if we had never received
his body before. Did we not receave his body at the Sacrament in former
times, did we receave, and then loose again? Yea we receave the body of
Christ at our first conversion, we receave his flesh, and blood in the word,
before we receve them in the Sacrament. We are in Christ's body before we eat
of Christ's body, De civit. de^ l. 2^. c. 25.
says Augustine. Dicendum non est eum comedere corpus Christi, qui non est in
corpore Christi. And again he says, that we are made partakers of Christ's
body in Baptism. Nulli aliquatenus est dubitandum, vnumquemque fidelium
corporis, and sanguinis tunc esse participem, quando in Baptismate membrum
efficitur Christi. And the Apostle says. By one spirit we are all Baptized
into one body. 1. Cor. 12.13. That we are graffed in Christ, that we putt on
Christ. Romans 6.35. Galat. 3.27. Vide de Consecrat did 1, Quia passus.
Tertullian says of baptism, that we are not baptized that we may cease from
sinning, but because we have left off to sin, and have our hearts washed, and
cleansed. Non ideo abluimur, De poenitentia
ut desinamus delinquere, sea quia des^imus, and cord loti sumus. The table is
ever spread for the soul, when the word is preached, and the Sacrament
ministered.

We bring with us actual faith to feed upon him, whom by habitual faith we
retain dwelling already in us. Familiaris loquendi modus est ut fieri dicatur
quod factum obsignatur. It is a familiar kind of speaking to say that a thing
is in doing, which already done is sealed and confirmed, De sacram. page 68.
says Whitakers. Fourthly, the nature of the gift is to be considered. Any man
will behave himself otherwise when he receives a Jewel out of the princes
hand, nor when he is receiving a supper, and is in the act of feasting with
him. Christ and his Apostles knew after what manner we should behave our selves
at this banquet, that we need not to go learn courtesy at the court.

You will say, that men bow to the chair of estate, The argument drawn from
ceremonies of court answered.
or the Princes letter, or seal, without injury done to the Kings person. Yea
the honor is conveyed to the Prince by the chair of estate, or the seal.
Doctor Abbots answer to Bishop in another purpose may serve here very well.
page 1215.
It should seem strange that formalities observed to Princes in th^^r courts,
for majesty and royal estate should be made patterns of religious devotions
to be practiced in the Church. De civit. dei. l. 2, cap. 4.
Augustine says that civil courtesies often are grounded upon base humility,
or pestiferous flattery. Hence it is that some countries mislike the
courtesies of other countries. Conon an heathen refused to adore Artaxerxes
after the manner of the Persians.

Next the bowing to the chair of estate or to the seal of the prince, is but a
civil worship for a politic end, to testify homage and allegiance. Doctor
Abbots in defense of Perkins, says It is holden for a matter of princely
Majesty, that there be a reverence performed to these things which serve in a
special manner for the Princes use. On the other side, Page 121^.
no such duty is done to the Princes Image. It is thought good by the State,
that the Majesty of Princes be upholden by such means, because they are but
weak mortal men. But God needs not any such props to hold up his majesty,
neither will he have any worship conveyed to him mediatelie by any creature
never so holy, or of whatsoever use. The sacraments are compared to seals, but
not in every respect. The sacraments have all their force and power from the
word, so has not the Kings seal from the Charter. The word is of it self
firm and sure without the sacraments, so is not the Charter without the seal.
A seal makes things authentical, as measures, clothes, grants, or the like.
The sacraments are annexed to the word, not to make the w^rd more authentical,
but to confirm our faith. The outward signs of the sacrament are made for us,
not we for them. And as one says, as they are the plainest part of Divinity,
so they come lowest to our necessity, and capacity. When we heard the word,
we were sealed with the Spirit, Ephesians 1.13. The holy Spirit is the seal or
signet sealing us to redemption, the graces of the Spirit are the seals
sealed, or printed upon us. The holy Spirit seals unto us Christ, and all his
benefits, and properly assures us of them, sometime by the word, and sometime
by the sacrament as outward means. The outward means are to be reverenced,
but not to be adored.

The argument taken from bowing before the arc answered.
It is alleged that we may bow before the Sacramental bread, and wine, because
the people of God bowed before the ark. We answer, they bowed not for reverence
of the arc, but to God dwelling, or sitting in the arc between the
Cherubims. God was after an extraordinary, and singular manner present in the
arc, delivering oracles. For this singular presence of God in the arc the
Temple was built, and all the implements thereof made. God promised to hear his
people, when they should turn them toward this Temple. So they bowed toward
the arc, toward the Temple, wherein the arc was, toward the mountain whereon
the Temple was situate, because of Gods presence in the ark, in the Temple
wherein the arc was, and which was situate upon the mountain. They bowed
toward the Temple, not as toward a particular thing, but as toward a particular
place of presence. The bread is a particular thing, not a particular place of
presence, wherein God may be said to sit, or dwell, or from whence he
promises to hear our prayers.

There is no such place of presence now under the New testament. The arc
wherein God dwelt or sat, was a type of Christ's manhood, not yet existing, and
of the Godhead dwelling in the manhood. The Temple also, John the second
chapter and the nineteen verse. But now under the new Testament we are
directed to direct our worship to that place where the Godhead is dwelling, in
the Manhood existing, that is, to the heaven where Christ's Manhood is.

Ye will say, Improper adoration is idolatrous.
we may reverence the bread as a sign of Christ's body by way of
representation, that is, as if his body, howbeit absent were present in the
bread, or under the accidents of bread, and all the honor that we would do
to the body of Christ, as if it were present, we do before, and about the
bread, as in a Comedy, all the honor done to him that represents the King,
is accounted done properly to the King, not to him that represents, but
improperly. Sicklyke to an Ambassador: and after the same manner to an empty
coffin at funerals. We answer, that we owe no adoration to any creature either
properly, or improperly. A representation of Christ's body actiuely to the
communicant, that is to represent his body to be received, we acknowledge: but
a representation of Christ's body passiuely, that is to stand in Christ's room
to receive adoration from the communicant, as a Vicegerent of Christ absent, we
do not acknowledge. For that were to give a portion of divine honor to the
creature, to make it Christ's Vicegerent when we worship him. By this reason
we might not only kneel, but kiss the sacrament, and direct our speech and
prayer toward it, as the Jesuit does, when fixing his eyes upon a Crucifixe in
his Sermon, he directs his speech to Christ. To this kind of worship many
refer the convey of civil worship to the Prince, by the chair of estate.
But it is limited to one particular, to wit, bowing.

Coniunct adoration, or proper respective of the signs are intended in the
act, and both are idolatrous.
Ye will say, ye intend not this representation, but consider Christ as
present, as the Papist considers the samplar, or person represented as
present, as clothed with the Image, or shining in the Image, that is, present
Secundum esse representativum, non secundum esse reale, that is, by mere
representation only. This coniunct adoration is like the coadoration of the
purple robe wherewith the King is clothed, or of the Popes shoe, when the Pope
is adored, or any submission, or supplication made unto him. But God will not
be worshipped according to our apprehensions. We make an idol of him if we
apprehend him otherwise then he is. The sacrament cannot be the robe of that
body which is in the heavens and not in the bread: and therefore the bread
cannot be worshipped concomitanter with the body of Christ upon a mere
apprehension. There is no adoration of any created thing with the Godhead, but
only of the manhead of Christ united personally to the Godhead. Therefore
Nestorius, an old heretic, conceiving the manhead of Christ to be a distinct
person from the Godhead, and notwithstanding averring that the manhead should
be adored with the Godhead, was condemned in the Council of Ephesus. The body
it self of Christ were not to be adored if it were not personally united to
his Godhead. I know the understanding Formalist denies in words both the
improper and coniunct adoration. But we are now examining the private intent of
the communicants, and who doubts but many apprehend Christ's, body to be
either present in apprehension, or represented as absent, or really present in
the bread when they kneel. Did not one of our Barons protest, that he kneeled
not for reverence of the bread, but because it was a sign of Christ's body?
What was that to say, but that he would not adore the simple bread, but that
he would adore the sacramental bread? but after what manner? whether
improperly, or coniunctly, or respectively? I think he could scarce tell
himself. What may we then judge of many in the land? The formalist kneeling
according to the intent of the act in regard of the divine mystery, that is,
of the sacramental receiving of Christ's body and blood, adoreth either the
body of Christ and the signs coniunctly, as obiectum quod, totale and
adaequatum, or else disiunctly the signs, as the material object, obiectum
quod, and the body of Christ only by consequence, as obiestum quo, the reason
wherefore he adoreth the signs properly and directly in recto, as they speak,
and the samplar but indirectly, in obliquo. There is no other regard either of
prayer, or any other like thing expressed in the act, which may lead us to
think that improper adoration was intended. And of the two last I cannot see
how the proper respective can be intended, seeing they are then using the
signs to the end whereunto they were appointed, and consider them in actu
exercito, as they are then representing Christ's body. Whereas the proper
respective is given to the signs, as to things sacred. As when the Papist
passing by the Image, uncovereth his head considering it only generaly and
confusedly, as a thing sacred. But when he considers the Image, as it is an
Image actu exercito representing the thing signified, and intends to adore in
it, or before it the samplar or person represented, then he kneeleth: for
their proper respective adoration they call veneration, such honor as they
give to the book of the Gospel, or sacred vessels, says Swarez, who calls
it adoratio veneraria. Howsoever it is with them, kneeling is ever a gesture of
adoration, and never to be used, but to God directly in absolute adoration.
Absolute adoration we call that which is given to persons, or intellectual
creatures for some intrinsic excellency in them. Respective we call that
which is determined in senseless and dead creatures, rests in them, and is
properly given them which are honored per se by themselves, howbeit propter
aliud for some extrinsick excelencie out of themselves and inherent in the
samplar, or thing represented, and consequently honor redoundeth to the
samplar by consequence.

The pretense of Obiectum a quo significative answered.
Put the case the Formalist were free of the former two intentions, that is, to
adore signs, either coniunctly or respectively, and that it were true
whereunto he flees, as unto his last refuge, that the bread and wine are
obiectum a quo significative, that is, an active object moving us to worship
the thing signified: which diffreth not from the adoration which Durandus
Holcot, and Pic^s Mirandula give to Images: for they adore not images the
object of their adoration; but only in their presence, or before them worship
the samplar. Their adoration is as abstract from the image as theirs can be
from the elements, neither can Doctor Morton show any difference. The outward
action is exercised materially before the image, the intention of worship is
directed to the samplar in their understanding. So the image was only obiectum
a quo significative to them in regard of the inward affection. And yet we
condemn them for exercising the natural action of outward adoration before the
image, or at the presence of the image. Resolut. page 161.
M. Lindsay says that there is a difference between images the invention of
men, and the works of God, the word of God, and the sacraments. But many of
the English formalists approve images as lawful objects to stir up the
memory, as the Replyer to Morton does testify. And they have reason: for if
they condemned images, as signs invented by men, unfit, and unlawful for
wakening up of the memory, and putting them in mind of some pious duty, they
must also condemn the sign of the cross, the surplice, and other significant
rites invented by man. Now if they may be lawful objects to stir up the
memory, what can hinder adoration before them, more then before other moving
objects. Si exemplaria ipsa per se sint digna adoratione, quid obstare potest
praesentia imaginis, Tom. 3. page 798.
quo minus adorari possint, says Swarez. So in the case of adoration there is
no difference. In the case of estimation, or veneration, and instruction they
differ. We esteem more of Gods works then the workma^ship of men. We owe
veneration, a decent and comely usage to Gods word and sacraments, which we
ought not to images. They are also ordained by God for our instruction, and so
are not images. But to adore God in them, by them, or before them by direction,
is forbidden as well as adoration before images. Otherwise we should fall down
before every green tree, before an ass, or a toade, or any other vile
creature, when they work as objects upon our minds, and move us to consider
Gods goodness, wisdom and power. We have to consider, that when a man is
considering the invisible things of God in the workmanship of an ass, tree,
toade or any other creature, he is not then praying, or praising except by
ejaculations, which may occur in all our actions, but he is meditating, and
contemplating. For if I should adore, that is pray, or praise God upon my knees
in the mean time, when I am poring with the eyes both of body and mind upon a
tree, or a toade, I should confound two exercises, or be thought to adore the
ass, the toade, or the tree, or God in, De adoratione lib. 3 disp. 1. cap. 2.
and 3.
or by the ass, toade or tree. Vasques the Jesuit doubts not to aver,
that not an image only, or an holy thing may be worshipped, with the same
adoration that is given to God, but also any thing in the world, the sun, the
moon, the stars, a stock, a little stone, or a straw. We are not far from this
horrible error, if we fall down to worship God before his creatures, when they
put us in remembrance of him, or when we contemplat his properties in them.
Resolutions p^g. 162.
M. Lindsay himself changes the phrase of speech to shun this absurdity. For
he says, To bow down when we have seen the works of God, when we have heard
the word, and when we receive the sacraments to adore him, when by his works
the word and sacraments we are taught to adore, is neither to bow down to an
Idol, nor to worship God in an Idol. Why does he not say, when we have
received the sacraments, as he said of the other two, when we have seen the
works of God, when we have heard the word, or why does he not say, when we see
the works of God, when we hear the word, and when we receive the sacraments,
as he should have done, if he would have showen the difference betwixt images,
the works of God, the word of God, and the sacraments. For the works, and word
of God are objects significant, when we see and hear the same. So if we may
fall down to worship God, when we see the sacrament, because it is obiectum a
quo significative, we may do the like when we hear the word, or in private
worship, when we see the creatures, and consider the workmanship of God in
them: for these are not images or inventions of men. The ground of this error
is the confounding of two exercises, prayer, or praise, and meditation, or
contemplation. If I were reading a passage of scripture, and meditating upon
it, I adore not then upon my knees, because I am then apprehending, and
considering what is read, and adore not till that exercise be ended. When it is
ended, if I find my self moved to pray or to give thanks, I pore not still with
the ey^s of my mind, and body upon the book, but turn me to a wall, or a
chair, or a bed, or any other thing casually placed before me, yea perhaps
before the book it self, but casually, as before any other thing. For I am not
then gathering lessons or instructions. For that exercise is ended, and this
time it is not fit. As it fares with the book of grace, so does it with the
book of nature. When I am reading in the book of nature beholding an ass, a
tree, or a toade, or any other workmanship of God, and considering in it his
goodness, power, wisdom, it is an object moving me to praise, and thank God,
but not in that exercise. For th^n I shall both still behold and adore. Now, if
we may not do this with the works of God in private worship, we may not do it
with the word read or preached, or the sacramental signs in public worship.
For when we are hearing, beholding, and considering, we are receiving
instruction from the objects of the eye and the ear, and we are then in
another employment then when we are adoring. Farther the elements are objectum
a quo significative immediately after the consecration, as the papist and
formalist both hold. Therefore all that are in the kirk should kneel at the
sight of the consecrated elements, even long before they receive, or approach
to receive, and the elements should be lifted up, as the bread is among the
papists at the elevation, to the end they may be moved to inward devotion, and
outward adoration by this obiectum a quo significative. for now is the time of
public worship, and after their consecration they have gotten their virtue to
signify. This adoration before a significant object instructing the mind, or
stirring up the memory will be found nothing different from improper adoration,
which is by way of representation. For I exercise the outward acts of adoration
before that object, as a Vice gerent of the thing absent signified by the same.
For the Jesuits say, they worship an image improperly, when they take it
obiective, and make it the Vicegerent of the thing considered, as absent, or
distant. Swarez reckoning all the sorts of adoration of images reduces them to
three, the improper worship of Durandus, and Holcot, Tom. 3. disp. 51. 52. 53.
when the image is obiectum a quo significatiue: the conjunct adoration of the
image with the samplar: the proper respective of the image for the samplars
sake. So the improper by representatio^ must be reduced to the first sort. To
adore then by direction before a creature, because it is obiectum a quo
significative, is to adore it by way of representation of the thing signified,
and to perform all that service before and about it, which I would perform,
if the samplar were present, which kind of adoration the understanding
Formalist denies. And in deed the act of Perth bears no such thing: for to
kneel in regard of so divine a mystery, to wit, as is the receiving of the
body and bood of Christ sacramentally is not to adore before the elements as
obiectum a quo significative the samplar, but to adore the elements themselves
with the thing signified. Thirdly, the el^ments are not set before us, as
obiectum a quo significative only, to be presented to the eye outwardly, and by
the eye to move the mind, De eucharist. lib. 4. c. 23.
but we take, eat, drink. Therefore says Bellermine, Iste fructus melius
obtinetur videndo eucharistiam in mensa, quam eam manducando. Nam du^
manducatur continuo peril significatio. At dum cernitur, and attente
confideratur, semper representat, and significat promissiones Dei, etiamsi per
annum integrum eam quis cernere vellet. Praeterea significatio melius
apprehenditur per oculos, quam per gustandi sensum. The meat set before us at
table, before it be used is an object moving us to praise God for his
beneficence, but withal it is a subject, whereupon we crave a blessing to be
powered, because we are to use it. Next we bless, or give thanks, not kneeling:
but in the very use and act of eating and drinking, none did ever say grace,
as we use to speak, far less kneel, no not among the most barbarous, or
yet the most superstitious. These three things are ever to be distinguished in
the benefits of God, and not to be confounded, preparation before the use, by
prayer and thanksgiving, the use it self, and thanksgiving after the use.

There are some other shifts scarce worth the answering, therefore I do but
lightly touch them. From the uncovering of the head, a gesture of simple
reverence, and that among some nations only, can no good argument be drawn
for kneeling, A fardel of pretenses answered.
which is a gesture of adoration among all nations, neither in civil, nor
religious use. I will not kneel to every one to whom I uncover my head. A
provincial synod at London 1603 ordained the head to be uncovered, when their
service is read in the church, yet I think they would not have enjoined
kneeling. And are not the words of Christ, which he uttered at the first
supper, as much to be reverenced? For that same voice sounds through all the
tables of the world Siclyke when they reason from the respective veneration of
the name of Jesus, by lifting the tap, or making a leg, which beside that it is
superstitious in giving more reverence to the name of Jesus, then to the name
of Christ, Savior, Redeemer, so is it not an argument for kneeling, which is a
gesture of adoration. Whereas it is said, we may receive upon our knees, that
which we may crave in Gods public worship upon our knees, is untrue. For the
preacher may crave a blessing upon his knees, and yet when he finds and
feels the blessing in his preaching, he may not adore upon his knees. Siclyke
the hearer may crave a blessing to his hearing, and yet in the act of hearing
may not adore upon his knees. Further, if I may receive kneeling in public
worship, that benefit which I craved in public worship, then in private worship
I may receive a benefit upon my knees, which I craved in private worship upon
my knees: for the difference of the place, public and private, alters not
the nature of worship. For the place is but a circumstance, common to all our
actions. So in whatsoever place he receive the benefit, he may receive it upon
his knees; and so because he craved daily food, by this reason he ought to
adore upon his knees, when he receives his food, and is enjoying the benefit,
eating, and drinking, which gross absurdity the grossest may perceive.
Humility of mind is required not only in all religious exercises, the
hearing of the word, receiving of the sacramenss, execution of the censures of
the church, but also in all our actions. It will not follow therefore, that
humiliation of our body, or adoration is required where humility of mind is
required, To conclude, as I asked before, when I examined the public intent,
so now I ask at the communicants pretending many private intents, what is the
reason that they kneel, when they reciue, eat, Christ's flesh, and drink his
blood in the Lords Supper, more then when they receive, eat his flesh, and
drink his blood at the hearing of the word, every one severally, as they
believe and find the like, and sometimes more fervent motions, if it be not in
regard of the elements, or of the thing signified, and the elements, which is
idolatry? Remember beside, that whatsoever be thy private intent, thy action
must be construed according to the public. If the public be idolatrous, thy
gesture is idolatrous. Ex voluntate iubentis pendet intentio exequentis, lib.
de praecep. and dispen.
says Bernard. Ye have seen my reasons, and answers, and therefore allege
not the naked and bare assertions of some Divines, who have not written so
hardly of this gesture of kneeling, because they have not been troubled with
it, as the Divines in our neighbor Church, who have been forced to examine and
consider it more narrowly: but let reason meet reason. Ratio cum ratione
concertet. For even a Jesuit Maldona^ does confess, that Rationum efficatia
est praestantior omni authoritate, nisi divina. Mortoni Apologia part. The
sitter is accessarie to the sin of the kneeler.
2. lib. 2. cap. 17.

The sitter is accessorie to the sin of the kneeler. First, he endures the
kneeler by his presence, and makes him think, that his kneeling is neither
scandalous nor idolatrous. You say, your sitting condemns his kneeling. No
such matter. But in communicating with him, you approve it as indifferent, as
when ye sit in time of prayer after sermon, when another is kneeling, or
standing. For shall you communicate with an idolater in the very act of his
idolatry, and not be accessorie in countenancing it with your presence. If you
do damn it as scandalous, or idolatrous, why communicate you with him? If you
build up that which you destroyed, you make your self a trespasser. The
Apostle forbids the Corinthians to converse, or eat with a brother
idolater, 1 Cor. 5. and yet you will eat and drink with him, when he is
committing the very act. The Apostle forbids not society with him in
public Assemblies, but only in private, and where he commits the act, till
he be reclaimed. Next, the communicant with the kneeler casts himself into
tentation, by setting before him an evil example, which may enduce him to do
the like, specially if the kneeler be a person of any credit and countenance.
Many are disquieted with the sight of a monster, or carcass many months
after. It is an evil token when you can be so well content to see such a
monster in our kirk, and your heart not rise within you. If you should present
your self to the mass in the same manner, and with the same liberty, custom
would so harden the heart, that in the end you would halt with the lame, and
conform in every point. It will creep like a Ring-worme: feemeth it now
tolerable, the next day it will seem holy, and the third day necessary. So
bewitching sins are idolatry and superstition. Thirdly, you are partaker of
an Idol feast. Start not at this I say: for the sacrament of the Lords Supper
may be turned into an idol feast, and has been a more abominable feast then
ever was any among the heathens. And howbeit there may be some difference
betwixt the formalists and the papists, arising upon the diversity of inward
opinions and conceits of Christ's real presence in the elements, yet if both
their gestures be idolatrous in their own kinds, the Lords supper is made an
idol feast. Non ad Diabolum pertinet quis isto, August. homde pastor.
vel illo modo erret, omnes errantes vult quibuslibet erroribus. It is nothing
to the Devil whether a man err this way or that way, whatsoever way they
err, all that be in error, he seeks to be his. Fourthly, the communicant
advances this innovation, and sets forward this gross corruption by his
presence and communicating with the kneeler. For if the kneelers were left to
themselves, they would be ashamed of themselves, whereas now they are comforted
and hardened in their sin, and some follow their example. Hieron. ad Ioanne^
Hierosol.
Fides pura mora^ non patitur ut apparuerit scorpius, illico conterendus est.
Pure faith suffers no delays. As soon as the scorpion appears, it is to be
bruised says Hierom. Fourthlie a confusion of gestures lawful, and unlawful
is brought into the Lords table, some sitting like ghuests at a feast, as
Christ, and his Apostles sat, others like supplicants kneeling, and adoring
upon their knees. This confusion is not like that variety of gesture in time
of prayer, when some sit, some stand, some kneel. For all the three gestures
are there indifferent. But not so here, This confusion of gestures at the
Lords table now is permitted only for a snare to bring thy feet, within the
grin. For when all are brought in, then will the formalists cry out. Confusion
of gestures is intolerable, uniformity, and conformity is necessary, as
Doctor Spark does in his persuasion to uniformity. The act of Perth, and act
of Parliament no warrant for the communicant.


Ye will pretend the act of Perth, and the act of Parliament ratifieng the
same. But know ye not, that the decrees of councels, or assemblies are not
Gospel, or determinations Evangelicall, as the Papists do esteem them, who
build their faith, and worship upon the authority of the church. Is it not
also well known, what were the proceedings of that assembly, how the sounder
part was born down by the corrupter. If we ought to receave, whatsoever
assemblies should determine, be the proceedings never so unjust, then were we to
be blamed, who rejected the council of Trent, not only for their wicked
decrees, but also for the nullities, and informalities in their proceeding. The
Father of lies himself is not able to justify that assembly, and it cannot be
defended, but with calumnies, and lies, which many eye and ear witnesses can
testify. Though we sit not formallie, and judiciallie in a consistory as
Judges over wicked, and unlawful assemblies. Yet, if we have any judgment,
we may, and ought to judge of assemblies, both of their procerdings, and
determinations least under color of Councels we suffet our selves to be led
like a calfe by the nose. Patientia asinina est non curare, quid ei imponatur,
aurum, an lutum says Peraldus. Farther I have co^curring with me, the body
of the church of Scotland, at least three parts of the whole number of the
particular congregations within the realm standing out against the decrees of
that assembly, and adhering to their former practice which is according to the
pattern, and to the confession of faith, wherein this church professes the
right use of Ministration of the Sacraments, and a detestation of all rites,
and ceremonies, brought in by Antichrist, or not warranted by the word of God.
The body of the Kirk is of greater authority, then an assembly, athough
lawful, it being only a representative body, not the collective, or
coaugmentatiue body. Lex vigorem habet cum moribus utentium approbatur. As for
the act of Parliament, it is only a ratification of the Act of Perth in
favors of the kirk, as all ratifications of church acts are pretended to be.
If the assembly of Perth it self, be not acknowledged by the kirk of Scotland
for one of her lawful assemblies, nor the decrees and ordinances thereof
judged agreeable to the word of God, then the act of ratification is no benefit
or favor to the kirk. The kirk of Scotland refuses such a benefit. Invito
beneficium non datur. What freedom and liberty was in that Parliament, and how
matters were carried I doubt not, but ye have sufficiently painted forth in that
book, which is entitled. The course of conformity. Esaias pronounces a woe
upon them that make heavy laws. cha. 10.1. Seeing Councels and parliaments may
be corrupt, either in their proceedings or decrees, let us stick to the word,
Enarrat. 2. in Psalm. 31.
which must be the rule of our faith and worship. Stet regula, and quod pravum
est corrigatur ad regulam, says Augustine. M. Knox condemned kneeling as
diabolical, which is now commended by his successors as commendable.


M. Knox, that worthy instrument of reformation in our Church in a letter
written to Matresse Anna Lock dated at Deep the sixth of April 1559, calls
the cross in baptism, and kneeling at the Lords table Diabolical inventions.
In his admonition directed to England, and printed Anno 1554, he ranketh
kneeling at the Lords table, among the superstitions, Page 31.
which profane Christ's true religion. When light did strive with darkness in
this realm, yet the Lord enlightened that worthy man for our benefit beyond
his fellows. Now we are turning light in darkness, and commending that as most
comely, and commendable, which he condemned as diabolical. There are yet some
of his successors in his station alive ( M. R. Bruce, that faithful servant of
God (who foretold, that the time would come, when the least kitchen less or
ladd in Edinburgh would be tried, and that by their own teachers, which we see
come to pass this day. As his successors have forewarned us of these times of
trial, so have they of judgments. Hear, what that meek man of God M. Robert
Rollock said.

Rollocke on the Passion printed in English page 345. WOe to them, whom he
forbids his servants go unto: Woe to us, if we say once, go not to
Edinburgh: Woe is them, and woe to that town, where the Lord forbids his
messengers to go. Beware of this, that the Lord say not to his messenger, go
to the north, or south, but go not to Edinburgh. For then shall wrath, and
destruction light on it.

Cyprianus lib. 2. Epist. 3. QVod si nec minima de mandatis Dominicis licet
soluere, quanto magis tam magna, tam grandia tam ad ipsum Dominicae passionis,
and nostrae redemptionis Sacramentum pertinentia fas non est infringere.


FINIS.

