A RELATION OF The successful beginnings of the Lord BALTEMORE'S Plantation
in Maryland.

Being an extract of certain Letters written from thence, by some of the
Adventurers, to their friends in England.

To which is added, The Conditions of plantation propounded by his Lordship for
the second voyage intended this present year, 1634.

Anno. Dom. 1634.

A Relation of the successful beginnings of the Lord Baltemore's plantation
in Maryland.
ON Friday the 22. of November 1633. a small gale of wind coming gently from
the Northwest, we weighed from the Cowes in the I Will of Wight, about ten in the
morning; and (having stayed by the way twenty days at the Barbada's, and
fourteen days at St. Christophers, upon some necessary occasions) we arrived
at Point-Comfort in Virginia on the 24. of February following, the Lord be
praised for it. At this time one Captain Claybourne was come from the parts
where we intended to plant, to Virginia; and from him we understood, that all
the natives of those parts were in preparation of defense, by reason of a
rumor some had raised amongst them, of six ships that were to come with a
power of Spaniards, whose meaning was to drive all the inhabitants out of the
country.

We had good letters from his Majesty to the Governor and Council of
Virginia, which made them favor us, and show us as noble usage as the place
afforded, with promise, that for their cattle and Hoggs, Corn or Poultry, our
plantation should not want the open way to furnish our selves from thence: they
told us likewise, That when his Lordship should be resolved on a convenient
place to make himself a seat; they should be able to provide him with as much
Brick and Tile, as he should have occasion to employ, until his Lordship had
made of his own: Also, that they had to furnish his Lordship with two or three
hundred Stocks ready grafted with Pears, Apples, Plummes, Apricotes, Figgs,
and Peaches, and some Cherries: That they had also some Orange and Limon trees
in the ground, which yet thriued: Also, Filberds, Hazel-nuts, and Almonds; and
in one place of the Colony, Quince-trees, wherewith they could furnish his
Lordship; And in fine, that his Lordship should not want any thing that Colony
had.

On the 3. of March we came into Chesapeake Bay, and made sail to the North
for Patoemeck river, the Bay running between two sweet lands in the channel
of 7. 8. and 9. fathom deep, 10. Leagues broad, and full of fish at the time
of the year; It is one of the delightfullest waters I ever saw, except
Potoemeck, which we named Saint Gregory's. And now being in our own Country,
we began to give names to places, and called the Southern Point, Cape Saint
Gregory; and the Northerly Point, Saint Michaels. This river, of all I know, is
the greatest and sweetest, much broader then the Thames; so pleasant, as I for
my part, was never satisfied in beholding it. Few Marshes, or Swampes, but the
greatest part sollid good earth, with great curiosity of woods, which are not
choked up with vnder-shrubbs, but set commonly one from the other, in such
distance, as a Coach and four horses may easily travel through them.

At the first looming of the ship upon the river, we found (as was foretold
us) all the Country in Arms. The King of the Paschattowayes had drawn
together 1500. bowe-men, which we our selves saw; the woods were fired in
manner of beacons the night after; and for that our vessel was the greatest
that ever those Indians saw, the scowtes reported we came in a Canow, as big
as an Island, and had as many men as there be trees in the woods.

We sailed up the river till we came to Heron Islands, so called from the
infinite number of that foul there. The first of those Islands, we called
Saint Clements; The second, Saint Katharines; And the third, Saint Cecilies.
We took land first in Saint Clements, which is compassed about with a shallow
water, and admitts no access without wading; here, by the ouerturning of the
Shallop, the maids which had been washing at the land, were almost drowned,
beside the loss of much linen, and amongst the rest I lost the best of mine,
which is a very maine loss in these parts. The ground is covered thick with
pokickeries (which is a wild Wall-nut, very hard and thick of shell; but the
meat (though little) is passing sweet) with black Wall-nuts, and acrons
bigger then ours. It abounds with Vines, and salletts, herbs, and flowers,
full of Cedar, and sassafras. It is but 400 acres bigg, and therefore too
little for us to settle upon.

Here we went to a place, where a large tree was made into a Cross; and
taking it on our shoulders, we carried it to the place appointed for it. The
Governor and Commissioners putting their hands first unto it, then the rest of
the chiefest adventurers. At the place prepared we all kneeled down, and said
certain Prayers; taking possession of this Country for our Savior; and for
our sovereign Lord the King of England.

Here our governor had good advice given him, not to land for good and all,
before he had been with the Emperor of Paschattoway, and had declared unto
him the cause of our coming: which was, first to learn them a divine
Doctrine, which would lead their souls to a place of happiness after this
life were ended: And also to enrich them with such ornaments of a civil life,
wherewith our Country does abound: and this Emperor being satisfied, none of
the inferior Kings would stir. In conformity to this advice, he took two
Pinnaces, his own, and another hired at Virginia; and leaving the ship before
Saint Clements at Anchor, went up the river, and landing on the south side, and
finding the Indians fled for fear, came to Patoemeck Town, where the King
being a child, Archihau his Uncle governed both him, and his Country for him.
He gave all the company good welcome; and one of the company having entered
into a little discourse with him touching the errors of their religion, he
seemed well pleased therewith; and at his going away desired him to return
unto him again, telling him he should live at his Table, his men should hunt
for him, and he would divide all with him.

From hence they went to Paschattoway. All were here armed: 500 Bow-men came
to the Waterside. The Emperor himself more fearelesse then the rest, came
privately a board, where he was courteously entertained; and understanding we
came in a peaceable manner, bade us welcome, and gave us leave to sit down in
what place of his kingdom we pleased. While this King was aboard, all the
Indians came to the Waterside, fearing treason, whereupon two of the Kings
men, that attended him in our ship were appointed to row on shore to quit
them of this fear: but they refusing to go for fear of the popular fury; the
interpretours standing on the deck, showed the King to them that he was in
safety, wherewith they were satisfied. In this journey the Governor
entertained Captain Henry Fleet and his three barks; who accepted a
proportion in beauer trade to serve us, being skillfull in the tongue, and well
beloved of the natives.

Whilst the Governor was abroad, the Indians began to lay aside fear, and to
come to our Court of guard, which we kept night and day upon St. Clements I Will:
partly to defend our Barge, which was brought in pieces out of England and
there made up, and partly to defend the Captains men, which were employed in
felling of trees, and cleaning pales for the pallizado: and at last they
ventured to come aboard our ship. It was worth the hearing, for those who
understood them, to hear what admiration they made at our ship; calling it a
Canow; and wondering where so great a tree grew that made it, conceiving it to
be made of one piece, as their Canow's are. Our great Ordnance was a great and
fearful thunder, they had never heard any before; all the Country trembles
at them.

The Governor being returned, we came some nine leagues lower to a river on
the North-side of that land, as bigg as the Thames: which we called Saint
Georges river: It runs up to the North about 20. miles before it comes to the
fresh. This river makes two excellent Bays, for 300 sail of Ships of 1000.
tun, to harbor in with great safety. The one Bay we named Saint Georges;
the other (and more inward) Saint Mary's. The King of Yaocomoco, dwells on the
left hand or side thereof; and we took up our seat on the right, one mile
within the land. It is as brave a piece of ground to set down on as most is in
the Country, and I suppose as good (if not much better) then the primest
parcel of English ground.

Our Town we call Saint Mary's: and to avoid all just occasion of offense,
and color of wrong, we bought of the King for Hatchetts, Axes, Howes, and
Clothes, a quantity of some 30 miles of Land, which we call Augusta Carolina.
And that which made them the more willing to sell it, was the wars they had
with the Sasquesa-hanoughs, a nigh bordering nation, who came often into their
Country, to waste and destroy; and forced many of them to leave their
Country, and pass over Patoemeck to free themselves from peril, before we
came. God no doubt disposing all this for them, who were to bring his law and
light among these Infidells. Yet seeing we came so well prepared with arms,
their fear was much less, and they could be content to dwell by us: yet do
they daily relinquish their houses, lands, and corne-fields, and leave them to
us. Is not this a piece of wonder, that a nation, which a few days before was
in arms with the rest against us, should yield themselves now unto us like
lambs, and give us their houses, lands, and livings for a trifle? Digitus Dei
est hic: and surely some great good is intended by God to this Nation. Some few
families of Indians are permitted yet to stay by us till next year, and then
the land is free.

We had not been long time seated there, ere Sir John Haruey Governor of
Virginia, did our governor the honor (in most friendly manner) to visit him:
and during the time of his being there, the King of Patuxunt also came to visit
us; and being come aboard the Arc, and brought into the great cabin, and
seated between the two Governors (Captain Fleet and Master Golding the
interpretors being present) he began his speech as follows.

When I heard that a great Werowance of the English was come to Yoacomoco, I
had a great desire to see him. But when I heard the Werowance of Pasbie-haye
was come thither also to visit him; I presently start up, and without further
counsel, came to see them both.

In the time of his stay at Saint Mary's, we kept the solemnity of carrying
our colors on shore: and the King of Patuxunt accompanying us, was much taken
with the ceremony. But the same night (he and Captain Fleet being at the
Indian-House) the Arke's great gunnes, to honor the day, spoke aloude; which
the King of Patuxunt with great admiration hearing, counseled his friends the
Yoacomoco Indians to be careful that they break not their peace with us; and
said:

When we shoot, our Bow-strings give a twang that is heard but a little way
off: But do you not hear what cracks their Bow-strings give?

Many such pretty sayings he used in the time of his being with us, and at his
departure, he thus expressed his extraodinary affection unto us.

I do love the English so well, that if they should kill me, so that they left
me but so much breath, as to speak unto my people, I would command them not to
revenge my death:

As for the Natives, they are proper tall men of person; swarthy by nature, but
much more by Art: painting themselves with colors in oil, like a dark Red,
which they do to keep the Gnatts off: wherein I confess, there is more ease
then comeliness.

As for their faces, they have other colors at times, as Blew from the nose
upward, and Red downward, and sometime contrariwise in great variety, and in
very ghastly manner sometimes; they have no beards till they come to be very
old, and therefore draw from each side of their mouths, lines to their very
ears, to represent a beard, and this sometimes of one color, and sometimes of
another.

They wear their hair generally very long, and it is as black as Iett: which
they bring up in a knott to the left-eare, and tie it about with a large string
of Wampampegg, or Roanoake, or some other of the best Jewels among them. Upon
their forehead, some use to wear a Fish of Copper, and some wear other
figures.

About their necks, they use to wear many bugle chains, blew and white, and
other colors; though these begin now not to be esteemed among them for truck.
Their apparel generally is deere-skin, and other Furre, which they wear like
loose mantles: yet under this, about their middle, all women and men, at man's
estate, wear Perizomata (or round aprons) of skins, which keeps them
decently covered, that without any offense of chaste eyes, we may converse with
them.

All the rest of their bodies are naked, and at times, some of the younger sort
both men and women have just nothing to cover them. Their feet are as hard as
any horn, when they run over prickles and thorns they feel it not. Their
Arms is a Bow, with a bunch of Arrows, of a yard long, furnished with three
feathers at the top; and pointed either with the point of a deeres horn, or a
sharp three-corner'd white flint; the rest is a small cane, or straight
stick. They are so expert at these, that I have seen one a good distance off
strike a very small bird through the middle: and they use to cast a thing up
from hand, and before it comes to ground to meet it with a shaft. Their bows
are but weak, and carry not level very far; yet these are their liuelyhood,
and every day they are abroad after squirrells, paretidges, turkies, dear, and
the like game; whereof there is a wonderful plenty; though we dare not yet
be so bold our selves, as to fetch fresh meat by this means far off.

The Indian houses are all built here in a long half Ouall; nine or ten
foot high to the middle top, where (as in ancient Temples) the light is
admitted by a window, half a yard square; which window is also the chimney,
which gives passage to the smoke, the fire being made in the midst of the
floor (as in our old halls of England) and about it they use to lie. Save only
that their kings and great men have their cabbins, and a bed of skins well
dressed (wherein they are excellent) set on boards, and four stakes driven
into the ground. And now at this present, many of us live in these Witchotts
(as they term them) conveniently enough till better be set up: But they are
dressed up something better then when the Indians had them.

The natural wit of this nation is good and quick, and will conceive a thing
very readily: they excel in smell and taste, and have far sharper sight then
we. Their ordinary diet is Poane and Omine, both made of corn, to which they
add at times, Fish, Foul, or Venison.

They are of great temperance, especially from Hott-waters or Wine, which they
are hardly brought to taste, save only whom the English have corrupted with
their own vices.

For modesty, I must confess, I never saw from Man or Woman, any action
tending to leuitie: and yet daily the poor souls are here in our houses, and
take content to be with us, bringing sometimes Turkies, sometimes Squirrills,
as big as English Rabbetts, but much more dainty; at other times fine white
cakes, Partridges, Oisters ready boiled and stewed: and do run unto us with
smiling countenance when they see us, and will hunt and fish for us, if we
will; and all this with intercourse of very few words, but we have hitherto
gathered their meaning by signs.

It is lawful among them to have more Wives then one; but all keep the rigor
of conjugal faith unto their Husbands: The Women's very aspect, is modest and
grave.

Generally the Nation is so noble, that you cannot do them any favor or good
turns, but they return it. There is small passion among them, but they weigh
all with a calm and quiet reason. And to do this the better, in great
affairs they are studdying in a long silence what is to be said or done: And
then they answer yea, or no, in two words: And stand constantly to their
resolution.

If these people were once Christians, (as by some signs we have reason to
think nothing hinders it but want of language) it would be a right virtuous,
and renowned Nation.

As for their religion, we have not language our selves to find it out; Master
Throughgood, who drives his Lordships trade upon the river of Patuxunt, has
related somewhat:

First, they acknowledge one God of Heaven, which they call [our] God; and cry,
a thousand shames upon those Christians that so lightly offend so good a God.
But they give no external honor unto him, but use all their might to please
an Okee (or frantic spirit) for fear of harm from him. They adore also
Wheat and Fire as two gods, very beneficial unto man's nature.

In the Machicomoco, or Temple of Patuxunt, there was scene by our Traders this
Ceremony. Upon a day appointed all the Towns met, and a great fire being
made; about it stood the younger sort, and behind them again the elder. Then
taking a little dear suett, they cast it into the fire, crying Taho, Taho, and
lifting up their hands to heaven. After this, was brought forth before them a
great Bagg, filled with a large Tobacco-pipe and Poake, which is the word which
they use for our Tobacco. This was carried about the fire, the youth following,
and singing Taho, Taho, in very good tune of voice, and comely gesture of body.

The round ended, one comes reverently to the bagg, and opening it, takes out
the Pipe, and deuides the Poake from one, to one. As every one took his
draught, he breathed his smoke upon all the limbs of his own body; as it
were to sanctify them by this ceremony, to the honor and service of their
God, whomsoever they meant.

This is all I can say touching their religion: Save only that they seem to
have some knowledge by tradition, of a flood wherein the World was drowned for
sin.

And now to return to the place it self, chosen for our plantation. We have
been upon it but one month, and therefore can make no large relation of it:
Yet thus much I can say of it already, For our safety, we have built a good
strong Fort or Palizado, and have mounted upon it one good piece of Ordnance,
and 4. Murderers, and have seven pieces of Ordnance more, ready to mount
forthwith. For our provision, here is some store of Peasen, and Beans, and
Wheat left on the ground by the Indians, who had satisfaction for it. We have
planted since we came, as much Maize (or Indian Wheat) as will suffice (if
God prosper it) much more company then we have. It is up about knee high above
ground already, and we expect the return of 1000. for one, as we have reason
for our hope, from the experience of the yield in other parts of this Country,
as is very credibly related to us.

We have also English Peasen, and French-beanes, Cotton, Oringes, Lemmons,
Melocotounes, Apples, Pears, Potato's, and Sugarcanes of our own planting;
beside Hortage coming up very finely.

But such is the quantity of Vines, and Grapes now already upon them (though
young) as I dare say if we had Vessels and skill, we might make many a tonne
of Wine, even from about our plantation; and such Wine, as those of Virginia
say (for yet we can say nothing) as is as good as the Wine of Spain. I fear
they exceed; but surely very good. For the clime of the Country is near the
same with Civil and Corduba: lying between 38. and 40. degrees of Northerlie
latitude.

Of Hoggs we have already got from Achomack (a plantation in Virginia) to the
number of 100, and more: and some 30. Cowes; and more we expect daily, with
Goats and Hens; our Horses and Sheep we must have out of England, or some
other place by the way; for we can have none in Virginia.

For the Commodities, I will speak more when I see further; only we have
sent over a good quantity of Iron-stone, for a trial, which if it prove
well, the place is likely to yield infinite store of it. And for that flax and
hemp which we have sowed, it comes up and we hope will thrive exceedingly
well; I end with the soil which is excellent, covered with store of large
Strauberies, Raspices Vines, Sassafras, Wall-nuts, Acornes and the like; and
this in the wildest Woods too.

The mould is black a foot deep, and then comes after a red Earth. All is
high Wood, but in the Indian fields, which are some parcells of ground cleared
for Corn. It abounds with good springs, which is our drink: Of beasts; I have
seen Dear, Racounes, and Squirills, beside which there are many others, which
I have not yet seen. Of Birds diuersly-feathered there are infinite; Eagles,
Bitterness, Herons, Swannes, Geese, Parteridge, Ducks, red, blew, party
colored Birds, and the like. By all which it appears, the Country
abounds, not only with profit but with pleasure. And to say truth, there
wants nothing for the perfecting of this hopeful plantation, but greater
numbers of our contrymen to enjoy it.

From St. Mary's in Maryland, 27. May, 1634.
We whose Names are here under written, having been Adventurers in this
first voyage, and lately come for England, with intent to return thither with
more provision of Men and other necessaries; were Eyewitnesses of the truth
of this whole Relation; and are ready to give further satisfaction to any one
in such particulars as shall be desired.

Captain Edward Wintour. Captain William Humber. Robert Smithson. Robert
Sympson.


The Conditions of the plantation.
1 What person soever, subject to our Sovereign Lord the King of England,
shall in this second voyage, be at the charge to transport into the said
Province of Maryland, himself or his Deputy, with ten able men fit for
labor, between the ages of 20. and 60. every man being provided in all things
necessary for a plantation: the particulars whereof they shall understand at
the place mentioned at the end of these Conditions: (which together with their
transportation, will amount to about 20 l. a man) His Lordship will assign to
every such undertaker, and for every such ten men, a proportion of good land
within the said Province, containing in quantity 3000. Acres of English
measure, which shall be erected into a Manor, and be conveied to him, and
his heirs forever: with all such Royalties and Privileges, as are usually
belonging to Manors in England. Rendering and paying yearly unto his Lordsh.
and his heirs for every such Manor; 600. pound weight, of good Wheat: and
such other services as shall be generally agreed upon, for public use, and the
common good; and as are usual in all other Plantations.

2 And forasmuch, as the straggling manner of dwelling used heretofore by our
English in foreign Plantations, has bin found by experience to be very
inconvenient, without comfort or security; besides the disorder and
distraction, which it causes in the government. And that at last (feeling the
effects of that error) they have bin compelled to unite themselves together in
one place. His Lordsh. therefore intends, that all his Planters, shall dwell
together at the first, at or as near as may be unto St. Mary's Town, the
seat now chosen for the Colony: where his Lordsh. will assign, and conveigh
unto every such undertaker as aforesaid, and his heirs for ever, a plot of
ground fit for a house and garden, to build upon, and so much land as near
unto the Town as conveniently may be (to plant Victual upon, and such other
things as he the said vnder-taker shall think fit) according to the
proportion of five Acres of English measure for every man.

3 Those that are not willing to be at the charge to transport the foresaid
number of men required for a Manor, and yet perhaps will be contented to be
at the charge of a lesser number, they shall have assigned to them and their
heirs for ever, the like proportion of land, in, and about the Town,
according to the number of their men as aforesaid; and a 100. Acres more for
each man, allotted to them in some convenient place of the Province, as others
have, and be made Freeholders to hold of his Lordsh. paying a yearly quit
rent of 20. pound weight of Wheat, for every such 100. Acres.

4 If any man shall be unwilling, to trouble himself with providing such men
and their necessaries, as aforesaid, and yet are desirous to employ some money
upon this Plantation; if they signify such their desire, according to the time
and place, here-vnder prefixed: they shall have directions to dispose their
money, in such a way, as shall give them content, whereby they may have the
advantage of the former conditions, according to the proportion of the money
they adventure.

5 Whatsoever Adventurers shall carry, or send over any women, more or fewer,
in the second voyage, he shall be allowed 30. Acres of good land in
surplusage above the former proportions: for every woman he shall so carry
over, or send over.

6 Whatsoever husbandman, or other laboring-man, shall be willing to go to
this Plantation, and to bind himself a servant there for five years, he
shall be entertained (if he come within the limited time to the place
appointed) upon these terms; that is to say; he shall be found sufficient
meat and drink, and clothing, during the said term: and at the end of the
said term, he shall have 50. Acres of good land conveied to him, and his
heirs for ever, within the said Province, a whole years provision of all
necessaries according to the usual custom of other Plantations.

And if he be either a sufficient Carpenter, Ioyner, Brick-layer,
Brick-maker, Mason, Wheele-wright, Cooper, or Ship-wright, in stead of these
50. Acres proposed, he shall have 100. Acres of good land, at the end of his
term, and the rest of the aforesaid conditions, for three years service only.

Whosoever intends to partake in this second Voyage, must come, or send before
the 20. of October next ensuing, to M. William Peasely Esquire. his Lordsh. brother
in-law, at his house on the backside of Drury Lane, over against the Cockpit
on the field-side: And there to him deliver their transportation-money,
according to the number of men they mean to send over, at the rate of six
pound a man, to the end convenient passage may be reserved for them, in his
Lordsh. shipping; beyond which time it will not be possible for any to partake
in this second Voyage.

15. July 1634.

