A PROGNOSTICATION OF RIGHT GOOD effect, fructfully augmented, contayninge
plain, brief, pleasant, chosen rules, to judge the wether for ever, by the
Sun, Moon, Sterres, Cometes, Raynbowe, Thunder, Clouds, with other
Extraordinary tokens, not omitting the Aspectes of Planetes, with a brefe
Judgment for ever, of Plenty, Lack, Sickness, Death, Wars etc. Openinge
also many natural causes, worthy to be known. To these and others, now at
the last are adjoined, diverse general pleasant Tables: for ever manyfolde
ways profitable, to al manner men of understanding: therefore again publisshed
by Leonard Dygges Gentylman, in the year of our Lord. 1555.

(*)

Imprynted at London, within the black Friars, by Thomas Gemini. 1555.

THE CONTENTS.
First ye have many pleasant chosen rules for ever, to judge alteration of
wether, by the Sun, Moon, Sterres, Cometes, Raynbow, Thunder, Clouds, with
many tokens extraordinary: not omitting the Co^iunctions, Quadratures, and
Oppositio^s of Planetes, among them selfs, and with the Moon also: and their
conbustion, in the.12. signs celestial. 2 Then ensue natural causes of such
alteration, according to Aristotele: first of the Raynbowe, then of Rain,
Dew, Snow, Hayle, VVinde, Earthquakes, Thunders, and Lightninges. 3 The
causes and operations of Cometes, Flames, and other horrible fyrye sightes,
apperinge in the air. 4 The natural causes, and significatio^s of Eclipses,
both of Sun and Moon, with the true proportion of all the Planetes, and
fixed Sterres, unto the earth. 5 Causes natural of many Suns and Moons,
appearinge at one time on the earth. 6 Then ensue the Aspectes of the Moon,
and her signification, in the 12. celestial signs, conducing to all manner
affairs. 7 A table, declaring what sign the Moon is in, for ever:
conteyninge the aptest time to let blood, to take purgatio^s, and to bathe. 8
How to know at all times, what the Moon differs from the Sun: I mean what
signs and degrees of the Zodiac ar between them. 9 Ye have a co^ducible note
of all the euel days in every month: with other necessaries: for letting
bloudde also, with the dominion of the Moon in man's body: for pourging, and
bathing, more largely then by the Table tofore said. 10 Of inundations or
fluddes, with the metest time of Timbre falling, Sowing, Planting, Grafting,
Hearclipping, Shauing, and Geidlng. 11 For farther knowledge in things following
the Sondaies letter and Leap year, is brefly declared by a Table, at no time to
be altered. 12 A table, as general for the Prime and Epact. 13 A table to
find the moveable feasts for ever. 14 Then is opened plainly the age of the
Moon at all times, the full, and quarter, for ever. 15 A table showing
continually the true time of ebbing and flowinge, in most coasts of England.
16 Here is also declared for ever, how long time the Moon shy neth, when she
rises and sets, with her continuance on the Horizon, or earth. 17 A Table
for the break of the day, and twilight, and for this country the true hour
and very mynute of the Sun risinge, and going down, with the just
quantity or length of every day in the year, and the length of the night
also. 18 The hour of the night is known by the Moon, and that dyuersly. 19
The hour of the day does plainly appear by right shadow: that is, by any
thing directly standing up, and also by shadow Geometrical, which is squyre
shadow. 20 The exact hour of the night is pleasauntly searched by Sterres and
Tables calculated, with an instrument appointed for that practice. This
instrument is a perfect Dial for the day, of al other the ground, whose
making, reringe, placinge, and use is plainly opened. 21 Before the peculiar
Calendar, ye have a brefe Kale^dar general, containing things commonly desired.
Here ends the contents.
To the right honorable, Sir Edward Fines, of the noble order of the Garter
Knight, Lord Clinton and Say, etc. Leonard Digges wissheth continuance of
health, and daily encreace of honor. (,:,)
Sith my late trobles (right honorable, and singular good lord) my duty has
made me careful to procure, that some fruit of my studies might declare me
thankefully minded, toward your lordshippe, emo^ge other honorable, to whom
I owe my self, with all my endeuore, and fruytes of study. For the performance
whereof, not only your lordshippes late talk of a Prognostication, seemed to
make that argument fittest: but also the manifest imperfectio^s, and manifold
errors yearly committed, did crave the aid of some that were both willinge,
and able to perform the truth in like matters. I thought it therefore worthy the
labor, truly and brefely to collect many things, both necessary, and
pleasant, as well for Nobility as others: and to adioyne them to my general
Prognostication, imprinted the year 1553. augmentinge diverse ways the same:
and more orderly placing such as were before set forth. Your honor shall here
receive, in this little book, by infallible rules taught for ever, a truth of
all such things as heretofore have been put forth of other for one years
profit only, compelled thereby of necessity to make a yearly renewinge of
them: whereupon errors many increased. You shall have diverse other conclusions
general, of none before attempted. These (right honorable lord) according unto
my duty, I do present, and beseech you in good worth to receive: and have
willed them to pass under protection of your Lordshippes name: that if to any,
any commodity ensue thereby, such as receive it, may have cause to further
me, in yeldinge thanks to your honor.

To the Reader.
TO avoid (Gentle reader) the yearly care, travails, and peines of other,
with the confusions, repugna^ces, and manifold errors, partly by negligence,
and often through ignorance, committed: I have again breefly set forth a
Prognostication general, for ever to take effect: adioining thereto diverse
profitable collectio^s, and many pleasant co^clusio^s, easy of all willing
ingenious to be perceived Here note (Reder) where as the eleuate Pole, and
Meridian should be considered: in this work it is performed for London: because
I wiss he this Meridian, Situation, or Clime the exact truth of things. If
any yearly practices in like matters, agree not with my calculatio^s: be
assured, they are false, or at the least for other Eleuatio^s, or Meridians
supputated, and therefore little serving thy purpose. And that the late rude
inue^tio^s, and gross devises of some (this year, and two years past,
published) might be of them perceued, then filed, and so serve to some profit:
I have purposed even now to put forth a book named Panauges, well serving their
turn, and so generally and most exactly all Europe, pleasant, profitable to
the learned, and no small delight to all manner me^. An other book is also ready
to come to thy hands, titled Tectonicon, a treasure unto the Masons,
Carpenters, and Landmeaters: correcting their old errors, wrongfully rekened
of them as infallible grounds: teaching faithfully, sufficiently, and very
brefely, the true me^suration of all manner land, tymbre, stone, bourde, glass,
etc: and at the end co^teining an Instrument Geometrical, appointed to their
vse-Take in good worth these labors (Loving reader) and look shortly for the
pleasant fruits Mathematical, eue^ such as have been promised by my friends, and
partly by me. Neither shall my desire to profit here stay: but entendeth
farther to proceed, if these seem accepted As the good will of Printers not had,
has kept the foresaid from you: so I trust the willing mind and excellency
of Thomas Gemini, shall bring them shortly unto you. Certes my hope is, while
life remains, not to be unfruitful to this commune wealth, with study, and
practice.

Against the reprouers of Astronomy, and sciences Mathematical.
I Am diversely occasioned, loving Reader, somewhat to write in the commendatio^
of the Mathematicals, which neded not: but only to open the folish rasshenes,
and rasshe foolishenes of such, which of late have in writing dispraised these
goodly arts. It is an old said saw, and true: Scientia non habet inimicum
nisi ignorante^. But to avoid tediousnes, and chiefly for the more satisfieng,
Vituperant, qui simpliciter eas ignorant.
I refer all of that sort, which have tasted any lerning (the rest not
regarded) to the first part of famous Guido Bonatus, de vtilitate Astronomiae
in communi: where he writes contra illos, qui dicunt quod Scientia stellarum
non potest sciri ab aliquo: contra illos, qui dixerunt quod scientia stellarum
non est vtilis, sed potius damnosa etc. contra illos, qui contradicunt iudiciis
Astronomiae, and qui reprehendunt eam, nescientes dignitatem eius, eo quod no^
est lucratiua. Also for brevity, I appoint all nyce divines, or (as Melanctho^
terms them) Epicurei Theologi, to his hye co^mendatio^s touching Astronomy,
uttered in his epistles to Simo^ Grineus, to Schonerus, and at the peroration
of Cardanus five books, where he shows how far wide they allege the
scriptures against the Astronomer, which make wholly with the Astronomer.
Melancthon writes and affyrmeth, Arrogantiam esse cum summa stultitia
coniunctam, venari choragium aliquod gloriae, ex insectatione artium, quae sunt
graui autoritate doctorum etc. prude^tium receptae. He calls it manifestum
insaniae genus, declaring quod magis opus habe^t Medicis, qua^ Geometris,
aduising the learned not to give ear unto their folly. Sinamus (ait) vna cu^
Epicuro ineptire. Which counsel lo, I follow. Now therefore, ye enemies of all
good doctrine, either give an overthrow, and that with your pen, or let
famous Guido, or learned Melancthon satisfy. If neither: certes I will shortly
(God sparyng life) take some pain in publisshyng the wonderful unknown
pleasant profits of these dispraysed high knowleges, and by that means to
enforce silence. Now in few, for thy encouragement in these, thus I say and
trewly, the ingenious learned, and well experienced circu^spect student
mathematical receives daily in his witty practices, more pleasant joy of
mind, then all thy gooddes (how rych so ever thou be) can at any time
purchase. Id tantum quod pulchrum est, quod purum est quod diuinum est, nihil
mortale sapiens dulci ardore amplectitur. Vt ^ulta paucis (creed mihi) extingui
dulce erit Mathematicarum artium labor. Now to end, that learned Guido, that
excellent Guido Bonatus, shows what Astrologi or Astronomy is, and ought not
says he, by any mean to be reprehended, in that the most wisest, yea, the
holy fathers have practiced that science. He proves it one of the chief
sciences Mathematical, by the authority of the best learned, and by Aristotele
in his Posteriorum. How comes it to pass louinge Reader, seeing it is a
noble science, et scientia est notitia vera conclusionum, quibus propter
demonstrationem firmiter assentimur, that it is counted vain, and of so small
strength. The secret truths and most pleasant profits therein not desired,
yea, utterly despised, and of some busy byghtinge bodies rejected as very lies.
Let no man doubt ignorancie, the great enemy of all pure learning Stulti
negligunt et cont^nunt: Q ui contradicit, ambitiosus est, Q ui ma ledicit,
fa(...) us.
has wrought this. Nam incertam vocat hanc artem vulgus, propter errores nou
arti, sed bominum indoctiss^^orum inscitie, et temeri^ tati (...)putandos, qui
citra delectum omnia effutiunt. Thus I leave indigestly farther to trouble:
favor me as I tender the furtheraunce of good learninges, profitable to a
common wealth. Fare most heartily well, unfeigned good Christian Reader.

HOW TO IVDGE VVEATHER by the Sun rising, or going down.
THe Sun in the Horizon, or rysynge, clear and De obseruandis ^^eteoris.
bright, shows a pleasant day: but thinlie ouercast with a cloud, betokens
foul weather. Also at the going down, the body diverse colored or read, and
about dispersed with like clou des, the beams read, and of length,
pronounce great wyndes the next day from that part. Blaknes in the Sun or
Moon betokens water: read, signifies wind. The element read in the
euenyng, the next day fair: but in the morning read, wind and rain. Also
the Sun beams spottid, grene, pale, or black, gathered to a cloud,
signify ^^yne. Further the Sun at the setting plainly seen without any
cloud, decla reth a fair night to ensue. Here note, Ptolome wills us
diligently to observe the circle, or circles about the Sun. If it be
clea(...) and the circle of no continuance, behold fair weather: if many of
them, wind. Wyndes more vehemente are signified, if that the circles be some
what read, here and there broken: but these ob scured, thycke, and black,
look for cold, wind, and snow. What Note.
is spoken of the Sun, touching the circles, the same is meant of the Moon.
Note here that greater wyndes chance in the day, than in the night.

How weather is declared by the color of the Moon: and by the nature of the
sign wherein she is.
IF the Moon in the third of her change, yea three days before the full, or
in the mids of the quarter, be found of pure light: no thing co^pasyng her,
the end direct up, she promi^ith fair weather, but bent to red color,
provoke wind. The Moon pale, or some Luna rube^^ ventat, pallor pluit, Alba
s^^ renat.
what inclined to black, obscure or thick, threatnith rain. Also by the
nature of the sign, wether may be judged, thus, according to Staeflerinus,
Monte regius, Leupoldus, and famous Guido Bonatus, with others well trauayled
in the mutacions of air. Consider the nature of the sign where the Moon is,
at the change, quarter, and full. If she be in hot and dry lignes, as Aries,
Leo, Sagittarius, in winter hot, earthy. wyndy. * watery.
a good token of fair weather: in somer, a great signification of immoderate
heat: if in erthy, cold and dry signs, as Taurus, Virgo, and Capricornus, in
winter judge cold, frost, and snow to ensue: but in somer temperate weather.
In aerie and wyndy^ signs, as Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius, much wynd. If in
watrye cold and moist lignes, as Cancer, Scorpius, and Pisces, in winter wett
weather: in somer a pleasant temperature.

Also, the Sun in Aquarie: the Moon, at the change there, or in Sagittarie,
or at the full in Leone: betokens rain. The Sun, in Pisces, or in Aries:
the Moon, in Virgo, Libra, or Sagittarie: signifies rain, especially in
watery dwellinges. The Moon in Aquari, or Pisces, look for change of weather:
the^ chiefly she troubles the air. The Moon: also at the change, or rather
at the full, in Aries, Libra, Scorpius, or Pisces, tempestuous weather
folowith. The Sun in Aquari, in Aries, Libra, or Scorpio, but chiefly in
Leone: the Moon, then at the full, and that after rain or missinges: look
for lightnyng, thundryng. etc. Also the Sun, or Moon found in Pisces,
without all help of Mars, it betokens abundance of rain, lightning,
thunder. etc. To conclude the Moon, in Cancer, Leo, Capricornus, or Aquarius,
aided with any aspect, but chiefly with the opposition or quadrate of Venus,
rain folowyth.

The judgment of weather by sterres.
Behold the sterres whose magnitude you know best. If they appear of much
light, in bigness great, more blasing the^ they Cum maior^ apparent, tum enim
Humore medius crassescit ^er.
are commonly, it be tokeneth great wind or moisture in that part where they
show: in winter, cold and frost. When sterres seem to run in the eleme^t,
it shewyth wind. Affirm also alteration of weather if they be few in nu^bre,
cloudie, and of litel light. Further when dim sterres appear with long fiery
tails, judge wyndes, and great drougthe: the more in nu^bre, the greater
effect. When sterres in the night (as it is said) shote, or seem to fall, it
arguith wind in that part: If in diverse places, inordinate wyndes: if in all
places, then pronounce Wyndes, Thunder, Lightnynges, yea weather most
tempestuous.

The signification of Cometes
Cometes signify corruption of the air. They arsignes of earthquakes, De
comctar^^ prodigiis, lege Cardanil. lib. 4. fol. 83.
of wars, changing of kingdoms, great derth of corn, yea a common death of
man, and beast.

How by the clouds change of weather is perceived.
IF thyck clouds resemblyng flocks, or rather great heaps of woll, be
gatherid in many places, they show rain. Also when gross, thick, dark
clouds, right over the north part, or somewhat declining to the west, ar close
with the earth, immediately folowyth rain. If they appear like hills,
somedeale from the earth, a good token of weather ouerpassed. Black clouds,
signify rain: white clouds apperyng in winter, at the Horizon, two or three
days together, prognosticate cold, and snow.

Of the raynebowe and his effect, touching alteration of air..
IF in the morning the raynebow appear, it signifies moisture, unless great
drouthe of air work the contrary. If in the Arcus niss sole aduerso non
fiunt. Non apparet nisi cum Vap^ res rarifica^tur, vel inspis santur.
evening it show it self, fair weather ensues: so that aboundaunt moist air
take not away the effect. Or thus.

The rain bow appering, if it be fair, it betokens foul weather: if foul,
look for fair weather. The grener, the moare rain: redder, wind.

Of Thundres: what they signify.
THundres in the morning signify wynd: about Noone, rayn: Signum futurorum
bellorum.
in the euenyng great tempest. So^me write (their ground I see not) that
Sonnedayes thundre should bring the death of learned men, Judges, and others:
Mundayes thundre, the death of women: Tuesdayes thundre, plenty of grain:
Wednesdayes thundre, the death of harlottes, and other blodshede: Thursdayes
thu^dre, plenty of sheep, and c^rne: Frydayes thundre the slaughter of a great
man, and other horrible murders. Saterdayes thundre a general pestilent plage,
and great death.

How weather is known after the change of every Moon, by the prime days.
Sunday prime, dry weather. Mondaye prime moist weather. Tuesday prime, cold
and wyndie. Wedensday prime, wonder full. Thursday prime fayer and clear.
Friday prime, myxte weather. Saturday prime, moist weather.

Now ensuyth extraordinary tokens for the knowledge of weather.
SOme have observed evil weather to follow, wha^ watery fowls Co(...)ne tokens
of weather, me^e for all manner wits.
leave the sea, desiring land: the fowls of the land flyeng high: the
cryeng of fowls about waters, making a great noise with there wings: Also the
sees swellyng with uncustomed waves: If bestes eat gredyly: if they lycke there
hooues: if they suddenly move here and there, making a noise, brethyng up to
the air with open nostrels: rain folowyth. Also the busy heuing of moules,
the appering or coming owte of woormes: hens resorting to the perch or rest
covered with dust, declare rain. The ample woorkyng of the spinnar in the
air: the ant busied with her eggs: the bees in fair weather not far wa^dring:
the continual prating of the crow, chiefly twice or thrice quick calling,
show tempest. When the crow or raven gapith against the son, in somer,
heat follows. If they busy themselves in proyning or wasshing, and that in
winter, look for rain. The uncustomed noise of pultrie, the noise of swyne,
of pecokes, declare the same. The swalowe flye^g and beating the water: the
chirpinge of the sparowe in the morning, signify rain. Rain suddenly dried
up: woody coueringes strayter then of custom: bells heard further then
comonli: the wallowynge of dogs: the alteration of the cock crowing: all
declare rayny weather. I leave these, wanting the good ground of the rest. If
the lernid be desirefull of the too foresaid, let them read grave Virgil primo
Georgicorum At Bor. etc.

There be a multitude of other not extraordinary but of the best known causes:
many for brevity here omitted: the moare part not mentioned, because they
pass the capacity of the common sort, upon all the which the Astronomer does
well and lernydly conclude. I doubt not there be also some time unknown
matters, mitigatinge the aforesaid, or prouokyng tempests unlooked for, which
nether experience, ne learning has stablisshed. How unkind (these considered)
yea how far from worthy thanks giving are they, which in general heddily do
blame, checkyng bitterly the Astrologer, with these iudiciarie matters, (the
least part among a nu^bre of his most certain doings) when things fortune
contrary to expectation? Understand gentle reader: the co^ sent of a
multitude famously learnid is their buclar, even in these matters iudiciari: who
have wayed a long time prudently, the great strength, the vehement force, and
maruaylous natures, of all erratical and celestial co^stellatio^s, with their
Angles, Radiations, Aspectes, Affections, Stationes, Progressions, Defections,
Dispositions, Applications, Preuentions, Ref^enations, Contrarieties,
Abscisions, Conjunctions, Quadratures, and Oppositions. etc. Therefore extreme
folly, yea mere madness does he utter, which imbraydeth or bacbiteth these
knowleges, not remembering the great, and manifold benefits, hadd through
them, and that with most certentie in all other doings.

What Meteoroscoper, yea who lernyd in matters astronomical, notith not the
great effects at the rising of the ster called the Canis minoris ^fficatia.
Litell dog? Trewlie the consent of the best learnid do agree of his force:
yea Pliny, in his history of nature affirms the sees the^ most fierce,
wynes to flow in cellars, standing waters to move, Orionis, Ar* cturi,
Coronae, caprae, succula rum effectus... and cum aut... and. cum cum ^ Aut cum
vel cum.
dogs inclined to madness then most wood. Farther these co^stellations, Orion,
Arcturus, Corona, rising provoke tempestuous weather: the Kydd and Goat,
wyndes. Hyades or Succulae rain. What Meteorologer consentith not to the great
alteration and mutation of air at the conjunction, opposition, or quadrate
aspect of Saturn, with either two lights? Who is ignorant, yea meanly
trauayled in Astronomy, that Iuppiter, with Moercurie, or with the Sun,
inforceth rage of winds? what is he that perceauith not the fearful thunders,
lightnynges, and raynes, at the meting of Mars, and Venus, or Iuppiter, and
Mars? etc. Leave for shame to impugn these iudicialles strongly authorized. He
that any other part carpith may seem moare then madd. All trewthe, all
experience, a multitude of infallible grounded rules are against him. Certum
est omnibus que notum, quod ^^li motus, signor^^ ortus, and occasus, planetarum
aspectus, and co^iunctiones, luminari^ eclypses. etc certiss^^am, determinatam,
ac infallibilem babent causam. Quis iam sanae mentis negabit eorum effectus
saepe innotescere, vtpote bella, fa^es, grandines, aeris perturbationes,
elemento^^ commotiones, terrae motus, and similia? Positis ca^^ sis
naturalibus, and non impeditis, sequitur effectus.

The learned that lysteth ingeniously to prognosticate of weather, will not
only discretly way all before written, but consider also with them the
Stre^gthe and Aspectes of the Planetes following, and their Co^bustio^ in the.
12. Signs, with the Co^iu^ctio^s of fixed Sterris, Ma^sions of the Moon, the
Ascende^t, Climes. etc. Also the times or quarters of the year must be notid
diligently, (as insueth) and judgment accordingly pronounced.

Of the year divided in four quaters.
THe spryng time is hott, and moist: and continues so long as the Son is in
Aries, Taurus, and Gemini: which is from the power of the breast.
tenthe of March unto the twelfthe of June. The somer is hott and dry,
compted from the beginning of Cancer, to the end of Virgo, that is, from the
twelfthe of June, to the fourtenthe of September. power over yelow colors.
Harvest is cold and dry: that is from the beginning of Libra, unto the end
of Sagittarie: compted from the. xiiij. of September to the twelfthe of
December. Winter is cold and moist: continued from. power over al flumes.
the beginning of Capricornus, to the end of Pisces: that is from the twelfthe
of December, to the tenthe of March.

Now follow the aspectes of the planetes, for the better judgment of weather.
Before I declare of planetes, and the signification of aspectes, it behooves
brefly to open what I call planetes, and what aspectes, and how they are
charactered and figured. Understood there be seven moveable sterres, pleasant
to the ^ight, called planetes. The highest Saturn.. The^ Jupiter.. Mars..
Son. Venus.. Mercury. and the Moon next to the earth. Now when I desire to
express Saturn, I write this figure: for Jupiter, this: For Mars, this. Thus
of the others as their characters declare. All radiatio^s or aspectes ar
expressed as follow. A Conjunction thus figured: and it is, when an other
planet is joined with the Son, or Moon, or others emonge themselfes, with in
one degree, or less. The Sextile aspecte or radiation is thus expressed: and it
is with in 60. degrees the one from the other. The Quadrate aspecte thus: 90
digres distant. The Trine thus: separated. 120. degres. The Opposition thus:
180. degrees, the one distant from the other. Lo here they follow in order: the
characters of the Planetes: and Signs also.

Conjunction, Sextile, Quadrat Trine, Opposition Aspectes.
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Son Venus Mercury Moon Planetes.
Aries Taurus Gemini Cancer Leo Virgo Libra Scorpius Sagittarius Capricornus
Aquarius Pisces Signs.

Yet for more playnesse behold this figure.


The signification of aspectes of planetes among them selves: for the judgment
of weather.
THe conjunction or meting of Saturn with Iuppiter, in fiery signs,, cum
inforcith great drouthe: in watery signs, fluddes, continual rain, general
ouerflowynges. etc. in aerie signs, plenty of wyndes. The quadrature, sextile,
or oppositio^ of Saturn, with Iuppiter, and, cum
in moist signs cawsith troubled air, by hayle, wind, rain, thunder, etc.
before and after.

The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition, of Saturn, with, and, cum
Mars, in watery signs, declare in somer, rain, often shoures, with hayle,
thunder and lightnyng.

The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of Saturn, with the, and, cum
Sun, chiefly in cold signs, show dark weather, hayle, rain, thunder,
and cold days.

The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of Saturn, with Venus,, and, cum,
in winter, engender cold and rain, principaly in moist signs: in summer,
mitigation of heat.

The conjunction, quadrature, and opposition of Saturn, with, and, cum
Mercury, in watery signs bring rain: in hott or dry signs, drouth: in
summer, thunder, lightnynges, and tempest.

The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of Iuppiter, with, and, cum
Mars, in moist signs, declare thunders lyghtninges, and rain: in winter,
snow, or clowdie thycke weather.

The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of Iuppiter, with the, and, cum
Sun, great and most vehement wyndes.

The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of Iuppiter, with, and, cum
Venus, in moist signs, cold and myssinges: in the rest signs, fair weather.

The conjunction, quadrature or opposition of Iuppiter, with and, cum
Mercury, great wyndes.

The conjunction, quadrature or opposition of Mars, with the, and, cum
Sun, in fiery signs, drouth: in watery, thunder, rain.

The conjunction, quadrature or opposition of Mars, with Venus, and, cum
in moist signs, rain, and tempest.

The conjunction, quadrature or oppositio^ of Mars, with Mercury and, cum.
in hot signs, great heat: in dry signs, drouth: in watrie, rain:
sometimes thunders, lightninges, with sodayn fierce wyndes.

The conjunction, quadrature or opposition of Venus, with, and, cum
Mercury causes rain: in somer thy provoke tempest, the more if they agree in
watery signs. Note what is said of the coniunctio^, quadrature or oppositio^,
the same is also meant of the Sextile and Trine: but they are oflesse
signification, so the lernid notes.

A declaration of weather by aspectes of the Mo^ne with planettes.
THe conjunction quadrature or opposition of the Moon, with, and, cum
Saturn, in moist signs, brings a cloudy day, cold air, according to the
nature of the sign: if she go from Saturn, to the Sun, by conjunction or
other wise, harder weather ensues.

The conjunction, quadrature or opposition of the Moon with, and, cum
Jupiter in Aries, or Scorpio shows fair, white dispersed clouds.

The conjunction, quadrature or opposition of the Moon with, and cum
Mars in watery signs rain: in hot signs, diverse colored red clou des are
made, all the element over: in summer, often thunder.

The conjunction, quadrature or opposition of the Moon with, and cum
the Sun in moist signs, rayny weather: the more if the Moon go from the
Sun to Saturn.

The conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of the Moon with and cum
Mercury, in moist lignes shows rayn and wind, the more when the Moon
passes from Mercury to Iuppiter: then great wyndes follow.

How wether is judged by the Oriental and Occidental station of Planetes, with
their combustion in the. 12. signes-celestiall. First of the planetes in Aries.
SATVRN in Aries, under the beams of the Sun, that is to in. What these
terms co^bust Oriental, and Occidental, mean.
say, combust, makes a cloudy dark troubled air: Oriental, I mean in the
morning apperyng before the Sun, fair wether: Occidental, that is to say,
showing him self after the Sun going down, betokens great wyndes.

Iuppiter in Aries combust, a token of rayn: being Occidental, it brings in
clouds, and dewes: Oriental, fair, pleasant wether.

Mars in Aries combust and Occidentall, good wether: contrary in
Oriental.

Venus in Aries combust, Occidental moystnes, great wyndes: Oriental in
thunders, and raynes.

Mercury in Aries combust tempest, Occidental, and Oriental, fair wyndy
wether. in


Of the planetes in Tauro.
SATVRN in Tauro co^bust, and stationarie, brings thick clouds, thunders,
and troblesome wether. in

Iuppiter in Tauro combust, indifferent wether: Occidental, pleasant shoures.
in

Mars in Tauro combust, a quiet air: but Oriental wyndye. in

Venus in Tauro combust thunders, etc. Occidental fair. in

Of the planetes in Gemini.
SATVRN in Gemini combust, and Occidental, drouth. in

Iuppiter in Gemini combust, a good signification. in

Mars in Gemini combust and Occidental, heat. in

Venus in Gemini combust Occidental, wind. in

Mercury in Gemini combust, wind. in

Of the planetes in Cancer.
SATVRN in Cancer combust, dark wether, great wyndes in
and troblesome wethers: Occidental calmer.
Iuppiter in Cancer combust brings calm pleasant wether. in

Mars in Cancer combust, great heat. in

Venus in Cancer combust, a quiet calm time. in

Mercury in Cancer combust, tempestuous wether, chiefly on the sea: in
Occidental calmer.
Of the planetes in Leone.
SATVRN in Leone combust, makes wyndes and mysslynges. in

Iuppiter in Leone combust, pleasant wyndes. in

Mars in Leone combust, Occidental, drouth. in

Venus in Leone combust, drouth. in

Mercury in Leone combusi, wyndes. in

Of the planetes in Virgin.
SATVRN in Virgin combust, is a significator of infirmities. in

Jupiter in Virgin combust, manifests abundaunce of things. in

Mars in Virgin combust, like unto Saturn. in

Venus in Virgin combust drouth: Oriental contrary. in

Mercury in Virgin co^bust, drougth, ragyng sees: Occide^tal drouth. in

Of the Planetes in Libra.
SATVRNE in Libra combust, shows infirmity of sight: in
Oriental, cold wyndes.
Jupiter in Libra combust, indifferent wether. in

Mars in Libra combust, brings moisture. in

Venus in Libra combust, moist air. in

Mercury in Libra combust, wyndes. in

Of the Planetes in Scorpione.
SATVRN in Scorpio combust, cold air: Occidental frost: in
Oriental cold, Northwyndes.
Jupiter in Scorpio combust rain: Occidental, bitter wether* in

Mars in Scorpio combust, declares moisture: Oriental, wyndes. in

Venus in Scorpio combust rain, both Occidental and Oriental. in

Mercury in Scorpio combust, ragyng wether, chiefly Oriental. in

Of the Planetes in Sagittario.
SATVRN in Sagittario combust, cold, rayny air: Oriental in
cold and frost.
Jupiter in Sagittario combust, (...) rain: Oriental wors wether. in

Mars in Sagittario combust, drouth. in

Venus in Sagittario combust, rain: Occidental, wynd, and cold. in

Mercuri in Sagittario combust rain: Occidental, clear air. in

Of the Planetes in Capricorn.
SATVRN in Capricorno co^bust, signifies dark wether with in
Southwyndes: Occidental cold: Oriental North wyndes.
Jupiter in Capricorn co^bust moist air: Occidental, increasing the same. in

Mars in Capricorn combust, cloudye: Occidental some heat. in

Venus in Capricorn combust, cold air. Oriental rain. in

Mercury in Capricorn combust rain, both Oriental and Occide^tall. in

Of the Planetes in Aquario.
SATVRN in Aquario combust cold air: Occidental dangerous in
sees: Oriental rayn.
Jupiter in Aquario combust, Occidental rayn. in

Mars in Aquario combust drouth: Occidental and Oriental plenty in
of wyndes.
Venus in Aquario cumbust, cloudye: Occidental hot: Oriental rayn. in

Mercury in Aquario combust, snow: Occidental more cold: Oriental in
rayn.
Of the planetes in Pisces.
SATVRN in Pisce combust, brings clouds: Occidentall in
rain.
Jupiter in Pisce combust, Oriental, calm waters. in

Mars in Pisce combust, Occidental, drouth: Oriental lightning, and in
thunders.
Venus in Pisce combust, cold: Occidental disposed to snow. in

Mercury in Pisce combust, moist air. in

Thus much of the judgment of weather.

SEEING that I have now sufficiently declared how, by what rules and tokens,
weather is judged: I think it convenient to adioyne here a brefe collection,
how Plenty, Scarsitie, Sickness, Death, Alterationes, Trobles, wars, etc. are
for ever perceived.

A rule to prognosticate the aforesaid, by the falling of Newyears day.
IT is affirmed of some, when Newyears day falls on the Su^daye, Sundaye.
then a pleasant Winter does ensue: a natural Summer: fructe sufficient:
Heruest indifferent, yet some wind and rain: many marriages: plenty of wine
and honye: death of young men, and cattle: robberies in most places: news of
prelates, of Kings: and cruel wars in the end.

On Mondaye, a winter somewhat vnco^fortable: Summer temperate: no plentye of
fructe: many fanlies and fables opened: A gues Mondaye.
shall reygne: Kings and many others shall dye: marriages shall be in most places:
and a commen fall of gentle men.

On Tewesdaye a stormy Winter: a wete Summer: a diverse Heruest: Corn, and
fructe indifferent: yet herbs in gardens shall not Tewesday.
florishe: great sickness of men, women and young children: Be a^^es shall
hunger sterue, and dye of the botch: many ships, Galleys, and Hulkes, shall be
lost: and the bloody flixes shall kill many men: all things dear, save corn.

On wednesdaye, Lee a warm Winter: in the end, snow and froste: a cloudye
So^mer: plentye of fructe, of corn, Hay, Wine, wednesdaye,
and Honye great pain to women with child, and death to infantes: good for
sheep: news of Kings: great wars: battle and slaughter toward the mids.

On Thursdaye, Winter and Summer wyndye: a raynye Heruest: Thursdaye.
therefore we shall have ouerflowynges: much fructe: ple^tye of Honye: yet
flesh shall be dear: Cattle in general shall dye: great troble, wars etc:
With a licentiouslyfe of the feminine sex.

On Fridaye, Winter stormy. Summer scante pleasante: Heruest Fridaye.
indifferent: little store of fructe, of Wine, and Honye: Corn dear: many
bleare eyes: youth shall dye: Earthquakes are perceived in many places,
plentye of thunders, lyghtnynges, and tempests: with a soden death of cattle,

On Saturday, a mean Winter: So^mer very hot: a late Heruest, Saterdaie.
good cheap garden herbs: much burninge: plentye of Hemp, Flax, and Honye:
old folk shall dye in most places: Fevers and Tertians shall grieve many
people: great mutteringe of wars: murders shall be suddenly committed in many
places, for light matters.

NOw that I have opened diverse ways, both for the learned and unlearned, how
wether to come at all times may be well judged and known etc: I thought it
mete, for farther knowledge therein, not to omit here, the natural causes of
such and so many alterations of air. Lo, therefore orderly they follow.

Natural causes, conducynge to all the aforesaid, ever to be had in memory
of the wise: and first of the Raynbowe.
THe Raynbowe is the shynyng, and rebounding of beamys of light, that turn to
the contrary vapor again, in the cloud. It declares sometime rain, and
many times fair wether: when the one, and how the other, is before opened.

Of Rain.
RAyn is a cold vapor. an erthy humor: or fumosities, out of waters or earth
drawn up by the virtue of the Sun, to Quare lapides pl^a^t, lege ^li, lib,
2, Ca. 44.
the nether part of the middle space of the air: there through cold thycked,
then dissolved: thus engendered falls on the earth. Here I leave to speak of
miraculous raynes, as Milk, Blud, Flesh, Yern Woll, etc. For more satisfieng
in these, read Plinius in the second book. 58. Chapter.

Of Frost and Dew.
A Cold moist vapor, a little way drawn up in the day, through ^^s est ate,
pruina bieme ^it.
faint heat of the Sun, descends in the night, dissolved on the earth,
there congelated, or resolved in to water, the one called Frost, the other Dew.
The last is a sign of fair wether, in the spryng or Harvest.

Of Snow.
IT is a moist vapor, drawn up to the middle region of the air, then
thy^ked, and frosen into the body of a cloud. So Nix humor modice concr^ tus.
congelated, descends.

Of Hayle.
A Cloud resolved into water, in the fall congelated, makes Hayle. The hyer
it comes from above, and the longer it Grando, plu^ uia in disce^su congelata.
tarryeth in the air, the rounde^ hayle.

Of wyndes.
VVynde is a multitude of dry exhalations, drawn up from the Ventor^ ergo
materia, calida and ^icca ex^alatio.
earth: and above the earth, enforced here and there.

Of earthquakes, in the most quiet time.
PLentye of wyndes, entered into holes, cones, or caves of the Quemadmodu^ in
n^be tonitruu^, sic in terra tr^nor.
earth, which absent from above the earth, causes quietness: the violent
brustyng out of them (the earth closed again) is the earthquake: Sign^^ est
futurorum bellorum.

Tokens of earthquakes to come.
AFyry cloud, appering in the element, like a litel pyllar, is a token Signa
terrae motus.
of earthquakes to come. The obscurity or darkness of the Sun, without
clouds, and straungely colored, blouddy or otherwise, is a token of
earthquakes.

Also, when Well water and others are troubled, or salt, or infec ted by favor
etc.

A great quyetnes of air, by land and sea, and chiefly the long absence of
wyndes.

Also, strange noyses herd, as clamours of men, russhynge of harnes,
mourninges, lamentations etc. All these have been observed, to signify
earthquakes at hand.

Of Thunders and lightninges.
THunder is the quenching of fire, in a cloud. Or thunder is, Fulgetrum prius
cerni, quam t^nitru^ audiri, cu^ simul fi^nt, certum est, Pli. lib. 2. Ca. 56.
co^tra Aristo.
an exhalation hot and dry, myxte with moisture, carried up to the
middleregio^, there thycked and wrapped into a cloud: of this hoar matter,
coupled with moystnes, closed in the cloud, grows a strife, the heat beating
and breakyng out the sides of the cloud, with a thundringe noise: the fire
then dispersed, is the lightnynge. Thus for the learned: Tonit(...) sonitus est,
qui editur qua^do ^ube^ rumpit halitus. Fulmen flamma vel repe^tinus est ignis,
qui ex collisione nubium, aut ruptura nascitur. Aristotele affirms the
lightnyng after the thunder: but the fire does first appear, in that the sight
is before the hering. If this satiisfie not, read the second of his Meteoron.
Here follows a note of lightninges.

There be three kinds of lightninges, dry, moist and clear.
Dry do not burn, but cleave, depart, or divide. Moist burn Note.
not, but alter color. The clear are of marvelous natures. Full barels by it
are emptied. It melts money in the purs, it breaks the sword, the purs and
scaberd not perisshed, yea, wex in them vnmolten.

Of the Cometes, or flames in the night.
A Comet is a flame, working in a dry, hot, flymye exhalation, drawn up to
the highest part of the air. His matter or substance Ventoru^ causa
after it is brent, dispersed provoke wyndes.

The natural cause of the Sun eclypsed.
NOthing else is the Eclips of the Sun, but the direct putting the body of the
Moon, between the Sun and the earth, or between our sight and the Sun:
which chances only at the change.

A Corollarie.
BY this gather the darkness at Christ's death, not to stand by nature all
ecliptical cause: but by supernatural, or miracle. For it was at the full Moon,
the scriptures witness: which enforced Dio^ysius Miracle,
Areopagita, at the time of his passion, to speak thus: Aut Deus nature
patitur, aut mundi machina dissoluitur.

The cause of the Moon eclipsed.
THe Sun being in the contrary point to the full Moon, enforces the shadow
of the earth, then directly put between the Vniuersalis est Eclipsis Lu^^ No^
semper in nouilunio, sed in ca, et cauda
Sun and the Moon, toward the Moon, hyding more or less of the Moon, as
she differs from the Ecliptical. Some observe pestilent plagues, sodayn
batayl, great dearth, to ensue these eclypses: which all I desire God to auert
from his chosen. Many other things by this Eclips are gathered, as Longitudes
of countries: the quantity of the Sun, containing the bigness of the earth
162 times: the compass Omniu^ planetaru^ ad terra^ magnitudo.
of the earth 21600. miles: whose thycknes, according to Archimedes rule is,
6872 miles and 8 eleuenthes of a mile. The quantite of the Moon is the 43 part
of the earth. The Sun contains Haec incredis bilia vide^tur ta^tu^ hiis,
qui matbematicis demo^strationi bus no^ assueue runt, etc.
the globe of the Moon 7000 times. Saturnus comprehends the bigness of the
earth 91 times. Jupiter 95 times. Mars 1 and 10. sixtenthes. Venus one 37 part.
Mercurius on 32000 part of the earth. Note here, that Alfraganus affirms the
least fixed sterre, perfectly seen, as bygge, as the whole earth.

HAec non erunt admirationi, si globi capacit atem ex longitudine diametri
quaesieris. Continet enim sol^^ dim^tiens terrae dimetientem quinquies
Dimetiens ad terrae dime tiente^ 11 ad 2.
and semissem. Estque propertio diametri solis ad terrae dimetiente^, quae est
numeri vud^^im ad duo, quintupla sesquialtera. Cubus soli^ mill ter^^ntu^ vna^
and triginta parts tales continet, cuiusmodi terrae cubus octonas
conplectitur. Cubus enim numeri vndecim, est mill tercentu^ vnu^ and triginta.
Cubus vero bi^arii, qui est terrae, octo. Subducto quoties id fieri potest,
minore cubo Cubus 1331 Terrae. 8.
qui est terrae, a maiore qui est solis, cognoscitur cub^^d cubum proportio,
and quanto Sol mayor, terra sit. Inuenimus ergo octo centics, sexagi^^ sexies,
in mill tercentum vno and triginta.

Terrae Diametros Lunae dimetiente^ co^plectitur ter, and duas eius diamet^i
portiones quintas. Dimetie^s terrae ad diam:. 17, ad 5. Cubus terrae 4. 913.
Cubus 125.
Estque ea proportio, dimetientis terrae ad Lunae diametrum, quae est septen
decim ad quinque tripla superbipartiens quintas. Cubus numeri septendecim,
quater mill nongenta tredecim. Cubus numer^ quinque, est centum viginti
quinque. Maiore cubo per minorem distributo, reperimu^ numerum ce^tum
vigintiquinque, tricies nouies in quater mill nonge^us tredecim: quod paululum
a superioribus obseruationibus diflert.

How many miles the Moon is from the earth: and every planet from other.
AS some have published, it is from the earth to the Moon. 15750. miles. From
the Moon to Mercury, is 12812. miles. From Mercury to Venus, as many miles.
From Venus to the Sun, is 23437. miles, and a half. From the Sun to Mars,
is 15725. miles. From Mars to Jupiter, is 78721. miles. From Jupiter to
Saturn, as many miles. From Saturn to the firmament 120485 miles. The Whole
sum, from the earth to the firmament is, 280734. miles, and a half.
The natural causes of many Suns or Moons.
THese cometo pass, when a thicker cloud is gathered toward Milichius notes
the king of Pole to has ue* seen. 6 Suns at ones.
the side of the Sun or Moon: in the which the broken beams of the Su^ne,
do leave the fashion and very form of that Su^ne. The first is the very Sun:
the second and third come of the breaking of the Sun beam is in the cloud,
on the side of the Sun. Thus as follows, says Plinius in his second book,
of the history of nature, and 31. Chapter. No more Suns are perceived in our
time then three: and they are never seen, either above or beneth the Sun, but
on the sides: never in the night, but only at the Sun rysinge, or
goyngedoune.

What is to be chosen or avoided, under every aspect of, the moon: with her
signification, in the. xii. signs, touchyug the same.
THE conjunction, quadrature, or opposition of Saturn with vel cum
the Moon, causes an euel unlucky day, for all matters. Leave therefore to
have to do any manner way: nothing shall prosper, or come well to pass then
attempted. Yet the sext le or Trine of Saturn, with the Moon declares a
convenient time to till, del^e or and cum
dygge, to sow, to lay fundacions, to erect ^r repair houses yea, a mete
time to obtaynesutes of fatherly farmours. The Moon in Capricorn or Aquario,
brings this later effect of the sextile and trine. in vel,


The conjunction, sextile, trine, quadrature, or opposition of Jupiter, vel cum
with the Moon, shows a fortunate day, chiefly to obtain suits of Kings,
noble Princes, Prelates etc, of Lawyars, and Religious persons: and a mete time
to study, to journey, to take an honest matter in hand. The Moon in Tauro, in
Leone, or Sagittario, in vel.
shows the same.

The conjunction, sextile, trine, quadrature or opposition of Mars with the
Moon, warns thee not to match thy self that day, or cum.
with warryours notwithstanding very good, and most mete to finisshe all manner
fyry works: naught to journey: yet most convenient for valiant captains, to
work their feat, to lead, encourage, or stomache their souldiars: most
unmeet to treat peace, to take servants, or to seek friendship.

The conjunction, quadrature or opposition of the Sun with,, vel cum
the Moon, declares a very unhappy day, for all matters: therefore attempt
nothing, ne any manner suit: neither plant, build, ne journey. Yet the sextile
and trine ar very fortunate, specially to obtain suit of Kings, Princes, and
other Nobles. The Moon in (...) enfor in
ceth the effect of this later part.

The conjunction, sextile, trine, quadrature, or opposition of Venus with the
Moon, causes a day most apt to obtayn all suits of,, uel cum.
women: good to woo, to attempt marriage, and to follow all manner pleasures, and
plesaunt pastymes: not unmeet to hyre servants, in vel
to let blud etc. The Moon in Libra or Pisces, provoke the like.

The conjunction, sextile, trine quadrature, or opposition of,,,, vel cum
Mercury with the Moon, promises a fortunate happy day, to bye and sell:
very good to enter children in liberal arts: an apt time for the ver^i^iar:
good to use marchaundise, to journey, to send embassage, to give accomptes, and
such like.

The Moon in Gemini, Cancer or Virgo, en^lyneth even to the same in vel.
aforesaid.

The Moon with the Dragons head, shows a lucky day for cum
all matters: with the tail joined, contrary.

Now ensues a Table showing what sign the Moon is in, and shall be for ever:
declaring also the metest time to let bludde, to p^urge, and to bathe.
THIS Table following, has at the head seven titles. The first months: the
second days: then the prime: the. 1^. signs: the titles to let bludd, to
pourge, and to bathe. Here it is to be noted, that those days are good for
these purposes, which be signed with this letter G: and those euel days, that
are noted with B. Now ensues the Table, and the whole use of it, and first for
the sign, where the Moon is.

This Table declares for ever, in what sign the Moon is, or shall be at any
day in the yea^^. It serves also very well to let bludde, to purge, and bathe.
Monetbes. D^^es. (...). Prime The 12. Signs. To let bludd. To purge. To
bathe. Febr. Noue^ 1 3 Aries. G B G March. 2 Aries. G B G 3 14 Taurus. B B B
(...) 4 6 Taurus. B G 5 Gemini. B G Aprile. 6 17 Gemini. B G 7 9 Cancer. G G
May. 8 1 Cancer. G G 9 Cancer. G G 10 12 Leo. B B G 11 4 Leo. B B G I^^e. 12
Virgo. B B B 13 15 Virgo. B B B July. 14 7 Libra. 15 Libra. 16 18 Scorp^^s G G
17 1^ Scorpi^^ G G Auguste 18 2 Scorpius G G 19 Sagitta. G G 20 13 Sagitta. G G
21 (...) Capri. B B B Septembre. 22 Capri. B B B 23 23 Aquari G Ian. Octo. 24
24 Aquari G 25 25 Pisces. G G 26 26 Pisces. G G 27 27 Pisces. G G

How to find by this Table, the sign where the Moon is for ever.
Seek out under the titles of the months, the name of the month, whose day
you must look out, right against the month, under the title of days: and
there begin to tell down wards, one, two, three, etc. to the end, if it so
require. And then from the beginning, if need be, until you have reconed the
number of the day that youseke. Look what number it falls upon in this
table, under the title of days: that number keep in mind. Then seek under the
title of the prime, the golden number for that year: right against that
lestward, under the title of days, begin to tell dounewardes, one, two, thr^,
four, etc, until you have reconed the number, which you did keep in mind.
Against that dounewardes, on your right hand, under the title of Signs, is
the sign wherein the Moon shall be that day. Eue^ then under the other titles,
ye shall find in right order, for lettinge bludde, for pourginge, and
bathinge, according as they be noted with G. which is good, and B. signifieng
badde. Ensample. The sixth day of March in the year of our Lord 1555, I
desire to know what celestial sign the Moon does then occupy. I find
first the name of the Month, that is, March: and the day as follows, in the
next order of this table. I begin here to tell, right against my month, at
the figure of. 2. saying: one, two, three, etc. so I have at the end, and
compte of syx days this figure 7. which I keep in mind. Now I must seek out
the golden number, for the year aforesaid, under the title of the prime here,
that is 17: against the which, on the left side is 6. There you must begin
again to compte, one, two, three, etc. until you come unto your number 7. So on
your right hand, in the row, or order, you shall see Virgo, the celestial
sign, that the Moon, is in: and after that these three letters, b, b, b, which
declare badde or evil to let bludde, to pourge or bathe, agreeable to the
titles in the head. G, there had signified good.

To know what the Moon differs from the Sun.
MVltiplie the age of the Moon, by 4, and divide by. 10: the quotient shows
the signs, that the Moon differs from the Sun: the remain augmented by.
3, brings degrees to be added.

Now shall follow, what days in every month are unmeet to let bludde,
dangerous to suffer wou^ding, perilous to fall sick, deathly to journey,
evil to marrye, and naught to take any matter in hand. The whole year after
this compte folowinge, has. 33. evil days.

The year has. xxxiii. evil days, general for ever.
IANVARIE has eyghte such days, the. i, the. ij, the iiij, the. v, the. x,
the. xv, the. xvij, the. xxix. Drink white wine this month.

February has three days, the. viij, the. x, the. xvij: these not so evil,
the. xxvi, the. xxvij, the. xxviij. Eat no potage of oaks, or malowes: they
are venomous.

March three days, the. xv, the. xvi, the. xix: this not so evil, the xxviij.
day. This month, all sweet meats are good.

April two days, the. xvi, the. xxi: these not so evil, the. vij, the viij,
the. x, the. xx. Use hot meats, of light digestion.

May three days, the vij, the. xv, the. xx: these not so evil, the iij, the.
vi. Rise early, and use breakefast.

June two, the. iiij, the. vij: these not so euel, the. x, the. xv, the. xxij.
Sage and lettuse are good to eat. Cold water fasting hurts not.

Iulie two days, the, xv, the. xx. Abstain from carnalitie.

August two days, the. xix, the. xx: these not so euel, the first, the xxix,
the. xxx. It hurts not to abstain from potage, and all hot meats, and
drinks of spicerie.

September two days the. vi, the. vij: these not so evil, the. iij, the iiij,
the. xxi, the. xxij. Eat good fruit.

October one day, the vi: these not so euel, the. iij, the. xvi, the xxiiij.
Good wine is wholesome this month.

November two days, the. xv, the. xix: these not so evil, the. v, the vi,
the. xxviij, the. xxix. Blede not.

Decembre three days, the. vi, the. vij, the. ix: these days not so evil,
the. xv, the. xvij, the* xxij. Blede not over much. Warm not thy legs at
the fire.

A conducible note for lettiug bludde.
LEt bludde at no time, without great cause: for it brings wekenes, Malu^
minui, vel purgationibus vti, tem pore caloris, propter defectu^ humoris.
and many infirmities. If ye do, see it be after good dige(...)n and fasting,
in a fair temperate day. Beware before of all manner exercise, bathinges,
watchinges. and carnal copulacion etc. After, use fine meats, of light
digestion: abstayninge from all the aforesaid, until the fourth day.

These signs are most dangerous for bludde letting, the Moon Ill to let blud
in,,,,
being in them: Taurus, Gemini, Leo, Virgo, and Capricorn, with the last half
of Libra, and Scorpius. Therest are all good, so the Moon bear no dominion in
that member, which ye cut: as follows.

Behold the figure.


The dominion of the Moon in man's body.
Aries. The. Head, and face. Taurus. The. Neck. Gemini The. Arms, hands,
shoulders. Cancer. The. Breast, stomache, rybbes. Leo. The. Heart, back. Virgo.
The. Bowels, belly. Libra. The. Reins, nauill, buttockes. Scorpius. The.
Secret members. Sagittarius. The. Thyes. Capricornus. The. Knees. Aquarius.
The. Shynnes, legs. Pisces. The. Fete.


FRom the change, to the first quarter, a mete time to let young men bludde.
From the first quarter, to the full, good for middle age. From the full, to the
last quarter, apt for aged folk. From the last quarter, to the change, best
for old men.


Signs mete for the complexions.
for the fleumatike: the head, and thyes excepted. ARIES. Sagittarius. for
melancholic: buttockes, and legs excepted Libra. Aquarius: Haec
diligentissime obseruare oportet solerte^ Medi cu^, nisi maiora pericula coga^t
for cholerike: breast, members, and fete excepted. Cancer. Scorpius Pisces. For
the sanguine, all be apt that tofore are named good.


In the spring time let bludde at the right side.

In Harvest time at the left side.

The learned Phisician will consider, beside all that is said, the
Conjunctions, Oppositions, and quadrate aspectes of the Planetes: with many
other things Astronomical, most necessary, both in bludletletting, purging,
bathinge, etc.

For to take purgations, and to bathe,
THe metest time to take purgations etc. is neither in hot, nor cold days:
that is, from the tenthe of March, to the twelfthe of June.

Further, by rules Astronomical, it must be performed when Good to purge,,.
the Moon is in cold, moist, and watery signs, as Ca^cer, Scorpius and Pisces:
conforted by aspectes, and radiations, of planetes fortifienge the virtue of
the body expulsive.

The Moon in Aries, Taurus, and Capricornus, naught. One cause of Bad to
purge.,,.
vomiting the purgation, is the Moon having aspect to any planet retrograde.
Good to bathe,,,,,.


The Moon in these signs folowinge, very good to bathe: Aries, Leo,
Sagittari, Cancer, Scorpius and Pisces.

These ensuyng are euel to bathe: Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn. Bad to
bathe.,,,


Of inundations, or fluddes: of tymbre fallinge: sowyng: planting: graffing:
hear clipping: shauing: and geldinge.
THe fludde is biggest at the full: because then dispersinge her virtue, she
fills all places with moisture. By common experience, joined with lerning, I
know, at the full the Moon Iodeth all bodies with humou^s: and so are
emptied, growinge to the The fall of timber.
change. Of this, some gather the fall of tymbre at the change, more to the
purpose then other times: wantyng then superfiuous moisture, the cause of
putrefaction. Omnis putredo ab aqueo humido ortum habet. Schoner wills from
the. xv. day unto the. xxij. day of the Moon, trees to be felled, and that
after Midsomer to January. So tymbre is strong, sound, and void of worms.
Good to sow.,,,,.


To sow, Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Libra, and Capricorn are best, in the
increace of the Moon.

To Plant or Graff, best is when the M^one has her being in any To plant or
graff,,
fixed sign: either in Tauro or Aquario, in thencrease.

Hear cut grows well, the Moon encreacing, being in Tauro, To cut
bear.,,.
Virgin, or Libra.

Cuttinge, shauing, clipping, in the wane, causes baldnes: what is then cut,
grows litel. Caluitiu^ prohibet, oleum Tartari.

The best time of Gel^ing is in Cancer, Scorpio or Pisces, in the wane. Good to
gelde,,.


This round Table above, and that also, which ensues: conduce to the rest
folowinge.


Here after ensuyth a table for the moveable feasts: whose use is thus briefly
declared.


THis Table following, conteyneth in the first title the Prime: in the second,
the Dominical letter: in the third, Lent: in the fourth, Easter day: in the
fyfthe, Rogation day: in the sixte, whitsondaie: in theseuenthe, how many
wekes and days are between whitsondaie and Midsomer. Which all appear by
their titles.

The use is this.
Ye shall consider by the Table before put forth, what number the prime is
that year, where of ye require to know all these aforesaid: and seek that
number under the first title of this Table ensuyng. Then s^ke under the
second, the Dominical letter, next after the prime for that year: which
title ensues the prime. Directly against the same Dominical letter, toward
your right hand, in the same line, ye shall find under the titles, what
^oneth and day, enery one of these aforesaid shall happen.

Ensample.
I would know this year of our Lord 1555. these moveable feasts: the first
Lent sundry, Easterdaye, Rogation days, Vvhitsonday, and how many wekes
betwixt Vvhitsonday, and Midsomer day. First I find the prime this year 17.
Which 17, I look out under the title of prime in this table. Then I seek in
the next order, and after the prime, for the Dominical letter that year. Now
in right order, according to the titles, I find the third of March to be the
first Lent sunday:, the 14. of April Easterday: the 19. of May, Rogation: the.
2. of June, Vvhitsondaye: and. 3. wekes, and 1. day betwixt Vvhitsondaye, and
Mydsomerdaie. Thus for ever.

The prime. The so^daies letter. The first Lent sondaie. Faster. day. Rogation
Whitsontide. Betwixt whitson. and midso. 16 D Februa. March April. May. Wek.
da^s d 8 22 26 10 6 3 e 9 23 27 11 6 2 13 f 10 24 28 12 6 1 2 g 11 25 29 13 6 0
A 12 26 30 14 5 6 10 b 13 27 May. 1. 15 5 5 c 14 28 2 16 5 4 18 d 15 29 3 17 5
3 7 e 16 30 4 18 5 2 f 17 31 5 19 5 1 15 g 18 Aprile. 1. 6 20 5 0 4 A 19 2 7 21
4 6 b 20 3 8 22 4 5 12 c 21 4 9 23 4 4 1 d 22 5 10 24 4 3 e 23 6 11 25 4 2 9 f
24 7 12 26 4 1 g 25 8 13 27 4 0 17 A 26 9 14 28 3 6 6 b 27 10 15 29 3 5 c 28 11
16 30 3 4 14 d March. 1. 12 17 31 3 3 13 e 2 13 18 June 1 3 2 f 3 14 19 2 3 1
11 g 4 15 20 3 3 0 A 5 16 21 4 2 6 19 b 6 17 22 5 2 5 8 c 7 18 23 6 2 4 d 8 19
24 7 2 3 e 9 20 25 8 2 2 f 10 21 26 9 2 1 g 11 22 27 10 2 0 A 12 23 28 11 1 6 b
13 24 29 12 1 5 c 14 25 3^ 13 1 4

How to know the age of the Moon: then the change, and quarter, for ever.
First learn the Epact, as I have instructed, for that year Ye seek to know
the age of the Moon: then reckon how many days is past of that month, which
day ye desire to know the age. Put that nu^bre to the Epact. Then begin at
March, and reckon for every month from him orderly one, until your said
day, includinge both the month of March, and also the month of your said
day. Add all these days, unto your former number: putting away as many
thirty days, as ye find. The rest, is the age of the Moon. But By the Prime
the Change is known, but uncertainly: therefore here omitted.
January and February are counted from March bacwarde, as above is said.
The age found, the change is known. If ye add 7. days to the change, ye
have the first quarter: then 7. days, and somewhat more, shows the full: and
so to it addinge 7. and more, brings the last qurater: thus by 7. unto the
new Moon.

Now ensue two perfect Tables, declaringe the true hour and minute of Ebbing
and Flowing, in most coasts of England.
When you will know the full sea, seek out the name of the Of Ebbiage and
Flowing.
place, where you desire the full water, in the headde of the Tables following:
or learn the points of the compass there noted: or if you list, know of some
mariner, what Moon makes a full sea there: a South west, or South Moon etc.
Then the age of the Moon found under the place or point of the compass,
shows in right order, the hour, and minute of the full water. The ebb then
is manifest. En^ample. I desire to know the full water at London bridge, the
year of our Lord 1555. the 6. day of February. I find by rules before put
forth, the 6. day of February, the year aforesaid, the Moon to be 14.
days old. I see also under the title where London is S. W. which letters
signify, that a Southwest Moon makes a full sea there: and that is at 2. of
the clock, and 12. minutes past. This is well perceived, if you run down in
the Table, to the 14. day of the age of the Moon, under London title. Behold
the Tables.

Quiub Southampton. Portsmoth. Redban Aberde^ Graves end. Du^dee. S. And. Age
of the Moon London Tinmot Hertle pole. Berwyke. Frith. Lythe. Du^bar. Falmot
South. S b w. S S w S w b S S w S w b w w S w w b S. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H.
M H. M H. M. H. M. 12 48 1 33 2 18 3 3 1 3 48 4 33 5 18 6 3 1 36 2 21 3 6 3 51
2 4 36 5 21 6 6 6 51 2 24 3 9 3 54 4 39 3 5 24 6 9 6 54 7 39 3 12 3 57 4 42 5
27 4 6 12 6 57 7 42 8 27 4 0 4 45 5 30 6 15 5 7 0 7 46 8 30 9 15 4 48 5 33 6 18
7 3 6 7 48 8 33 9 18 10 3 5 36 6 21 7 6 7 51 7 8 36 9 21 10 6 10 51 6 24 7 9 7
54 8 39 8 9 24 10 9 10 54 11 ^9 7 12 7 57 8 42 9 27 9 10 12 10 57 11 42 12 27 8
0 8 45 9 30 10 15 10 11 0 11 45 12 30 1 15 8 48 9 33 10 18 11 3 11 11 48 12 33
1 18 2 3 9 36 10 21 11 6 11 51 12 12 36 1 21 2 6 2 51 10 24 11 9 11 54 12 39 13
1 24 2 9 2 54 3 39 11 12 11 57 12 42 1 27 14 2 12 2 57 3 42 4 ^7 12 0 12 45 1
30 2 15 15 3 0 3 45 4 30 5 15 12 48 1 33 2 18 3 3 16 3 48 4 33 5 18 6 3 1 36 2
21 3 6 3 51 17 4 36 5 21 6 6 6 51 2 24 3 9 3 54 4 39 18 5 24 6 9 6 54 7 39 3 12
3 57 4 42 5 27 19 6 12 6 57 7 42 8 27 4 0 4 45 5 30 6 15 20 7 0 7 45 8 30 9 15
4 48 5 33 6 18 7 3 21 7 48 8 33 9 18 10 3 5 36 6 21 7 6 7 51 22 8 36 9 21 10 6
10 51 6 14 7 9 7 54 8 39 23 9 24 10 9 10 54 11 39 7 12 7 57 8 42 9 27 24 10 12
10 57 11 42 12 27 8 0 8 45 9 30 10 15 25 11 0 11 45 12 30 1 15 8 48 9 33 10 18
11 3 26 11 48 12 33 1 18 2 3 9 36 10 21 11 6 11 51 27 12 36 1 21 2 6 2 51 10 24
11 9 11 54 12 39 28 1 24 2 9 2 54 3 39 11 12 11 57 12 42 1 27 29 2 12 2 57 3 42
4 27 12 0 12 45 1 30 2 15 30 3 0 3 45 4 30 5 51 North. N b E N N E N E b N N E
N E b E E N E E b N

For Lin Hu^ber weimot Dertm Plimot Bristo. Milfo Bridg^ water Portl. Peter
port Age of the Moon Orkn Pole. Or* well. Di^p. Lux. Lenoys Boloig. Dover.
Harwic Yar(...)ot Calice. East. EBS. ESE. SEBE SE SEBS SSE SBE H. M. H. M. H.
M. H. M (...) H. M H. M H. M. H. M. 6 48 7 33 8 18 9 3 1 9 48 10 33 ^1 8 12 3 7
36 8 21 9 6 9 51 2 10 36 11 21 12 9 12 51 8 24 9 9 9 54 10 39 3 11 24 12 9 12
54 1 39 9 12 9 57 10 42 11 27 4 12 12 12 57 1 42 2 27 10 0 10 45 11 30 12 15 5
1 0 1 42 2 30 3 15 10 48 11 33 12 18 1 3 6 1 48 2 33 3 18 4 3 11 36 12 21 1 6 1
51 7 2 36 3 21 4 6 4 51 12 24 1 9 1 54 2 39 8 3 24 4 9 4 54 5 39 1 12 1 57 2 42
3 27 9 4 12 4 57 5 42 6 27 2 0 2 45 3 30 4 15 10 5 0 5 45 6 30 7 15 2 48 3 33 4
18 5 3 11 5 48 6 33 7 18 8 3 3 36 4 21 5 6 5 51 12 6 36 7 21 8 6 8 51 4 24 5 9
5 54 6 39 13 7 24 8 9 8 54 9 39 5 12 5 57 6 42 7 17 14 8 12 8 57 9 42 10 27 6 0
6 45 7 30 8 15 15 9 0 9 45 10 30 11 15 6 48 7 33 8 18 9 3 16 9 48 10 33 11 18
12 3 7 36 8 21 9 6 9 51 17 10 36 11 21 12 6 12 51 8 24 9 9 9 54 10 39 18 11 24
12 9 12 54 1 39 9 12 9 57 10 42 11 27 19 12 12 12 57 1 42 2 27 10 0 10 45 11 30
12 15 20 1 0 1 45 2 30 3 15 10 48 11 33 12 18 1 3 21 1 48 2 33 3 18 4 3 11 36
12 21 1 6 1 51 22 2 36 3 21 4 6 4 51 12 24 1 9 1 54 2 39 23 3 24 4 9 4 54 5 39
1 12 1 57 2 42 3 27 24 4 12 4 57 5 42 6 27 2 0 2 45 3 30 4 15 25 5 0 5 45 6 30
7 15 2 48 3 33 4 18 5 3 26 5 48 6 33 7 18 8 3 3 36 4 21 5 6 5 51 27 6 36 7 21 8
6 8 51 4 24 5 9 5 54 6 39 28 7 24 8 9 8 54 9 39 5 12 5 57 6 42 7 27 29 8 12 8
57 9 42 10 27 6 0 6 45 7 30 8 15 30 9 0 9 45 10 30 11 15 West. wbN wNw Nwbw
(...) Nw NwbN NNw Nbw

To know how long the Moon shyneth.
FOr her shyning in the encreace, multiply the age of the Moon by 4. In the
wane augment therest of the age, which she lacks of 30. by 4: and divide by
5. The Quotie^t shows the hours. The Remain, if there be any, multiplied by
12. brings minute^ to be added.

Here follows for the going down, and rysinge of the Moon: with her
continuance on the earth.
NOte diligently after the change, and before the full of the Moon, what hour
the Sun goyth down: and add to that same so many hours and minutes, as
the Moon shyneth that night: for that hour and minute, she goes down. Then
has she continued as long time on the earth, as the Sun would have done,
being in that sign where she is. Therefore, her rysinge is known by
subduction of that Arc. Note after the full, the Moon ryseth so many hours
before the S(...)ne, as she shyneth that night.

Now shall follow a Table, at al times plainly and briefly declaring, what day
the Sun is entered the first degree of every sign. It shows the break of
the day: the hour, and minute of the Sun rising: the just length of the
day: the length of the night also; the very minute of the Sun setting: and
the Twylight.
Monethe^ Day^^. Break of the day. Sun rysinge. Length of the day Le^gthe of
the night Sun settinge. Twylyghte. Days. Months. of the day. H. M. H. M.
H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. b^^. 10 6 0 8 11 7 37 16 23 3 49 6 0 10 20 5 58 8 10 7
40 16 20 3 50 6 2 1 (...)- 3 (...) 1 5 54 8 0 8 0 16 0 4 0 6 6 20 2 10 5 44 7
49 8 2^ 15 39 4 11 6 16 10 7 2^ 5 35 7 34 8 52 15 8 4 26 6 25 1 Nou^. 4 F^b^. 1
5 15 7 12 9 35 14 25 4 48 6 45 20 3 10 5 0 6 55 10 9 13 51 5 5 7 0 10 7 20 4 50
6 36 10 47 13 13 5 24 7 10 1 Octo. 4 Man. 1 4 20 6 18 11 23 12 37 5 42 7 40 20
11 10 4 0 6 1 11 58 12 2 5 59 8 0 (...) 16 20 3 40 5 41 12 37 11 23 6 ^9 8 2^ 1
Sept^^. 12 Apr. 1 3 8 5 18 13 24 10 36 6 42 8 52 2^ 10 10 2 40 5 1 ^3 57 10 3 6
59 9 20 10 15 20 2 10 4 43 14 33 9 27 7 ^7 9 50 1 Aug. 1^ May. 1 1 30 4 25 ^5 9
8 51 7 35 10 30 20 12 10 0 30 4 0 15 35 8 25 7 48 11 30 10 12 20 Cotinu all
day. 4 0 15 59 8 1 8 0 Day continual. 1 ^ul. 7 Iu* 1 3 51 16 17 7 43 8 9 20 3
10 3 48 16 23 7 37 8 12 10 (...). Minutes to be added, to the length H. M. H.
M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M.

The use of this table.

Consider the month and day, that ye require any of the to foresaid: and
sake in this table that same, under the titles: proceed in right ordr^: so ye
have your purpose. If the very day be not found, take the nearest of your
table. Or by proportion the truth is given: which all by Eusa^ple following
shall plainly be declared.

Ensample.
The first day of January, I desire all the aforesaid: that is, the break of
the day: the very minute of the Sun rysinge: the length of the day, and
also of the night: the Sun going down: and the ^wilighte. I find on the
right hand of January, these nu^bres running down, 1, 10, 20, which declare
the first day, the tenthe day, and twentieth, of that month. Now to my
purpose, I require the break of the day etc. The first of Ianutrie, in the
Table, under that title, on the right hand of this figure 1. I see 5. hours,
and 54, minutes, that is, 6. of the clock wanting 6. minutes. The risinge of
the Sun in that order, is just at 8. as this figure 8. there declares, under
that title, in the row. The length of the day, 8. hours: the length of the
night, 16. hours: the Sun settinge is at 4: the twilight, at 6. and 6.
minutes. Even thus, for the tenth day, and also for the twentieth of that
month, in the rows according to their titles, in the head of my Table.

The entry of the is before omitted, to avoid in the Table, confusion, and so
muu^ the rather, because it sufficiently appears, in the general Calendar
folowinge.

How to work by proportion, when the day is not found.
I Would know all thaforsaid, the first day of January. I take for ensample the
brea^e of the day. Remember the first day of January, I did find the
break, to be at 5. of the clock, and 54, minutes: and the tenthe day I may
find, the break of the day to be at 5, and 44. minutes, that is, 10 minutes
less. I see now 10. days do give me 10. minutes less. I say therefore (by
proportion) the fyfthe day must give 5. minutes less then 5. hours 54.
minutes: which is 5. hours, 49. minutes, my request. Thus for all the other
titles.

To know the hour of the night, by the Moon: and that diversely.
THe hour of her rising known, as is opened, and a mark How by the Moon,
the night hour is found.
made for it, in any true fixed, or mouable Su^ne Dial, the hours and minutes
from that mark all the night after, are to be added to her rising. If more
then 12. surmount, only that above 12. shows the true hour and minute. If
at the rising she may not be seen, then by the Sun rising, in that very
sign (with the help of this Almanac) you may perceive what hour she would
note at her rising. Therefore from that mark count.

Another way.
When the Moon is at the full, look what hour her shadow shows in any
Dial, that is the hour of the night. After she be past the full 28. hours, ye
must add one hour: but before the full, pull one from that ye find in the
Dial. If twice 28, two hours etc. So have ye the hour of the night.

How the hour of the day, by right shadow, that is by any thing directly
standing up, is known: and by squyre shadow also.
FIrst it behooves you to have a staff, or any other thing, divided in twelve
equal parts: and each portion in 6. other: so are those last parts 1^.
minutes a piece. When ye list to have the hour, set up directly your divided
staff, on a plain level ground, or bourde etc. Note the just length of that
shadow, what parts and minutes it contains. With those, enter your month
in the peculiar Kale^dar following: beholdinge diligently under the name of
that month, the small enclosed Tables: considering well, which of those small
Tables are nerest unto your day: and that judge by the sign, or day there
noted. That table serves your purpose: where you must look out the parts
and minutes of the shadow before found, or nere unto it: under or over the
which the hour is set, before, or after noone. Note that two pryckes there
signify half a part more than is noted: one prick, half a part less. Here it
is also to be noted, that every Table has within, two rows of figures: the
upper is for the staf: the other for the squyre shadow, And whatsoever is
before said of the one, that same is meant here of the other, saving of the
compositio^. For the squyre must be divided from the inward angle, to the end
of one side, in 12. equal parts:
even so from that angle, the other side into 24. like parts, as this figure
shows. These to the wytty suffice.

The composition of an instrument, for the hour of the night: which is also a
perfect Dial for the day.
THe taking of an Altitude supposed, I could exactly in few (and that
without an instrument) satisfy. And for want of that knowledge, make upon a
plain bourde, or rather fine plate, a circle: the byggar the better: part it
into 360. porcions, thus.

The circle made, divide it in 6. not moving the compass: then every of them
in 6: and each of those last in 10: so have you 360. par tes. Then Character
it, beginning at the North thus, 10. 20. 30. etc. (as in the figure) toward
the East, ending with 360. Now lay a ruler on the center, even with some
divisions, drawinge through to the extremes of the circle, a line. Then cross
that with an other. These two must divide your circle in 4. equal parts: which
lines show the very East, West, North, and Southe, when by a Meridian or
square Dial, with a nedel rectified, they are placed. Now to end, set a small
streyghte wyre, a foot or more long, plumme vprighte in the center: and there
fasten it. Thus this instrumente is finisshed, to be fixed about your house,
equidista^t or leuil with the Horizon: having a nedell, if ye lift, in it,
trewlye to plage it, when and where you will. That it may be also a Dial, you
must pull streyghte lines from the center, to every fyfte^th part: decking
them with Characters in the inward margent, conveniently as ye see the figure.
Thus when the Sun shyneth, the shadow of the wyre, shows the true hour
etc. being trewly plaged, well placed, and rered, as follows.

A perfect instrument for the day, and the night.
The right reryng, and placing, of the Dial tofore mentioned.


LIft up handesomely, your instrumente or Dial, toward the North, in some
meet place, the side of a squyre lyenge on it, until the plummet and line,
centred in the extreme upper part of the other side of your squyre like long,
cut all that squyre side, which lies on your instrument, the fifth part only
except. Then move your instrument, hither and thither, this or that way, until
the shadow of the wyre fall upon the hour of the day, keeping diligently your
heyth before. Your Dial thus fixed declares, all the year long, the exact
hour and parts thereof. No Dial in truth excels this. Have in
remembrance, that this instrument must lie leuel, nothing at al rered, for the
hour of the night by sterre.

To get the exact hour by two sterres of the first light, with an instrument
or circle, tofore divided, first of me invented, calculated and practiced.
THe instrument, equidistantly set and plaged, as is declared in the
composition, ye ought to lay the edge of a ruler unto the The way to find the
hour of the night.
wyre, the other nether end touching the instrument, mouyng here and there,
still touching the wyre, until either Sterre does offer it self with that
edge, and that by the judgment of the eye. Then put down discretely your ruler
(ever touching the wyre) the hinder end not moved, observing how many parts
are cut from the North, to the edge of the ruler. Enter with them the pe culiar
Calendar following: seeking out your month, placed in the mids of every
Table: then the day of that month must be there found.

Note that, every table has on the sides, the days thus ordered 1. 5. 10. 15.
20. 25. 30. Know, that order or row of figures, which is right against, or
nerest your day, serves the turn. The nu^bre or parts before cut by the
Ruler, and now found in that row of your table, shows the precise hour. If it
be to littel, that hour over the head or under is not yet come: if contrary,
it is past.

How these two bright sterres, being of the first light are found: the one
called Aldebaran: the other Alramech.
THe best way is thus: The month and dae known, with By what means these
sterres are known.
the ^^ew hour of the night, enter your Table, consideringe that month and
day: observe what parts belong there to that Sterre and hour. Then resort
to your instrument, layeng the edge of your ruler, as many parts from the
North, Eastward, circu^spectlye lifting up that edge, close by the wyre: so
the fair Sterre shyneth even with that edge.

Or thus grossly.
ALdebaran is ever a meat rod, and more to the eye under the An other way to
find them
7. Sterres, and some what North of them, in the rising. Alramech is contrary
to him plaged, accompanied with a little dim Sterre, an ell from him, by the
judgment of the sight.

Now follows a brefe, pleasant, necessary, general Calendar: divided in two
parts. Vvherof the first contains six months, from January to June: the
second table the other six months, from Iulie to December. In this Calendar
are set forth the Festiual days: the entringe of the Sun into the Signs
celestial: the euel Days within every month etc.
NOte here, that the evil days in each month are all marked with a Colon,
that is a doble or twopricked point: some, that be more meanly euel, are
marked with one full point, set before them.

NOte also: that some Terms ensuing moveable Feasts, are mouea ble, and so
could have no certain place in the Calendar, for their beginning and ending.
Know therefore, that Faster Term always begins the^s. day after Easter,
rekening Faster day for one; and ends the Mondaye next after the Ascension
day.

Trinity Term begins the Friday next after Corpus Christi day: and ends
the VVednesdaye fourtennight after.

Michaelmasse Term begins the 9. or 10. day of October: and ends the 28.
or 29. of Nouembre.

Hilarie Term begins the 23. or 24. day of January: and ends the 12. or
13. day of February.

The first part of the general Calendar: from January to June. January.
February March. Days April. May. June.:A Circ^^. d d 1 g b Ph. lac. e:b e
Purifi. e 2 A c f c f f 3 b.d g:d g g 4 c e:A*:e A A 5 d f b f Epiph. b b 6 e.g
c g c c 7.f:d:d A:d d 8.g b e b e in e 9 A c f:c in:f f 10.b d.g d g g in 11 c
in e A Barna. e A A 12 d f in b in f Hilar. b b 13 e g c g c Valent. c 14 f A
d:A d:d 15 g:b.e b e:e 16:d c f:c:f f 17 b d g d g g 18 c e A e A:A 19 d f b f
b b 20.e:g c g c c 21:f A d A d d 22 g b.e b e e 23 A Georg. c f c f Mat. f 24
b d g Ioa^bap. d Co^. Pau. g g Annun. 25 c Marc. e A e.A A 26 d f b f.b b 27 e
g c g.c.c 28 f A d:A d 29 g b e P^. Pa. b e 30 A c f c f 31 d

The second part of the general Calendar: from Iulie to December. Iulie.
August. Septem. Days October. Nouem. December. g.c Pet. vin. f 1 A d Om. sa^. f A
d g 2 b e Om. any. g b e.A 3.c f A c f.b 4 d g b d g c 5 e.A c e Dog beg. A:d
6:f.b:d Nicol. f b:e 7 g c:e g c f Not. ina. 8 A d f Coce* ina. A d g 9 b e:g b
e A 10 c f A c f b 11 d g b d g c 12 e A c in e A d 13 f b in d f in b in e in
14 g in c e:g c f 15 A:d.f A d g 16.b e g b e Dog end A 17 c f.A c f b 18 d
Luc. g b d:g c 19 e:A c:e:A d 20 f b d f b.e Mathe. 21 g c e Tho. ap. g Ma. mag
c.f 22 A d.f A d g 23 b e g b e Barthe. A 24.c f A c Iac. apo. f b 25 d g b
Not. do. d g c 26 e A c Step^. e A d 27 f b d (...). (...). f b e 28 g Si.
Iud..c e Inno^en. g.c decol. Io. f Micba. 29 A.d f P. A.d g 30 b e Andr. g b e
31 c A

NOw ensues the needful, necessary, peculiar Calendar tofore mentioned: with
Instruments belonging thereto. The composition, and appliance of the said
Tables, with the pleasant use of them, ar before sufficiently, opened:
therefore farther declaration here, might seem superfluous.



Necessary instruments, to find exactly the hour of the day and night,
diverse ways, with help of this peculiar Calendar.
Dial
Squire.
Staff.


The peculiar Calendar.
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 108 123 142 165 190 214 60 71 From evening to midnight. 5
112 128 148 172 198 220 63 75 10 117 135 157 182 207 228 67 78 15 123 142 165
192 214 234 71 81 20 129 150 175 200 222 240 75 86 25 136 158 183 208 229 244
79 90 30 142 166 192 215 234 249 82 94 January has. xxxi. days. From midnight
unto day. 82 94 106 121 142 168 198 1 86 97 111 127 149 177 206 5 89 1^1 116
134 157 187 214 10 93 105 122 141 168 198 223 15 9^ 111 128 150 179 207 231 20
102 117 135 159 189 216 237 23 106 122 143 169 299 223 243 30 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8



6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 169 195 218 62 73 83 95 From evening to midnight. 5 176 201
223 64 75 86 99 10 185 109 230 69 79 90 103 15 192 215 235 71 82 94 107 20 200
222 240 75 86 98 112 25 207 228 244 78 89 102 117 30 February has. xxviii.
days. From midnight unto day. 10^ 124 146 174 203 226 1 112 129 152 180 209
231 5 117 135 161 190 216 238 10 122 143 168 198 224 243 15 128 1^0 180 207 231
248 20 134 158 188 214 236 252 25 30 1 2 3 4 5 6



7 8 9 10 11 12 1 59 70 81 93 105 120 From evening to midnight. 5 62 72 83 95
108 124 10 65 76 87 99 113 130 15 69 80 90 103 118 136 20 72 82 94 107 123 144
25 75 86 98 112 128 150 30 79 90 101 117 134 159 March has. xxxi. days. From
midnight unto day. 139 166 196 220 240 1 145 173 203 225 244 5 153 182 210 232
249 10 162 191 217 238 254 15 171 200 225 243 258 20 178 208 231 248 262 25 188
215 237 253 266 30 1 2 3 4 5 6



8 9 10 11 12 1 92 104 118 136 162 From evening to midnight. 5 94 106 122 143
170 10 98 111 127 150 178 15 101 116 134 158 188 20 105 122 141 168 198 25 111
126 149 177 206 30 116 133 157 186 214 Aprile has. xxx. days. From midnight
unto day. 191 218 238 254 1 199 224 243 257 5 208 230 247 261 10 214 236 252
265 15 223 242 256 269 20 229 247 261 273 25 236 251 265 276 30 1 2 3 4 5



8 9 10 11 12 1 117 134 159 189 216 From evening to midnight. 5 120 140 165 195
220 10 126 148 176 205 228 15 133 156 186 213 235 20 140 166 195 221 240 25 148
175 205 229 246 30 157 186 214 235 251 May has. xxxi. days. From midnight
unto day. 237 252 266 278 1 240 255 268 279 5 246 260 273 284 10 251 264 276
287 15 256 268 280 291 20 260 272 284 294 25 264 276 287 298 30 1 2 3 4 5



8 9 10 11 12 1 161 191 217 238 253 From evening to midnight. 5 169 200 225 243
258 10 180 209 231 248 262 15 190 216 237 253 266 20 200 225 243 258 270 25 209
232 249 262 274 30 217 238 253 267 278 June has. xxx. days. From midnight
unto day. 267 278 289 300 1 270 280 292 303 5 274 285 296 307 (...). 10 278
288 299 15 281 292 303 20 285 296 308 25 289 300 82 30 1 2 3 4 5



8 9 10 11 12 1 218 219 254 267 278 From evening to midnight. 5 226 243 258 270
281 10 231 249 262 274 285 15 238 253 267 278 289 20 243 258 270 282 292 25 249
262 274 285 296 30 253 266 277 288 299 July has. xxxi. days. From midnight
unto day. 290 300 82 1 292 308 86 5 296 78 89 10 300 82 93 15 303 85 97 20 307
89 100 25 81 93 105 30 1 2 3 4 5



8 9 10 11 12 1 255 267 279 290 301 Fr(...) ^^ening to midnight. 5 259 271 281
292 304 10 262 274 285 297 78 15 266 277 288 299 81 20 269 280 291 303 85 25
273 284 295 306 8^ 30 278 287 298 80 92 August has. xxxi. days. From midnight
unto day. 83 94 106 121 138 1 86 97 111 125 144 5 89 101 115 131 151 10 93 105
119 136 158 15 96 109 124 142 165 20 99 113 129 148 173 25 104 11^ 135 156 181
30 1 2 3 4 5



7 8 9 10 11 12 1 266 278 289 299 82 93 From evening to midnight. 5 269 280 291
303 84 96 10 273 284 294 306 88 100 15 276 286 298 80 92 104 20 279 290 302 83
94 107 25 283 294 305 87 99 114 30 287 297 79 90 102 117 September has. xxx.
days. From midnight unto day. 105 119 136 159 184 1 109 123 142 165 191 5 113
129 149 173 199 10 117 135 155 180 205 15 122 140 163 189 212 20 128 147 171
197 219 25 133 153 179 204 225 30 1 2 3 4 5 6



6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 276 287 298 80 91 103 117 From evening to midnight. 5 279
290 301 82 94 106 121 10 283 293 304 86 98 111 126 15 285 67 78 89 102 115 132
20 289 70 81 93 106 120 138 25 292 74 85 97 111 125 145 30 296 78 88 101 115
131 151 October has. xxxi. days. From midnight unto day. 133 155 180 205 227
243 1 138 161 186 211 231 247 5 146 169 195 218 236 251 10 152 177 202 224 242
256 15 159 185 210 230 246 260 20 168 193 216 235 250 263 25 176 201 223 241
255 267 30 1 2 3 4 5 6 7



5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 289 297 80 90 103 117 134 155 From evening to midnight. 5
290 301 82 94 106 121 138 162 10 293 305 87 98 111 126 146 169 15 297 79 90 102
117 133 154 180 20 301 83 94 107 122 137 163 188 25 305 87 99 113 128 147 173
198 30 80 91 104 118 134 156 180 207 November has. xxx. days. From midnight
unto day. 180 205 226 243 257 269 280 292 1 186 211 231 247 260 272 284 295 5
196 218 237 252 264 276 287 000 10 204 225 243 256 268 280 291 000 15 212 232
248 261 273 284 295 000 20 220 138 253 266 277 288 127 000 25 228 244 258 269
280 292 132 000 30 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8



5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 81 92 105 119 135 156 183 208 From evening to midnight. 5
84 96 109 123 143 165 192 215 10 88 100 114 130 150 175 201 223 15 93 105 120
135 159 185 210 230 20 98 111 126 145 168 195 218 236 25 102 116 132 153 177
203 225 242 30 106 121 138 162 186 211 231 247 December has. xxxi. days. From
midnight unto day. 229 245 258 271 282 292 135 1 234 249 263 274 286 123 143 5
240 255 267 278 288 129 150 10 246 260 271 283 293 137 162 15 251 264 275 286
124 146 174 20 256 268 279 291 131 153 183 25 261 272 284 295 138 165 195 30 1
2 3 4 5 6 7




