Of English Dogs, the diversities, the names, the natures, and the
properties.

A Short Treatise written in latin by Johannes Caius of late memory, Doctor
of Physic in the University of Cambridge; And newly drawn into English by
Abraham Fleming Student.

Natura etiam in brutis vem ostendit suam. Seen and allowed.

Imprinted at London by Rychard Iohnes, and are to be sold over against S.
Sepulchers Church without Newgate. 1576.

A Prosopopoicall speech of the Book.
SOme tell of stars th'influence strange,
Some tell of birds which fly in the air,
Some tell of beasts on land which raunge,
Some tell of fish in rivers fair,
Some tell of serpents sundry sorts,
Some tell of plants the full effect,
Of English dogs I sound reports,
Their names and natures I detect,
My forhed is but baulde and bare:
But yet my bod'ys beutifull,
For pleasant flowers in me there are,
And not so fine as plentiful:
And though my garden plot so green,
Of dogs receive the trampling feet,
Yet is it swept and kept full cleene,
So that it yeeldes a savor sweet.
Ab. Fle.
DOCTISSIMO VIRO, ET Patrono suo singulari D. Perne, Eliensis ecclesiae
Cathedralis dignissimo Decano, Abrahamus Flemingus, (...).
SCripsit non multis abhinc annis (optime Patron) et non impolite scripsit,
vir omnibus optimarum literarum remis instructissimus, de doctorum grege non
male meritus, tuae dignitati familiaritatis nexu coniunctissim^s, clarissimum
Cantabrigiensis academiae lumen, ge^ma, et gloria, Johannes Caius, ad Conradum
Gesnerum summum suum, hominem peritissimum, indagatorem rerum reconditarum
sagacissimum, pulcherrimaque historiarum naturalium panoplia exornatu^,
epitomen de canibus Britannicis non tam breuem quam elegantem, et vtilem,
epitomen inquam varijs variorum experimentorum argumentis concinnatam: in cuius
titulum cu^ forte incidissem, et nouitate rei nonnihil delectarer,
interpretationem Anglicam aggressus sum. Postquam vero finem penso imposuissem,
repentina quaedam de opusculi dedicatione cogitatio oboriebatur, ta^demque post
multas multarum rerum iactationes, beneficiorum tuorum (Ornatissime vir) vnica
recordatio, instar rutilantis stellae, quae radiorum splendore quaslibet
caliginosas teterrimae obliuionis nebulas dissipat, et memoriae serenitatem,
plusqua^ solarem, inducit, mihi illuxit: nec no^ officij ratio quae
funestissimis insensae fortunae fulminibus conquassata, lacerata and conuulsa,
pene perierat, fractas vires multumque debilitatas colligebat, pristinum robur
recuperauit, tandemque aliquando ex Lethea illa palude neruose emergebat, atque
eluctata est. Qua^ voragine^ simulatque euaserat, sic effloruit, adeoque
increuit, vt vnamquamque animi mei cellula^ in sui ditionem atque imperij
amplitudinem raperet. Nune vero in contemplatione meritorum tuorum versari non
desino, quorum magnitudinem nescio an tam tenui et leuidensi orationis filo
possim circumscribere: Hoc, Aedepol, me non mediocriter mouet, non leuiter
torquet, non languide pungit. Est praeterea alia causa quae mihi scrupulum
inijcir, et quodammodo exulcerat, ingrati nempe animi suspicio a qua, tanquam
ab aliqua Lernaea Hydra, pedibus (vt aiunt) Achilleis semper fugi, et tame^
valde pertimesco ne officij mora et procrastinatio (vt ita dicam) obscaenam
securitatis labem nomini meo inurat, eoque magis expauesco quod peruulgatum
illud atque decantatum poetae carmen memoriae occurrebat.

Dedecus est semper sumere nilque dare.
Sed (Ornatissime vir) quemadmodu^ metus illius mali me magnopore affligebat
atque fodicabat, ita spes alterius boni, nempe humanitatis tuae, qua caeteris
multis interuallis praeluxeris, erigit suffulcitque: Ea etiam spes alma et
opima iubet et hortatur aliquod quale quale sit, officij specimen cum
allacritate animi prodere. Hisce itaque persuasionibus victus me morigerum
praebui, absolutamque de canibus Britannicis interpretatione^ Anglicam, tibi
potissimum vtpote patrono singulari et vnico Maecenati dedicanda^ pro^osui: non
quod tam ieiuno et exili munere immensum meritorum tuorum mare metiri machiner,
non quod religiosas aures sacratasque, prophanae paginae explicatione obtundere
cupiam, nec quod nugatorijs friuolisque narrationibus te delectari arbitrer cum
in diuinioribus excercitationibus totus sis: sed potius (cedat sides dicto)
quod insignis ille egregiusque liberalium artium, et praecipue medicae
facultatis princeps (qui hoc opusculum contexuit) ita viguit dum vixerat
adeoque inclaruit, vt haud scio (vt ingenue fatear quod sentio) an post funera
parem sibi superstitem reliquerit. Deinde quod hunc libellum summo studio et
industria elaboratum in transmarinas regiones miserat, ad hominem omni
literarum genere, et praesertim occultaru^ rerum cognitione, quae intimis
naturae visceribus et medullis insederat (O ingeniu^ niueo lapillo dignu^)
cuius difficultates Laberyntheis anfractibus flexuo sisque recessibus impeditas
perserutari and iuuestigare (deus bone, quam inge^s labor, quam infinitum
opus,) excultum, Conradum Gesnerum scriberet, quae tantam gratiam conciliauit
vt non solum amicissimo ofculo exciperet, sed etiam studiose lectitaret,
accurate vteretur, inexhaustis denique viribus, tanquam perspicacissimus draco
vellus aureum, et oculis plusquam aquilinis custodiret, Postremo que madmodum
hanc epitomen a viro vere docto ad virum summa nominis celebritate decoratum
scrip^am fuisse accepimus, ita eandem ipsam (pro titulo Britannico) Brita^nico
sermon, licet ineleganti, vsitata and populari, ab esuriente Rhetore donatam,
tuis (eruditissime vir) manibus commendo vt tuo sub patrocino in has at que
illas regionis nostrae parts intrepide proficiscatur: obtestorque vt hunc
libellum, humilem et obscuram inscriptionem gerentem, argumentum nouum et
antehaec non auditum complectientem, ab omni tamen Sybaritica obscaenitate
remotissimum, aequi bonique consulas.

Tuae dignitati deditissimus Abrahamus Flemingus.

To the well disposed Reader.
AS every manifest effect proceeds from some certain cause, so the penning of
this present abridgement (gentle and courteous reader) issued from a special
occasion. For Conradus Gesnerus, a man whiles he lived, of incomparable
knowledge, and manyfold experience, being never satisfied with the sweet sap
of understanding, requested Johannes Caius a profound clarke and a rauennous
deuourer of learning (to his praise be it spoken though the language be
somewhat homely) to write a breuiary or short treatise of such dogs as were
engendered within the borders of England: To the contentation of whose mind and
the utter accomplishement of whose desire, Caius spared no study, (for the
acquaintance which was between them, as it was confirmed by continuance, and
established upon vnfainednes, so was it sealed with virtue and honesty)
withdrew himself from no labor, repined at no pains, forsook no travail,
refused no endeavor, finally pretermitted no opportunity or circumstaunce which
seemed pertinent and requisite to the performance of this little libell. In the
whole discourse whereof, the book, to consider the substance, being but a
pamphlet or skantling, the argument not so fine and affected, and yet the
doctrine very profitable and necessary, he uses such a smoothe and comely
style, and tyeth his invention to such methodicall and orderly proceedings, as
the elegantnes and neatness of his Latin phrase, (being pure, perfect, and
unmingled) makes the matter which of it self is very base and clubbishe, to
appear (shall I say tolerable) nay rather commendable and effectual. The
sundry sorts of English dogs he discovers so evidently, their natures he
rippeth up so apparently, their manners he opens so manifestly, their
qualities he declares so skilfully, their proportions he painteth out so
perfectly, their colors he describes so artificially, and knytteth all these
in such shortness and breuity, that the mouth of th'aduersary must needs
confess and give sentence that commendation ought to be his reward, and
praise his deserved pension. An ignorant man would never have been drawn
into this opinion, to think that there had been in England such variety and
choice of dogs, in all respects (not only for name but also for quality)
so diverse and unlike: But what cannot learning attain? what cannot the kay of
knowledge open? what cannot the lamp of understanding lighten? what secrets
cannot discretion detect? finally what cannot experience comprehend? what buge
heaps of histories has Gesnerus hourded up in volumes of a large syze? Fishes
in floudes, Cattle on land, Birds in the air, how has he sifted them by
there natural differences? how closely and in how narrow a compass has he
couched mighty and monstrous beasts, in bygnesse like mountains, the books
themselves being lesser then Molehilles. The life of this man was not so great
a restority of comfort, as his death was an ulcer or wound of sorrow: the loss
of whom Caius lamented, not so much as he was his faithful friend, as for
that he was a famous Philosopher, and yet the former reason (being, in very
deed, vehement and forceable) did stinge him with more grief, then he
peradventure was willing to disclose. And though death be counted terrible for
the time, and consequently unhappy, yet Caius aduoucheth the death of Gesner
most blessed, luckie, and fortunate, as in his Book entitled, De libris
proprijs, appears. But of these two Eagles sufficient is spoken as I suppose,
and yet little enough in consideration of their dignity and worthiness.
Nevertheless little or mickle, something or nothing, substance or shadow take
all in good part, my meaning is by a few words to win credit to this work,
not so much for mine own English Translation as for the singular commendation
of them, challenged of duty and desert. Wherefore gentle Reader I commit them
to thy memory, and their books to thy courteous censure. They were both
learned men, and painful practitioners in their professions, so much the more
therefore are their works worthy estimation, I would it were in me to advance
them as I wish, the worst (and yet both, no doubt, excellent) has deserved a
monument of immortality. Well there is no more to be added but this, that as
the translation of this book was attempted, finished, and published of
goodwill (not only to minister pleasure, as to afford profit) so it is my
desire and request that my labor therein employed may be acceptable, as I hope
it shall be to men of indifferent judgment. As for such as shall snarr and
snatch at the English abridgement, and tear the Translatour, being absent,
with the teeth of spightfull envy, I conclude in breuity there eloquence is
but currishe, if I serve in their meat with wrong sauce, ascribe it not to
unskillfulness in coquery, but to ignorance in their diet, for as the Poet
says. Non satis est ars sola coquo, seruire palato:
Nanque coquus domini debet habere gulam:
It is not enough that a cook understand,
Except his Lords stomach he hold in his hand.


To wind up all in a watcheworde I say no more. But do well, and Farewell.

His and his Friends, Abraham Fleming.

The first Section of this discourse.
The Preamble or entrance, into this treatise.
I Wrote unto you ( well beloved friend Gesner) not many years past, a
manifold history, containing the diverse forms and figures of Beasts,
Birds, and Fyshes, the sundry shapes of of plants, and the fashions of
Herbs, etc.

I wrote moreover, unto you severally, a certain abridgement of Dogs, which
in your discourse upon the fourmes of Beasts in the second order of mylde and
tameable Beasts, where you make mention of Scottishe Dogs, and in the
wynding up of your Letter written and directed to Doctor Turner, comprehending
a Catalogue or rehersall of your books not yet extant, you promised to set
forth in print, an^ openly to publishe in the face of the world among such
your works as are not yet come abroad to light and sight. But, because
certain circumstaunces were wanting in my breuiary of English Dogs (as
seemed unto me) I stayed the publication of the same, making promise to send
another abroad, which might be committed to the hands, the eyes, the ears,
the minds, and the judgments of the Readers. Wherefore that I might perform
that preciselye, which I promised solempnly, accomplish my determination, and
satisfy your expectacion: which art a man desirous and capeable of all kind of
knowledge, and very earnest to be acquain^ed with all experimentes: I will
express and declare in due order, the grand and general kind of English
Dogs, the difference of them, the use, the propertyes, and the diverse
natures of the same, making a tripartite division in this sort and manner.

All English Dogs be either of,
A gentle kind, serving the game. A homely kind, apt for sundry necessary
uses. A currishe kind, meet for many toys.
Of these three sorts or kinds so mean I to entreat, that the first in the
first place, the last in the last room, and the myddle sort in the middle
seat be handled. I call the^ universally all by the name of English dogs, as
well because England only, as it has in it English dogs, so it is not without
Scottishe, as also for that we are more inclined and delighted with the noble
game of hunting, for we Englishmen are adicted and given to that exercise, and
painful pastime of pleasure, as well for the plenty of flesh which our
Parkes and Forests do foster, as also for the opportunity and convenient
leisure which we obtain, both which, the Scotts want. Wherefore seeing that
the whole estate of kindly hunting consists principally, In these two points,
In chasing the beast that is in hunting In taking the bird that is in fowleing


It is necessary and requisite to understand, that there are two sorts of
Dogs by whose means, the feats within specifyed are wrought, and these
practyses of actiuitie cunningly and curiously compassed, Two kinds of Dogs
One which rouseth the beast and continues the chase. Another which springs
the bird and bewrays the flight by pursuit,


Both which kinds are termed of the Latins by one common name that is, Canes
Venatici, hunting dogs. But because we English men make a difference
between hunting and fowleling, for that they are called by these several
words, Venatio, and Aucupium, so they term the Dogs whom they use in these
sundry games by diverse names, as those which serve for the beast, are called
Venatici, the other which are used for the foul are called Aucupatorij, The
first kind called Venatici I divide into five sorts,
The first in perfect smelling excels. The second in quick spying
excels. The third in swiftness and quickness. excels. The fourth in
smelling and nymblenesse. excels. The fifte in subtlety and deceitfulness,
excels.


Of the Dog called a Harier, in Latin Leuerarius.
THat kind of Dog whom nature has endued with the virtue of smelling, whose
property it is to use a lustines, a readiness, and a couragiousnes in hunting,
and draws into his nostrells the air or sent of the beast pursued and
followed, we call by this word Sagax, the Grecians by this word (...) of
tracing or chasing by ye foot, or (...), of the nostrells, which be the
instruments of smelling. We may know these kind of Dogs by their long,
large, and bagging lips, by their hanging ears, reachyng down both sides of
their chappes, and by the indifferent and measurable proportion of their
making. This sort of Dogs we call Leuerarios Hariers, that I may comprise the
whole number of them in certain specialties, and apply to them their proper
and peculier names, for so much as they cannot all be reduced and brought under
one sort, considering both the sundry uses of them, and the difference of
their service whereto they be appointed.

Some for
The Hare Some for one thing and some for another. The Fox Some for one thing
and some for another. The Wolf Some for one thing and some for another. The
Heart Some for one thing and some for another. The Bucke Some for one thing and
some for another. The Badger Some for one thing and some for another. The Otter
Some for one thing and some for another. The Polcat Some for one thing and some
for another. The Lobster Some for one thing and some for another. The Weasell
Some for one thing and some for another. The Conny. etc. Some for one thing and
some for another.
As for the Conny, whom we have lastly set down, we use not to hunt, but
rather to take it, sometime with the net sometime with a ferret, and thus
every several sort is notable and excellent in his natural quality and
appointed practice. Among these sundry sorts, there be some which are apt to
hunt two diverse beasts, as the Fox otherwhiles, and other whiles the Hare, but
they hunt not with such towardnes and good luck after them, as they do that
whereunto nature has formed and framed them, not only in external
composition and making, but also in inward faculties and conditions, for they
swerve oftentimes, and do otherwise then they should.

Of the Dog called a Terrar, in Latin Terrarius.
ANother sort there is which hunteth the Fox and the Badger or Greye only,
whom we call Terrars, because they (after the manner and custom of ferrets in
searching for Connyes) creep into the ground, and by that means make
afraid, nyppe, and byte the Fox and the Badger in such sort, that either they
tear them in pieces with their teeth being in the bosom of the earth, or else
hayle and pull them perforce out of their lurking angles, dark dongeons, and
close caves, or at the least through conceived fear, drive them out of their
hollow harbors, in so much that they are compelled to prepare speedy slight,
and being desirous of the next (albeit not the safest) refuge, are otherwise
taken and intrapped with snares and nets laid over holes to the same
purpose. But these be the least in that kind called Sagax.

Of the Dog called a Bloudhounde in Latin Sanguinarius.
THe greater sort which serve to hunt, having lips of a large syze, and ears
of no small lenght, do, not only chase the beast whiles it lives, (as the
other do of whom mention above is made) but being dead also by any manner of
casualtie, make recourse to the place where it lies, having in this point an
a^ured and infallible guide, namely, the sent and savor of the blood
sprinkled here and there upon the ground. For whether the beast being
wounded, does notwithstanding enjoy life, and escapes the hands of the
huntesman, or whether the said beast being slain is conuayed ^^enly out of the
parcke (so that there be some signification of blood shed) these Dogs with no
less facility and easiness, then auiditie and greediness can disclose and
bewray the same by smelling, applying to their pursuit, agilitie and
nimblenesse, without tediousness, for which consideration, of a ^inguler
specialtie they deserved to be called Sangumarij, blood ^ound^, And albeit
peradventure it may chance, (As whether it chances shaldome or sometime I am
ignorant) that a piece of flesh ^e ^^^atily stolen and cunningly conuayed away
with such prouisos and proc^^eats, as thereby all app^raunce of blood is either
prevented, excluded, or concealed, yet these kind of dogs by a certain
direction of an inward assured notyce and privy mar^ke, pursue the deed
dooers, through long lanes, crooked reaches, and weary ways, without wandering
awry out of the limits of the land whereon these desperate purloyners prepared
their speedy passage. Yea, the natures of these Dogs is such, and so
effectual is their foresight, that they ca^ bewray, separate, and pycke them
out from among an infinite multitude and an innumerable company, creep they
never so far into the thickest thronge, they will find him out
notwithstanding he lie hidden in wild woods, in close and ouergrowen groves,
and lurcke in hollow holes apt to harbor such ungracious guestes. Moreover,
although they should pass over the water, thinking thereby to avoid the
pursuit of the hounds, yet will not these Dogs give over their attempt, but
presuming to swym through the stream, persevere in their pursuit, and when they
be arrived and gotten the further bancke, they hunt up and down, to and fro
run they, from place to place shift they, until they have attained to that
plot of ground where they passed over. And this is their practice, if perdie
they cannot at ye first time smelling, find out the way which the deed dooers
took to escape. So at length get they that by art, cunning, and diligent
endeavor, which by fortune and luck they cannot otherwise overcome. In so much
as it seems worthily and wisely written by Aelianus in his sixte Book, and
xxvix. Chapter. (...) to be as it were naturally distilled and powered into
these kind of Dogs. For they will not pause or breath from their pursuit
until such time as they be apprehended and taken which committed the fact.
The owners of such hounds use to keep them in close and dark channells in
the day time, and let them lose at liberty in the night season, to the intent
that they might with more courage and boldness practice to follow the fellon
in the evening and solitary hours of darkness, when such ill disposed
varlots are principally purposed to play their impudent pageants, and imprudent
pranckes. These hounds (upon whom this present portion of our treatise
runs) when they are to follow such fellows as we have before rehearsed, use
not that liberty to raunge at will, which they have otherwise when they are in
game, (except upon necessary occasion whereon depends an urgent and effectual
persuasion) when such purloy^^^s make speedy way in slight^ but being
restrained and dr^wne back from running at randon with the leasse, the end
whereof the owner holding in his hand is led, guyded, and directed with such
swiftness and slownesse (whether he go on foot, or whether be ride on
horseback) as he himself in heart would wish for the more easy apprehension
of these venturous varlots. In the borders of England and Scotland, (the often
and accustomed stealing of cattle so procuring) these kind of Dogs are very
much used and they are taught and trained up first of all to hunt cattle as
well of the smaller as of the greater grouth and afterward (that quality
relinquished and left) they are learned to pursue such pestilent persons as
plant their pleasure in such practices of purloyning as we have already
declared. Of this kind there is none that takes the water naturally, except
it please you so to suppose of them which follow the Otter, which sometimes
haunte the land, and sometime uses the water. And yet nevertheless all the
kind of them boiling and broyling with greedy desire of the pray which by
swymming passes through river and flood, plung amyds the water, and pass the
stream with their pawes^ But this property proceeds from an earnest desire
wherewith they be inflamed, rather then from any inclination issuyng from the
ordinance and appointment of nature. And albeit some of this sort in English be
called Brache, in Scottishe Rache, the cause hereof rests in the she sex and
not in the general kind. For we English men call bytches, belonging to the
hunting kind of Dogs, by the term above mentioned. To be short it is
proper to the nature of ho^nors, some to keep silence in hunting until such
time as there is (...) offered. Othersome so (...) as they smell out the place
where the beast ^urck^th, so bewray it immediately by their importunate
barcking, notwithstanding it be far at many furlungs cowchyng close in his
cabbyn. And these Dogs the younger they be, the more wantonly bark they, and
the more liberally, yet, oftimes without necessity, so that in them, by reason
of their young years and want of practice, small certainty is to be reposed.
For continaunce of time, and experience in game, ministers to these hounds
not only cunning in running, but also (as in the rest) an assured foresight
what is to be done, principally, being acquainted with their masters watch
words, either in reuoking ^ imboldening them to serve the game.

Of the Dog called the Gasehounde, in Latin Agasaeus.
THis kind of Dog which pursues by the eye, preuayleth little, or never a
whit, by any benefit of the nose that is by smelling, but excels in
perspicuitie and sharpness of sight altogether, by the virtue whereof, being
singular and notable, it hunteth the Fox and in the Hare. This Dog will
^h^e^e and separate any beast from among a great flock or hea^de, and such a
one will it take by election as is not lancke, lean and hollow, but well
spread, smoothe, full, fat, and round, it follows by the direction of the
eyesight, which in deed is clear, constant, and not uncertain, if a beast be
wounded and gone all ^ay this Dog ^eeketh after it by the stedfastnes of the
eye, if it chance peradventure to return and be mingled with the residue of
the flock, this Dog spyeth it out by the virtue of his eye, leaving the rest
of the cattle untouched, and after he has set sure sight upon it he
seperateth it from among the company and having so done never cease until he
have wearyed the Beast to death. Our country men call this dog Agasaeum, A
gasehounde because the beams of his sight are so steadfastly settled and
immovably fastened. These Dogs are much and usually occupied in the Northern
parts of England more then in the Southern parts, and in ^caldy lands rather
then in bushy and woody places, horsemen use them more then footmen to
the intent that they might provoke their horses to a swift galloppe (wherewith
they are more delighted then with the pray it self) and that they might
accustom their horse to leap over hedges and ditches, without stop or
stumble, without harm or hassard, without doubt or danger, and so escape with
safeguard of life. And to the end that the ryders themselves when necessity so
constrained, and the fear of further mischief enforced, might save themselves
vndamnifyed, and prevent each perilous tempest by preparing speedy flight, or
else by swift pursuit made upon their enimyes, might both overtake them,
encounter with them, and make a slaughter of them accordingly. But if it
fortune so at any time that this Dog take a wrong way, the master making some
usual sign and familiar token, he returns forthwith, and takes the right
and ready trace, beginning his chase a fresh, and with a clear voice, and a
swift foot follows the game with as much courage and nimblenesse as he he
did at the first.

Of the Dog called the Grehounde, in Latin Leporarius.
THere is another kind of Dog which for his incredible swiftness is called
Leporarius a Grehounde, because the principal service of them depends and
consists in starting and hunting the hare, which Dogs likewise are endued
with no less strength then lightness in maintenance of the game, in serving the
chase, in taking the Bucke, the Heart, the Dowe, the Fox, and other beasts of
semblable kind ordained for the game of hunting. But more or less, each one
according to the measure and proportion of their desire, and as might and
ability of their bodies will permit and suffer. For it is a spare and bare
kind of Dog, (of flesh but not of bone) some are of a greater sort, and
some of a lesser, some are smooth skynned, and some are curled, the bigger
therefore are appointed to hunt the bigger beasts, and the smaller serve to hunt
the smaller accordingly. The nature of these dogs I find to be wonderful by
ye testimonial of histories. For, as John Froisart the Historyographer in his
4. lib. reports. A Grehound of King Richard, the second yt wore the Crown,
and bare the Scepter of the Realm of England, never knowing any man, beside
the kings person, when Henry Duke of Lancaster came to the castle of Flinte to
take King Richard. The Dog forsaking his former Lord and master came to Duke
Henry, fawned upon him with such resemblaunces of goodwyll and conceived
affection, as he favored King Richard before: he followed the Duke, and
utterly left the King. So that by these manifest circumstances a man might
judge this Dog to have been lightened with the lamp of foreknowledge and
understanding, touching his old masters miseryes to come, and unhappiness nigh
at hand, which King Richard himself evidently perceived, accounting this
deed of his Dog a Prophecy of his overthrow.

Of the Dog called the Leuiner, or Lyemmer in Latin Lorarius.
ANother sort of dogs be there, in smelling singular, and in swiftness
incomparable. This is (as it were) a myddle kind betwixt the Harier and the
Grehounde, as well for his kind, as for the frame of his body. And it is
called in latin Leuinarius, a Leuitate, of lyghtnesse, and therefore may well
be called a lyghthounde, it is also called by this word Lorarius, a Loro,
wherewith it is led. This Dog for the excellency of his conditions, namely
smelling and swift running, does follow the game with more eagernes, and
takes the pray with a jolly quicknes.

Of the Dog called a Tumbler, in Latin Vertagus.
THis sort of Dogs, which compasses all by crafts, frauds, subtelties and
deceiptes, we English men call Tumblers, because in hunting they turn and
tumble, winding their bodies about in circle wise, and then fearcely and
violently venturing upon the beast, does soddenly gripe it, at the very
entrance and mouth of their receptacles, or closets before they can recover
means, to save and succor themselves. This dog uses another craft and
subteltie, namely, when he runs into a warren, or fetteth a course about a
connyburrough, he huntes not after them, he frayes them not by barcking, he
makes no countenance or shadow of hatred against them, but dissembling
friendship, and pretending favor, passes by with silence and quietness,
marking and noting their holes diligently, wherein (I warrant you) he will not
be ouershot nor deceived. When he comes to the place where Connyes be, of a
certainty, he cowcheth down close with his belly the ground, Provided always
by his skill and polisie, that ye the wind be never with him but against him
in such an enterprise. And that the Connyes spy him not where he lurcketh. By
which means he obtains the sent and savor of the Connyes, carried toward
him with the wind and the ayre^ either going to their holes, or coming out,
either passing this way, or running that way, and so provides by his
circumspection, that the selly simple Conny is debarred quite from his hole
(which is the haven of their hope and the harbor of their health) and
fraudulently circumuented and taken, before they can get the advantage of their
hole. Thus having caught his pray he earryeth it s^^edily to his Master,
waiting his Dogs return in some convenient lurcking corner. These Dogs are
somewhat lesser then the hounds, and they be lancker and leaner, beside that
they be somewhat prick eared. A man that shall mark the form and fashion of
their bodies, may well call them mungrell Grehoundes if they were somewhat
bigger. But notwithstanding they counteruaile not the Grehound in greatness, yet
will he take in one days space as many Connyes as shall arise to as big a
burden, and as heavy a load as a horse can carry, for deceit and guile is
the instrument whereby he makes this spoil, which pernicious properties supply
the places of more commendable qualities.

Of the Dog called the theeuishe Dog in Latin Canis furax.
THe like to that whom we have rehearsed, is the theeuishe Dog, which at the
mandate and bydding of his master fleereth and leereth abroad in the night,
hunting Connyes by the air, which is leuened with their savor and conveyed to
the sense of smelling by the means of the wind blowing toward him. During
all which space of his hunting he will not barcke, least he should be
prejudicial to his own advantage. And thus watches and snatcheth up in
course as many Connyes as his Master will suffer him, and bears them to his
Masters standing. The farmers of the country and vplandishe dwellers, call
this kind of Dog a night curre, because he hunteth in the dark. But let
thus much seem sufficient for Dogs which serve the game and disport of
hunting.

A Dial pertaining to the first Section.
Dogs serving ye pastime of hunting beasts. are divided into Hariers In
Latin called Venatici. Terrars In Latin called Venatici. Bloudhounds In
Latin called Venatici. Gasehounds In Latin called Venatici. Grehounds In
Latin called Venatici. Leuiners or Lyemmers In Latin called Venatici.
Tumblers In Latin called Venatici. Stealers. In Latin called Venatici.


The second Section of this discourse.
Of gentle Dogs serving the hawk, and first of the Spaniell, called in
Latin Hispaniolus.
SVch Dogs as serve for fowling, I think convenient and requisite to place
in this second Section of this treatise. These are also to be reckoned and
accounted in the number of the dogs which come of a gentle kind, and of those
which serve for fowling.

There be two sorts.
The first finds game on the land. The other finds game on the water.
Such as delight on the land, play their parts, either by swiftness of foot,
or by often questing, to search out and to spring the bird for further hope of
advantage, or else by some secret sign and privy token bewray the place
where they fall.

The first kind of such serve The Hawk, The second, The net, or, train,
The first kind have no peculier names assigned unto them, save only that
they be denominated after the bird which by natural appointment he is allotted
to take, for the which consideration.

Some be called Dogs,
For the Falcon and such like, The Phesant and such like, The Partridge and
such like,
The common sort of people call them by one general word, namely Spaniells. As
though these kind of Dogs came originally and first of all out of Spain.
The most part of their skynnes are white, and if they be marcked with any
spots, they are commonly red, and somewhat great therewithal, the hears not
growing in such thickness but that the mixture of them may easily be
perceived. Othersome of them be reddishe and blackishe, but of that sort there
be but a very few. There is also at this day among us a new kind of dog
brought out of France (for we English men are maruailous greedy gaping
gluttons after novelties, and covetous coruorauntes of things that be seldom,
rare, strange, and hard to get.) And they be speckled all over with white and
black, which mingled colors incline to a marble blewe, which bewtifyeth their
skins and affoordeth a seemly show of comlynesse. These are called French
dogs as is above declared already.

The Dog called the Setter, in Latin Index.
ANother sort of Dogs be there, serviceable for fowling, making no noise
either with foot or with tongue, whiles they follow the game. These attend
diligently upon their Master and frame their conditions to such beckes,
motions, and gestures, as it shall please him to exhibit and make, either
going forward, drawing backward, inclining to the right hand, or yealding
toward the lest, (In making mention of fowls, my meaning is of the Partridge
and the Quail) when he has found the bird, he keeps sure and fast
silence, he stays his steps and will proceed no further, and with a close,
covert, watching eye, lays his belly to the ground and so creeps forward
like a worm. When he approaches near to the place where the bird is, he
lays him down, and with a marcke of his paws betrayeth the place of the
birds last abode, whereby it is supposed that this kind of dog is called
Index, Setter, being in deed a name most consonant and agreeable to his
quality. The place being known by the means of the dog, the fowler
immediately opens and spreedeth his net, intending to take them, which being
done the dog at the accustomed beck or usual sign of his Master ryseth up
by and by, and draws nearer to the foul that by his presence they might be
the authors of their own insnaring, and be ready entangled in the prepared
net, which conning and artificial endeavor in a dog (being a creature
domestical or household servant brought up at home with offalls of the
trencher and fragments of victuals,) is not much so be maruailed at, seeing
that a Hare (being a wild and skippishe beast) was seen in England to the
astonishment of the beholders, in the year of our Lord God, 1564. not only
dancing in measure, but playing with his former feet upon a tabberet, and
observing just number of strokes (as a practicioner in that art) besides that
nipping and pinching a dog with his teeth and claws, and cruelly thumping
him with ye force of his feet. This is no trumpery tale, nor trifling toye (as
I imagine) and therefore not unworthy to be reported, for I reckon it a
requital of my travail, not to drown in the seas of silence any special
thing, wherein the providence and effectual working of nature is to be pondered.

Of the Dog called the water Spaniell, or finder in Latin Aquaticus s^u
Inquisitor.
THat kind of Dog whose service is required in fowling upon the water,
partly through a natural towardness, and partly by diligent teaching, is
endued with that property. This sort is somewhat big, and of a measurable
greatness, having long, rough, and curled hear, not obtained by extraordinary
trades, but given by natures appointment, yet nevertheless (friend Gesner) I
have described and set him out in this manner, namely powlde and notted from the
shoulders to the hinder most legs, and to the end of his tail, which I did
for use and customs cause, that being as it were made somewhat bare and naked,
by shearing of such superfluity of hear, they might atchiue the more
lightness, and swiftness, and be less hindered in swymming, so troublesome
and needelesse a burden being shaken of. This kind of dog is properly
called, Aquaticus, a water spaniel because he frequenteth and has usual
recourse to the water where all his game and exercise lies, namely
waterfowles, which are taken by the help and service of them, in their kind.
And principally duckes and drakes, whereupon he is likewise named a dog for
the ducke, because in that quallitie he is excellent. With those dogs also we
fetch out of the water such foul as he stounge to death by any venomous
worm, we use them also to bring us our boultes and arrows out of the water,
(missing our marcke) whereat we directed our level, which otherwise we should
hardly recover, and oftentimes they restore to us our shaftes which we thought
never to see, touch or handle again, after they were lost, for which
circumstaunces they are called Inquisitores, searchers, and finders. Although
the ducke other whiles notably deceaueth both the dog and the master, by
dyuing under the water, and also by natural subtilty, for if any man shall
approach to the place where they build, breed, and sit, the hens go out of
their neastes, offering themselves voluntarily to the hands, as it were, of
such as draw nie their neasts. And a certain weakness of their wings
pretended, and infirmity of their feet dissembled, they go so slowely and so
leasurely, that to a man's thinking it were no masteryes to take them. By which
deceiptfull trick they do as it were entyse and allure men to follow them,
till they be drawn a long distaunce from their neastes, which being compassed
by their provident conning, or conning providence, they cut of all
inconveniences which might grow of their return, by using many careful and
curious caueates, least their often haunting bewray ye place where the young
ducklings be hatched. Great therefore is their desire, and earnest is their
study to take heed, not only to their brood but also to themselves. For when
they have an ynckling that they are espied they hide themselves under turfes or
sedges, wherewith they cover and shrowde themselves so closely and so craftily,
that (notwithstanding the place where they lurcke be found and perfectly
perceived) there they will harbor without harm, except the water spaniell by
quick smelling discover their deceiptes.

Of the Dog called the Fishers, in Latin Canis Piscator.
THe Dog called the fisher, whereof Hector Boethus writes, which seeks for
fish by smelling among rocks and stones, assuredly I know none of that kind
in England, neither have I received by report that there is any such, albeit
I have been diligent and busy in demanding the question as well of fishermen,
as also of huntesmen in that behalf being careful and earnest to learn and
understand of them if any such were, except you hold opinion that the beauer
or Otter is a fish (as many have believed) and according to their belief
affirmed, and as the bird Pupine, is thought to be a fish and so accounted.
But that kind of dog which follows the fish to apprehend and take it (if
there be any of that disposition and property) whether they do this for the
game of hunting, or for the heat of hunger, as other Dogs do which rather
then they will be famished for want of food, covet the carckases of carrion and
putrifyed flesh. When I am fully resolved and disburthened of this doubt I will
send you certificate in writing. In the mean season I am not ignorant of that
both. Aelianus, and Aelius, call the Beauer (...) a water dog, or a dog
fish, I know likewise thus much more, that the Beauer does participate this
property with the dog, namely, that when fishes be scarce they leave the
water and raunge up and down the land, making an insatiable slaughter of
young lambs until their paunches be replenished, and when they have fed
themselves full of flesh, then return they to the water, from whence they
came. But albeit so much be granted that this Beauer is a dog, yet it is to
be noted that we reckon it not in the beadrowe of English dogs as we have
done the rest. The sea Calfe, in like manner, which our country me^ for brenitie
sake call a Seele, other more largely name a Sea Vele, makes a spoil of
fishes between rocks and banckes, but it is not accounted in the catalogue or
number of our English dogs, notwithstanding we call it by the name of a Sea
dog or a sea Calfe. And thus much for our dogs of the second sort called in
Latin Aucupatorij, serving to take foul either by land or water.

A Dial pertaining to the second Section.
Dogs serving the disport of fowling^ are divided into Land spaniele Setters
called in latin Canes Aucupatorij Water spaniels or finders called in latin
Canes Aucupatorij


The fisher is not of their number, but several.

The third Section of this abridgement.
Now follows in due order and convenient place our English Dogs of the
third gentle kind, what they are called to what use they serve, and what sort
of people plant their pleasure in the^, which because they need no curious
canuastings and nigh syfting, we mean to be so much the briefer.

Of the delicate, neat, and pretty kind of dogs called the Spaniel gentle or
the comforter, in Latin Melitaeus or Fotor.
THere is, besides those which we have already delivered, another sort of
gentle dogs in this our English soil but exempted from the order of the
residue, the Dogs of this kind does Callimachus call Melitaeos, of the
Iseland Melita, in the sea of Sicily, (which at this day is named Malta, an
Iseland in deed, famous and reno^med, with courageous and puisaunt soldiers
valliauntly lighting under the banner of Christ their unconquerable captain^
where, this kind of dogs had their principal beginning.

These dogs are little, pre^ty, proper, and fine, and sought for to satisfy
the delicateness of dainty dames, and wanton women's wills, instruments of
folly for them to play and dally withal, to try^^e away the treasure of time,
to withdraw their minds from more commendable exercises, and to content their
corrupted concupiscences with vain disport (A selly shift to shun yrcksome
ydlnesse.) These puppies the smaller they be, the more pleasure they provoke,
as more meet play fellows for minsing mistrisses to bear in their bosoms, to
keep company withal in their chambers, to succor with sleep in bed, and
nourishe with meat at bourde, to lay in their lappes, and lick their lips
as they ride in their wagons, and good reason it should be so, for coursnesse
with fynenesse has no fellowship, but featnesse with neatenesse has
neighborhood enough. That plausible proverb verified upon a Tyrant, namely
that he loved his sow better then his son, may well be applied to these
kind of people who delight more in dogs that are deprived of all possibility
of reason, then they do in children that be capeable of wisdom and
judgment. But this abuse peradventure reigns where there has been long
lack of issue, or elsewhere barrennes is the best blossom of bewty.

The virtue which remains in the Spainell gentle otherwise called the
comforter.
NOtwithstanding many make much of those pretty puppies called Spaniels gentle,
yet if the question were demanded what property in them they say, which
should make them so acceptable and precious in their sight, I doubt their
answer would be long a coining. But seeing it was our intent to travail in
this treatise, so that ye reader might reap some benefit by his reading, we
will communicate unto you such conjectures as are grounded upon reason. And
though some suppose that such dogs are fyt for no service, I dare say, by
their leaves, they be in a wrong box. Among all other qualities therefore of
nature, which be known (for some conditions are covered with continual and
thick clouds, that the eye of our capacities can not pearse through the^) we
find that these little dogs are good to assuage the sickness of the stomach
being oftentimes thereunto applied as a plaster preservative, or borne in the
bosom of the diseased and weak person, which effect is performed by their
moderate heat. Moreover the disease and sickness changes his place and
enters (though it be not precisely marcked) into the dog, which to be no
untruth, experience can testify, for these kind of dogs sometimes fall
sick, and sometime die, without any harm outwardly enforced, which is an
argument that the disease of the gentleman, or gentlewoman or owner whatsoever,
enters into the dog by the operation of heat intermingled and infected. And
thus have I hitherto handled dogs of a gentle kind whom I have comprehended
in a triple division. Now it remains that I annex in due order such dogs as
be of a more homely kind.

A Dial pertaining to the third Section.
In the third section is contained one kind of dog which is called the Spaniell
gentle or the co^forter, It is also called A chamber companion, generally
called Canie delicatus. A pleasant play fellow, generally called Canie
delicatus. A pretty worm, generally called Canie delicatus.


The fourth Section of this discourse.
Dogs of a course kind serving for many necessary uses called in Latin Canes
rustici, and first of the shepherds dog called in Latin Canis Pastoralis.
Dogs of the courser sort are These two are the principal.
The shepherds dog The mastiue or Bandogge.


THe first kind, namely the shepherds hounde is very necessary and profitable
for the avoiding of harms and inconveniences which may come to men by the
means of beasts. The second sort serve to succor against the snares and
attemptes of mischiefous men. Our shepherdes dog is not huge, vaste, and
big, but of an indifferent stature and growth, because it has not to deal
with the bloudthyrsty wolf, sythence there be none in England, which happy and
fortunate benefit is to be ascribed to the puisaunt Prince Edgar, who to
the intent yt the whole country might be euacuated and quite cleared from
wolfes, charged and commanded the welsheme^ (who were pestered with these
butcherly beasts above measure) to pay him yearly tribute which was n^te the
wisdom of the King) three hundred Wolfes. Some there be which write that
Ludwall Prince of Wales paid yearly to King Edgar three hundred wolfes in the
name of an exaction (as we have said before.) And that by the means hereof,
within the compass and term of four years, none of those noisome, and
pestilent Beasts were left in the coasts of England and Wales. This Edgar
wore the Crown royal, and bare the Scepter imperial of this kingdom, about
the year of our Lord, nine hundred fifty, nine. Since which time we reed
that no Wolf has been seen in England, bred within the bounds and borders of
this country, mary there have been diverse brought over from beyond the seas,
for greedynesse of gain and to make money, for gasing and gaping, staring, and
standing to see them, being a strange beast, rare, and seldom seen in
England. But to return to our shepherds dog. This dog either at the
hearing of his masters voice, or at the wagging and whisteling in his fist, or
at his shrill and horse hissing brings the wandering weathers and straying
sheep, into the self same place where his masters will and wish is to have
the^, whereby the shepherd reapeth this benefit, namely, that with little labor
and no toil or moving of his feet he may rule and guide his flock, according
to his own desire, either to have them go forward, or to stand still, or to
draw backward, or to turn this way, or to take that way. For it is not in
England, as it is in France, as it is in Flaunders, as it is in Syria, as it
is in Tartaria, where the sheep follow the shepherd, for here in our country
the sheepherd follows the sheep. And sometimes the straying sheep, when no
dog runs before them, nor goes about and beside them, gather themselves
together in a flock, when they here the sheepherd whistle in his fist, for
fear of the Dog (as I imagine) remembering this (if unreasonable creatures
may be reported to have memory) that the Dog commonly runs out at his
masters warrant which is his whistle. This have we oftentimes diligently
marcked in taking our journey from town to town, when we have hard a
sheepherd whistle we have rayned in our horse and stood still a space, to see
the proof and trial of this matter. Furthermore with this dog does the
sheepherd take sheep for ye slaughter, and to be healed if they be sick, no
hurt or harm in the world done to the simple creature.

Of the mastiue or Bandogge called in Latin V^llaticus or Cathenarius.
THis kind of Dog called a mas^yue or Bandogge is vaste, huge, stubborn,
ougly, and eager, of a heavy and hurthenous body, and therefore but of little
swiftness, terrible, and frightfull to behold, and more fearce and fell then
any Arcadian curre (notwithstanding they are said to have their generation of
the violent Lion.) They are called V^llatici, because they are appointed to
watch and keep farm places and country cotages sequestered from common
recourse, and not abutting upon other houses by reason of distaunce, when there
is any fear conceived of theefes, robbers, spoylers, and nightwanderers. They
are serviceable against the Fox and the Badger, to drive wild and tame swyne
out of Meadows, pastures, glebelandes and places planted with fruit, to bayte
and take the bull by the ear, when occasion so requires. One dog or two at
the uttermost, sufficient for that purpose be the bull never so monsterous,
never so fearce, never so furious, never so s^earne, never so untameable. For
it is a kind of dog capeable of courage, violent and valiant, striking
could fea^e into the hearts of men, but standing in fear of no man, in so much
that no weapons will make him shrincke, nor abridge his boldness. Our English
men (to th^intent that their dogs might be the more fell and fear^e) assist
nature with art, use, and custom, for they teach their dogs to bait the
Bear, to bait the Bull and other such like cruel and bloody beasts
(appointing an ouerseer of the game) without any collar to defend their
throtes, and oftentimes they train them up in fighting and wrestling with a
man having for the safegarde of his life, either a Pikestaffe, a clubbe, or a
sword and by using them to ^uch exercises as these, thoy^ dogs become more
sturdy and strong. The force which is in them surmounteth all belief, the fast
hold which they take with their teeth exceeds all credit, three of them
against a Bear, four against a Lion are sufficient, both to try masteryes
with them and utterly to ouermatch them. Which thing Henry the seventh of that
name, King of England (a Prince both politic and warl^ke) perceauing on a
certain time (as the report runs) commanded all such dogs (how many
soever they were in number) should be hanged, being deeply displeased, and
conceauing great disdain, that an ill favored rascal curre should with such
violent villainy, assault the valiant Lion king of all beasts. An example for
all subjects worthy remembrance, to admonish them that it is no advantage to
them to rebel against ye regiment of their ruler, but to keep them within the
limits of Loyalty. I reed an history aunswerable to this of the selso same
Henry, who having a notable and an excellent fair Falcon, it fortuned that the
kings Falcon^rs, in the presence and hearing of his grace, highly commended his
Majesty's Falcon, saying, that it feared not to intermeddle with an Eagle, it
was so venturous a bird and so mighty, which when the King hard, he charged
that the Falcon should be killed without delay, for the self same reason (as
it may seem) which was rehearsed in the conclusion of the former history
concerning the same king. This dog is called, in like manner, Cathenarius, a
Cathena, of the chain wherewith he is tied at the gates, in ye day time, least
being lose he should do much mischief and yet might give occasion of fear
and terror by his big barcking. And albeit Cicero in his oration had Pro. S.
Ross. be of this opinion, that such Dogs as barcke in the broad day light
should have their legs broken, yet our countrymen, on this side the seas for
their carelessnes of life setting all at cinque and sice, are of a contrary
judgment. For thee fes roge up and down in every corner, no place is free from
them, no not ye princes palla(...) time they practice pilfering, picking open
robbing, and privy stealing, and what legerdema^ne lack they^ not fearing the
shameful and horrible death of hanging. The cause of which inconvenience does
not only i^^he from ripping need and wringing want, for all ye steal, are
not pinche^ with p^uerty^ but some steal so maintain their excessive and
prodigal expenses in apparel, their lewdnes of life, their hautines of heart,
their wantonness of manners, their wilful ydlenes, their ambitious bravery, and
the pride of the saucy Salacones (...) vain glorious and arrogant in
behavior, whose delight depends wholly to mount nimbly on horseback, to
make them leap lustely, spring and praunce, galloppe and amble, to run a
race, to wind in compass, and so forth, living all together upon the
fatness of the spoil. Othersom therbe which steal, being thereto provoked by
penury and need, like masterless^ me^ applying themselves to no honest trade,
but raunging up and down impudently begging, and complaining of bodily
weakness where is no want of ability. But valiant Valentine the emperor, by
wholesome laws provided that such as having no corporal (...), sold
themselves to begging, pleded poverty with pretended infirmity, and ^leaked
their idle and slothful life with colorable shifts and cloudy coss^ning,
should be a perpetual slave and drudge to him, by whom their impudent ydlenes
was bewrayed, and laid against them in public place, least the insufferable
slouthfallnes of such vagabondes should be ^urtherous to the people, or being
so hateful and odious, should grow into an example. Alfredus likewise in the
government of his common wealth, procured such increase of credit to justice
and upright dealing by his prudent acts and statutes, that if a man travailing
by the high way of the country under his dominion, chanced to lose a budget
full of gold, or his capcase fa^sed with things of great value, late in the
evening, he should find it where he lost it, safe, sound, and untouched the
next morning, yea (which is a wonder) at any time for a whole months space if
he sought for it, as Ingulphus Croyladensis in his History records. But in
this our unhappy age, in these (I say) our deuelishe days nothing can escape
the claws of the spoyler, though it be kept never so sure within the house,
albeit the doors be locked and boulted round about. This dog in like manner
of Grecians is called (...).

Of the latinists Canis Cultos, in English the Dog keeper.
Borrowing his name of his seruire, for he does not only keep farmers houses,
but also merchaunts maisons, wherein great wealth, riches, substance, and
costly stuff is reposed. And therefore were certain dogs found and
maintained at the common costs and charges of the Citizens of Rome in the
place called Capitolium, to give warning of theefes coming. This kind of
dog, is also called, In latin Canis Laniarius in English the Butchers Dog.

So called for the necessity of his use, for his service affoordeth great
benefit to the Butcher as well in following as in taking his cattle when
need constrains, urges, and requires. This kind of dog is likewise
called, In latin Molossicus or Molossus.

After the name of a country in Epirus called Molossia, which harbors many
stout, strong, and sturdy Dogs of this sort, for the dogs of that
country are good in deed, or else their is no trust to be had in the
testimony of writers. This dog is also called, In latin Canis Mandatarius a
Dog messinger or Carrier.

Upon substanciall consideration, because at his masters voice and
commandment, he carries letters from place to place, wrapped up cunningly in
his lether collar, fastened thereto, or sowed close therein, who, least he should
be hindered in his passage uses these helps very skilfully, namely
resistaunce in fighting if he be not ouermatched, or else swiftness and
readiness in running away, if he be unable to buckle with the dog that would
feign have a snatchat his skin. This kind of dog is likewise called, In
latin Canis Lunari^s, in English the Mooner.

Because he does nothing else but watch and ward at an ynche, wasting the
wearisome night season without slombering or sleeping, bawing and wawing at the
Moon (that I may use the word of Nonius) a quality in mine opinion strange
to consider. This kind of dog is also called.

In latin Aquarius in English a water drawer. And these be of the greater and
the waighter sort drawing water out of wells and deep pi^tes, by a wheel
which they turn round about by the moving of their burthenous bodies. This
kind of dog is called in like manner.

Canis Sarcinarius in Latin, and may aptly be englished a Tynckers Curre.
Because with marvelous patience they bear big budgettes fraught with
Tinckers tools, and metal meet to mend kettels, porrige pottes, skellets,
and chafers, and other such like trumpery requisite for their occupacion and
loytering trade, easing him of a great burden which otherwise he himself
should carry upon his shoulders, which condition has challenged unto them the
foresaid name. Besides the qualities which we have already recounted, this kind
of dogs has this principal property ingrafted in them, that they love their
mast^rs liberally, and hate strangers despightfully, whereupon it follows
that they are to their masters, in traue^ling a singular safgard, defending
them forceably from the invasion of villons and theefes, preserving their lyfes
from loss, and their health from hassard, their flesh from hacking and hewing
with such like desperate dangers. For which consideration they are
meritoriously termed.

In Latin Canes defensores defending dogs in our mother tongue. If it
chance that the master be oppressed, either by a multitude, or by the greater
violence and so be beaten down that he lie groueling on the ground, (it is
proved true by experience) that this Dog forsakes not his master, no not
when he is starcke dead: But enduring the foree of famishment and the
outrageous tempests of the weather, most vigilantly watches and carefully
keeps the dead carcass many days, indeuouring, furthermore, to kill the
murderer of his master, if he may get any advantage. Or else by barcking, by
howling, by furious iarring, snarring, and such like means betrayeth the
malefactor as desirous to have the death of his aforesaid Master rigorouslye
revenged. And example hereof fortuned within the compass of my memory. The
Dog of a certain wayefaring man travailing from the City of London directly
to the Town of Kingstone (most famous and renowned by reason of the triumphant
coronation of eight several Kings) passing over a good portion of his journey
was assaulted and set upon by certain confederate theefes laying in weight for
the spoil in Comeparcke, a perilous bottom, compassed about with woddes to
well known for the manyfolde murders and mischeefeous robberies their
committed. Into whose hands this passinger chanced to fall, so that his ill
luck cost him the price of his life. And that Dog whose ^yer was English,
(which Blondus registreth to have been within the banckes of his remembrance)
manifestly perceauyng that his Master was murdered this chanced not far
from Paris) by the hands of one which was a suitor to the same woman, whom he
was a wooer unto, did both bewraye the bloody butcher, and attempted to tear
out the villons throat if he had not sought means to avoid the revenging
rage of the Dog. In fyers also which fortune in the silence and dead time of
the night, or in stormy weather of the said season, the older dogs, barcke,
ball, howl, and yell (yea notwithstanding they be roughly rated) neither will
they stay their tounges till the household servants, awake, rise, search,
and see the burning of the fire, which being perceived they use voluntary
silence, and cease from yolping. This has been, and is found true by trial,
in sundry parts of England. There was no faynting faith in that Dog, which
when his Master by a mischaunce in hunting stumbled and fell toppling down a
deep dytche being unable to recover of himself, the Dog signifying his
masters mishappe, reskue came, and he was hayled up by a rope, whom the Dog
seeing almost drawn up to the edge of the dytche, cherefully saluted, leaping
and skipping upon his master as though he would have embraced him, being glad
of his presence, whose longer absence he was loathe to lack. Some Dogs there
be, which will not suffer fyery coals to lie skattered about the hearthe, but
with their paws will rake up the burning coals, musyng and studying first with
themselves how it might conveniently be done. And if so be that the coals
cast to great a heat then will they buyry them in ashes and so remove them
forward to a fyt place with their noses. Other Dogs be there which exequute
the office of a Farmer in the night time. For when his master goes to bed
to take his natural sleep. And when, A hundred bars of brass and iron
boltes,
Make all things safe from startes and from reuoltes.
When Ianus keeps the gate with Argos eye,
That dangers none approach, ne mischiefs nigh.


As Virgill vaunteth in his verses, Then if his master byddeth him go abroad,
he lingereth not, but raungeth over all his lands lying there about, more
diligently, I wys, then any farmer himself. And if he find any thing their
that is strange and pertaining to other persons besides his master, whether it
be man, woman, or beast, he drives them out of the ground, not meddling with
any thing which does belong to the possession and use of his master. But how
much faythfulnes, so much diversity there is in their natures, For there be
some,
Which barcke only with free and open throat but will not bite, Which do both
barcke and byte, Which bite bitterly before they barcke,


The first are not greatly to be feared, because they themselves are fearful,
and fearful dogs (as the proverb imports) barcke most vehemently.

The second are dangerous, it is wisdom to take heed of them because they
sound, as it were, an Alarm of an afterclappe, and these dogs must not be
over much moved or provoked, for then they take on outragiously as if they were
mad, watching to set the print of their teeth in the flesh. And these kind
of dogs are fearce and eager by nature.

The third are deadly, for they fly upon a man, without vtteraunce of voice,
snatch at him, and catch him by the throat, and most cruelly byte out
colloppes of fleashe. Fear these kind of Curres, (if thou be wise and
circumspect about thine own safety) for they be stout and stubberne dogs,
and set upon a man at a sodden unawares. By these signs and tokens, by these
notes and arguments our men discern the cowardly curre from the courageous
dog the bold from the fearful, the butcherly from the gentle and
tractable. Moreover they conjecture that a whelpe of an ill kind is not worth
the keeping and that no dog can serve the sundry uses of men so aptly and so
conveniently as this sort of whom we have so largely written already. For if
any be disposed to draw the above named services into a table, what man more
clearly, and with more vehemence of voice gives warning either of a wastefull
beast, or of a spoiling thief then this? who by his barcking (as good as a
burning beacon) fore shows hassards at hand? what manner of beast stronger?
what servant to his master more loving? what companion more trusty? what
watchman more vigilant? what revenger more constant? what messinger more
speedy? what water bearer more painful? Finally what packhorse more patient?
And thus much concerning English Dogs, first of the gentle kind, secondly of
the courser kind. Now it remains that we deliver unto you the Dogs of a
mungrell or currishe kind, and then will we perform our task.

A Dial pertaining to the fourth Section.
Dogs comprehended in ye fourth section are these The shepherds dog The
Mastiue or Bandogge^
which has sundry names diriued from sundry circumstances as The keeper or
watch man called in Latin Canes Rustici. The butchers dog called in Latin
Canes Rustici. The messinger or carrier called in Latin Canes Rustici. The
Mooner called in Latin Canes Rustici. The water drawer called in Latin Canes
Rustici. The Tinckers curr called in Latin Canes Rustici. The fencer, called
in Latin Canes Rustici.


The fifth Section of this treatise.
Containing Curres of the mungrell and rascal sort and first of the Dog
called in Latin, Admonitor, and of us in English VVappe or Warner.
OF such dogs as keep not their kind, of such as are mingled out of sundry
sorts not imitating the conditions of some one certain spice, because they
rese^ble no notable shape, nor exercise any worthy property of the true perfect
and gentle kind, it is not necessary that I write any more of them, but to
banishe them as unprofitable implements, out of the bounds of my Book,
unprofitable I say for any use that is commendable, except to intertaine
strangers with their bareking in the day time, giuyng warnyng to them of the
house, that such and such be newly come, whereupon we call them admonishing
Dogs, because in that point they perform their office.

Of the Dog called Turnespete in Latin Veruuersator.
THere is comprehended, under the curres of the coursest kind, a certain
dog in kytchen ^eruice excellent. For when any meat is to be roasted they
go into a wheel which they turning round about with the weight of their
bodies, so diligently look to their business, that no drudge nor skullion can
do the feate more cunningly. Whom the popular sort hereupon call Turnespets,
being the last of all those which we have first mentioned.

Of the Dog called the Daunser, in Latin Saltator or Tympanista.
THere be also dogs among us of a mungrell kind which are taught and
exercised to dance in measure at the musical sound of an instrument, as, at
the just stroke of the drombe, at the sweet accent of the Cyterne, and tuned
strings of the harmonious Harp showing many pretty tricks by the gesture of
their bodies. As to stand bolte upright, to lie flat upon the ground, to turn
round as a ringe holding their tails in their teeth, to beg for their
meat, and sundry such properties, which they learn of their vagabundicall
masters, whose instruments they are to gather gain withal in City, Country,
Town, and Uillage. As some which carry old apes on their shoulders in
colored iackets to move men to laughter for a little lucre.

Of other Dogs, a short conclusion, wonderfully engendered within the coasts
of this country.
Three sorts of them, The first bred of a bytch and a wolf, In Latin
Lyciscus. The second of a bytche and a fox, In Latin Lacaena. The third of a
bear and a bandogge, In Latin Vrcanus.


OF the first we have none naturally bred within the borders of England. The
reason is for the want of wolfes, without whom no such kind of Dog can be
engendered. Again it is delivered unto thee in this discourse, how and by what
means, by whose benefit, and within what circuit of time, this country was
clearly discharged of rauenyng wolfes, and none at all left, no, not to the
least number, or the beginning of a number, which is an Vnari.

Of the second sort we are not utterly void of some, because this our English
soil is not free from foxes, (for in deed we are not without a multitude of
them in so much as diverse keep, foster, and feed them in their houses among
their hounds and dogs, either for some malady of mind, or for some
sickness of body,) which peradventure the savor of that subtle beast would
either mitigate or expel.

The third kind which is bred of a Bear and a Bandogge we want not hear in
England, (A strange and wonderful effect, that cruel enimyes should enter
into ye work of copulation and bring forth so savage a curre.) Undoubtedly it
is even so as we have reported, for the fyery heat of their flesh, or rather
the pricking thorn, or most of all, the tyckling lust of lechery, bears such
swinge and sway in them, that there is no contrariety for the time, but of
constraint they must join to engender. And why should not this be consonant
to truth? why should not these beasts breed in this land, as well as in
other foreign nations? For we reed that Tigers and dogs in Hircania, that
Lions and Dogs in Arcadia, and that wolfes and dogs in Francia, couple and
procreate. In men and women also lyghtened with the lantarne of reason (but
utterly void of virtue) that foolish, frantique, and fleshely action) yet
naturally sealed in us) works so effectuously, yt many times it does
reconcile enimyes, set foes at freendship, unanimity, and atonement, as Moria
mencioneth. The Vrcane which is bred of a bear and a dog, Is fearce, is
fell, is stout and strong,
And byteth sore to flesh and bone,
His furious force indureth long
In rage he will be ruled of none.


That I may use the words of the P^^t Gratius. This dog exceeds all other
in cruel conditions, his leering and fleering looks, his stearne and savage
vissage, makes him in sight fearful and terrible, he is violent in fighting,
and wheresoever he sets his tenterhooke teeth, he takes such sure and fast
hold that a man may sooner tear and rende him in sunder, then lose him and
separate his ^happes. He passes not for the Wolf, the Bear, the Lion, nor
the Bull, and may wortherly (as I think) be companion with Alexanders dog
which came out of India^ But of these, thus much, and thus far may seem
sufficient.

A starte to outlandishe Dogs in this conclusion, not ^mpertinent to the
Authors purpose.
Use and custom has intertaines other dogs of an outlandishe kind, but a
few and the same being of a pretty bygnesse, I mean Iseland, dogs curled
and rough al over, which by reason of the lenght of their hear make show
neither of face nor of body. And yet these r^rres, forsoothe^ because they are
so strange are greatly set by, esteemed, taken up, and made of many times in
the room of the Spaniell gentle or comforter. The natures of men is so moved,
nay rather married to novelties without all reason, wit, judgment or
perseueraunce, (...). Outlandishe toys we take with delight,
Things of our own nation we have in despite.


Which fault remains not in us concerning dogs only, but for artificers
also. And why? it is to manifest that we disdain and contempne our own
workmen, be they never so skillful, be they never so cunning, be they never so
excellent. A beggarly beast brought out of barbarous borders, from the
uttermost countries Northward, etc. we stare at, we gase at, we muse, we
marvel at, like an ass of Cumanum, like Thales with the brazen shancks, like
the man in the Moon.

The which default Hippocrates marcked when he was alive, as evidently
appears in the beginning of his book (...), so entitled and named:

And we in our work entitled De Ephemera Britanica, to the people of England
have more plentifully expressed. In this kind look which is most blocklishe,
and yet most waspishe, the same is most esteemed, and not among Citizens only
and jolly gentlemen, but among lusty Lords also, and noble men, and dainty
courtier ruffling in their ryotous rags. Further I am not to wade in the
foorde of this discourse, because it was my purpose to satisfy your
expectation with a short treatise (most learned Conrade) not wearysome for me
to write, nor tedious for you to peruse. Among other things which you have
received at my hands heretofore, I remember that I wrote a several
description of the Getulian Dog, because there are but a few of them and
therefore very seldom seen. As touching Dogs of other kinds you your self
have taken earnest pain, in writing of them both lively, learnedly, and
largely. But because we have drawn this libell more at length then the former
which I sent you (and yet briefer then the nature of the thing might well
bear) regardyng your more earnest and necessary studdies. I will conclude
making a rehearsal notwithstanding (for memoryes sake) of certain specialties
contained in the whole body of this my breuiary. And because you participate
principal pleasure in the knowledge of the common and usual names of Dogs
(as I gather by the course of your letters) I suppose it not amysse to deliver
unto you a short table containing as well the Latin as the English names,
and to render a reason of every particular appellation, to the intent that no
scruple may remain in this point, but that every thing may be sifted to the
bare bottom.

A Dial pertaining to the fifte Section.
Dogs contained in this last Dial or Table are The wapp or warner, called in
Latin Canes Rustici. The Turnespet, called in Latin Canes Rustici. The
dauncer, called in Latin Canes Rustici.


A Supplement or Addition, containing a demonstration of Dogs names how they
had their Original.
THe names contained in the general table, for so much as they signify
nothing to you being a stranger, and ignorant of the English tongue, except
they be interpreted: As we have given a reason before of ye latin words so
mean we to do no less of the English that every thing may be manifest unto
your understanding. Wherein I intend to observe the same order which I have
followed before.

The names of such Dogs as be contained in the first section.
SAgax, in English Hunde, is derived of our English word hunte. One letter
changed in another, namely, T, into D, as Hunt, Hunide, whom (if you
conjecture to be so named of your country word Hunde which signifies the
general name Dog, because of the similitude and likeness of the words I
will not stand in contradiction (friend Gesner) for so much as we retain
among us at this day many Dutche words which the Saxons left at such time as
they occupied this country of Britane. Thus much also understand, that as in
your language Hunde is the common word, so in our natural tongue dog, is the
universal, but Hunde is particular and a special, for it signifies such a
dog only as serves to hunt, and therefore it is called a hunde.

Of the Gasehounde.
The Gasehounde called in latin Agasaeus, has his name of the sharpness and
steadfastness of his eyesight. Ey which virtue he compasses that which
otherwise he cannot by smelling attain. As we have made former relation, for
to gase is earnestly to view and behold, from whence flows the deriuation
of this dogs name.

Of the Grehounde.
The Grehounde called Leporarius, has his name of this word, Gre, which word
sounds, Gradus in latin, in English degree. Because among all dogs these
are the most principal, occupying the chiefest place, and being simply and
absolutely the best of the gentle kind of hounds.

Of the Le^yner or the Lyemmer.
This dog is called a Leuyner, for his lyghtnesse, which in latin sounds
Leuitas. Or a Lyemmer whsch word is borrowed of Lyemme, which the latinists
name Lorum: and wherefore we call him a Leuyner of this word Leuitas? (as we
do many things besides) why we derive and draw a thousand of our terms, out
of the Greek, the Latin, the Italian, the Dutch, the French, and the Spanishe
tongue? (Out of which fountains in deed, they had their original issue.) How
many words are buried in the grave of forgetfulness? grown out of use? wrested
away? and peruersly corrupted by diverse defaultes? we will declare at large in
our book entitled, Symphonia vocum Britannicarum.

Of the Tumbler.
Among hounds the Tumbler called in latin Vertagus, is the last, which
comes of this word Tumbler flowyng first of al out of the French fountain.
For as we say Tumble so they, Tumbier, reserving one sense and signification,
which the latinists comprehend under this word V^ertere, So that we see thus
much, that Tumbler comes of Tumbier, the vowell, I, changed into the Liquid,
L, after ye manner of our speech. Contrary to the French and the Italian
tongue. In which two languages, A Liquid before a Vowell for the most part is
turned into another Vowell, As, may be perceived in the example of these two
words Implere and plano, for Impiere and piano, L, before, E, changed into,
I, and L, before A, turned into I, also. This I thought convenient for a taste.

The names of such Dogs as be contained in the second Section.
AFter such as serve for hunting orderly do follow such as serve for hawking
and fowling, Among which the principal and chiefest is the Spaniell, called in
Latin Hispaniolus, borrowing his name of Hispania Spain, wherein we English
men not pronouncing the Aspiration H, Nor the Vowell I, for quickness and
readiness of speech say roundly A Spaniell.

Of the Setter.
The second sort of this second division and second section, is called a
Setter, in latin Index, Of the word Set which signifies in English that
which the Latinistes mean by this word Locum designare, ye reason is rehearsed
before more largely, it shall not need to make a new repetition.

Of the water Spaniell or Finder.
The water Spaniell consequently follows, called in Latin Aquaticus, in
English a waterspaniell, which name is compounde of two simple words, namely
Water, which in Latin sou^deth Aqua, wherein he swymmeth. And Spain, Hispania,
the country from whence they came, Not that England wants such kind of
Dogs, (for they are naturally bred and engendered in this country.) But
because they bear the general and common name of these Dogs since the time
they were first brought over out of Spain. And we make a certain difference
in this sort of Dogs, either for some thing which in their voice is to be
marked, or for some thing which in their qualities is to be considered, as for
an example in this kind called the Spaniell by the apposition and putting to
of this word water, which two coupled together sound waterspaniell He is also
called a fynder, in Latin Inquisitor, because that by serious and secure
seeking, he finds such things as be lost, which word Find in English is that
which the Latins mean by this Uerbe Inuenire. This dog has this name of
his property because the principal point of his service consists in the
premises.

The names of such Dogs as be contained in the third Section.
NOw leaving the suruiewe of hunting and hauking dogs, it remains that we
run over the residue, whereof some be called, fine dogs, some course, other
some mungrels or rascals. The first is the Spaniell gentle called Canis
Mel^taeus, because it is a kind of dog accepted among gentles, Nobles,
Lords, Ladies, etc. who make much of them vouchsafeing to admit them so far
into their company that they will not only lull them in their lappes, but
kiss them with their lips, and make them their pretty playfellowes. Such a
one was Gorgons little puppie mentioned by Theocritus in Siracusis, who taking
his journey, straightly charged and commanded his maid to see to his Dog as
charely and warely as to his child: To call him in always that he wandered not
abroad, as well as to rock the babe a sleep, crying in the cradle. This
puppitly and peasantly curre. (which some frumpingly term fysteing hounds)
serve in a manner to no good use except, (As we have made former relation) to
succor and strengthen quailing and quamming stomachs, to bewray bawdery, and
filthy abominable lewdness (which a little dog of this kind did in
Siciliae) As Aelianus in his.7. book of beasts and.27. chapter records.

The names of such dogs as be contained in the fourth Section.
OF dogs under the courser kind, we will deal first with the shepherds
dog, whom we call the Bandogge, the Tydogge, or the Mastyue, the first name
is imputed to him for service Quoniam pastori famulatur, because he is at the
shepherds his masters commandment. The second a Ligamento of the ^and or
chain wherewith he is tied, The third a Sagina. Of the fatness of his body.

For this kind of dog which is usually tied, is mighty, gross, and fat fed.
I know this that Augustinus Niphus, calls this Mastinus (which we call
Mastinus.) And that Albertus writes how the Lyciscu^ is engendered by a bear
and a wolf. Notwithstanding the self same Author takes it for the most part
pro Molosso. A dog of such a country.

The names of such dogs as be contained in the fifte Section.
OF mungrels and rascals somewhat is to be spoken. And among these, of ye
VVappe or Turnespet, which name is made of two simple words, that is, of Turn,
which in latin sounds Vertere, and of spete which is Veru, or speed, for the
English word inclines closer to the Italian imitation: Veruuersator,
Turnspet. He is called also VVaupe, of the natural noise of his voice VVau,
which he makes in barcking. But for the better and the redyer sound, the
vowell, u, is changed into the co^sonant, p, so yt for waupe we say wappe. And
yet I wot well that Nonius borrows his Baubari of the natural voice Bau, as
the Graecians do their (...) of wau,

Now when you understand this that Saltaro in latin signifies Dansare in
English. And that our dog thereupon is called a daunser and in the latin
Saltator, you are so far taught as you were desirous to learn, And now
suppose I, there remains nothing, but that your request is fully accomplished.

The winding up of this work, called the Supplement, etc.
THus (Friend Gesner) you have, not only the kinds of our country dogs, but
their names also, as well in latin as in English, their offices, services,
diversities, natures, and properties, that you can demand no more of me in
this matter. And albeit I have not satisfied your mind peradventure (who
suspectest al speed in the performaunce of your request employed, to be mere
delays) because I stayde the setting fourth of that imperfect pamphlet which,
five years ago, I sent to you as to a private friend for your own reeding,
and not to be printed, and so made common, yet I hope (having like the bear
lickt over my young) I have waded in this work to your contentation, which
delay has made somewhat better and (...), after wit more meet to be perused.

The end of this treatise.
FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Index, declaring the whole discourse of this abridgement. The
number imports the Page.
A.
A Bridgement of Dogs. 1. Abstinence from lost goods. 27. Aelianus his
opinion of bloodhoundes. 6. Aelianus and Aelius, opinion of of the beauer. 19.
Alfredus maintained justice. 27 An example of rebellion, and the reward of the
same. 26 An example of love in a dog. 31 Arcadian dog. 36
B.
Bandogges bayte the Bear and the Bull. 25 Blondus opinion of a dog. 30
Blooddy and butcherlye curres. 32 Beauer called a water dog. 19 Beauer
wherein he is like a dog. 19 Beasts prevented of succor. 5 Bloodhoundes how
they are known. 5 Bloodhounds conditions in hu^ting. ibidem Bloodhounds whence
they borrowe their names. ibid. Bloo^houndes pursue without weariness. 6
Bloodhoundes discern thieves from true men. 6 Bloodhoundes hunte by water and
by land. ibid. Bloodhoundes whne they cease from hunting. ibidem. Bloodhoundes
why they are kept close in the day, and let lose in the night. ibide.
Bloodhounds have not lybertye always to raunge at will. 7 Bloodhoundes are
their masters guides. ibid. Borders of England pestred with pylferers. ibidem.
Bloodhounds why ^hey are used in England and Scotland. ibi. Bloodhoundes take
not the water naturally. ibidem. Bloodhoundes called Brache in Scottishe.
ibidem. Bloodhounds when they barck. 8 Butchers dog. 28 Butchers dog why so
called. ibide.
C.
Caius book of dogs twyse written. 1 Conny is not hunted. 4 Connye caught
with the ferryt. ibidem. Conny taken with the net. ibi. Continuance of time
breeds cunning. 8 Castle of Flint. 10 Cunnies prevented of succor. 11
Callimachus. 20 Co^forter called Meliteus. ibid. Comforters proportion
described. ibide. Comforters conditions declared. ibidem. Comforters to what
end they serve. ibidem Comforters the pretier, the pleasaunter. 21 Comforters,
companions of idle dames. ibidem Comforters why they are so much esteemed among
gentlefolkes. ibidem. Comforters, what virtue is in them. ibide. Conditions
natural, some secret, some manifest. ibide. Comforters called by sundry names.
ibide. Cicero pro. S. Ross. 26 Country cotages annoyed with thieves. ibidem
Capitolium kept dogs at the common charge. ibide. Carrier why he is so
called. 28 Carriers service and properties. ibidem. Comeparcke, a perilous
place. 30 Commendation of the mastiue. 32
D.
Dogs for hunting two kinds generally. 2 Diverse dogs diverse uses. 4
Deceit is th'instrument of the Tumbler. 12 Dogs for the faulcon, the
phesaunt, and the partridge. 15 Dogs are household servants. 16 Ducks deceive
both dog and master. 17 Ducks subtyle of nature. ibi. Ducks disse^ble
weakness. ibi. Ducks prudent and provident. ibidem. Ducks regard them selves
and their brood. ibid. Dogs of a course kind. ibi. Dissembling thieves. 27
Dissembling dogs. 30 Defending dogs stick to their masters to the death.
ibide. Defending dogs greedy of reuengement. ibidem Diversity of mastiues.
32 Dangerous dogs. ibid. Daunsers qualities. 35 Daunsers beg for their
meat. ibidem Daunsers used for lucre and gain. ibid. Dogs wonderfullye
engendered. ibidem.
E.
England is not without Scottish dogs. 2 Election in a gase hound. 8 England
and Wales are clear from wolves. 24 Edgar what time king of England. ibidem
Espirus a country in Graecia. 28
F.
Fox hunted by the gasehound. 8 Flight preuenteth peril. 9 Froisart
historiographer. 10 Flint Castle. ibide. French dogs bow their skins be
speckled. 15 Fisher dog none in England. 18 Fisher dog, doubtful if there
be any such. ibidem. Faulcon and an Eagle fight. 26 Faulcon killed for fighting
with an Eagle. ibid. Fire betrayed by a dog. 30 Fire raked up by a dog. 31.
Farmars keep dogs. ibid. Fearful dogs bark sorest. 32 Foxes kept for
sundry causes. 36 Foxes wholesome in houses. ibid.
G.
Gesner desirous of knowledge. 1 Gesner earnest in experimentes. ibi.
Gasehounde whence he has his name. 9 Gasehoundes used in the North. ibidem
Gasehound sometimes loses his way. ibidem. Grehound light footed. ibid.
Grehounds special service. ibi. Grehoundes strong and swifte. ibidem Grehounds
game. 10. Grehounds spare of body. ibi. Grehounds nature wonderful. ibid.
Grehound of King Richard. ibid. Gentle dog. 14 Gratius Poet his opinion. 37
Getulian dog. 38
H.
Hunting wherein it consists. 2 Hunting and fowleing do differ. 3 Hunting
dogs, five special kinds. ibid. Harryer excels in smelling. ibidem
Harryer how he is known. ibi. Hare hunted by the gasehound. 8 Henry Duke of
Lancaster. 10 Hole of the Conny, their haven of health. 11 Hare daunsing in
measure. 16 Hare beating and thumping a dog. ibidem Hear a hinderaunce to
the water Spaniell in swymming. 17 Hear an unprofitable burden. ibi. Hector
Boethus. 18 Henry the seventh. 26 Henry's commandment to hang all bandogges.
ibid. Henry's Faulconer, and his Faulcon. ibi. Hippocrates. 38
I.
Justice mayntained by Alfred. ^7 Ingulphus Croyladensis historiographer. 28
Ianus watching. 31 Indian dogs. 37 Iseland curres, rough and rugged. ibid.
Iselande curres mutch set by. ibidem
K.
King Richard of England. 10 King Edgars trybute out of Wales. 23 King Henry
the seventh. 26 King of all beasts, the Lion. ibi. King of all Birds, the
Eagle. ibi. Keepers service. 28 Kingston, o^ Kingstoune very famous in old
time. 30 Kings crowned at Kingstoune, to the number of eight, their names are
these. Edward the first, Athelstan, Edmunde, Aldred, Edwin, Edgar, Edeldred,
Edward, syrnamed Iron rybbes. ibid.
L.
Leuiner quick of smelling, and swyft in running. 10 Leuiner, why so called.
ibi. Leuiner follows the game eagerly. ibi. Leuiner takes his pray speedily.
ibid. Lion king of all beasts. 26 Lust of the flesh reconcileth enemies. 36
M.
Masters beck a direction to the gasehound. 9 Melita or Malta. 20 Mastiues
proportion described 20 Mastiue, why he is called Villaticus. ibi. Mastiues use
and service. ibi. Mastiues are mankind. ibi. Mastiues of great might. 26
Molossia. 28 Mooner, why so termed. 29 Mooner watchful. ibi. Mung^ellesl. 24
Mais^erles men carry Apes about. 35 Man in the moon. 37
N.
Nature has made some dogs for hunting. 4 Natural properties of the water
spaniel. 16 No Wolves in England nor Wales. 24 No place free from thieves.
27 Nothing escapes the spoiler. 28 Nonius bau wan. 29 Names of the mastiue. 33
Names of the spaniel gentle. 22 Names of Dogs whence they were derived.
39.40.41.42. etc.
O.
One Dog hunteth diverse beasts. 4 Owners of bloudhoundes how they use
them. 6 Order of the Tumbler in hunting. 11 Of the Cumane ass. 37 Of brazen
shanckt Thales. ibi. O^ter. 7
P.
Properties of a bloudhound issuing from desire. 7 Proportion and making of the
water spaniel. 17 Pupine a byrd and a fyshe. 18 Princes palace pestered with
thieves. 26 Paris in France. 30
R.
Rome maintained dogs. 28 Rare toys meet for Englishemen. 37
S.
Smelling is not incident to the gasehound. 8 Spaniels of a gentle kind. 14
Spaniels two sorts. ibide. Spaniel of the land what properties. ibidem.
Spaniel for the hawk and the net. ibide. Spaniels some have special names.
ibide. Spaniel a name universal. 15 Spaniels the color of their skins.
ibidem. Setters make no noise, or very little, in their game. ibidem. Setters
give attendaunce. ibide. Setters behavior. ibide. Setter whence he has his
name. 16 Sea calfe not numbered among English dogs. 19 Sea calfe called a
dog fish. ibi. Seele or sea veale. ibidem. Spaniell gentle or the comforter.
20 Shepherdes dog. 23. The necessity of their service. ibi. The proportion of
them. ibidem. Shepherdes what benefit they reap by their dogs. 24
Sheepherdes in what countries they go before their sheep. ibidem. Sheep how
they flock at the sheepherds whistle. ibid. Sheepherds Dog choose and take.
ibid. Salacones vaineglorious. 27
T.
Terrars hunt the badger and the Fox. 4 Terrars hunt as ferryts hunt. ibi.
Terrars conditions. ibid. Terrars hold fast with their teeth. 5 Tumblers
crafty and fraudulent. 11 Tumblers why so named. ibid. their trade in hu^ting.
ibi. their dissembling of friendship. ibi. they hunt against the wind 12
Theeuish dogs. ibidem Theeuish Dog a night curre. ibidem Thieves fear no
law, 27. Some steal for need. ibid. Some to maintain bravery. ibi. Tynckers
curres bear burdens 29. their conditions. ibi. they love their masters. ibid.
Two suitors to one woman. 30 Turnespet painful in the kytchen. 24 Thales with
the brazen feet. 37
V.
Virtue of the comforter. 21 Valentines law for vagabundes 27 Virgils vearse.
31
W.
VVatchwordes make Dogs perfect in game. 8 VVonder of a Hare of Leuerit. 16
Water spaniell called the finder. ibidem Water spaniels what properties.
ibidem Water spaniels their proportion. 17. how they be described by D.
Caius. ibidem Why so called. ibidem Where their game lies and what it is.
ibidem Why they are called fynders. ibidem VVanton women, wanton puppies. 20
Wolves bloudsucking beasts 23. none in England nor wales ibidem. three
hundred paid yearly to Prince Edgar. ibid. Warner what service he does. 34
VVappes unprofitable dogs. ibidem
Y.
Young dogs barcke much. 8 Yolping and yelling in a bandogge. 31 Ill kind
whelps not regarded. 31
The end of the Index.
Faults escaped thus to b'amended.
In the last page of the Epistle Dedicatory, Quae for Qui Page. 3. Grecians for
Graecians, Page. 28. Canis Cultos for Canis Custos, Page. 38. Britanica for
Britannica.
Other faults we refer to the correction of the Reader.

There be also certain Accents wanting in the Greek words which, because we
had them not, are pretermitted: so have we been feign to let the Greek words
run their full length, for lack of Abbreuiations.

Studio and industria Abrahami Flemingi.


