AN AVNSWERE TO THE TREATISE OF THE CROSS: wherein ye shall see by the plain
and undoubted word of God, the vanities of men disproued: by the true and Godly
Fathers of the Church, the dreams and dotages of other controlled: and by
lavvfull Counsels, conspiracies overthrown. Read and Regard.

Si quis diuersam sequitur doctrinam, and non acquiescit sanis sermonibus Jesus
Christi, et ei quae secundum pietatem est doctrinae, is inflatus est, and nihil
scit.

Paulus. 1. ad Tim. 6. If any man teach otherwise, and agrees not to the
wholesome words of Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to
Godliness, he is puffed up and knows nothing.

IMPRINTED AT LONdon, by Henry Denham, for Lucas Harryson. Anno. 1565.

To John Martial: student in Divinity: James Calfhill Bacheler of the same,
wishes the spirit of Truth and modesty, with increase of knowledge in the
fear of God.
IT is not very long ago since the famous report of your (Martial) affairs
came unto mine ears, and treatise of defense unto my hands. In deed as a
young scholar (for so ye say ye are, and I by your workmanship may well
conjecture) ye have said for the Cross so far as your skyl does serve you, or
as the honesty of the cause deserves. I suppose it had been more honesty for
you, and would have furthered your purpose better, if either your weakness,
had vvrestled at the first on a better ground, or so vveak a cause had got some
sturdier champion to defend it. Now that you fight more egerly than vvisely
in a Cross quarrel, ye lie so open to be crossebytten, that the cause it
self and your poor credit go to the ground together. For though ye use to
face men vvithal, such terms and titles of estimacion, as rather of some be
gotten by continuance, than given by desert: as Bacheler of Law and student
in Divinity: yet if ye had joined more Logique with your Law, your reasons
should not have run so lavvlesse (as they do:) or if you had remembered your
old humanity, you would not have stained your nevve divinity, with such
slanders and lies, such vain supposals and idle tales, as I am ashamed to
hear of any that challenges to himself the name of learning. But man's law
strikes so great a stroke with you, that Gods rule and conscience is
excluded from you: and being so deep in your popish divinity, you have
forgotten al christian humanity. Wherefore the censure of S. Paul, which in
the beginning I used as my word, may justly be applied to you: that in as much
as ye give no ear to the sound doctrine, 1. Tim. 6.
nor content your self with that religion which accords to piety: ye are
but puffed up with vain glory: ye seek for praise of men: which of the
vviser sort ye shall never purchase. How well your poesy serves against us
whom you would seem to touch, when the Apostle inueyed against the enemies
of the cross of Christ, (which you are and not we) shall afterward be seen
in the discourse. But among you, the willful vvanderers, of one affection, of
one bringing up, the saying is verified which Horace has: Horatius in Art
Poetica.
Scribimus indocti doctique Poe^mata passim. First came into our stage, a gaye
disguised gest, a sudden convert (and I fear me greatly least an Apostata) M.
Doctor Harding: he, because he is right worshipful M. Doctor, and has
otherwise some opinion of learning (words in deed at vvil) he must needs
be thought to say something. But how this something in effect is nothing, the
Bishop of Salisburie abundantly does prove. Next to the Master, came the
worthy Scholar: and yet worthy Man he gave but a Dor. We do easly see in
whose forge he was framed: he savors of the fire that flevve out before: and
yet neither of them both for all their heat of railing, has any warmth of
religion. His proves I pass to the reproufe published abroad already. Only I
am sorry M. Novvell had not a more learned adversary. Then commes in M. Rastal,
and puts in his Reioynder. All against M. Jewel. Alas I pity the poor
soul, he makes his match so far amiss. Dares Entellum. Nay. Hinnului
Leonem. Yet he says that he vvil but fight with a Penknife, He will
overthrow with a breath if he can. O noble courage. He leaves the bloody
lances and terrible halbardes, for Hardy Harding: and Doughty Dorman: he
himself vvil come after, and blow his enemies before him. If I should deal
with this dangerous bugge, I would for all that, provide my self of a
longer svvorde, for belike he has a very strong breath: and yet with a Bodkin
he may be borne over. I will not touch this proud pecockes tail, I will
leave it at leisure to be pulled of an other. To make up the mess, steps out
M. Stapleton: he vvil not stand by, and be but a looker on: having therefore
never a vveapo^ of his own, he runs to a Ruffian, and borrovves his svvord.
He has put on a new scabbard on it: he has varnished the hiltes. The blade
it self is al to be hackt. It has been already in so many frayes, and borne
away so many blows, that it is now scarcely able to scratch. This young man
therefore vvil sight with the scabberde. But if a man give him a dry blovv or
two (as for his vvilfulnesse he well deserves) we shall see hereafter what
fence he has for it. There is none of all these, but may with more ease
make.xv. such books as they cu^ber the Printers of Antwerp vvithal, than
answer xv. leaves of sound doctrine. The parties be known: their skill,
their qualities we are (God vvote) to well acquainted with, to be now
abused by Dogs eloquence. If your causes were better (as worse they can not
be,) forsooth you should find, of your old acquaintance ynovve to match you:
and unless ye were sounder, to shame you to. This advantage ye have (God be
thancked for it) that ye have nothing else to do, but commit to vvriting your
pieuish fancies, and send them into England to set us a work vvithal. We our
selves are occupied otherwise (as friends to the flock of christ which we
have in charge) tha^ that we can or will atte^pre our doings, to the lewd
desert of our contemned enemies: or mispende our time in answering of that,
which in the ears of al indifferent, carries a sufficient confutacion with
it. Notvvithstanding least some more simple than other, may be deceued by you:
and you your selves be fooded in your folly through to much forbearing and
silence of ours: we have humbled our selves beneath the honesty of our
cause: we have for charities sake vouchsaued to say more than the cause
requires, or all the college of your co^spiracy can with good reason
answer. As for you (good sir) which only come to make up a number, and seem
to do something, choosing to entreat of a plausible matter, (as your
discretion does take it:) if ye had held your tongue I might have esteemed you
somevvhat, and reputed you wise. Ye remember the Proverb. Stultus si tacuerit.
Prove. 17.
Thus ye write, al: some more, some less, learned, unlearned, vvilfull, and
vvitlesse: but mera poemata, stale iestes or fables: and especially you, whom
among the rest I may pity rather than envy. For, learning have ye little,
discretion less, good manners least of al. Your friends that most embrace your
opinion, are ashamed of your proves when ye speak of your self: so fond they
are, so senseless and vnsou^d. Nor I do derogate so much from my self, but I
would be ashamed to answer such a book, unless I thought good upon this
occasion of unseasonable sovving of your rotten seed, to plant again in the
Lords field, the seed of salvation and certain truth, to the comfort of the
vveake, and confusion of the wicked. Wherein I marvel not if the doctrine be
higher, than your skill can reach unto. For I know what Doctor presented you:
I know who made you start up a writer. Magister artis ingenijque largitor
venture. Your exhibition belike failed you, and therefore ye thought to pick a
quarrel to the alms basket. But more alms it were with stripes ynovve to
send you to schole again, than to revvard you as a Schoolmaster to other. For
this must I needs say, that either ye have not well learned your Sophistry,
or else you think you have to do with fools. For three kinds of
Paralogismes of false arguments or fond cauils, are most familiar with you.
First, by inserting often into your vvriting, Non causam pro causa, taking that
for a buttresse and defense of your cause, which makes naught to purpose.
Then by arguing ab eo quod est secundu^ quid, ad simpliciter: making a general
consequent, of that which in part is true, an absolute rule of that which
was done, or spoken only in some respect: And most of all A consequenti,
when ye rashly gather, that does not truly follow. Ye may paraduenture
bring us into hatred by these sinister means, with them, that by prejudice
have a pleasure in your fancies: but your proves for all that, shall be nothing
the sounder, nor our substanciall truth the weaker. As for the whole drift
and conclusion of your tale, whereby ye heap all mischieues on us, derive the
cause of the plages of God, and our sinful lives, from the spring of doctrine,
which in Christ we profess: therein ye bewray your vvilfulnesse and your
ignorance. VVilfulnesse, in speaking against a knovve^ truth: Ignorance in
reasoning to overthrow your self. For though we deserve most evil at gods
hands, being still better learned, and not better lived, yet if ye remember your
self (M. Martial) there was never age so free from miseries, specially in
England, as since the preaching of the Gospel, this of ours has been: and sure
a pitiful piece of work it is, when Papists in honesty shall contend with
them, whom ye call Protestants. A slender point of defense it is, when you
give such a prick, as makes your selves to bleed.

But ye may not be touched, ye think, you have dedicate your book to the
Queens highness, ye craftily come with a fair vievve, commending her
Majesty in apparaunce, but in effect, with a false profer (to your shame and
confusion be it spoken) ye condemn her. Thus traitorously ye seek for defense
at her hands, whose person ye flee, whose doings ye impugn. You have
received from your Jove of the Capitol a Pandoraes box, to present (and God
will) to our Prometheus. But she (God be thanked) is to wise to credit you.
Ye may seek for some other popish Epimetheus, that accepting your offer, may
set abroad your mischieues. I doubt not but the levvdenesse of such her
enemies, shall work great aduau^tage both to her highness, and to us her
true subjects. Folio. 1.
Ye call her gracious and clement Princess Elisabeth by the grace of God,
Queen of England, France and Ireland. The rest of her style, ye vvittingly
omit. That which is the chief praise in a christian Prince, to be Defender of
the Faith: ye abridge her of: belike ye repute her not to be such a one. That,
which your great god much like to Caiphas prophecy, was contented to give to
her predecessor, Folio. 3.
you loving subject and true bedes man, be loath to grant her, the true
successor. That which is the only proof of kinglike authority, within her
own realms and dominions, to be the supreme governor under god of all
persons and causes, ye deny to her: and yet ye grant her to be the Queen. She
to be Queen, and yet a subject to other: you to be English men, and yet no
subjects to her. In deed good cause you have with all the rabble of your
perverse co^federates and outlavves, to call her gracious and clement
princess, if grace and clemency it may be called, which suffering you to your
self vvil, takes not the svvord of vengeance in her hand, but lets you run
headlong on your own destruction. Her grace might punish, where she
forbeareth: She might justly pronounce the sentence of death, where she
remitteth an easy prisonment. Therefore clement she is. Ye say right well. But
whether her majesty (gracious otherwise to al) be gracious unto you, I
doubt. For if it had pleased her royal grace to have brideled you, ere this,
with shorter raynes, ye had not been at this day, so headstrong as ye are.
Many hundreths of you (repenting your rebellious hearts) had been converted to
Christ, and by severity learned that, which clemency shall never teach you.
Now is your insole^ce grown to such excess, that ye abuse al other, and
your selves to: that ye think men dare not for fear do that, which for tender
heart and pity they do not: that ye think with hypocrisy to deceive God, and
with flattery the world. Ye threaten kindness on the Queens majesty,
Folio. 1. b.
saying that her noble personage in all princely prowess (for so ye term it)
and her good affection to the cross (which is the matter ye treat of) moved
you so presu^ptuously to adventure, so aduenterously to presume (I should say)
as to recommend your Treatise to her highness. In deed we have a most noble
Princess (God for his mercy prosper her, long to reign over us in despite of
your malice, and increase of our joy) such a one as is beautified with rare
gifts of nature, in vvisdome marvelous, in virtue singular. Provvesse she
leaves to the other sex. Subjects she has ynovve to practice it. As for her
private doings, neither are they to be drawn as a president for all: nor any
ought to creep into the Princes bosom, of every fact to judge an affection.
This can the world well witness with me, that neither her grace and
wisdom, has such affiaunce in the Cross, as you do fondly teach: neither
takes it expedient, her subjects should have that, which she her self (she
thinks) may keep without offense. For the multitude is easyly through
ignorance abused: her Majesty to well instructed for her own person, to
fall into Popish error and Idolatry. Now for that which follovveth, if ye
were so good a subject, as you ought, and framed your self to live
according to the laws, ye should see and consider, how good order is taken
by Public authority, not Privy suggestions, that Roodes and Images should be
removed, according to Gods law, out of churches, chapels, and oratories: and
not so despitefully thrown down in hie vvayes, Folio. 1. b.
as you most constantly do affirm: the contrary vvherof, as by our law is
established, so in effect is proved. For we do see them in many places stand,
nor are at all offended therewith. And do not you give us a good cause to
credit you in the rest, who in the first entrance of your matter make so lovvd
a lie? But that your impude^ce may be the more apparent, ye stay not so: ye
stick not to father, of the ancient fathers faith, such falsehodes and
absurdities, as they never thought: good man never gathered. For, where ye
say, Folio. 2.
by their authority, that ever since Christ's death christen men have had the
sign of the cross in churches, chapels, oratories, private houses, hie ways
and other places meet for the same, it shall be evident by their own
vvritings (such as none shall agaynsay) that.400. year after Christ, there was
not in the place of Gods service, any such sign erected. By the way I report
me to that which Erasmus a great stickler in the cross quarrel vvriteth.
Vsque ad aetatem Hieronomi erant probatae religionis viri, In Catechesi sua.
Cap. 6
qui in templis nullam ferebant imaginem, nec pictam, nec sculptam, nec textam,
ac ne Christi quide^ (vt opinor) propter Anthropomorphitas. Until Hieroms time,
there were men of good religion (which is to be noted, least ye say they were
heretics) that suffered not in Churches any picture at all, either painted or
graued, or wouen, yea not so much as the picture of Christ because of the
Anthropomorphites. (as I suppose) Now this was above.400. year after Christ:
In proaemio. 3. Cement super Amos.
for by Hieroms own co^putacion, it must be after the syxt year of Arcadius
Consulship, which falls out Anno.408. And Prosper Aquitanicus makes it to
be.422. year after Christ. But as much as this, the Fathers themselves shall be
vvitnesses of, to disprove your vanity. Folio. 2.
Then, that they worshipped the sign of the cross, or counseled other to do
the same is as true as the other: yea a thing it was, when use of such signs
was received in deed, most abhorred of them. Ep. li. 7. Indict. 2. Ep. ^9.
I appeal to your Pope, Gregory the great the first that ever defended Images.
He found fault with Serenus Bishop of Massilia, for breaking the Images that
he found in his church: yet he conde^neth your doctrine for worshipping them,
saying in one place. Et quid zelum vos ne quid manu factum adorari possit,
habuisse laudauimus. And truly we commended you in that ye had a zeal, that
nothing made with hand should be worshipped. Tua ergo fraternitas and illas
seruare, and ab earum adoratione populu^ prohibere debuit. Therefore your
brotherhead should have preserved them, and forbidden ye people that they
should not worship them. And this Gregory was 600. year after Christ. Where
then was the reverence done to the sign? Where gave they the counsel to
creep to the Cross? See you not how shamefully ye abuse the Prince with
slanders and untruths? As for the third substancial ground whereupon ye
build the buttresse of your cause, that no fear or mystrust of Idolatry can
be where the cross is woorshipped, that position and more than Paradoxe,
Folio. 2.
is as true as the rest: 2. Reg. 18. Number. 21. Joan. 9.
as true as the Jews could commit no Idolatry in worshipping the brazen
Serpent, and yet that sign was commanded once: this sign to us ward was
commanded never. Wherefore since your vvare is no more vvorth (M. Martial) you
like a pelting Peddler putting the best in your pack uppermost, I see not
where ye may have vtteraunce for it, unless it be to serve to sluttish uses.
And that ye should rest in any hope, that the Queens majesty amidst her great
affairs, should have so much vacant time as to take a vievve of your vain
devises, is a miracle to me, and makes your folly to appear the more, the more
ye conceive a liking of your self. The story that ye bring of Socrates report,
It is Socratis. lib. 5. Cap. 10.
not truly quoted (for I think ye never red it) makes small for your purpose.
What though Sisinnius an heretic a Nouatian did give advise for appeasing of
the Arrians heresy, that the ancient fathers should be called to witness?
vvil you take example of one not well instructed, nor wise, in this case as
it appeared? Were the ancient fathers suffisaunt to appease the cause? Were
they not enforced (that notvvithstanding) each man to bring his opinion in
vvriting, and stand to a further judgment and determination? Read ye the
place. They neither could, nor can, for imperfections that remayn amongst them,
content the conscience in doubtful cases, nor ought at any time to be judges
of our faith. S. Augustine contra Maximinu^ Arrian. Epis. has a goodly rule,
better to be follovved and observed than yours. For when in the like
controversy with the Arrians the counsel of Ariminum where many Fathers
were assembled, made for the one part, and the Counsel of Nice confirmed the
other: Augustine to declare that we ought not to depend upon man's judgment,
but wholy and solely, upon the truth of Gods word, said: Nec ego Nicenum nec
tu debes Ariminense tanquam preiudicaturus proferre Concilium. Epist. lib. 3.
Cap. 14.
Nec ego huius authoritate, nec tu illius detineris. Scripturarum
authoritatibus, non quorumque proprijs, sed vtrisque communibus testibus res
cum re, causa cum causa, ratio cum ratione concercet. which words in English
be these: Neither I must bring forth the Counsel of Nice, nor thou the
Counsel of Ariminum, as one to prejudice the other. Neither I am bound to the
authority of the one, nor thou restrained to the determination of the other.
But by the authorities of the Scriptures, (not peculiar witnesses unto either
of us, but common and indifferent unto us both) let one matter with an other,
cause with cause, and reason contend with reason. Then is it no outrage (as it
pleases your wisdom to term it) to refuse your order, Folio. 3.
since most of the fathers, yea every one of them have had their errors, as
afterward more clearly shall appear. Yet for all your dotages, vvherof
peradventure ye dreamed in some dronken frensy, for all your absurdities, I dare
and vvil ioyn issue with you. Let the doctrine of the received fathers (for
you make fathers of friars, and lege^d lies laws) decise the co^trouersy that
is betwixt us. If I bring not more sound antiquity to confirm my truth, than
you ca^ avouch for maintenance of your error: If the self same fathers direct
me not in the right way, which you misconster for the cross way: Let our
Theodosia deal as she lusts with me, the shame to be mine. Otherwise (if
it be Gods will) the amendment to be yours. Amen.

THE PREFACE to the Readers.
IF neither experience of elder age, nor present authority of Scripture were,
to put us in mind of the sleyghtes of Satan, how he continually does bend
his force, against the forte of our afflicted souls: yet ye subtle
conspiracies of these younger days, ye practice of the Papist, that Martials
now the Devils host, and marches forward with a forged Ensign, appearing
outwardly to be the friend of Christ, whose faith and religion he utterly
subuerteth, may serve as a warning piece out of the watch tower, to make us
run to the walls of faith, betaking our selves each man to his defense, in
the certain truth of Gods eternal testament. For if the groundwork be shaken
once, whereupon we build our health and salvation (which is the affiaunce in
Christ our God, and credit to his word) then enters our ennimy with banner
displayed, and beats us down to the pit of damnation. Wherefore he seeking
to supplant Christ, and pull our hearts from service of him: co^passeth by all
means to win him self some credit with us: and the knowledge of God,
revealed in his word, by a little and a little to be taken from us. But he
has of him self to ill a name to be esteemed so: and therefore under viser of
that that he is not, he winnes men to yield to that that they should not. He
becomes therefore in all his works an Ape of God, to imitate and resemble
after his hellish manner, to the utter overthrow and destruction of our souls,
that which our heavenly father has provided for our health, salvation and
bliss. Herein has he handled himself so workmanly, that he lokes very
narrowly that can discern the difference. Yea the eyes of his heart must be
better cleared, than by the light of reason, or else he shall be blinded in the
mist. We see that even from the beginning, after Gods spirit had moved Abell,
and the holy Patriarks, to offer sacrifice unto him, that should be figures all
of that one sacrifice, which Christ according to the prefixed pleasure of ye
eterne Deity, should at his time on the Cross perform: The Devil in
worshipping of his Idols did come so near the same, that the self same did
seem to be done in both. Yea generally in all the superstitions and
detestable rytes of ye heathen folk, he took his pattern out of the ordinance
of ye Hebrews and manners of the Christians. Which thing Tertulian among the
Latin writers the most ancient and chief right well declares: De
Prescriptionibus ad uers. Heret.
Ipsas quoque res Sacramentorum diuinorum in Idolorum mysterijs emulatur. etc.
Yea the very matter and substance of the divine Sacraments he counterfeyts in
his Idol service. He has his baptism whereby such as do believe in him, have
forgiveness promised them: He marketh his men with signs in the forehead: he
has his offerings, his sacrificers, his virgins, and his votaries. That if we
look on the supersticio^s of Numa Pompilius, the badges, the privileges, the
offices of his priests, the vessels, the ceremonies, ye furniture of his
sacrifices, we shall see how the Devil Morositatem illam, as Tertullian terms
it, Iudeae gentis imitatus est: did imitate ye fancies and self wilnesse of
the Jews. As Moses went up into the mount Syna and there received the Law
tables, whereof the author God him self should be: So Minos afterward among the
Grecians hyding him self a while, in Jupiters cave, came forth at length, and
gave them laws, from mighty Jove, as he pretended. And to the end, the people
might the more be bound in obedience, the like practice had the Roman King,
of whom I spoke before, saying: that in the night time he had secret
conference with Aegeria, and she delivered him such wholesome laws as ye mighty
Gods had decreed on. Whereby what other thing was attempted of the Devil, but
that all credit should be denied to Moses, in as much as Minos and Numa to, did
allege the like authority for themselves, and yet it was evident they were
but fables. Will ye go to the circumstances of place and persons? Then as God
ordained his service to be had first in ye tabernacle, then in the temple at
Jerusalem, so would the Devil have his hills and groves. As God did raise up
his holy men and Prophets, that being inspired with the holy Ghost might
declare his will, and by force of miracles win the more credit: So has the
Devil his coniurers, his witches, his figure flingers and his sorcerers, with
the spirit of illusion to work strange effects. As we have a place of
eternal rest, so have they their heaven. Elisios campos et amaena vireta
fortunatorum nemorum, the sweet pleasant Paradise and places of good hap: As
we have hell: even so have they: that if we preach the blessedness of the
faithful by the merits and mercies of Christ our Savior, then step the
godless out, and take it as a tale of ye Poets Paradise. If we threaten
vengeance to the misbeleuers, and extreme torment of hell fire, the Devils
limbs laugh us to scorn again, and do resemble it to Plato his Purgatory,
or to the scalding of Pyriphlegeton, a river so devised by the heathen folk,
to burn in hell with flames unquenchable. Such sleights has Satan to put us
in security of any further pain: to pull us from the hope of perfecter
estate, that here we may live, as the Devil would have us: in the end to
receive as the Devil can reward us. And he has not wanted his instruments of
old. He has made himself ministers from time to time, that in the worlds eye
were most worthy reverence, and likelier than the rest to compass his desire.
Among them all to the Devils behoof never so faithful servant, to the
destruction of the people never so pestilent instruments, as the Papists are:
for what have they not done, to the utter subversion of al true religion? As
Christ commanded the beleuers in his name to be baptized: So they in the
Devils name have baptized Bells, with the same ceremonies and sole^nities, that
they would use in Infants christening: save that the Devil would have in his
sacrament, a certain more Majesty, than God in his. Therefore the Papists by
the spirit of the Devil, ordained that a bishop must needs christen a Bell,
where as every poor priest may christian a child. And because that through
water consecrated by the word of God, sins are remitted, not by the force of
water, but power of the spirit: therefore the Devil would have his
consecration of water and of salt, De Consecr. Did. 3.
qua cuncti sanctificentur ac purificentur aspersi: as it is written in the
Popes decrees, yt whosoever are sprinkled therewith, are by and by sanctified,
purified, made clean and holy: go no further than to their Portesses, and you
shall see how they approve it. Aqua benedicta, deleantur tua delicta. Aqua
benedicta, sit tibi salus and vita. By the holy water so, be thy offenses put
the fro. Let the holy water be, salvation and life to thee. These words were
in their daily service. But O blasphemous mouths to attribute that to their
inventions, which is the work of God alone, the price of the blood of Christ
our savior. Yet will they have as their father had, when he came forth with
Scriptum est, the Scripture for them: applied I promise you, to as good a
purpose, as when the Witch by her Pater noster made her payle go a milking.
For why should I not compare the Priests, (that consecrate Crosses and ashes,
water and salt, oil and cream, bows and bones, stocks and stones, that
christen bells that hang in the steeple, that conjure worms that creep in the
field, that give S. John's gospels to hang about men's necks) to the vilest
Witches and Sorcerers of the earth. Each Prince has his people: and delivers
his laws to be observed of them: which if they keep, they show they are his.
And God (that his servants might be known to ye world, by walking according to
his will) ordained some works, wherein he would have us to exercise our selves:
As ye fear, the faith, the love to Godwarde, the repentance of our evils, the
profession of the Gospel, the furtherance of the same, prayer, thanksgiving,
and praise of God, patience, perseverance, justice, charity, and such other
like. What does the devil now? To seal his servants into league with him, he
deuiseth ordinances to make the^ to be known by: As, strange attire,
difference of meats, refusal of marriage, rising at midnight, shutting up in a
cloister, erecting of Images, worshipping of saints, service in latin, gadding
on Pilgrimage, making of vows, most wilful beggary, most vile hipocrisy.
Hereby the simple have been so deluded, that they thought gods service to
consist herein: and so, the devil for God was honored. Hereby the devils
children have so magnified themselves, that (Gods law neglected) their beastly
fancies have been had in reverence. For prouse whereof, go no further than to
this. Sole life is not by God commanded: The devil does exact it in his
ministers. Genes. 26. Exodus 20. 1. Cor. 6. Heb. 13
Adultry is by god condemned: The devil in his ministers makes a trifle of it.
That filthy vice which by the testimony of the Apostle Paul does quite exclude
us from ye kingdom of heaven, they make but a game of, or a sin venial. If
ye credit me not, read the the decree, of Alexander the.iij. of ye name: Cap.
At si Clerici. paragra. de Adult.
there he affirms that as for adultery and such other faults, which he
accompteth by express word, crimina leuiora, trifling offenses, ye bishop may
dispe^se with. And yet some good fellows, will say yt we preach liberty. We, or
ye Papists? Judge ye. Did. 24. cap. Fraternitatis
Pelagius the Pope as we read in a certain decretal of his (and when I speak
of decrees and decretals, think yt I speak of no other matter, than yt which
ye papists have in as souerain a price as ye bible) gives a worthy ce^sure in
ye like case. A man yt had been married, would needs after ye decease of his wife
become a priest: and sued for his orders. The Prelates fell of examining the
matter whether he were Bigamus or no: that is to say, whether his wife was a
maid when he married her, or whether he himself had married a second wife. For
if either of these had been found in him, he had been unmeet to enter into
orders. But found he was to be an adulterer, who after his wives death, had a
child by an other woman. Now what says the holy father. In as much as he is
not found to be Bigamus, but yet proved incontinent, we hope well of him: let
him have his orders. As for his lechery, we bear with him, in respect of the
weakness of this our age. See the religion of Popery. If it had been his hap
to have married a wydowe, or the second time to have entered into ye holy state
of matrimony, this man should have had no orders: Now that he is become a
whoremaster, he has them. Here co^mes in place, the famous judgment of him
that makes the gloze, not in mockery, but in good earnest. Ecce casus, vbi plus
valet Luxuria quam Castitas Behold a case, where Incontinence has a more
privilege, than Chastity. Thus I suppose ye see how the Devil does advance
his works, and by the ministry of the Papists set up himself in place of
God. Now that his religion should in all points, to the worlds eye, be as
perfect as Gods, and ye men should not want helps ynowe to hell: As God
appointed the prayers unto him to be made through Christ our mediator: So when
the Devil will be served best, he deputeth saints to be intercessors, and
every one of them has his charge lymitted. One to deliver us from the fever
Quartane, another to preserve us from the danger of the sea. One to restore
the goods that we have lost, another to defend our foldes from the Fox. One
for the plague, another for ye purse. One for our selves, another for our
swyne. And is not this mere Gentilitie? Yet is it right Popery. As they had
Juno for women in childbed, so we ye blessed virgin in her place with us. As
they had Esculapius to save them from diseases: so had we S. Roke to supply
that rome. As they had Mars to help them in warfare: so had we S. George to
make us win the field. Finally, least there should want any thing to please
the wanton world: As God of his mercy did make man, after the image and
likeness of himself: so the Devil has put in the mind of man, to make
Images after the likeness of God, and so to transfer his honor unto
creatures. The blockish Images, the dead crosses, have been crept to, been
worshipped. The lively Images of Christ himself, have been brought to the
cross, and burned cruelly. May I not therefore with Clement the Apostles
successor say. Quis est iste honor dei, per lapideas and ligneas formas
discurrere, atque exanimes figuras venerari, Recog. li. 5.
and hominem in quo vera Dei Imago est spernere? What honor of God is this, to
run about the counterfets of timber and of stone, and to worship the shapes
that are without soul, and despise man, in whom the true shape of God is? Yet
have we often heard and sometime to our grief have seen, that for the
quarrel of stocks and stones, many learned men have lost their lives: and
where the learned and godly books, containing Gods undoubted word, have been
torn in pieces and despitefully burned: these Lay men's books have with no
grief at al been suffered to stand, but for the pulling down have procured
the death and destruction of many. Thus for the Idol sake the true Image of
Christ has been defaced, and painted Images been suffered to the abuse: the
thing taken from us that should teach us the right use. It is not unknown to
all the world, with what cruelty and rage, Satan has vpholden and maintained
his devise, by executing of thousands, for contempt of an Image: But for the
contempt of God and murdering of his saints, what conscience was there ever
in Papiste? When the people of Antioch, Theodoret. lib. 5. Cap. 19. and. 20.
had in despite pulled down the brazen Image of Theodosius his wife, (who then
was Emperor) for this their outrage and disobedience, they were threatened (as
they well deserved) to lose their liberties, and be committed to the sword. But
when the men of war approached, a silly man whose name was Macedonius, deuoid
of learning and great skyll, but virtuous otherwise, did stay their rage with
this kind of oration. Tell the Emperor (my friends) that he is not only an
Emperor, but a man to: Therefore he ought not only to respect his Empire and
rule, but also his own condition and nature. For vvheras he is a man, he has
subjects of the like estate with himself: and the nature of man, is made
after the Image and likeness of God. Wherefore he ought not so cruelly and
outragiously to slay the image of god, least the maker of that image should be
incensed thereby to wrath. He should rather consider that this extremity is
used only for an image of brass: and none there is, unless he be mad, but can
tell the difference between a dead and senseless thing, and that which has
both life and soul. Let him also remember this, that it is easy for us, for
one Image of brass to restore many. But he for all his power, is not able to
make one hear of them that shall be destroyed for it. With report hereof, the
good Emperor was quieted, and in stead of cruelty extended courtesy. But
since Idolatry has taken root, how many thousand christians have without
redemption been burned and hanged, only for disprouing ye abuse of Imagry? And
with them that be wedded to their own wills, yet to this day a greater fault
it is, to speak against an Image of any kind of metal, than doing of a
trespass against the majesty of God. And therefore we see that pictures and
Images which partly of Gentilitie, partly of a blind and foolish zeal, were
received at the first to be signs of good will, and prouocations to virtue,
have been in process, the destruction of Religion, and maintenance of gross
Idolatry. I omit ye offense and cause of stumbling unto the weak, Deuteronomy. 20.
Leuit. 19. Math. 18.
which in the scripture is often accursed. Justinius in his book de Monarchia,
shows how man's nature had understanding at the first granted, to ye end
that the truth might be learned of them, and the true worship of the one God,
the only maker and Lord of all. But the Devils malice craftily came in place,
and caused men to forget their own estate, and the maisty of God, for their
own imaginations. Which thing, experience it self has taught us, that the
flesh deliting in her own devises, has made us prone above al other faults,
to supersticion and wicked worshippings. Esaias says, Cap. 2.
Their land was full of Idols and they worshipped the work of their own
hands. Wherein, the order of words is to be noted, how first the Prophet does
name the matter, be it silver or gold: then afterward he co^mes to the use,
which consequently always does follow. For it ca^ not be chosen, but with the
Idol must go the abuse: as of the fire if ye lay on wood, arises flame. Nor
only in our days this vile corruption has had the upper hand, but by the
same deceitful train, ever from the beginning, Satan has inuegled ye hearts
of the simple. Ezechiell affirms, Cap. 20.
that when the Israelites were yet in Egypt, they had rebelled against ye Lord,
they had not cast away the abominations of their eyes, nor yet forsaken the
Idols of the country: wherefore God intending to weane them from the breast of
fornication, to leave the sucking of such dregs of Idolatry, for this only
respect, delivered unto them most part of his ceremonies. Yet all they were
not able to keep them within the compass of Gods true service, but that they
would fall to their own inventions. We see how they forced Aaron, Exodus 32.
before his brother Moses could desce^d from the mount, to make them a golden
Calfe, to fall down and do worship to it. We see how when they were in the land
of promise, under their Judges and their Kings, they went a madding after their
Idols. We see that after ye zealous kings Ezechias and Josias had reformed
religion, 2. Reg. 21. and.23.
ye people were so prone to ye contrary, that immediately upon their deceasse,
they returned again to their old vomit. Yea when ye ten tribes were brought to
captivity, for serving God otherwise than he would, ye tribe of Judah, was not
by this their brethrens plague amended: nor when they were brought under yoke
themselves, they considered any whit the cause of their distress, which was ye
forsaking of their Lord and God. For being in Babylon, they went as nere as
they could to ye rytes of Gentilitie: and restored again unto the land of
promise, under Antiochus they fell again. Such is the violent persuasion of
error, such is the force of supersticion, that as soon as ever occasion is
ministered, our corrupt nature enclineth to it. Whereof we need to fetch no
further proof, than our own days. That Idol of Winchester Stephen Gardyner,
subscribed in king Edwardes reign against the use of Images, comparing them to
a childs book, that ought to be taken from him if he only delited in the
golden cover: Yet in Queen Mary's days, he forgot himself, and commanded
them every where to be erected. For.xiiij. year together, as by good
depositio^s it is to be seen, he preached against the Popes supremacy,
vehemently, pythily, earnestly, very earnestly, forwardly: but as soon as ever
opportunity served him, he brought (in the Devils name) the Idol in again.
What shall I speak of men's private doings? generally we heard in our Josias
reign, when he had pulled down the hie places, that our affections had been
laid to low, that we had been deceived. And as for Pilgrimages, pardons, and
such idle toys, who would defend them? who would not confess, that they had
been abused by them? yet in that terrible Interraigne of Antichrist, a
Pilgrimage in Wales was straight erected. Fair fruit followed. Much resort
unto it: and never any of the learned fathers opened once his mouth against it.
Such is the trust to men: So ready and apt we are, to follow (as the Prophet
says, and as I did allege before) the abominations of our own eyes,
attempering Gods service unto our outward senses. Whereby it commes to pass,
as Lactantius does say, vt Relligio nulla sit, De fall. Rel 1.2. Cap. 19.
vbi simulachrum est, that no Relligion is there, where an Image is. And since
(to come near to our present purpose) Crosses in market places, and not in
Churches, are (as by good proof we find) great stumbling stones not only to
the simple, but also to such as will seem to be wyser: impossible me think, it
is, a Cross to be erected, in place of Gods service, and him, that hanged on
the Cross, to be honored as he ought. For the mind is rapt from heavenly
consideration, to the earthly creature: from the soul, to the substance: from
the heart, to the eye. Cause we can assign none other, but as the same
Lactantius, does say. Esse aliquam peruersam potestate^, De fall. Rel. li. 2.
Cap. 1.
qua veritatis sit semper inimica: quae humanis erroribus gaudeat: cui vnicum
ac perpetuum sit opus, offundere tenebras, and hominum caecare mentes, ne lucem
videant, ne denique in caelum aspiciant, ac natural corporis sui seruent. There
is a certain perverse power, which always is enemy unto the truth: which
takes pleasure in man's error: whose only and continual work it is, to
ouercast clouds and mistes of darkness, to blind the minds of men that
they see not the light: that they look not up into heaven, and keep the nature
of their own body. For where as other living creatures, in that they have not
received wit and reason, bend groueling to the ground, but we have an upright
state, a countenance aloft, from God our maker given us: it appears that ye
religion, and service of God accords not unto men's reason, which bends and
bows the heavenly creature, to worship, to kneel, to knock to the earthly.
God would have us to look upon the heavens, to seek for our religion there, in
that place, which is the seat of his glory: to behold him in heart, whom,
with our eye we can never see. And is not this an extreme folly, yea a mere
madness, to advance the metal which is but corruptible, to abase ye mind
which is eterne? where as the shape and proportion of our bodies, do teach
us no less, but that our minds should be lifted thither, whetherward ye see
our heads erected? yet has our enemy so enchaunted us, that we have for his
sake forsaken our friend: forgotten God and our selves to. But he has not done
this at once and altogether: by a little and a little he has crept in upon us,
til at the length he has wholly possessed us. At the first, Images among
Christen men, were only kept in private houses: painted or graven in story
wise: which had some meaning and signification in the^. Afterward they crept
into the Church, by a zeal not according to knowledge, as by Paulinus at Nola:
yet nothing less was meant, than worship of them. So that at the first, they
seemed in some respect to be tolerable, as means to excite men to
thankfulness and devotion: until the Devil showed himself in his likeness,
and turned the glory of the immortal God, to the service of a vile and earthly
creature. Yet if we had not seen that effect follow, which in deed we have, to
lamentably, to the desperate destruction of many christen souls, we might
notwithstanding justly condemn the whole faithless and fond invention. For it
was but a wilworship, a naughty service, having no ground of the word of God,
and only spring of error and Gentilitie. For according to the commandment of
the Almighty. Deuteronomy. 12.
Every man must not do, what soever seems good in his own eyes. What
soever God has commanded us, we must take heed to it: neither adding any
thing unto it, nor taking any thing away from it. Likewise the Prophet Jeremy
Ierem. 23.
does advise us: Not to hearken to them that speak the vision of their own
heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord. For what is chafe to wheat?
And the Apostle to the same effect, Romans 14.
What soever is not of faith, is sin: faith is by hearing, and hearing by
the word of God. Wherefore Tertullian does well affirm. quod nobis nihil
licet de nostro arbitrio indulgere, De pres. aduers. Heret.
sed nec eligere quod aliquis de arbitrio suo induxerit. Apostolos domini
habemus authors, qui nec ipsi quidque de suo arbitrio quod inducerent,
elegerunt, sed acceptam a Christo disciplinam, fideliter nationibus
assignarunt. That it is not lawful for us, to flatter our selves with any
thing of our own judgment and discretion: nor to chose that, which any man
has brought in of his own head, we have the pattern of the Apostles for us:
which took nothing to bring in after their own pleasure, but faithfully
assigned to the nations, the doctrine yt they had received of Christ. Ciprian
also. Cecilio fratri. Epis. 6 8.
Non hominis consuetudinem sequi oportet, sed Dei veritatem: cum per Esaiam
Prophetam Deus loquatur and dicat: Sine causa autem colunt me, mandata et
doctrinas hominum docentes: Et iterum, Dominus in Euangelio hoc idem repetat,
dicens: Reijcitis mandatum Dei, vt traditionem vestram statuatis. We must not
follow the custom of man, but the truth of God: in as much as he speaks by
his Prophet Esaias and says: They honor me in vain, teaching the doctrines and
precepts of men. And again in the Gospel, Christ himself repeateth the same,
saying: Ye refuse the commandment of God, to establish your own tradition.
And learned Austin does teach us no less, writing on this sort. Extat
authoritas diuinarum Scripturarum, De Trinita. lib. 3. Cap. 11.
vnde men's nostra deuiare non debet, nec relicto solidamento diuini eloquij:
per suspicionum suarum abrupta praecipitari, vbi nec sensus corporis regit, nec
perspicua ratio veritatis elucet. There is extant with us the authority of
holy Scripture, from the which our mind ought not to swerve: nor leaving the
substantial ground of Gods word, run hedlong on the perilles of our own
surmises, where we neither have sense of body to rule us, nor apparent reason
of truth to direct us. Wherefore sith the scripture has taught, and Fathers
confirmed, that only God is sufficient scholemaster: and his word prescribes
us one certain order, Each man by preaching to be instructed in the truth,
What should we run to dumb Doctors, which take out nothing else, but lessons
of lies? For as Hieremie says, Cap. 10.
Eruditio vanitatum, lignum. The stock is a doctrine of vanity. And Abakuk.
An Image is the teacher of lies. Cap. 2. Joan. 5.
Shall we then discredit the counsel of our God, saying: Scrutamini
scripturas: Search ye the Scriptures: and follow the devise of the Devil,
teaching Contemplamini picturas: Look upon pictures? Let men bring in, what
pretense they lust, that Images do serve for men's instruction: yet evident
it is, that they came from Gentilitie, Eccl. hist. li. 7. Cap. 18.
and that does Eusebius prove. For he reports, that he saw in the City of
Caesarea, a certain Image. But where? Ante domus illius fores. Before the
door in the streate, not in the Church: which old men said was made as like
to Jesus as it could. Another Image there was made like a woman kneeling before
Christ, holding up her hands, containing the history of her, Math. 9.
that was diseased with the issue of blood. Now come to the judgment of the
ecclesiastical writer on it. Nec mirum videri debet, eos qui ex gentibus olim
a seruatore nostro curati sunt, ista fecisse: quando et Apostolorum illius
imagines, Pauli videlicet et Petri, demque et ipsius Christi, in tabulis
coloribus depictas asseruari vidimus: quod veteres ex gentili consuetudine, eos
quos seruatores putarunt, ad hunc modum honorare soliti fuerint. that is to
say. Nor it ought to seem any marvel, that they which from among the Gentiles
were cured of our Savior, did these things: where as we have seen the
pictures of his Apostles, of Paul and Peter, of Christ himself, reserved in
tables, set forth with colors, because men of old time (by custom that came
from the Gentiles) were wont to honor on this sort them, that they thought
to be the helpers and preseruers of them. In which words.ij. things are
especially to be observed. First that erecting of Images came from Paganism,
when such as were newly converted to the christianity, could not clearly be
weaned from all their Gentilitie: no more than we returning from popery, can
willingly leave the rags of Rome. And surely many things might be borne withal
in them, which being far stepte in years, came at length to the truth, and
hardly forsook that, that all their lives they had been inured to. And therefore
as in Paganism they made Images of them that had well deserved: so in
Christianity, they did the like obseruaunce to Christ and his Apostles.
Furthermore by the testimony of Eusebius it appears, that in his time (which
was three hundred and.xxv. year after Christ,) neither Images nor pictures,
nor any such counterfets, were brought into the Churches: nor yet received of
all Christians, (for he made a wonder and strange sight, of that that he there
saw) but only privately some took it up: not for religion, not for Gods
service, but for a witness of their own good wills: as we in our houses have
the pictures of them whom we hold dearest, and do love best. The first that
ever we do read of, to have brought in Imagry into the Church, was Pontius
Paulinus a bishop of Nola, which lived in the reign of Theodosius and Martian
Emperors, four hundred and three score year after Christ. The occasion of
his inconsiderate zeal was this. The people were accustomed every year once,
to celebrate the feast of Faelix the martyr: and in the church to banquet and
make good cheer. The bishop seeing some abuse therein, to ye end he might keep
them from surfeiting and riot, caused the walls of the temple to be painted
with stories, taken out of the old testament: that they beholding and
considering the pictures, might give themselves the more to temperance and
sobriety. About the same time, Prudentius reports, how he saw painted and
portrayed in the Church, the history of S. Cassian. Thus Imagry came from
private houses, to public places: from paynting also, to embossing: yet
neither privately nor openly, painted or embossed, we read that they were
honored: Until it was about six hundredth year after Christ, when through
barbaritie, of Goths and Vandales (which burst into Italy, spoiled all places,
and burned libraries) virtue decayed, learning went to wreck, Religion was
little seen unto: Then by commen ignorance of Gods word, negligence of the
bishops, and unruly reign of barbarous aliens, Images were not only set up,
but began to be worshipped. Therefore Serenus bishop of Massile the head town
of Gallia Narbonensis, now called the Province, seeing the people by occasion
of Images, fall to Idolatry, brake all that were in that City, to pieces: were
they either of Christ, or of his saints. And was therefore complained upon, to
Gregory ye first of that name then bishop of Rome. And as this was ye first
learned bishop, that did allow the open having of Images in Churches: so upon
him, do all image worshippers at this day ground their defense. Epist. libr 7
Indict. 2. Cap. 109.
He reproved Serenus, for breaking down of them: he commended the having of
them, but the worshipping of them, he utterly condemned. He would not have had
it to be abolished, which was set up not to be worshipped, but only to
instruct the minds of the ignorant. He would have had ye sight of the Story,
but the service and honor to the thing that was seen, he willed by all means
to be avoided. How well this doctrine took place afterward, how sone the thing
wherein he minded best, came to wickedest end, the horrible mischieues that in
the East and Weast Churches insued, are a lamentable example to us. For
although the Images taught not the people, but blinded them in deed: though
contrary to Gregory's determination, they were abused to most damnable
Idolatry: yet have they had, and yet have, their defenders, yea with such
zeal, such earnest affection this quarrel of Images has been maintained,
Fruits of Images.
that it bred a schism between the East and the Weast Churches: that it
engendered hatred between one christian and another: set Counsel against
counsel: Church against Church: Prince against Prince. Hence rose rebellions,
treasons, unnatural and cruel murders: the daughter digging up, and burning
her father the Emperor his bones: the mother murdering her own son, being an
Emperor. At the last the tearing in sunder of Christendom and the Empire, into
two pieces: till the Infidels, the Turks, (the common enemies to both parts)
have most cruelly vanquished, destroyed and subdued, the one whole part, all
the Empire of Greece: and have won a great piece of the other Empire, and put
all Christendom in most dreadful fear and horrible danger. Al which matters
are in the discourse more at large opened. Gregory therefore, if he had lived
but a while longer, and seen the least part of all the miseries, which all the
world has felt since, only for maintenance of those Mammots: he would, and
well might have cursed himself, for leaving behind him so leude a President.
But by the way, to prosecute a little the two points of Gregory's
determination. First, that they teach not according to his will: then, that they
be worshipped contrary to his will: If any instruction might be taken of them,
and there were no peril annexed to them, God that omitted nothing, necessary
for our salvation and comfort, would not so earnestly in scripture have
forbidden them. I refer you to the places themselves, most manifest in that
behalf, to many to be rehearsed. But I have quoted the Book, the Chapter and
the sentence, that you may easily find them, and I exhort you to reading of
them. Exodus 20.4. Leuit. 19.4. Numer. 23.23. Deuteronomy. 4. from the first sentence
to the.48. Psalm. 115.4. and so forth. Psalm. 135.15. Sap. 13.14.15. Esaias. 40.18.
and forward. Esaias. 42.8. Esaias. 44.9 Ezechiel. 6. Baruch. 6. Act. 7.48. Act.
15.28. Romans 1. 1. Cor. 5.10. 1. Cor. 10.14. 2. Cor. 6.14. Gal. 5.20. 1. John.
5.21. And although there be none that think the gold and silver, the stock
or the stone, to be God himself: yet is it great prejudice, great derogation
from the glory of God, to seek so great a God after so base a sort. Yet
seking it is not, but rather forsaking: whatsoever pretext, or good intent go
with it. Iud. 17.
Michah when he had stolen the.xj.C. Sicles of silver from his mother: being
somewhat religious otherwise, and fearing the curse that she laid upon the
thief, confessed the fact, and brought the goods home again. His mother was
glad, and as the story witnesses, did dedicate straight the silver for her
son: not to any idol, but to God himself, and made an image of it. When this
was don, Michah set it up in his own house, builded a chapel, made an altar,
prepared furniture, appointed service for it, the Ephod, the Teraphin, the
Albe, and the Vestement, the Leuite of Bethlehem, the Priest deputed for it.
And say not here that I think Ephod to be Latin for an Albe, and Teraphin for
a Vestement. But I know that by the names of Ephod and Teraphin, all
superstitious attire is signified. Thus they pretended to serve God with an
Image. Thus theft gave occasion of superstitions. Thus Idols brought in
Oratories, chapels and altares, sacrifices, vestementes and such like, which
al be utterly condemned of the Lord. For it follows in the history. In those
days there was no King in Israel: but every man did that, which was good
in his own eyes. But in the law we read, commanded the direct contrary.
No man shall do that, Deuteronomy. 12.
which seems good in his own eyes. Wherefore in the same chapter a certain
place is prescribed, where Gods service should be. And afterward to the same
intent, first the tabernacle and the one only altar, then the temple it self
was builded by Solomon. Nor the temple was sooner reared, than a certain and
due form of Gods service was appointed: from which if the people any deal
swarued, it was holden fornication. And the Prophets cried out: Dereliquistis
dominum and seruijstis Dijs alienis. Iere. 2.5.11.13.
Ye have forsaken the Lord and served strange Gods. This as Michah did for
devotion, Jeroboam afterward did for policy. For when ye kingdom of Israel
was pityfully divided, by the work of God, for Idolatry sake: and that only
the tribe of Judah, with a few of the Beniamites, cleaued to the house of
David: the rest of the ten tribes followed this wicked tirant. He, fearing
greatly least by the doctrine of the Leuits, ye kingdom might grow again
into one body, if the people according to their ancient order, went up to
Jerusalem to serve God: to the end he might estraunge the people both from
the temple and discipline of the law, partly for fear, partly for ambition,
instituted a new religion, different from that which they had received:
another than that which God appointed. Wherefore he made them two golden
Calves, 1. Regu^. 12.
not to be Idols, but to represent the true God unto them, and this in effect
he said. Ye have long taken pains to travail to Jerusalem, I pity your vvery
iourneyes, I have co^passio^ of your great expenses: I have provided therefore,
that ye may serve God nearer home, that at your own doors, ye may have the
religion, which is as acceptable unto God, as that. Well did the wise worldling
foresee, that without religion no policy could stand: and therefore he would
have a cloak of that to cover his shame withal. He brings forth Images. He
does not use any new sacrifice or solemnities unto them. But as the Israelites
in the wilderness cried to their one Calfe. These are thy Gods O Israel,
Exodus 32.
that brought thee out of the land of Egypt, So do they now cry out to their
two Calves, These are thy Gods O Israel, that brought thee out of the land of
Egypt. But as they before were not so diuelishe and beastly, to think that
Aarons Calfe, delivered them from Pharao his bondage (for Aaron himself at that
time said, Festum domini cras est, To morrow is the feast of the Lord, not
the feast of the Calfe or of the Ox) so now Jeroboam taught not, the people
believed not, that those molten things were Gods in deed, but attributed to
the sign, the name peculiar to the thing that was signified: and although they
directed their words to the Images, yet they erected their hearts unto God.
Nothwithstanding Abiah the Prophet said thus to Ieroboa^. Thou have done evil,
above all that were before thee: 1. Regu^. 14.
for thou have gone, and made thee other Gods, and molten images to provoke me,
and have cast me behind thy back. For Augustine says. Quisquis talem cogitat
deum, qualis non est deus, Quest sup. Ios. lib. 6. Cap. 29.
alienum deum vtique and falsum in cogitatione portat. Whosoever ymagineth God
to be such a one as he is not, carries in his thought a strange and a false
God. True godliness tells us, that we ought not otherwise to deem of him,
than in his word he has set forth unto us. Socrates was wont to say,
Vnumquemque Deum sic coli oportere, August de Co^. Euan li. 1. cap. 18.
quomodo seipsum colendum esse praecepisset. Every God was so to be honored, as
he him self had given in commandment. Wherefore as Michah and Jeroboam
grievously offended: so who soever brings into Gods service any thing of his
own devise, he sins deadly: But Images, Crosses, and Crucifixes, are men's
devises, whereby they flatter themselves in pleasing God: they ought therefore
to be abhorred. Erasmus Erasmus.
says in Cathechesi. Vt imagines in templu sint, nulla praecipit vel humana
constitutio. He makes an argument from the less to the more: saying, that not
so much as man's constitution, does bind that Images should be in Churches:
therefore much less the law of God. For God seeing the inconvenience that
should by them arise unto us, utterly forbad them: as the places above
rehearsed, prove. Let not therefore the disguising cloak of a good intent, make
us shake of the true garment of God, to transgress his commandment, and
derogate from his glory. Who soever lead us but a little awry, from the path
that Christ has willed us to tread in, lead us the right way to ye Devil of
hell. Beware ye therefore of these Syrene times, these enchaunting charms,
that wise men of the world are wont to use, saying: Bear for a time. Use
discretion. Be not to rash in reformation. We ought rather to hearke^ to Christ
himself, Iean. 12.
which wills us To walk vvhilest we have the light. If we suffer mistes to
be ouercaste the clear shyning sun, darkness shall sooner overtake us than
we would. There is but one gate whereby we must enter into eternal life.
There is but one way to bring us to our iourneyes end. The least strayning in
the world, shall make us come never thither. And yet not only for our own
sakes, but also for Christ's cause, we must take a wise way herein. For they
that go about to bereue us of our life (which is hydden in Christ) would as
well that God should be disgraced in us. Wherefore in controversies of our
religion, we should not only have respect to this, how dear our own
salvation is to us, but also how far, we further and advance the glory of
our God. Then if it were so, that Images were commanded (as they are not) and
had their end to teach (as they do not) both our own profit, and honor of
our God, might make us the willinger to embrace them. But as they are not
commanded, but accursed: so bring they no knowledge, but blind in ignorance.
For if they do teach, it is for the shape and not for the substance. Otherwise,
the trees in the wood, and silver in the shop, might teach as well as they. If
the shape do work an understanding in us, because it is made, as the Image of
a man, or of a woman: then why not one Image teach as well as another? Shall
the gayer coat, which makes us peradventure more couetously disposed, or more
wa^tonly affected, strike a more zeal of devotion into us? We have seen
Images in every Church: specially of Ladies, and of the Cross: then, why did
they gadde from London, to Wilsdon, from Wilsdon to Walsingham, to seek for
other Ladies? Could not the one teach as much as the other? Their eloquence,
their voice, and diligence, was all alyke. Why did my country men, from their
own parishes, where they had crosses ynowe, come on pilgrimage so often, to the
very Cross of Ludlowe? Why did they run from every corner of their own
country, to the Roode of Chester? Unless ye will say (as many thought in
deed) that the iron chain, of that sturdy champion, put about the neck,
might save them from the hempen halter: which other could not do. Then must it
needs be somewhat else than teaching, that makes this people, to give unequal
honor, to signs of equal saints. Alexander the Coppersmyth will come in with
his band, and there will be a stir, which shall be the dearest Diana to the^.
Otherwise, they would no more crouche to this Image or that, than they do to
the Bible, which teaches (me think) as much as they. Again if they teach,
let me ask them, whom? Learned? or unlearned? If they teach the unlearned,
how can they know the picture of Christ, from the picture of Peter? Because
of the Cross? Why, both were crucified. But not after one sort. How know
they that? They have learned it of other. But here they have lost the state
that they were in, for they are now become to be learned. Of other also they
might have learned more lessons than that, and of more certaynty. But the crown
of Thorn, the wou^d in the side, do make the matter plain. Alas how shall
the simple know, that Christ was crowned, was wounded for us? They have heard
it of M. Parson: let M. Parson then preach it to them. If he preach not a
truth with his tongue, the picture by and by will teach a lie. I remember how
Stephen Gardener Stephen Gardener
(whose authority I use in aunswering of him who was Usher of the school
where he was Bishop of the Sea) was fowly once abused by an Image. Where as
the King in his great seal was set on both sides, on the one side as in war
the chief captain, on the other side as in peace the liege sovereign: that
famous bishop had found out there S. George on horseback, which the grauer
never made in it, nor the Sealer never sealed with it. Yet in his letters to M.
Vaugham of Portesmouth, answered afterward by the Counsel, concerning the
same matter which we have now in hand: He uses these words. He that can not
read the scripture about the Kings broad seal, either because he can not
read it at all, or because the way does not express it, yet he can read S.
George on horseback on the one side. If his learned Lordshippe, could not
read aright such a common Image, if the inscription could escape his eyes: no
marvel if the lay people were deceived in the like. I will tell you what these
books do teach them. Carnal and gross ymaginations of God: and give further
occasion to feed their own wicked humor. When Amadys Amadys.
a Goldsmith of London, lay at the point of death, his Parson presented him
with the Cross, to put him at the least, in remembrance of his maker. But
what his remembrance was helped thereby, his answer declares. For he raised
himself in his bed and said, What is the price of an ovvnce? Such is the fruit
that the unlearned receive by Images, yea, though they be of the best sort. As
for the learned, they have better books: they need not to be warned with such
idle workmanship. A lively Image is more to purpose than a dead. And if the
proportion and shape of a man, may move us, then why not of the living, rather
than the dead? If I see a poor man stretched on the Cross in deed, enemies
scorning him, power oppressing him: and death aflicting him: he may for the
remembrance do me more good, and for peril less harm. For I need not to
doubt Idolatry to him. But if I nail a dead picture, on the material Cross,
and set it up in the Church, my memory is little mended. I may peradventure,
and not like to the contrary but I shall be miss led by it. Now suppose it were
so, that a Crucifixe in the Church did tell me in deed in most significant and
plain letters, that Christ on the Cross died? what am I the better for that,
unless I know that he dyed for me, and the mean how his death may be applied
to me? But this by no picture can be expressed. The promises in the word must
declare me that, without the which nothing is the image, yea, worse than
nothing. Will ye then have us to be put in mind of our estate and condition,
of our redemption in Christ? No picture can represent it, no piece of metal
can set out that, which all the preaching, all the writing in the world, is
not able sufficiently to beat into our dull and forgetful heads. Objection.
But often we see that by the Image or Story, our memory is helped. Hereto I
answer, first, that it is an extraordinary, and therefore an unlawful
mean: condemning the negligence of them that should be perfecter and lively
remembrauncers: and excluding (as it were) the word of God, from his proper
function. Then also there ought not any such forgetfulness to rest in us:
Christ has willed us thereof to be mindful ever: we should not stand in
need of more outward helps, than he (expert of our infirmities) has of his
mercy provided for us. Consider this with your selves, that if an Image be put,
it is an Image of God, or an Image of man. God is invisible, and has no body:
how can he then be portrayed? Shall we give a shape to him, that has no shape?
The Lord spoke unto you (says Moses) out of the middle of fire. Deuteronomy. 4.
You heard the voice or sound of his words, but you did see no form or shape
at al. And by and by follows. Take heed therefore diligently unto your
souls. You savve no manner of Image, in the day in the which the Lord spoke
unto you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire: least peradventure you being
deceived, should make to your selves any graven Image, or likeness of man or
woman. And again in the same chapter. Bevvare that thou forgette not the
covenant of the Lord thy God, which he made with them, and so make to thy
self any carved Image, which the Lord has forbidden to be made. For the Lord
thy God is a consuming fire, and a ielous God. Thus God does earnestly and often
call upon us, to mark, and take heed, and that upon the peril of our
souls, to the charge that he gives us. Then by a solemn and long rehearsal
of all things in heaven, in earth, and in the water, he forbids any Image or
likeness of any thing to be made. There follows also the penalty: the
horrible destruction, with a solemn invocation of heaven and earth to record,
denounced and threatened to all transgressors of this commandment. Therefore
in the old law, the myddle of the propitiatory (which represented Gods
seat) was empty: least any should take occasion to make any similitude or
likeness of him. Esaias after he has set forth the incomprehensible Majesty of
God, he asks: Esaias. 40.
To whom then vvil ye make God like, or what similitude vvil ye set up unto
him? Shall the caruer make him a carved image, and shall the goldesmith cover
it with gold, or cast him into a form of silver plates? And for the poor
man, shall the Image maker frame an Image of timber, that he may have somevvhat
to set up also? And after this he cries out. O vvretches, heard ye never of
this? has it not been preached to you since the beginning, how by the
creation of the world, and the greatness of the work, they might understand
the majesty of God, the maker and creator of all, to be greater than that it
could be expressed or set forth in any Image or bodyly similitude? Thus far
the Prophet Esaias, who from the.44. Chapter to the.45. entreats in a manner of
no other thing. Act. 17.
And S. Paul evidently teaches the same, that no similitude can be made unto
God, in gold, silver, stone, or any other matter. By these and many other
places of scripture, it is evident, that no Image either ought, or can be made
unto God. For how can God a most pure spirit, whom man never saw, Joan. 1.
be expressed by a gross, bodyly and visible similitude? How can the infinite
majesty and greatness of God, incomprehensible to man's mind, much more not
able to be compassed with the sense, be expressed in a finite and little Image?
How can a dead and a dumb Image, express the living God? What can an Image,
which, when it is fallen, can not rise up again, which can neither help his
friends, nor hurt his enemies, express of the most puissant and mighty God, who
alone is able to reward his friends, and destroy his enemies everlastingly? S.
Paul says: that such as have framed any similitude of god, Romans 1.
like a mortal man, or any other Image of him in timber, stone, or other
matter, have changed his truth into a lie. Wherefore they that make any Image
of God, are plainly conuicte to be godless persons. I may reason with them as
Arnobius does with the Gentiles. Si certum est, Lib. 6. paulo post princip.
apud vos Deos esse quos remini, atque in summis caeli regionibus degere, quae
causa, quae ratio est, vt simulachra ista fingantur a vobis, cum habeatis res
certas, quibus preces possitis effundere, and auxilium rebus in exigentibus
postulare? If you be assured (says he) that they which you think be Gods
in deed, and dwell in the high regions of Heaven: what cause, what reason is
there, that you make these Images, whereas ye have sure and certain things,
whereto ye may pour out your prayers, and crave help when your need
requires? So if we have a God in deed, Objection.
what do we with his Image? Forsooth because we can not see God any
otherwise: we must both see him and serve him, on this sort. So said the
Heathen and Idolaters. Arn obius lib. 6.
Quia Deos videre datum non est, eos per simulachra colimus, and munia
officiosa prestamus. Because it is not granted us to see the Gods (quod
they) therefore we honor them by their Images, and do our duties toward
them. But what does this aunciente father answer them? The same that I do to
all our Imagemongers. Hoc qui dicit and asserit, Deos esse non credit, nec
hahere conuincitur suis religionibus fidem: cui opus est videre quod teneat, ne
inane forte sit, quod obscurum non videtur. He that says and affirms this,
believes that there is no God at all, and is convinced, that he gives no
credit to his own religion: in as much as he must needs see that, that
he must hold: least happyly it fall out to be nothing, which is not apparent
to the eye to be something. And least peradventure ye say, that these words
of Arnobius, can not be applied unto our age, because he speaks of Gods,
and we acknowledge but one God (although I might answer that we having for
the Image of our one GOD in specialtie, the same excuse, which they in
generaltye, had for all their Gods, are proved to be in the same fault with
them, and being in the same fault, must be partakers of the like shame) yet
let us see whether his own Scholar, which knew his masters meaning best,
did not apply the pretensed reason, to our one God, and Image of him.
Lactantius de falsa Relligione. Li. 2. cap. 2.
Verentur ne omnis illorum religio, inanis sit and vacua, si nihil in presenti
videant quod adorent: and ideo simulachra constituunt, quae quia mortuorum sunt
Imagines, similia mortuis sunt, omni enim sensu carent. Dei autem in aeternum
viuentis, viuum and sensibile debet esse simulachrum. That is to say: they are
afraid least their religion be void, and to no purpose, if they see nothing
presently that they may worship: and therefore they make counterfets, which
because they are Images of the dead, are like to the dead, for they be
without sense: But the Image of God who lives for ever, must be lively and
sensible. So far Lactantius. Wherefore since God is not like unto these, for
he is living, but these are dead: he has neither hand nor foot, but these
have both, though they neither strike, nor stand of them selves: he is neither
old nor young, but these are painted, some gracious, some grisley, some lustye,
some rustye: it follows that they are not the Images of God, which are made
by the hand of man. For as Lactantius says: Simulachrum a similitudine nomen
accepit. An Image, has taken his name of likeness.

But some of the adversaries will not in this contend with me. They may
perhaps grant an abuse in the Image of the Father (whom notwithstanding
they have suffered to stand in every Church and Chapel, like an old man,
with a gray bearde, and a furred gown, even as the Paynters conceyte did serve
him) But the Image of the Son, because he is made man for our sakes, may (as
a man) be set forth unto us. And therefore they write, how Christ did send
his picture to Abgar King of Edissenes. But as it is not like, that any such
matter should be, and Eusebius writing the history at the full, omit it: so
that we neither may, nor ought, make any Image of Christ himself, shall by good
reason appear. And first imagine that it were possible, to have the true
counterfeit of Christ: It follows not therefore that we ought to have it. For
in all cases, that concern religion, it is not only to be enquired, whether a
thing may be done or no: but whether it be lawful and agreeable to Gods word
to be done or no. For all wickedness may be, and is daily done, which yet
ought not to be done. De vera Reli. To. 1 Cap. vltimo.
Wherefore Augustine counsels us, That we love not those sightes that be
subject to the eye: least svvaruing from the truth, and loving shadows, we
be cast into darkness. Let not our Religion consiste in our own fancies: for
any truth whatsoever it be, is better than any thing, that can of our own
head be devised of us. But some will say what truth have ye for you, Objection.
that Images are utterly forbidden? I might refer them to that which is said
and proved before: but because they are contentious, I will add somewhat else:
yet nothing beside the commandment it self. Thou shall not make any
likeness of any thing in heaven above, Exodus 20.
in earth beneath, or in the water under the earth. Could any more be
forbidden and said than this? either of the kinds of Images, which be either
carved, molten, or otherwise similitudes: or of things whereof Images are
forbidden to be made? Are not all things either in heaven, earth, or water
under the earth? Be not our Images of Christ and his Cross, likenesses of
things in heaven, earth or under the earth? Objection.
If they say that this com^aun^ement concerns the Jews only to whom the
law was given. I answer with all the fathers of the Church, that it was
moral, and not ceremonial. Therefore it byndeth as well us as them. Objection.
If they say that these and such other prohibitions, concern the Idols of the
Gentiles, and not our Images: In Epist. ad Joan. patriar. Ierosoli.
Epiphanius shall answer them, who did rent a painted cloth, wherein was the
picture of Christ, or of some Saint, affirming it To be against our Religion,
that any such Image should be had in the temple. Ireneus also shall answer
them: Li. 1 cap. 24.
who reproved the heretics, called Gnostici, for that they carried about, the
Image of Christ, made truly after his own proportion in Pilates time (as they
said) and therefore more to be esteemed, than these lying Images of him, which we
now have. Augustine also shall answer, De ciuitat Dei. libr. cap. 3.
who greatly allows M. Varro, affirming, that religion is most pure without
Images, and says himself: Images be of more force to croke an unhappy soul,
than to teach and instruct it. And he says further. Every child, yea, every
beast, In. Psalm. 3^ and Psalm. 1^
knovveth that it is not God that they see. Wherefore then does the holy Ghost
so often vvarne us, of that which al men know? He answers, thus. For when
Images are placed in temples, and set in honorable sublimitie, and begin once
to be worshipped, forthwith breeds the most vile affection of error. Thus
all the Doctors have thought the commandment to extend to us: and that our
Images are forbidden by it. Now if they will yet reply and say: Objection.
that Images are in deed forbidden: not to be had, but to be worshipped: for
otherwise the works in clothes of Arras, the Images in Princes coins, the
art of Paynting, and Caruing. etc. were wicked: I answer to this: that Images
for no superstition, Images of none worshipped, nor in danger to be
worshipped, are in deed tolerable: but Images placed in public Temples, can
not be possibly without danger of worshipping, and therefore are not there to be
suffered. The Jews to whom this law was first given, (who should of
congruence, have the true sense and meaning of it) thought that it was so
generally to be taken, that neither in the beginning, they had any Images
publicly in their Temples, Anti. Iud. li. 17. cap. 8. Lib. 18. ca^ Lib. 18.
ca 1
as Josephus writes, neither after the restitution of the Temple would by any
means consent to Herod, Pilate, or Petronius, that Images in the Temple at
Jerusalem, should be placed only, although no worship was required at their
hands: but rather offered themselves to the death, than to assente that Images
should once be placed in the Temple of God: neither would they suffer any Image
maker to dwell among them. Origin adds this cause. Least their minds should
be plucked from God, to the conte^plation of earthly things. The Turks taking
some part of their religion, observe to this day ye same. Cap. 10.
For he that writes their story annexed to ye Alchoran, says: Picturas seu
sculpturas omniu^ Imaginu^ sic abhorrent and detestantur, vt Christianos qui in
hijs tantu^ delectantur, Idololatras and cultores Demonum vocent, and in
veritate esse credant. Vnde dum essem in Chio, and ambasiatoribus Turcorum pro
recipie^do tributo illuc venientibus, introductis in Ecclesiam nostram, vellem
persuadere de Imaginibus: nequaque acquiescentes, sed omnibus rationibus
refutatis hoc solum affirmabant, Vos idola colitis. Which words may thus be
turned into English. They so abhor and detest all painting and grauing of any
Images, that they call, and verily believe, the Christians that only delight in
them, to be Idolaters and worshippers of Devils. Wherefore, when I was in Chio,
and would have persuaded the embassators of the Turks, which came thither to
receive tribute, (after I had brought them into our Church) as touching Images,
they would not agree, but refuting all reason, this only they affirmed, You
worship Idols. And surely Jews and Turks will never come to our religion,
while these stumbling blocks of Images remain amongst us, and lie in their
way. Now that I have proved, as well by the words of Scripture, as by the
true sense and meaning of it, so understood of all the faithful, that it is a
piece of infidelity, to have an Image in place of Gods service: it might
suffice to decise the controversy that is in hand. But an Image can not be
made of Christ, unless it be a lying Image, as the Scripture peculiarly
calls Images lies, as I proved before. his humanity, where as we are by
Christ's own words commanded, that al should so honor the son, as they honor
ye father. Io. 5.
But against this, a crafty Papist may reply and say, that by the same reason,
it is not lawful to paynt a man, for he consists of soul and body: and the
soul which is the chief part of him, no art or cunning is able to express.
But I answer to this, that the reason is nothing like. For the soul may be
severed from the body: as daily, by death, we see experience: nor it is
impiety to think upon or behold, the shape of a man without a soul: But the
Divinity of Christ can not be separate from his humanity: neither is it
lawful to imagine an humanity without a Divinity, least we fall into the
heresy of Nestorius, as in the third Article, where I shall have occasion to
speak of the Counsel assembled by commandment of Constantine the fifth, at
more large is opened. Oratione contra Idol.
Athanasius appoynteth two ways to come to ye knowledge of God. Animam, and
Opera, the Soul of man, which by the word, may behold the word, and so enter
into the privy chamber of the Almighty: and if that suffice not, the works of
God, whereby the invisible things of his eterne virtue and Divinity may be
seen of us. Romans 1.
Then, us to seek any new ways, since these are ordained ever since the
beginning and creation of the world, is to much foolishness. If we seek for
comparisons, and will have one thing set forth by an other, why should we not
rather follow Christ's institution, than be addicted to our own devises? Christ
in the Scripture has resembled himself to many of his creatures, which daily
and hourly, are before our eyes: And can we not be contented with them, but
make new creatures of our own heads, to put us in mind of our bounden
duties? We see the light and shining sun: and see we not the power of Christ
in it? We see the ways and doors to our houses: and see we not Christ the
ready path to heaven? We see the hens clocking of their chickens: and see we
not Christ continually calling us? We see pore shepherds feeding of their
sheep: and see we not Christ the true feder of our souls? We see our selves
ye lively Images, and perfect cou^terfets of Christ himself: and shall Christ be
forgotten unless we have a crucifix? There is nothing I promise you, but
madness in this meaning. There is nothing that can so lively express the
affects, (as I may term them) and qualities of Christ, as those things, which
he thought good to serve our understanding. Shall we then refuse the more
evident argument, and fall to the darker signification? Shall we contemn Christ
and his order, and set so much store by a blind picture? Nero, I remember, was
sometime so wanton, vt gladiatorum pugnas spectaret in Smaragdo. He had an
Emeraud in his ring, yt would give to ye eye the resemblances of things that
were before it. Wherefore when ye masters of defense, came to play their prises,
he would behold the^ in his ring. I wis he might have discerned them better if
he had looked on their own selves, and not have footed in a stone to see the^.
But nothing can content the curious: and the flesh delights in her own
devises. Thus is it proved that Images do not according to Gregory's mind,
teach: but in all respects be vain and foolish: and if they did teach, yet by
the scripture and word of God, such scholemasters are forbidden to us. Now that
they are honored contrary to his mind: experience of long time has proved,
and the Popish doctrine has confirmed. For, In Pontificali.
order is taken how they shall be hallowed. First with exorcisme of water and of
salt, then with hypocritical and blasphemous prayer: afterward with sensing,
anointing, kyssing, erecting, and an hundredth other most vile obseruances:
Priuyleges and pardons be granted to them: Candels and tapers be lighted before
them: Much gold and Jewels are bestowed on them: And least authority should
want to error, in all their sayings, in all their writings, and in their
general Counsels, they have confirmed the worshipping of them: as in the
second at Nice, and that which was assembled at Rome by Gregory the third.
But of these Idolatrous deeds and doctrines, I shall have occasion hereafter
to entreat. Suffiseth now that I have showed, how the Devil abuses the works
of God to his own purpose: how Images have crept into the Church: how
necssarily they are naught: both by the word of God, and authority of good men
condemned. And since they teach not, otherwise than lies: and are
notwithstanding honored, to the shame of us, and derogation of gods glory, they
ought in general to be removed from the place of peril: the place of Gods
service. We must not give place to our own reason: we must not measure God
with the line of our fancies, but build according to the plat laid before us,
and show our thankfulness by obedience. If we once give place to our enemy
which daily does assault us, I confess (with Martial) that we give occasion
of our own fall. If we be not circumspect and wise in Christ, we shall unawares
be set upon and betrayed. We see how he suborneth his ministers by all crafty
means to seduce us if he can. They were wont to say, There is small store of
Saints, when the Devil carries the Cross. But we may justly suspect, that
there is small goodness in the Cross, when it is carried by the Devil and his
Saints. Martial, much like to Virgils Sinon, (of whom he took a president to
make an artificial lie) for three leaves together in his Preface, tells
undoubted trothes, to the end, that the falshodes, which folishly (God wot)
he does infer, may have ye more credit. Note.
And whensoever I bring any of Martials allegations, I note in the margent the
leaf of his book, where ye shall find it, after this sort. Fol. with a. or
b. for the first, or second page, because it were vain to recite more of his
idle words, which might well increase the volume, but cumber to much and
loathe the reader. Fol. 3. b.
He begins then with a long process: and has cowched all his eloquence
together, to tell a good tale of his master the Devil. He labors busily about
ye, which no man contendes with him of. There he forgot ye rule of Logique de
Reciprocatione, that is an ill argument which serves both parts. I grant
that Satan has gone about, first by persecution and fear: afterward by fair
promises, to make the more to hang upon him. We have had experience of this in
some of his own sect, D. Harding.
whom these two Doctors, fear of Death, and hope of Promotion, within the
space of a month instructed more, than in seven years he could learn before.
We see the trial of this, in every one of the new Colligioners of Louain, who
could be contented with all their hearts to reform themselves: unless in
their M. the Devils service, they feared on the one side, a new reuolte and
rage of Antichrist: and on the other side, hoped to be bishops when the
world should turn. Rusticus expectat dum distuat amnis. They know what
follows. Now to turn the weapon on their own heads. Because the providence
and mercy of our God, has frustrate their hope in their opinion to long, they
have thought it best to make open war, against God, and al honesty: to send
for their friends, and summon their dicts in the low countries. Thence have
proceeded the popish practices. The smoky styrres that were blown in Scotland.
The fyry factions inflamed in France. The Pholish treason condemned in
England, The Popish conspiracy attempted in Ireland: that as it has been the
old wont, and all the Religion of Romish fathers, to maintain by the sword,
that rain of Romulus, first gotten by murder, to set sometime the Irene
against Constantine the syxte.
mother against the son. The Henry the.4. against Henry the.3. Emperors.
son against the father: the In England against King John and Henry the
second.
people against the Prince: So they might set realms together by the ears,
and arm the subjects against the Queen, themselves to be maintained in their
pride and hypocrisy. When this has not taken the desired effect: (God giving
wonderful and glad success to the noble furtherer of his word and glory)
they have thought it most gaynefull for them, to come in with a new battle:
a battle of books: whereof some already be come into our sight, and they
say, that more do lie in ambushe. Thanks be to God they shead no blood,
though they breath nothing else but sedition and lies. If it have pleased God,
at any time to raise, more notable instruments in his Church, as Luther,
Zvvinglius, and Calvin were: as Knokes, Latymer, and Cranmer have been, to
beat down the walls of the malignant Church: and most of them, with their
blood to bear witness to the truth: then are they condemned of the
Antichristians, and with all words of beastliness, and reproach, slaundered. But
now they have uttered themselves so far, their malice and impudence is so
apparent, that their tongue in deed is no slander at all. They were wont to
say, that a man should not beelye the Devil. What shame is it then for M.
Martial to beelye the Saints, Folio. 6. b.
as that ye reformation at Berna, should be under Zvvinglius, where he never
preached, or had ought to do? The alteration of the state in Heluetia should
be in the time of Luther and his abbettors, where as it chanced almost. CC.
years before they were borne, sub Bonifacio octauo. That knowledge of the
Gospel in England, began in Latimer and Cranmers days whereas in King Henry
the third his reign, An. 1374. not only VVickleife and many in his time, but
also the King himself, began as good matter of reformation (as ye Chronicles
report) But they will still be like themselves. And now M. Martial brags of
his masters arms, and recognisance in his forehead. Fol. 7. b.
What it is that his forehead has, more than unshamefastness, I see not: what
his tongue has, we may al be witnesses, the forward and faithful profession of
his master. Ille homicida erat ab initio, Joan. 8.
and in veritate non extitit, quia veritas in illo non est. He was a manqueller
from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in
him. Wherefore, dearly beloved, although this Ape come forth with ten Articles,
in imitation of ten Commandments, yet God be thanked, they neither be the
Commandments, therefore to be followed: nor articles of our faith, therefore to
be believed. But rather, (as in the process it shall well appear) every one (as
he consters them) swarues from the faith: and therefore by commandment we
ought to beware of them, judge you indifferently. I appeal to the conscience
of every Christian, whether we (avoiding the occasion of Idolatrye) tend any
whit to Paganism, as the Papists by their devises do, or whether (we by
removing al Images, and consequently the Cross to) do derogate from Christ
and from his passion, as they do: which having the material Cross, can not
come to the knowledge and faith of the crucified. I confess that I am more
aspre in my writing, than otherwise I would, or modesty requires. But no such
bitterness is tasted in me, as the beastliness of them (with whom I have to
do) deserves. Bear with me therefore, (I beseech you) bear with a truth in
plain speech uttered. Bayarde has forgot that he is a Horse: and therefore
if I make the stumbling iades sides to bleed, blame me not. Impute not to
malice, and impacience, that which is grounded of hatred to the crime, but love
to the persons which be touched. I hope by this means, that seeing their own
shame, they will come to more honesty: or hearing their own evil doings,
surceasse (at least wise) their evil speaking. They have nothing so rife in
their deprauing mouths, wherwithall to burden our ministry in England, as
heaping together all base occupations: to show, Fol. 9. a. b.
that the crafts men thereof be our preachers. I wis I might answer and
justify the same, that as great a number of learned, as ever were: as ancient
in standing and degree as they, supply the greatest rooms, and places of most
credit. Wherefore they do us wrong to match the simplest of our side, with
the best of theirs. As for their famous writers, Rascal, Dorman, Martial and
Stapleton which now with such confidence make their challenges, be known unto
us, what they are. But they which at home be no more known than contemned, as soon as ever they taste ye good liquor of Louain, they be great clerks,
Bachelors of Divinity, students of the same, they must be magnified, they
must be reverenced, as if Apollo suddenly had cast his cortayne about them.
But to grant that the inferior sort of our ministers were such in deed, as
these men of spyte ymagine, such as came from the shop, from the forge, from
the whyrry, from the loome: should ye not (think you) find more sincerity and
learning in them, than in all the rabble of their Popish chaplens, their
massemongers, and their soulepriests? I lament yt there are not so many good
preachers as parishes: I am sorry that some, to unskillful, be preferred. But I
never saw, that simple reader, admitted in our church: but in the time of
Popery, ye should have found in every diocese, forty six John's in every
respect, worse. I could exaggerate their case alike, and prove it better, how
Bawdes, Bastardes, and beastly abused Boys, have been called to be Bishops
among them. Sorcerers, Simoniakes, Sodomites, Pestilent, Perjured, Poysoners,
have been advanced to be Popes among them? Shall this derogate from their holy
see. Yet none of ours, of any calling, or name amongst us, can, of envy it
self, be burdened with the like. As for the Rascal of their religion, what
were they? what are they? Adulterous, Blasphemous, Covetous, Desperate,
Extreme, Folish, Gluttons, Harlots, Ignoraunts: and so go through the cross
row of letters, and truly end it with Est Amen. Therefore if they urge us any
further, with imperfection in our state, thereby to bring us into contempt and
harred: we will desce^d to particularities, and detecte their filth to the whole
world. We are not (dear Christians) the men, Folio. 9. b,
that the adversaries of the truth report us: we do not lean to our own
wisdoms: we prefer not our sayings before the decrees of ancient Fathers.
But after the advice of the fathers themselves, we prefer the Scriptures
before men's pleasures. This may we do without offense (I trust.) The Popes
themselves have permitted us this. Eleutherius the Pope, writing to Lucius King
of England, said thus unto him. Petijstu a nobis leges Romanas and Caesaris, In
the ancient records of London remaining in the Guild hall.
vobis transmitti, quibus in regno Britanniae vti voluistis: leges Romanas and
Caesaris semper reprobare posumus, legem Dei nequaquam. Suscepisti enim,
miseratione diuina, in regno Britanniae legem and fidem Christi: Habetis penes
vos in regno vtranque paginam: Ex illis per Dei gratiam, per consilium regni
vestri sum legem, and per illam Dei patientia, vestrum rege Britanniae regnum,
Vicarius vero Dei esto in regno illo. etc. Ye have required of us to send the
Roman and Imperial laws unto you, to use the same in your realm of England:
we may always reiecte the laws of Rome, and laws of the Emperor, but so can
we not the law of God. For ye have received through the mercy of God, the law
and faith of Christ into your kingdom: You have both the Testamentes in your
realm: Take out of them by the grace of God, and advise of your subjects, a
law: and by that law, through Gods sufferaunce, rule your realm. But be you
Gods Vicar in that kingdom. And so forth. If the Louanistes had but a mangled
piece of such a Presidente for the Pope, as here is for every Prince: Lord,
how they would triumph. They would desiphre, and by rethorique resolve every
letter of it. But let that pass. It is enough for this place, to show the
Popes own decree: that all men's devises, be they never so worthied, with the
name of Fathers, may justly be repelled, and ought to give place to the law of
God. Wherefore, if any of their own imagination, have brought in any thing to
Gods service not altogether consonant to the word: not we, but the word does
wipe it quite away. Did. 11. cap. Consuetudinem.
For I think it meet according to the decretall taken out of Augustine.
Consuetudinem laudare, quae tamen contra fidem Catholicam nihil vsurpare
dinoscitur: to praise the custom, which notwithstanding, is known to usurp
nothing against the catholic faith. If this faith be retained, I will not
contend with any: but the Fathers, I will with all my heart reverence. The
common place of our adversaries, is to exhort the Prince and other, to keep
the aunciente traditions of our Fathers. And I beseech them with al my heart,
that they will defend and maintain those things, which they received
according to truth. If tyranny of men has brought in any thing against the
Gospel, let not the name of Fathers, and vain opinion of antiquity, bereue
us of the sacred and everlasting verity. What greater folly can there be than
this, to measure Gods matters with the deceitful rule of man's discretion,
where the pleasure of God, revealed in his word, should only direct us? They
that plead at the bar in civil causes, will not be ruled over by examples,
but by law. Demosthenes said very well: (...). It is not meet that things
should be ordered, as otherwise they have often been. Much less should Gods
wisdom, be set to school unto man's folly. Wherefore, to conclude, Folio,
9. b. Joan. 4.
the only sweet water to quench our thyrsts, must be fet from the fountain of
Gods eternal will. There is the well that springs up into everlasting life.
Beware of the puddle of men's traditions: it infecteth often: feelde it
refreshes. We must not use the pretexte of custom, but enquire for that which
is right and good. Chrisost. in Genesis cap. 20. Hom. 56.
If any thing be good, if it profyt, and edify the church of Christ, let it be
received, yea, though it be strange. If any thing be hurtful and prejudicial,
to the true simplicity of the Gospel, let it be abandoned, though.xv.
hundredth years custom have confirmed it. For my part I crave no further
credit, than the christian conscience grounded on the word of God, shall of
indifferency, and good reason, grant me. The Lord direct your hearts in his
love and fear: confound Satan with all his wickedness: and give the glory
only to Christ. His name be praised for ever and ever. So be it.

To the first Article.
Having to erecte ye house of god, whereto we ought to be fellow workers, we are
bound especially to see to this: that neither we build on an evil ground,
thereby to lose both cost and trauail: nor set to sale and commend to other, a
ruinous thing, or any way infectious, in stead of a strong defense, or
wholesome place whereupon to rest. The Apostle commending his doctrine to the
Corinthians, says: Vt sapiens architectus, fundamentum posui. 1. Corin. 3.
As a skillful masterbuilder, I have laid the foundation: And other foundation
can no man lay, than that which is laid, which is Christ Jesus. Christ has
received of his father all things: he has conferred upon us no less: he by
his death has made entrance into life for us: he is become our wisdom, our
righteousness, our sanctification and redemption. By his name we must only be
saved: by his doctrine we must only be directed: upon that rock, that faith of
his, we must substantially be grounded. If any man teach other lessons than of
that, we must say with Paul, Si Angelus e celo, Gallath.
If an Angel from heaven, teach otherwise than the Apostles have preached to
us, let him be accursed. And with S. John, Quod audistis ab initio, id in vobis
permaneat, Let that abide in you, which you have heard from the beginning: so
shall you continue both in the son and in the father. And this is the promise
that he has promised us, 1. Joan.
even eternal life. If any man do not bring this doctrine with him, do not so
much as salute him, Joan. 14. Math. 15.
neither receive him into your houses: For he that loves God, hears his
voice, says Christ. And they in vain do worship him, that teach the doctrine
and precepts of men. Men in God his matters not to be believed without the
word
Men have their errors and imperfections, and though they be the children of
God, yet they be not guided by his good spirit always. Every man that has an
instrument in his hand, can not play on ye same: nor every man that has
learned the science, can please the ear. But if the strings be out of tune, or
frets disordered, there wants the harmony that should delight: So whenever
we swerve never so little, from the right trade of Gods holy word, we are not
to be credited, we ought not to please. Wherefore since the way is dangerous,
our feet slippery: that we fall often, and are slyding ever: no marvel if the
best of us sometime do halte. It falls often, that such as preach and profess
Christ, build sometime on him, evil, unsound, and corrupt doctrine. Not that
the word of God is occasion of heresies, but that men lack right understanding
and judgment of the same, which comes only by the spirit of God. And this it
is that S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 5.
how some do build upon Christ ye foundation, gold, silver, and precious
stones: But some other, timber and hay, and stubble. Yet must we not take the
hope of Gods mercy from such evil carpenters, as lay so rotten a covering upon
so sure a building, where as otherwise they offending in trifles, be sound
enough in greater matters: and stick to Christ, the only substantial and true
foundation. Yet such their errors and imperfections being brought to the fire
of gods spirit, De doctrine. Christiana li. 2. ca. 9. and sequentibus
and tried by the word, shall be consumed. Augustine therefore, when he would
frame a perfect preacher, wills him to confer the places of Scripture
together. He sendes him not to the Doctors distinctions, nor to the censure of
the Church, nor canons of the Popes, nor traditions of the fathers, but only
to quiet and content himself with the word of God. Therefore in the primitive
Church, when as yet the new Testament was not written, al things were examined
according to the sermons and words of the Apostles. For which cause S. John
writes: Qui ex Deo est, nos audit: 1. Joan. 4.
He that is of of God, hears us: and he that hears us not, is not of God.
So far therefore as men accord with the holy Scripture, and shape their
writings after the pattern that Christ has left them, I will not only my self
esteem them, but wish them to be had in most renoune and reverence. Otherwise,
absolutely to trust to me^, which may be deceived: and gather out of the
fathers writings, whatsoever was witness of their imperfection, is neither
point of wisdom, nor safety. In every age, God raised up some worthy
instruments in his church: And yet in no age any was so perfect, that a
certain truth was to be builded on him. Which thing by example, as well under
the law, as in the time of grace, god has sufficiently by his work declared.
Among the Jews who was ever comparable unto Aaron? Aaron.
who fell so shamefully? he assented for fear unto the peoples Idolatry. Among
the ministers of the Gospel, who had so great and rare gifts as Peter? who did
offend so fleshely? Peter.
for dread of a girl, he denied his master. Which thing was not done without
the providence of almighty God, thereby to put men in remembrance of their
frailty, and further to instruct them whence truth in doctrine must only be
fetched. Trust not me, Pro loco. li. 3. de Trinita. To. 3.
says Augustine, nor credit my writings, as if they were the canonical
scripture: But whatsoever thou find in ye word, although you did not believe
it before, yet ground thy faith on it now. And whatsoever you read of mine,
unless you know it certainly to be true, give thou no certain assent to it.
Epist. 48. ad Vincent. de Vi coer. her.
And in an other place reproving such as will bring forth cauils out of men's
writings, thereby to confirm an error, he says: that a difference should be
made between the assertions and minds of men, were they, either Hillarie,
Ciprian, Agrippine, or any other: and canon of the Scripture. Non enim sic
leguntur, he says, tanquam ita ex eis testimonium proferatur, vt contra
sentire non liceat, Concio. ad Adolesc.
sicubi forte aliter sapuerint, quam veritas postulat. In eo quippe numero
sumus vt non dedignemur etia^ nobis dictu^ ab Apostolo accipere: Et si quid
aliter sapitis, id quoque deus vobis reuelabit. For they are not so red as if a
testimony might be brought forth of them, which it were not lawefull for any
man to gaynesay, if peradventure they thought otherwise than the truth
requires. For we are in the number of them that disdain not, to take this
saying of the Apostle to us: If any of you be otherwise minded, God shall
reveal the same unto you. Wherefore with what judgment the fathers of the
church ought to be read, Basile sets forth by a propre similitude. Iuxta
totum apium similitudinem, orationum participes nos fieri conuenit. Illae enim
neque ad omnes flores consimiliter accedunt, neque etiam eos ad quos volant
totos auferre tentant, sed quantu^ ipsis ad mellis opificiu^ commodu^ est
accipientes, reliquu^ valere sinunt: Et nos sane si sapiamus, quantum sincerum
est, and veritati cognatum ab ipsis adepti, quod reliquum est transiliemus. We
must be partakers of other men's sayings wholly after manner of the Bees: for
they flee not alike unto all flowers: nor where they sit, they crop them quite
away: but snatching so much as shall suffice for their honey making, take their
leave of the rest. Even so we, if we be wise, having got of other so much as is
sound, and agreeable to truth, will leap over the rest. Which rule if we keep,
in reading and alleging the fathers words, we shall not swerve from our
profession, the scripture shall have the sovereign place, and yet the Doctors
of the Church shall lose no part of their due estimation. None of the Fathers
but have erred.
There is not any of them that the world both most wonder at, but have had
their affections, nor I think that you (adversaries to us and to the truth)
will in every respect admit all, that any one of the fathers wrote. My self
were able from the very first after the Apostles time, to run them over all,
and straightly examining their words and assertions, find imperfections in
all. But I would be loath, by discrediting of other, to seem that I sought some
praise of skill, or else be likened to Cham Noah's son, that seeing the
nakedness of the fathers, Genesis 21.
will, in contempt utter it. But because in ceremonies and obseruances, (wherein
they scant agreing with themselves: every one discording from other, declined
all from simplicity of the Gospel) we are only burdened with the name of
fathers: give us leave sometime to use a Regestion, let us have the liberty
toward other, which Hierome grants against himself: saying, Certe vbicunque
Scripturas non interpretor, In Apo. pro lib. contra Iouin. To. 2.
and libere de meo sensu loquor, arguat me cui lubet. Truly whersoeuer I
expound not the scriptures, but freely speak of mine own sense, let any man
that list reprove me: Not that I will give so large raynes to the headdinesse of
some, which either of affection or of singularity, will needs dissent: but
that: I will not exempte any from their just defense, Joan. 4.
from trial of the spirits whether they are of God. We must follow the
example of them of Berrhea, which trusted not to Paul himself, but searched
the scriptures whether they were so. Two Judges of controversies, the word
and the spirit.
But where as this precept is general, all men to judge, all men to try, what
doctrine they receive: this judgment and trial to be had by the word, is
somewhat in deed, but yet not all that may be said in the matter. I grant the
Scripture to be a good Judge in deed: But unless the spirit of wisdom and
knoweledge, do lighten our wits and understanding, it shall avail us little
or nothing, to have at hand the word of God, whereof we know not the sense
and meaning. Gold is tried by the touchstone, and metalles in the fire, yet
only of such as are expert in the faculty. For neither the touchstone, nor
yet the fire, can any thing further the ignoraunte and unskillful. Wherefore,
to be meet and convenient men, to judge of a truth, when we do read or hear
it by the holy Ghost, we must be directed. In this behalf, although I know
that the gifts of God have their degrees, yet dare I say, that none is utterly
so void of grace, It is possible to try a truth.
but has so much conferred on him, as shall be expedient for his own behoof,
unless he be utterly as a rotten member cut of from Christ. Vain it were to
commau^d a thing that lies not in us: and us to deny the possibillitie, when we
have a promise of a thing that shall be, does argue our inconstancy and
mysbelief. Wherefore sith Christ and his Apostles, say often times, Videte,
Cauete, Probate, which words be spoken in the commanding mode: and bid us
See, Beware, and Prove: I must needs conclude, that we shall not be destitute
of the spirit of God, so far as shall be most needful for us, if we do ask
the same by faith. And whereas Christ does affirm that we shall know: 1. Joan.
4.
And S. John in his epistle, does assure us, that (...) do know: Spiritum
veritatis, and Spiritum erroris, the Spirit of verity, and Spirit of error, we
must acknowledge and confess, that the truth is not hid from us, further
than we list to shut it up from our selves. But here arises and doubtful
case. If every man shall have authority, to give his verdit upon a
controversy, Two kinds of examination of doctrine. Private.
which shall seem and say, that he has the spirit, no certain thing shall be
decreed: every man shall have his own way: no stable opinion and judgment to be
rested on. Hereto I answer again, that there be two kinds of examination of
doctrine: one private, another public. Private, whereby each man does settle
his own faith, to stay continually upon one doctrine, which he knows
steadfastly, to have proceeded from God. For consciences shall never have any
sure port or refuge to run unto, but only God. He, when he is called upon,
will hear our prayers: when he is desired, will grant us his spirit. But he
has prescribed us a way before hand to attain the same, if we bring under all
senses of ours unto his word. Joan. 8.
Si patrem habetis Deum, quomodo non agnoscitis loquelam meam? If ye have God
to your father, says Christ, how falls it out that ye do not understand my
talk? Oues mea cognoscunt vocem meam, and non sequuntur alienum. My sheep,
says he, know my voice, and follow no stranger. Nor doubt it is, but by the
instinct of the holy Ghost, we be made his sheep, which will not hearken to
errors and heresies, (which are the voices of strangers) but follow the voice
of our master Christ, which in the Scripture is crying to us. If these reasons
and allegations may not prevail with some, to drive them to a sure and safe
ankerholde in Christ: let them run, and they list, Public
to the other kind of examination of doctrine: which is the common consent of
the Church. For sith it is to be feared greatly, least their arise some
phrenetike persons, which will brag and boast, as well as the best, that they
be Prophets, they be endued with the spirt of truth, and yet will lead men
into all errors: this remedy is very necessary, the faithful to assemble
themselves together, and seek an unity of faith and godliness. But when we
have run as far as we can, The scriptures last refuge.
we can go no further than to the wall: we must reuolte to the former
principles, and try by the Scriptures, which is the Church. Wherefore in
controversies of our Religion, if men's devises were less esteemed, and the
simple order of Gods wisdom followed: less danger, fewer quarrels, should
arise amongst us: more truth, more sincerity should be retained of us. And to
this end I could have wyshed, that you, M. Martial, should have learned
first, to frame your own conscience according to the word: then have
ascribed such authority thereto, that we needed not, forsaking the fountain,
to follow the infected streams: nor, having the use of sweet and sufficient
corn, feed upon acornes still. But I would, that, had been the most fault of
yours, to have attributed much unto the fathers: and had not otherwise of
malice wrested them: and of mere ignorance sometime corrupted them. The
Scripture, which in the title of your book, has the first place, in ye rest of
the discourse has very little or no place at al: and under name of Fathers and
antiquity, fables and follies, of newefangled men, are obtruded to us. To come
to the instants.

Folio. 18.
First ye bring forth the significations of Cross in Scripture. Ye muster your
men, whose aid ye will use in this sorry skirmish. And although they be very
few, yet ye number one more than ye have: and like a covetous captain, will
needs indent for a dead pay. Ye say that the scripture has preferred to your
band.4. Soldiers: Folio. 24.
The Cross of affliction. The passion of Christ. The Cross that he died on.
And the material or mystical sign of the Cross: Material, to be erected in
the church: Mystical, to be made with the finger in some parts of the body.
These be not many ye wot, ye might have kept tale of them: But the first, and
the second, as the word of God commends in deed, and be most necessary for
our salvation, so will you not deal withal: they be to cumbersome for your
company: the third ye confusely speak of: of which notwithstanding small
commendation in the Scripture is found: The fourth, which ought to strike the
greatest stroke, is not extant at all. For neither the material, nor mistical
Cross, in that sense that ye take them, to that end that ye apply them, be
once mentioned in the word of God. Wherefore ye might blotte out of your book,
Scripture, and take to your self some other succors, or fight with a shadow.
I needed not to trouble my self about your third Cross: which is the piece of
wood, whereupon Christ died: both for because we have it not: and also you
your self do not take it incident into your purpose to treat of: Yet because
ye make many gloses thereon: and apply to the sign, the virtue propre to the
thing it self, it is not amiss to examine your folly. First, ye cite a place
of Chrysostom, Folio. 13.2.
ex Demonstratione ad Gentiles: and for.3. leaves together (although ye do not
tell us so much) ye write an other man's words as your own, to praise your
pregnante wit. But ye patch them and piece them ilfauoredly: and whatso ever
seems to make against you, ye leave out fraudule^tly. This is no plain or
honest dealing. In deed Chrysostom stops many a gappe with you. The comfort
of your Cross does most rest in Chrysostom. Chrysostom.
But Chrysostom was not without his faults. His golden mouth, wherein he
passed other, sometime had leaden words, which yielded to the error and abuse of
other. I am not ignorant that in his days, many evil customs were crept into
the Church: which in his works he reproves not. He praises such as went to
the sepulchers of Saints. He makes mention of prayer, To. 4: ad pop. 66. In.
1. Cor. 16. Hom. 41.
for the dead. Monkerie he commends above the Moon. In his tract of
Penance, beside many other absurdities, (when he had rehearsed many ways to
obtain remission of sins, as Alms, Weping, Fasting, and such other) he
makes no mention at all of faith. In his commentaries upon Paul, he says:
that Concupiscence, unless it bring forth the externe work, is no sin.
Wherefore if he had said so much for the Cross, as ye misconster, and more
than accords with the glory of Christ, I might lap it up with other of his
errors, and having the Scripture for me, Chrysostom should be no president
against me. But I will not go this way to work. I admit his authority, but
mark, M. Martial, what his meaning is. In the place that ye allege for the
Cross, he dealt with the Gentiles. The mark that he shot at, was to prove to
them, Quod Christus Deus esset, that Christ was God, as in the title appears.
Now because this punishment, to be hanged on the gallows, was marvelous
offensive unto the heathen, nor they could think him to be a God, ye was
executed with so vile a death: Chrysostom therefore goes as far in the
contrary, proving, that that, which was a token of curse, was now become the
sign of salvation. And because that they spoke so much shame of the Cross,
derogating therefore from him that was crucified: the Christians to testify by
their outward fact, their inward profession, would make in every place the
sign thereof. This was the occasion that the mystical Cross, crepte into
custom. But here is no place to entreat of that, though you, taking still,
Non causam pro causa, that which is impertinente for proof of your matter,
confound the same. Notwithstanding, Things well receued, il continued.
how things received to good purpose (as to the judgment of man seems) may
afterward grow to abuse, this sign of the Cross shows. That, which was at
the first, a testimony of Christianity, came to be made a Magical
enchauntment. That which was a reproufe to the enemies of the Cross, became in
the end, a cause of conquest against the Christians. Nor it is to be thought,
that whersoeuer a sign of a Cross was, were it either in mountain or in
valley, in tavern or in chamber, in brute bodies or in reasonable, there was
by and by a zeal of true devotion: but as well, or rather an heathenish
obseruaunce, The sign of the Cross an hethenish obserua^ce
a supersticion of them, that never thought on Christ. We read that the
Egiptians great Idol Serapis, had a Cross in his breast, and that sign was
one of their holy letters. Li. 2. Ca. 29 Sozom. li. 7. Cap. 15,
Whereupon Ruffinus reports, that many of the learned among the Egiptians,
were the rather contented to embrace Christianity, because they saw the
Cross esteemed: which was before, a great ceremony of theirs. And we may well
suppose that when they pulled down the Images of Serapis out of their windows
and walls, and placed in their stead the sign of the Cross, Act. 17.
they imitated ye fact of the Apostle Paul: who of the Athenians superstition,
did take occasion to preach a truth: So these, to win the Egiptians to the
faith, would retain something of their old obseruaunce, but applied to
another meaning, than they before did understand. So the custom of running
about the streates with fyrebrands, in honor of Proserpina, was turned with
christians into Candelmasse day. Candlemas day. Cross week. Con. Polo^. 12
Sigebertus in Chro. li. 13. Bonifac. 4. Alhallovven day.
The sacrifice of Ceres done in the fields, with howling of women, and crying
of children, was made a general observance with us, in the Rogation week. The
Images of Mercury set by the hie way sides, were afterward converted to
Crosses. And where there was in Rome Templum Pantheon, a temple, wherein all
the Gods of the world were honored: the devout fathers to take away this
Idolatry, did consecrate a church in the same place unto Alhallowes: ye that
should now be converted unto saints, that before was attributed unto false
Gods. And yet whatsoever pretext of zeal, they had, this was no good change:
no sound reformation: to take away many false Gods: of true saints to make
many Devils. For so they are, when they be honored, I mean, by that honor of
Invocation. So that it is not straight ways allowable, whatsoever is brought
in, under cloak of good intent: nor whatsoever has been upon good occasion
received once, (as this was never) must necessarily be retained still. Stephanus
the Pope has this decree. Si non nulli ex praedecessoribus and maioribus
nostris fecerunt aliqua, Did. 63. cap Quia in paragr. verum.
quae vllo tempore potuerunt esse sine culpa, et postea vertuntur in errorem
and superstitionem, sine tarditate aliqua and cum magna authoritate a posteris
destruantur. If any of our predecessors and elders have done any thing, which
at any time could be without offense, and afterward be turned into error and
superstition, let them without any more delay, and with great authority be
destroyed of the^ that come after. Then, since this crossing has bred such
inconvenience, that the externe action had still in reverence, the inward faith
has been untaught: and that virtue attributed to the sign (which only
proceeds from him, which it signified:) the sign it self may well be left,
and the signified Christ be preached simply: Lib. de Past. cap. 8.
For as Augustine says. Noli putare te iniuriam facere montibus sanctis,
quando dixeru, auxilium meum non in montibus, sed in domino. Think not that
thou do any injury to the holy hills, when thou say, my help is not in
the hills, but from the Lord: So there is no wrong done to ye Cross of Christ,
if I say: not ye Cross, but ye crucified, is to be trusted to. Which thing
your own author means in the self same place which is alleged, although it
please you to suppress the words. For after he had said: Sparsa est in
parietibus domorum, in culminibus, in libris, in ciuitatibus, in vicis, in
locis quae habitantur, et quae non habitantur, which place you cite to show
what use, what estimation of the Cross was every where, ye very next words
that follow, be these. Vellem audire a Pagano, vnde symbolum tam maledicta
mortis ac supplicij, omnibus tam desiderabile, nisi magna crucifixi virtus. I
would hear of a Pagan, how it comes to pass, that the sign of so cursed a
death and punishment, is so desired of al, if it be not the great power of him
that was crucified. This ye leave out, and yet have recourse again unto the
words that follow, whereby ye would prove the sign it self to be a token of
much blessing, and a wall of all kind of security. For so Chrysostom says.
If against my objection ye do reply and say that the power of him which was
hanged on the Cross, made the Cross it self and the sign thereof, to be of
more virtue: that this was not the mind of the Doctor, the conclusion of his
tale conuinceth. Folio. 15. a.
Hoc mortem fustulit, says he, hoc Inferni aereas portas confregit: This took
away death, this broke the brazen gates of Hell. etc. But did there any
material thing? did the piece of wood? did any sign, work this effect? was
death and Hell conquered by it? The articles of our faith do teach us
otherwise: and the phrase of Scripture is far differente, Mat. 1.
Ipse, saluum faciet populum suum, a peccatis suis. It is he, says John, it is
Christ, and not the Cross, that shall save the people from their offenses.
Mat. 18. Luc. 19. Joan. 3.
Venit filius hominis quaerere and seruare quod perierat. The son of man came
to seek and save that which was lost. Misit Deus filium suum in inundum, vt
seruetur mundus per ipsum. God sent his son into the world, that by him, by
him, the world might be saved. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the
wilderness, Ibidem.
so must the son of man be exalted, that all that believe in him, perish not.
These titles of honor, this work of mercy: to sanctify us, to purchase
deliverance from death and hell, as it is acknowledged of us: so is it
attributed in Gods word, to Christ himself, and not to his Cross. Et qui
loquitur, 1. Peter. 4.
loquatur tanquam eloquia Dei. If any man speak, let him speak as the words
of God: Yet evident it is, that Chrysostom by a figure of Metonymia, did
speak of the Cross, that which was properly to be applied to the passion.

From Chrysostom, ye clime up to Martialis, Folio. 15. a. Martialis.
whom ye do make Sapientum octauum, one of the.72. disciples. Eusebius says,
Septuaginta discipulorum catologum nusquam reperiri, Lib. 1. Ca. 12.
that the catalogue, the Register of the.72. disciples is found in no place.
But you place them at your pleasure, you are able to point them out with your
finger. Hierom, Gennadius, Isidorus, making books of purpose, of ecclesiastical
writers, never do remember this author of youres, whom you for the names sake
do like the better. But if his aunciency had been such, as you pretend, it had
been a great oversight of them, to have so forgotten him. But to his place. The
Cross of our Lord is our invincible armoure against Satan, an helmet
vvarding the head, a coat of fence defending the breast, a targat beating
back the darts of the devil, a svveard not suffering iniquity and ghostly
assaults of perverse power to approach unto us. If this may be rightly
understood according to the letter, we need not greatly to stand in dread of
Satan, he is easly vnaquisht, we need no further armor than the Cross, let
Christ alone, this Mars shall suffice us. God said to Job, Job. 40.
that Behemoth or Leuiatha^ are of another manner of force: none dare come nere
them, none can resist them: the sweard shall never touch the^: the spear
yeldeth to them. They esteem iron as a straw, and brass, as rotten wood. But
rotten wood, a cancred, wormeaten, ilfauored Cross, may keep us safe enough
from the Devil. Then is not the Devil such a Bugge as we talk of: he is
(belike) some Robin good fellow, that only is meet to make babies afraid.
But if that you, in your most ruff at Winchester, had been no more terrible to
the boys, with a rod in your hand, than the parish priest, with confidence in
the Cross, is to the Devil: your Scholars should have had as little
learning, as you discretion, Folio. 15. b.
or the Devil dread. But you are not so to be dalied withal. Damascenus
Damascenus.
says further for you, that the Cross is given us, as a sign upon our
foreheads, like as Circumcision was to the Israelites: by this, we Christen
men differ, and are discerned from infideles. This is our shield, our
vveapon, our banner, and victory against the Devil. This is our mark, that
the destroyer touch us not. To speak a little of your author, not utterly to
discredit him, but in part to excuse him, for that he was not in all points so
sound, Rerum To. lib. 21.
as otherwise it had been to be wished: Eutropius writes, that he lived in the
reign of the Emperor Leo Isauricus, ye third of that name. Then was the
bloody bickering for Images. Then Satan did bestyrre himself. Then was it no
marvel, if a man learned, and godly otherwise, were carried away with the common
error. I am not ignorant that Damascene did greatly contend for Images. But
out of the Scriptures, he brought no proof at all. Only by a miracle he
would confirm them. We know what illusions are wrought in that behalf: and
therefore against the word, no authority of man, 2. Reg. 18.
no miracle must come in place. Ezechias destroyed the brazen serpent, which
had a most strange and wholesome miracle to witness with it (for all were
restored to health by it:) And shall forged lies make learned men, and godly
Princes, forbear so great abuse, maintained by fond opinion, and after no
sound precept? But let us weigh his reason. He compares the Cross on the
foreheade and circumcision together. If he had showed as much commandment for
the one, as is for the other, I could have liked it it well: now, that
circumcision was straightly enjoined, and the sign of the Cross never spoken
of: Circumcision was a thing done in the flesh: The Cross in the foreheade is
but a sign in the air: I see not how these things can join together. But if
Damascenus (which I rather think) do take the sign in the foreheade, for the
passion it self printed in our hearts: then, on the other side, there is as
great a square. For circumcision did only serve for a remembrance: but this
Cross is the thing it self to be remembered. Lactantius Lactantius de vera Sa.
Li. 4. Ca. 26.
goes nearer a truth, and compares together the blood of the lamb
(wherewithal the door posts of the Hebrews were sprinkled) and the sign of
the Cross, that men in the uttermost parts of their bodies bear. But
Lactantius says. Cruor pecudis tantam in se vim non habuit, vt hominibus
faluti esset. The blood of a beast, had not such power in it, as to save men.
Therefore (say I) the sign of the Cross, is neither shield, nor weapon, nor
victory of ours. And this is mine answer to Damascenus. Nor I am herein
ashamed of the Cross, but I am ashamed of your too cross and overthwart
proves. Ye grant your self, Fol. 16. a. b.
that the effects aforesaid, are to be ascribed to the death of Christ: but
yet you swear (Mary) that they are not to be done, without the sign of the
Cross. Your argument is this: As men notvvithstanding the merits of Christ's
passion, must receive the Sacraments: So sighters against the assaults of
Satan, must not only have faith, but also the outvvarde sign of the Cross.
O cunning comparison. O worthy argument, that all the world may wonder at.
Would a man have thought, that an Usher of Winchester, could have become so
deep a Divine? The sacraments (ye say) must concur with faith: Ergo, the
sign of the Cross, with Christ. This is as good a reason, as if I should say:
Notwithstanding Gods power that gives the increase, I must eat my meat:
Ergo, notwithstanding my labor, whereby I may sustain my self, I must
needs covet my neighbors goods. The respects be like. In the first
proposition: Gods power, and faith: the necessity of Sacraments, and of
noriture, to be compared together. In the second: Christ's passion, to answer
our labor, which both are necessary, and the same sufficient means for us:
and the lusting after another man's goods, set against the sign of the
Cross, whereof there is nere another, commanded but forbidden. Ye were taught
once out of the Topics, that it is an il argument a consequenti, when in two
propositions, things utterly unlike, shall be compared together, and the one by
no mean can infer the other. Sacraments are commanded by express word of
Scripture. Ye should have proved first, that the sign of the Cross is so.
Sacraments have a promise annexed to them. Sacraments no cause of grace. Folio.
17. a.
Where is the promise to the sign of the Cross? To pass over the rock that
in the midst of your course ye run upon, that Sacraments are the cause of
grace: whereas in them, the only promises of God, by Christ, both by word and
sign, are exhibited unto us: which promises if we apprehend by faith, then is
the grace increased in us: and the gift of God, by faith received, is by the
Sacrament sealed in us. So much by the way to teach you true doctrine. But to
return to the other purpose. If there be such necessity of ye sign of the
Cross to fight against Satan, what a fool was Paul, when he furnished a
Christian with his complete armor, Ephesians. 6.
to forget this chief piece of defense, which is able (belike) to do more than
all the rest? 1. Peter. 5.
What a fool was Peter, when he gave advise to resist that adversary, that
said not as well, Resistite Crucis signo, as otherwise fide solida. He might
have willed us to have taken a Cross in our hand, or made such a sign in our
forehead and so resisted him. But he only said, Resist him by steadfast faith.
That faith has this effect to withstand temptations, is plainly to be seen by
the word of god. That ye sign of the Cross can do the like, I utterly deny
til you be at leisure to prove it. But why? does not Athanasius say? Athanasius
Quaestio. 39 as M. Martial quotes it Folio. 17. a.
The devils seeing the Cross, oftentimes tremble, flee away, and are miserably
tormented? Correct your book sir: ye quote it amiss. In deed in his book of
Questions. Quaest. 15. he demau^deth why the Ass that Christ rode on, should
not as much be esteemed, as ye Cross, that he suffered on. Whereto he
answers, yt upon the Cross our salvation was wrought and not on the Ass.
Wherefore, the Devils seeing that Cross, are still afraid. But what is this to
the sign of the Cross, since we have no more that Cross than we have ye
Ass. But if we had it, should we think the Devil would be afraid of it, without
any further force or resistance? I will answer again by Athanasius. He asks a
question, how charmers, Quaest. 32.
do cast forth Devils out of men? Hereto he answers: That where it is written
in the gospel. If Satan cast out Satan, his kingdom can not stand, thereby
it is manifest that the charmer does not cast out Satan, but Satan of his own
accord goes out to deceive men, and to the end they shall not go to Christ,
by this means he persuadeth them to go to the Sorcerers: On like sort the
devil may seem to tremble and quake when he sees a cross, but it is for no
other purpose but this, that we should leave our confidence in Christ, and only
repose it in a piece of wood. Wherefore, I suspect, as insufficient, Folio. 17.
b.
the counsel given to the Religious, that when wicked Spirits should set upon
them, then they should arm themselves and their houses, with the sign of the
Cross. For to retorte the argument on your own head, Fol. 10. 18. a
Though they fear the banner, in which our savior Christ spoiling the
powers of the air, brought the^ forth in open shevve: Yet does it not follow,
that the sign of this banner is able to work ye like effect. The banner that
there was spoken of, was the death it self. The banner that we bear, is scant
a figure or shadow of it. I know how in this latter age, much Crossing has
been used: and how the example thereof, has come from elder years. A
necessary note to be observed in reading of the Fathers.
But the Fathers in many things have thought better, than they have written:
Many times they have borrowed of the common custom, impropre phrases, and such
as seem to maintain an error, the thing it self being otherwise defined in
them. So Augustine uses the name of satisfaction, because it was a common
word, but the heresy of Satisfaction, he does plainly reprove. He uses this
proposition: Omne peccatum est voluntarium. Every sin is voluntary: because
it was a common phrase: yet he excludes not ye byrth-sinne, which is of
necessity. The like could I speak of other. Wherefore, not so much their
saying, as their intent and meaning is to be considered. In this case, many of
the fathers speak of the Cross in the foreheade. The Scripture mencioneth the
sign in the forehead. But to what purpose? Shall we think, that the breaking of
the air with a thu^be, or drawing of a thing after such a form, is like to
that which the Poets call Orci galea, the helmet of Hell: wherewithal,
whosoever be covered, they can not be seen, nor any shall hurt them? Then were
the Cross worse than the coniurers Mace: then were the foreheade accursed for
having it. The Cross in the foreheade what it means.
Wherefore there was a further meaning in it, which for your instruction I will
now tell you. The forehead betokens shame. Whereupon ye proverb, Perfricuit
fronte^, he has rubde his forehead, is spoken of him that is past shame.
Wherefore the sign of ye death of Christ, is willed to be set in the sign of
shame, to signify unto us, that of Christ's death, we should not at any time be
ashamed. Tom. 8. in Psalm. 141.
Nor this is my private exposition. Augustine confirms the same. Quia in
front erubescitur ille qui dixit, Qui me erubuerit coram hominibus, erubescam
eum coram patre meo qui in Caelis est: ipsam ignominiam quodammodo, and quam
pagani derident, in loco pudoris nostri co^stituit. Audis homine^ insultare
impudenti, and dicere, fronte^ non habet. Quid est, fronte^ non habet? Impudens
est. Non habeam nud am frontem, tegat eam crux domini mei. Which is as much to
say, as this. Because in the foreheade is that, whereby we are ashamed of him
that said, He that shall be ashamed of me before men, I will also be ashamed
of him before my father which is in Heaven: the very ignominy and shame as it
were, which the Paganes do laugh to scorn, he has appointed in the place of
our shame. Ye hear a man, lay to an impudent persons charge, that he has no
foreheade, what is meant by that? He in impudent. Let me not therefore have a
naked foreheade, let the Cross of my master Christ cover it. Thus may ye well
understand the Fathers, whenever they teach you to make a Cross in your
foreheade: for otherwise, the crossing with out believing, is mere enchaunting.
Chrisosto^. He does translate Simpliciter in Corpore only in the forehead.
I gladly do embrace the testimony of Chrysostom, which you bring forth for
your self, ex Hom. 55. in.16. Mat. Crucem non simpliciter digito in corpore,
sed magna profecto fide in mente prius formare oportet. Thou must not with thy
finger, simply printe the Cross in thy body, but first of al, with great faith
in thy mind. This is it, M. Martial, that marres all your market. This if ye
grant me (which is your own allegation) we two shall sone agree. For if this
be the Cross, that ye mean of, let it be had, a Gods name, let it be honored.
But this is no material nor mystical Cross, for neither of them both, can be
printed in the heart: Therefore it is the faith in Christ's passion: which the
finger cannot impresse in the forehead: Folio. 18. b.
but grace can engraffe in the mind of man. Haec crux non terribiles, sed
despicabiles hominibus daemones effecit. This Cross has made Devils, not
terrible, but contemptible unto men. M. Martial a fine translator
In translating of which few words, ye show your self to be very negligent,
or very ignorant. For thus ye english the^. This Cross has made devils not
only terrible, but contemptible to men. Where ye should have said, either, not
only not terrible. or else, have put (only) in your purse. For the sense can
not stand with it. Now where ye gather (but indirectly) out of Chrisostoms
words, that two things be requisite: first printing the merits of Christ's
passion in the mind, afterward the signing of the Cross in the body: I
briefly answer. Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora. In
vain it is to do by the more, that may be done by the fewer. There is nothing
in the world that the Cross can do, but faith can do without the Cross.
Leave we therefore, that which may tend to superstition and is vnco^maunded, and
betake our selves to that which is of force enough, and is the foundation of
our faith. Another note to be obeserued in readi^g of the Fathers.
Here would I stay with you, from recital of more out of Chrysostom, but that
I thought good to warn you, that figures of Hyperbole and Metonymia, be often
in the Fathers writings. When they praise a thing, they ascribe more unto it
than they mean, and many times under the name of one thing, applied fitly to
our capacities, they understand another. I remember that Chrysostom has
these words. Tom. 4. de laud. Pauli Hom. 4.
Non solum crucifixum, sed etiam pro ipso occisorum fauillas Daemones
contremiscunt. Not only the Devils tremble at Christ crucified, but also they
quake at the very ashes, of them that were slain for him. Here is as much
attributed to ashes, as was before to the Cross: And think ye therefore that
Satan would be afraid to te^pt you, if ye had a few ashes of dead bones in
your bosom? Peradventure some of you may be so sotted in folly, that ye would
gather them up devoutly, and keep them as relics holily. Such I refer to
the place of Chrysostom In opere imperfect. Hom. 44. in Cap. Mat. 23.
Whereupon I shall have occasion hereafter to entreat, when I come to speak of
the like absurdity, Folio. 19. b.
the little pieces of the Cross kept. Now let us hear what ye find in other.
Origin Origin.
ye bring, in his exposition of the Epistle to the Romans. Lib. 6. And
although this father makes most against you, as afterward shall appear, yet to
the end that such young scholars as you, may learn with what judgment ye
ought to read the old writers, I think it expedient, somewhat to speak of
him. In sundry points his doctrine is sound: specially concerning the
Trinity, the two natures in Christ, the baptism of Infants, original sin,
and use of Images. But things have passed under his name, where are intermedled
many fond opinions, which both were condemned in his own time, and are not now
to be credited of us. As, that before the creation of the world, there was an
other world. That the Devils in hell, shall at the last be saved. And if ye
scan his other writings, there will appear, either great inconstancy, or very
small perfection. In the article of justification he swarueth from himself,
and in some points from all other too. The spirit he takes, not for the
motion of the holy Ehoste but for the Allegorical interpretation. Peter, he
supposes to excel the rest, because it was said to him in the plural
number. Whatsoever thou losest in earth shall be losed in the Heavens. Caelis
and Caelo.
Whereas to other it is spoken in the singular number, It shall be losed in
Heaven. These and such other toys, are not only in him, but also in other of
his time and age: wherefore they ought to be red as witnesses of things done,
not as Presidents of faith and doctrine. Yet, unless you, M. Martial, will
set Origin to schole again, and teach him what to say: you can not conster any
lesson of his, to pick out a proof of any other Cross, than the mind
conceyueth, not the hand makes. For though ye bring a piece of a sentence,
wherein the praise of the Cross is put, Tanta vis est Crucis, So great is the
power of the Cross, (quod he) Yet if ye remembered the very next words that
go before, ye should plainly see of what Cross he meant. Discoursing upon
these words of the Apostle: ^et not sin reign in your mortal body. He
asks a question, how it is possible to avoid it. He answers. Si faciamus
illud, quod idem Apostolus dicit: Mortificate membra vest aqua sunt super
terram, et si semper mortem Christi in corpore nostro circumferamus: Certum
namque est, quia vbi mors Christi circumfertur, non potest regnare peccatum. If
we do that, says he, which the same Apostle wills us, Mortify your
members which are upon the earth, and if we carry about always in our bodies
the death of Christ. For it is certain that where the death of Christ is
carried about, there can no sin raygn. And immediately he infers your
words. Est enim tanta vis Crucis Christi, For the power of the Cross of
Christ is so great. Whereby it is evident, that he speaks of the death of
Christ, and that is the Cross that he commends. That Cross have you nothing
to do withal. But if the picture of a Cross looked on, be able to daunt (as
you devise) concupiscence and sensuality, how has it fallen out, that your
spiritual fathers, all to be crossed about their beds, have had their
familiars between the sheets? How have your Nuns (that chaste generation) with
their beads in their hands, ben blessed with great bellies? I will no more
offend chaste ears. But Origens Cross, that is to say, the death of Christ,
both may and must, Origin overthrows Imagry. Contra Celsum. Libr. 8.
be set before our eyes, and faithfully kept in the chest of our hearts, though
no visible sign be made thereof: which neither hand can truly counterfeit, nor
man's folly ought falsely to forge. Origin therefore in the behalf of
Christians of his time, says: Celsus and aras, and simulachra, and delubra nos
ait defugere quominus fundentur, quandoquidem inuisibilis nostrae huius and
inexplicabilis communionis fidem, and charitatis: factionem esse existimat: cum
nihil interea videat, nobis quidem pro arit and delubris iustorum esse mentem,
a qua haud dubie emittuntur, sua assimi incensi odores, vota, inquam et preces
ex conscientia puriore. etc. Because his sentence is long in the Latin, I will
word for word rehearse it in English. Celsus does say that we avoid the making
of Altares, and Images, and Oratories, because he thinks that the faith of
our invisible and inexplicable communion and charity, is nothing else but a
faction: where as in the mean while, he sees not that insteade of Altares and
Oratories with us, the minds of the faithful are, from which no doubt, most
sweet savors of incense are cast out, prayers, I mean, and supplications from
a pure conscience. Whereof S. John in his Revelation speaks on this sort:
Apocal. 8.
The prayers of the Saints are incense. And the Psalmist: Psalm. 141
Let my prayer O Lord, be in thy sight as incense. Furthermore we have Images
and worthy offerings unto God, not such as be made by unclean workmen, but
framed and fashioned by Gods word in us: whereby such virtues may rest in us,
which shall imitate and resemble the first begotten of all creatures: in whom
examples are, as well of Justice, continence, and valiantness: as otherwise of
wisdom, godliness, and all virtues. Therefore such Images are in all, as have
by the word of God, gotten them, this temperance, this righteousness, this
fortitude, this wisdom and piety, with all the frame of other virtues, in
which I think it meet, the honor be given unto him, which is the pattern of
all Images, the Image of God invisible, and so forth. Whereby it appears (as
in plain words he speaks after) that all Images should be such, as God
himself commanded: such as should be within man, and not without man: such as
consisted in the knoweledge of him, after whose Image man himself was made.
Also his testimony serves for this: No Images in Origens time but spiritual.
that in his time there were no material Images in temples. There was no Roode,
no Cross, no likeness of any thing, save only spiritual, of grace and
virtues. Consider, I beseech you, how in his fourth book against Celsus, he
commends the Jews. Nimirum apud quos praeter eum qui cu^ctis praesidet
rebus, pro Deo nihil vnquam sit habitum: nec quisquam, sieve Imaginum fictor,
sieve statuarum fabricator, in eorum Republica fuerit, vt quos procul lex ipsa
abigeret, vt ne qua hijs esset fabricandoru^ simulachrorum occasio, quae
stultos quosdam mortalium a Deo reuelleret, and ad contemplanda terrena animi
oculos retorqueret. That is to say. Among whom nothing was ever accounted God,
beside him which rules all, nor in their common wealth any caruer of Idols, or
Image maker was, as whom the law it self drove away from them, to the intent
they should have no occasion to make any Images, which might pluck certain
folish persons from God, and turn the eyes of their souls to the
conte^plation of earthly things. So much for Origin. And if ye read his book
through: ye shall see it proved in plain words, a frentike part to worship
Images: a madness to say, that any knowledge of God can be gotten by them.
Only this suffiseth here, that your allegatio^ makes not to your purpose: and
your author alleged, makes most against you. Then what should ye talk that
in the primitive Church, Crosses were set up in every place: that every Church
and Chapel had the sign of ye Cross erected in it: that sacraments could not
be made without it: that men devoutly kept pieces of it. etc. Whereof Origin.
280. year after Christ, Folio. 9. a.
knew nothing, but rather by the law condemned such obseruances. Where now is ye
counsel that you have learned of your elders? Where is ye aduertiseme^t of
grave fathers? Where is the medicine, that you call sovereign, taken from the
best Physicians of ye church? I will not compare you to a Tapster, a Tinker, an
Osteler, but to a leude Apoticarie, that understands not his bil, but gives
Quid pro Quo, or else to Cook Ruffian that marres good meat in the dressing.
But to proceed, and give somewhat a further taste of your unsavory soppes: ye
bring forth Cassiodores Cassiodor Folio. 19. b.
authority, which may be answered in a word, that he means nothing less
than you do ymagine. For what though, the signs of the heavenly Prince be
prynted upon the faithful, as the Image of the Emperor is in his coin,
whereby the Devil is expulsed from them. etc. What though, the Cross be the
invincible defense of the humble, the overthrow of the proud, the victory of
Christ, the undoing of the Devil, the destruction of hell, the confirmation of
heavenly things, the death of infidels, the life of the just? Is a Roode, or a
Crucifix, or wagging of a finger, able to show, whose men we are, as the print
in yt money does show, whose the coin is? Whersoeuer that Image and
superscription is sta^ped, there is it certain who has a right to the coin.
But whosoever have the sign or stamp of a Cross upon them, show not thereby
whose servants they are. Your Popes, and your Prelates have Crosses before
them, Crosses hanging upon them, Crosses in their Crowns, Crosses in their
garments: And yet I fear me, least ye will not affirm them, to be the best
servant of Christ. You know, sometime there be coins of counterfets. I
know, the most crossers, are not the best Christians. The sign of God printed
in the faithful is the belief in Christ: The sign of God in the faithful.
and grace to do thereafter. The Cross that is their refuge, their succor
and defense, is the death of Christ and merits of his passion. But see what
pieuishnesse is in Papists. Pieuishnesse of Popery.
Whersoeuer they read of fire in the Scripture, thence they kindle Purgatory.
Wheresoever they hear a body mentioned, there do they tear it to
Transubstantiation. Wheresoever they see, this word (Cross) come in place,
they lift it up to the Roodeloft, or at the least, to the forehead. Me thinks,
M. Martial, that you might have remembered your first division, where ye made
mention of.iiij. significations of the Cross, and so applied (as the troth is)
the sayings of your authors unto the second. But your wisdom foresaw this
objection of mine, and therefore ye grant, that nothing can avail or profit
man, Fol. 20. a. b.
unless he has a steadfast faith in Christ, and faithful belief in the merits
of his passion. But (Mary) say you (Mary is much beholding to you, in deed she
stands next to ye Cross) as not every simple, bare, and naked faith, but such
as works by charity, conquereth the world: so not every faith works to
man the foresaid effects, but faith assisted by the sign of the holy Cross.
Then by your reason, the sign of the Cross is as necessary to concur with
our belief, as charity to be with faith. But faith without charity is a
Devils faith. Therefore belief without a sign of the Cross is also devilish.
I am sure that no man endewed with common sense, howsoever he be affected in
cases of religion, but will condemn herein the lack of discretion in you. For,
tell me I pray you, what scripture, what father, what reason ever taught you to
compare the sign of the Cross, with charity, with hope, with fasting, and
with prayer? None of these, but we have an hundredth places in the word of God,
to commend and command them? But as for the sign of the Cross, what mention
is there, Folio. 21. a.
much less commendation. Forsooth ye bring authorities and experimentes.
Authorities of Lactantius Lactantius
and Augustine, Experiments of Iuliane. As for Lactantius he tieth two points
together, The name of Christ, and sign of his passion. Psalm. 54. Prouer. 18.
The power of the name we read of: Save me O God by thy name. The name of the
Lord is a strong tower, the righteous runs unto it and is exalted. And: Our
help is in the name of the Lord. Psalm. 123.
And in the new Testament: Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.
Math. 23.
In my name (says Christ) they shall cast out Devils. And the effect thereof
was proved in the.70. disciples which returned home with joy, Marc. 16. Luc.
10. Joan. 14. Act. 2. Act. 3. Act. 4.
and said: Devils are subject unto us in thy name. Whatsoever in my name you
shall ask my father, you shall obtain. Whosoever shall call upon ye name of the
Lord, shall be saved. Examples also, of Peter: In the name of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth rise up and walk. Also: His name has made this man sound, whom ye
see, and know through faith in his name. And: There is no other name under
Heaven whereby we may be saved. In all these places there is no sign of the
Cross spoken of: yet all these prove a true effect. Wherefore the name of
Christ alone, would have done as much, as the name and the sign together. Nor
we must impute the virtue to the sign, though contrary to the use, and example
of Scripture, it pleased some men to add it. The like may be said of Austins
place, Augustine
for where he speaks of the articles of our faith, called in latin Symbolum,
De symb. ad Cathe. 1.
which he willed before to be written in the heart, laid up in store in the
book of memory, he concluded, that a way, to withstand the enemy, was cum
symboli sacramento, with the sacrament of faith (which you interpret a
steadfast faith) and Crucis vexilio, and ensign of the Cross. What means he
by that Metaphore? What is that ensign of the Cross? The Banner that is
carried about the churchyard in procession? No: But that which in the self same
sentence before he called Canticu^ salutis, joining it with Symboli remedio,
contra antiqui Serpentis venenum, The song of salvation, joined with the
remedy of the.xij. Articles of our faith, against the poison of the old
serpent. Therefore straight after, when he had rehearsed the two chief engines,
wherewithal our enemy does afflict us: Voluptatem and Timorem, Pleasure and
Dread. He does not bid us to make the sign of a cross in our foreheade, nor
run to succor of so weak a shield: but to fence our selves Timore Domini
casto, and fide Orationis. With the chaste fear of God, and faith of Prayer.

Ye see by this time that your authorities make nothing for you: The wrong
understanding of the name (Cross) does make your arguments run of uncertain
feet, and halte down right. The ioyntely concurring of faith, and fruits I
know to be necessary: the word of God does teach me: But the necessary
concurrence of the sign of the Cross with faith, is more than you can learn,
either of Gods word, or else good father, and therefore more than we ought to
believe, unless we wilfully believe a lie. Mat. 16. Mark. 8. Luc. 9. 2. Cor. 4.
Christ was sufficient scholemaster to us: he left no precept of his Cross
amongst us. Only he willed Every man to take up his own Cross. The Apostles
that gloried in the Cross, that is to say, ye death of Christ, that lived
under the Cross: that is to say, were subject to afflictions, carrying about
with them the death of Christ in their mortal bodies: that did many miracles
by him that hanged on the Cross: never used (as we read) the sign of the
Cross, nor gave any counsel or commandment for it. Hebr. 4.
Shall Christ our hie priest, touched with the feling of our infirmities, be
insufficient furnishet of us, and folish men arm us at all points? Shall the
Apostles forget so necessary a piece of defense, and the Pope remember it? I
think in deed that the Cross quarrellers took all their president of Julian
the Apostata, Papists take President of Julian the Apostata Folio. 21. a.
that whereas they meante to have as little Religion, they would have as light
a rescue, as he had. But before I come, to recital of his story: let me cite
your comparison. It is not odious, but to ridiculous, The bare sign of the
Cross, ye prefer before naked, sole and only faith. The sign of the Cross,
of it self what is it? A beating of the air: a throwing of a stone against the
wind: in effect nothing. But faith, make it as naked and bare as you can, yet
is it a quality of the mind, which at the least wise to the world commends
us. For let it be as the scholemen term it, fides informis, an unshapen faith:
1. Tim. 1.
or as Paul calls it fides ficta, a feigned faith: or the worst that ye can
make it, Daemonum fides, the Devils faith: Yet does it teach us somewhat, it
takes away the excuse of ignorance, as Paul to the Romans witnesses. And
forces a sin upon us, as Christ himself affirms. If I had not come and
spoken to them, Joan. 15.
they should have no sin. Your naked Cross, as it can not stand by it
self, so in it self it contains nothing, unless perhaps some worms and
spiders be crept into a corner of it. All must rest in the conceyt of man and
his imagination. I might say with Thomas Aquinas: Quod fides informis and
formata fides est idem habitus, quia ad naturam fidei nihil attinet sieve
charitas ad fit, sieve non adsit. Nam hoc per accidens sit: as he says. Whose
words in english be these: Faith vnshaped and shaped faith, is all one
constant quality, because it skilleth not for the nature of faith, whether
charity be there or no. For that is an accidental thing. Now if this were
true: a naked faith, were far better than a naked Cross: because there should
be no difference, between a naked faith, and a faith cladde, as well as can be.
But if I should stand in defense of this, I should be as fowly deceived as your
Saint was. Lib. 3. Sent. Did 23. Cap. Vnicu^.
I will reason with you out of the master of the Sentence. Let faith be taken
Sine pro eo quo creditur, sieve pro eo quod creditur, either for that whereby we
believe, or else for that which is believed: certain it is, that the simplest of
them both, is better than a sign, though it be of the Cross. For be it the
latter faith, Quam Daemones et falsi Christiani habent, as he says: which the
Devils and false christians have, yet by the same, Possunt credere deum, et
credere deo. they can believe that there is a God, they can give credit unto his
words. But a bare Cross can not do this. Take me a man that never heard of
Christ, and bring him to a Spanyard to behold all his Crosses, at the Mary
Mass, and he shall be as learned when he comes away, as the Ape is devout,
when he has eaten the host. But if a man neither did, nor could ever hear at
all, this naked faith were able to teach him, without any further information,
that a God there is, which the very Gentiles did understand. Again to compare
a gift of God, which is in the mind, to ye work of man made with the hand,
is Canibus catulos coniungere, matribus haedos. To join the whelps and
hounds, the kiddes and goats together. Now to your Julian. Iulians example.
Folio. 21. b.
Ye say, that when he had consulted with Sorcerers, and they had made the
Devils solemnly to appear. He was stricken in a fear, and forced to make the
sign of the Cross in his foreheade. Then the Devils loking back, and seeing
the figure of the Lords banner, and remembering their fall and overthrow,
suddenly vanished out of sight. Thus much, or so much as this ye cite out of
Theodorete, and Gregory Nazianzene. For the truth of the history I contend
not with you. But what I judge of the experiment I will tell you. First of al,
that wicked, reprobate, and godless persons, can use the sign of the Cross
as well as other. Which proposition shall quite confute all your ninth Article.
For if such as Julian can cross themselves: and notwithstanding have never a
whit the more faith, (as your self confess) then how falls it out that the
Cross drives out heresies. Fol. 22. a. Contradictions in Martial.
Fol. 94. b. that the sign of the Cross conuerteth obstinate sinners. Fol.
114. 115. that the sign of the Cross makes wicked men to think upon God,
that the Cross is comfortable in desperation. Fol. 116. Secondly, this I note.
How sore the Devil was hurt by the Cross, when it nothwithstanding, he
retained ye possession of whole Julian both in body and soul. Thyrdly, that
the devil does feign himself to be afraid of that, which with all his heart
he would have men to use. For this is a general rule, that the Devil is a
lier, and always will seem to be as he is not. If there were no other matter
in the world against you, this only were sufficient to discredit you. For
what better reason is there, that Crossing ought not to be used at al, than
that the Devil did seem to dread it. If that indede he had been afraid of it,
he would have doubled a point with you: and not have played so open play. He
runs from the Steeple to dwell in the people. He counterfets a flight from the
holy water bucket, and nestles himself in the bosom of the priest. He seems
to give place to the charmers enchantment, and yet that sacrifice does please
him excedingly. Ye confess, that Julian had no hope in Christ, no love to god,
no faith: and will ye not confess, that he was thereby a desperate person, and
a lyin of the Devil? The Devil, then, should have done him wrong, if he had
put him in any further danger. But one thing I marvel at: how you, M.
Martial, a bacheler of law: sometime Usher of Winchester: now student in
Divinity: making a book: entitled to the Queen: perused by the Learned:
privileged by the King: allowed by Cunner: should fall into manifest
contradictions, and escape uncontrolled. I see it is true, quod mendacem memorem
esse opertet. a lier had need have a good remembrance. Ye said in the leaf
before. Folio. 21.
The sign of the Cross must concur with faith, and faith with the sign
of the Cross. Now, ye allow the bare sign of the Cross without any faith,
to have the force and power aforesaid. If I thought ye were ignorant of Satan's
practices, I would show you some of them, to make you more circumspect. But you
have been brought up in his schole a good while, and therefore I think ye
practice after him, endeavoring your self, of set purpose to deceive. For
which, like a Spider ye spinne a subtle web. You suck out of the Fathers
the worst joyce that you can, that you may turn the same into your own fylthy
and infected nature. Gregory did well in abhorring the name of universal
Bishop. But Gregory's authority is not taken in that. Gregory said well,
when he told us the tale of Speciosus a deacon that would rather forsake his
benefice, than his Wife. But the president of that, persuadeth you not. Only
when Gregory disgraceth himself, with old wives tales, and tryfling customs
of his corrupted time, then is he meat for your sawsy mouths. A Jew says
Gregory, without trust, confidence or faith, Folio. 22. b.
in Christ's passion, was preserved from Spirits, by the sign of the Cross.
I rehearse not the circumstaunce of the tale, because I have told you more
than is true already. For if he had no faith in Christ, the Scripture is plain
that there could no spirit be worse, than himself. Heb. 11.
Impossible it is to please God without faith. And shall God by the Cross
preserve them that please him not? Who sees not what a fable this is, or
rather a blasphemy, if it be weighed aright. But Gregory has it: A doctor of
the Church. So has he more untruths than this. Lib. Dial. 4. Cap. 55.
As that for confirmation of sacrifice for the dead, he brings forth a
vision, a dream, or a dotage, such a one as I am ashamed to father upon him,
or any one of the faithful: yet proof good enough for such a matter of
naught. His tale, is this. A certain priest that used the bathes, went on a
day into them, and found a young man (whom he knew not) very obsequious and
seruiseable unto him, he pulled of his shoes, he took his garments, he did
whatsoever might be comfortable for him. When this he had often done, one day
the priest going thitherwarde thought thus with himself: I ought not to seem
unthankful unto him, which has so devoutly been accustomed to serve me,
whenever I wash me, but needs I must carry him somewhat for a reward. Then
took he with him the tops of two loaves which had been offered at service. And
as soon as ever he came unto the place, he found his man, he used his seruise
as he was wont in all points. Thus when he had washed and put on his clothes,
as he was going out, he offered (as a blessing) unto the man that had been so
diligent about him, that which he brought with him, requiring him courteously to
accept that which he offered him, in the way of charity. But he mourning and
afflicted, answered: Father, what meanest thou to give me these? This bread is
holy, this can I not eat. For I whom thou see, sometime was Lord of this
place. But for my sins now after my death am deputed hither. But if thou will do any thing for me, offer this bread unto almighty God for me, to be a
mediator for my sins. And then know that god has hard thy prayer, when thou
shall come hither to bathe thee and find me not. So the next weke after, the
priest continued in mourning for him, every day did offer the host for him, and
afterward when he came to ye bath, he found him not. Hereupon father Gregory
concludes. Qua ex re quantum prosit animabus immolatio sacrae oblationis
ostenditur, quando hanc and ipsi mortuorum spiritus a viuentibus petunt, and
signa indicant quibus per eam absoluti videantur. In english this. By which
thing it is showed how much ye sacrifice of the holy oblatio^ profits ye
souls, when the spirits of the dead require this of the living, and show
signs whereby they may appear to be delivered by it. And so far Gregory. But
is it not a pitiful case, that of so weak a ground, so wicked a doctrine should
be builded, contrary to the manifest word of God? In the.xviij. of
Deuteronomie: Seek not to learn a truth of the dead. And in the.viij. of the
Prophet Esaias. Should not a people inquire at their God? shall they depart from
the living to the dead? How soever the state of men is after this life, no
doctrine should be gathered of ye talking of spirits. And furthermore, that
dead men do serve in the bathes upon the earth: be losed out of the popish
Purgatory which they affirm to be subtus terram, under the earth, to become
as it were Barbers apprentices upon the earth, may well be a legend for Plato
his Purgatory, joined with the tale of Danaus daughters, who pour in water
into a bottomless tubbe. Wherefore, M. Martial, doubt ye not this, but the
wicked spirits, which saw vas vacuum sed signatum, an empty vessel but signed
with the Cross, were bold notwithstanding, ad euitandum vacuum, to enter into
him. As for the words of Lactantius, which you bring forth, Folio. 23. Lib. 4.
ca. 27. de vera Sap
that when they do sacrifice to their Idols, if there stand any man by, that
has his forehead signed (for that which you add (with the Cross) is more
than ye find in the text) then they offer up no sacrifice, neither their
vvisserd is able to give answer: must rather be understood of the faithful
christened, than of any that were crossed. For by the signed foreheade they
signified baptism, and the faith of Christ which they professed. Otherwise if
it be as you say, Folio. 23.
that spirits can not abide the sign of the Cross, nor continue in place
where any man is that has the sign of the Cross. the best counsel that I
can give men, is to be marked, to burn their flesh with an hot iron, and
make a durable Cross in their foreheades, whereby they may be free, as long as
they live, from fearing of spirits, without any more a do. But I fear me least
this be no sufficient defense. For Serapis and his priests were all to be
Crossed: and yet the Devils daunced among them. The Pope has his Crosses, yea
double and treble, yet is not the Devil afraid to come at him. Siluester
the.ij. as Platina reports, was a practiser of naughty arts, and therein
addict himself altogether unto the common enemy of mankind. And in deed first
he gat the Archbyshoprike of Reme, and afterward of Rauenna, by Symony. Last of
all, by the Devils forwarding help, he gat also the occupying of ye Popes see:
howbeit, under this condition, that when he departed this life, he should be al
wholly the Devils, by whose false deceyts he obtained so high dignity. Whereupon
as the same Platina, the Popes own Secretary does write. When Siluester was
not circumspect enough, in being ware of the Devils baytes, he was killed, all
to pulled, of the promoter of his, the Devil: Yea, when he was a Massing in the
Church. A strange case, M. Martial, that so many crosses as were in the church,
so many Crosses as were in the Mass, could not save the supreme head of the
Church, from tearing in pieces by wicked spirits, yea, when he was at his holy
Mass. Wherefore the Cross in your.iiij. signification, Folio. 23.
is not, the heavenly note and immortal sign. It has not that effect by
continual meditation of heavenly things, and the life to come, to make men
heavenly and immortal. Still you do reason a non causa pro causa, attributing
that unto the outward sign, which is in deed the virtue of Christ, Folio. 23. b
and belief in his passion. Ye say, that the sign of the Cross is spoken of,
by God himself in his Prophet Esaias. But it shall appear by the very Scriptures
that you allege, how ignorantly and how falsely you cite your authorities.
Esaias. 49.
God by the mouth of his servant witnessed, how he would bring to pass, yt
the Church which had continued barren a long while, should now be fruitful, and
have such store of children, that she should wonder at her own increase,
saying: Quis genuit mihi istos, quum egosim sterilis and solitaria, relegata
and vaga? Quis ergo educauit istos? En ego sola relicta sum, isti ergo vndenam
sunt? Who has begotten me these, seeing I am barren and desolate, a banished
person, and a wanderer to and fro? And who has nourished them? Behold I was
left alone and whence are these? God to answer this case, and to show that
there should be a spiritual brood, begotten through grace of adoption, not by
the common course of nature, but by the secret working of his spirit, said:
Tollam ad gentes manum meam, et ad populos signu^ meu^ erigam. I will lift up my
hand to ye gentiles, and set up my standard unto the people. Meaning that not
only the Jews, but also the Gentiles, should be brought to Christ, which
agreing in unity of one faith together, should be gathered as brethren into one
mothers lap. Now I beseech you turn over your histories, co^sult with your
elders, and see what it was that brought the Gentiles to christianite, the
Idolatrous nations to true religion. If it were ye sign of the Cross after
your.iiij. signification, Folio. 24. a.
made of some earthly matter to be set up in Churches, or made with man's
hand in the air, in form and likeness of the other, then is it somewhat that
you have said. But if it were the preaching of the word (as most certain it is)
which did so work in the hearts of men, ye refusing their errors, they became
to be faithful: then you, are a falsefier of the word, M. Martial. Learn you
of me, that preaching is that hand of God, that standard of his, whereby that
merciful effect is wrought, as well in us as in all other, to be brought to the
truth from blindness and ignorance. And if ye think scorn to learn of me,
learn of God himself, who in ye text before, says: that his mouth is a sharp
sweard, and that preaching is a chosen shaft, had in the quiver of the
almighty. For the word in operation is as forcible as a sweard: it moves, it
rauisheth, it renueth men: it pearceth to the heart, it searches the secret
places, it enters through, as S. Paul says, Heb. 4,
even unto the dividing asu^der of the soul and of the spirits, and of the
joints, and of the marowe: and is a discerner of the thoughts, and the
intentes of the heart: neither is there any creature which is not manifest in
his sight, but al things are naked and open unto his eyes, with whom we have
to do. This two edged sweard which God has put in the mouth of man, does try
the force of things set against it. It cutteth the corrupt affections from the
heart. It opens the festered sores, the pestilent impostumes of our ill
desires. It overthrows the kingdom of Satan, It slayes his host, sin,
death and hell. And as an arrowe which is past the bow of a cunning archer,
can not be stayed by hand, before it have his lighting place: so does the word
hold still his constant course: it makes way whersoeuer it goes: it falls as
he wills, which is the only directer of it. But fall where it will, it
falls with effect, nor any man can withstand the blow that it gives. If you
can justly ascribe any such piece of operation, to the Cross in your fourth
signification, then will I gladly give place unto you. But whereas it is
certain, that no work of man, can alter the heart, or once regenerate it to
true piety: the standard that Esaias the Prophet speaks of, makes nothing for
your purpose. But S. Hierome ye say, takes your part, for upon that place he
notes. Fol. 23. b.
Undoubtedly there is meant the banner or sign of the Cross. In deed s.
Hierome has these words: Haud dubium quin vexillum crucis, vt impleatur illud
quod scriptum est: Laudibus eius plena est terra. Which is as much to say as
this. No doubt but it shall be the ensign of the Cross, that it may be
fulfilled which is written, The earth is full of his praises. Here Hierome does
explicate himself, what he does mean by the ensign of the Cross: the setting
forth of the praise of God, which is not by setting of a Cross on the altar,
but by preaching the crucified Christ unto people. The place of Jeremy
the.iiij. makes no more for the Cross, tha^ it does for the Candlesticks. For
when the Prophet had spoken to the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem, to be
circumcised to the Lord, Jeremy. 4
and cut of the foreskinnes of their infected hearts, ne egrederetur tanquam
ignis furor eius, et acce^deretur, and nemo extingueret, least his wrath should
go forth as fire, and should be kindled, and no man quench it. He comes
further to declare the obstinacy of men's hearts, that by no means can be
brought to goodness, but seek by all means to avoid the reward and plague of
wickedness. Wherefore by an Ironye, he says unto them. Blow the trumpet in
the land: cry and gather together and say: Assemble your selves, and let us go
into strong cities. Set up the standard in Sion. etc. As if that he had said.
I know what you will do: when the wrath of God shall fall upon you, when your
ennimies shall oppress you, you will not consider the cause thereof: but you
will run to your strong holds, you will arm your selves, and stand at your
defense: you will set up your standard in Sion, and think that you shall be
safe there. But it will not be so, says the Lord: Quoniam ego malum accersam
ab Aquilone. Because I will bring a plague from the North. And truly there is
no cause why Hierome in this place, should run to his Allegory, whereas
there is so plain and sound a sense in the letter. But if his Allegory should
take place: let all go together and it makes against you. For his words be
these. Ingrediamur civitates munitas. Haereticorum bella consurgunt, Christi
monumenta nos teneant, Leuate signum Crucis in sublimitate ecclesiae. Let us
enter into the walled cities, The battayles of the Heretics do arise, Let
the munitions of Christ hold us, Lift up the sign of the Cross in the height
of the Church. Let me now ask you this question: whether we must run
against heretics with a Cross in our hand: as I remember, a priest of your
faculty, beat all his parish with the Cross staff. If this artillery beat
not down heresies, think that S. Hierome meante another thing: that it is to
say, The sign of the Cross in the top of the Church. The preaching of the
word in the prelates of the Church. Now, as for the sign of the son of
man, Math. 24.
which shall before the judgment appear in heaven: Forsooth there is no
certain proof that it shall be a Cross. For Chrysostom in his second
exposition upon the.xxiiij. Chapter of Mathewe, Hom. 49.
says: Quidam putant Crucem Christi ostendendam esse in caelo, Verius autem
est, ipsu^ Christu^, in corpore suo habente^ testimonia passionis, id est,
vulnera lanceae and clauorum, vt impleatur illud quod dictum est. Et videbunt
in quem pupugerunt. Some (says Chrysostom) think that the Cross of Christ
shall be showed in heaven. But it is truer, that Christ himself shall appear,
having in his body the testimonies of his passion: that is to say, the wounds,
of the spear and nails, that it may be fulfilled which was said: And they
shall see him whom they pierced. Nor only content with his own censure, he
brings after a proof of Scripture, that the words cannot be spoken of the
Cross, but of the body of Christ himself: because the rest of the
Evangelists writing of the same matter, do only say: Videbunt filium hominis
venientem. They shall see the son of man coming. Whereupon he concludes that
all the Evangelists do show Signum Christi, esse ipsum corpus Christi, qui in
signo corporis sui cognoscendus est, a quibus crucifixus est: That the sign of
Christ, is the body of Christ himself, who in the sign of his body, shall be
known of them of whom he was crucified. So that ye challenge more a great
deal, than we need to grant you. But you shall see how courteously I will deal
with you. Admit that the sign of the son of man, is the Cross in deed?
What have ye gained now? First, it shall be no material Cross made with
man's hand, nor yet a sign prynted in his foreheade. Therefore ye must run
to a fyfte signification of Cross in Scripture: for this can not serve for the
fourth. The places that ye cite out of the ninth of Ezechiell, and seventh of
the Revelation, where many be sealed into Gods servants, (out of which order
I fear me least a number of my Crossemasters, may cry with the Friar, Nos
sumus exempti, we are exempt) I marvel that you can without blushing utter. But
if ye have any shame in you, I will make you to blushe. Think you that the
sign of GOD in the foreheades, was the sign of a Cross drawn with a finger?
Is the spirit of life and lively faith, (which only express the true printe of
God) inspired, as soon as a Cross is figured? Is the sign of a Cross
sufficient to discern the good from the bad? the faithful from the infidels?
Yet such must the sign of the Cross be, if it be the same, that either
Ezechiel or Saint John speaks of. Consider this ye gross Papiste, that he
that marked the foreheades in Ezechiell, was neither Caruer, Crosser, nor
Coniurer. He was clothed in linen, and had an ynkehorne by his side. He bare
the type of a Scribe and a Priest. The mark that he gave them, was the letter
Thau The letter Thau.
(of which I speak more in the next Article) signifying the law, direction, or
rule. To note, that the minister of Gods word, must printe the seal. He must
ingraue in the very heart, the law of God, and rule of faith: and then be
they safe and sure from all evil. The blood of the Lamb in the old law,
was not cast behind the door, but sprinckeled upon the door posts: The mark
of God is not set in the back, but in the foreheade of all the faithful:
That, as things most manifest, be said to be written in a man's foreheade,
and the forehead is the place of shame: so should the servants of the living
God, lightened with his word and holy spirit, never dissemble it, or be
ashamed of it. Again, the persons sealed, as well in Ezechiell, as in the
Revelation, do show that they had a surer mark, than a sorry sign of the
Cross can be. For in Ezechiell we read. Pass through the City of
Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheades of them that mourn and cry,
for all the abominations that be done in the myddeste thereof. And in the
seventh of the Revelation: Till we have sealed the servant of our God in
their foreheads. Therefore such as lamente and be sorry for abominable
wickedness, such as be in deed the servants of God, they be sealed: But all
men indifferentely have the sign of the Cross, many more than be grieved with
the sight of sin, or do continue in the fear of God: Therefore the seal,
that in these places is spoken of, is not the sign of the Cross. Julian was
Crossed, Pope Siluester was crossed, and yet, as it is proved before, neither of
them both did mourn for their sins, or served God. See ye not then, how
fondely ye pretend scripture for your cross? There be only five places
brought, and every one of them does make against you. Wherefore since these be
the only ground of the two kinds of Crosses, whereupon in this treatise ye
mind to discourse: Folio. 24. a.
and these make nothing for you: what shall we think, not of your slender
building, but ill-favored botching, whose foundation already is shaken unto
naught? Ye please your self well, and think ye have showed a great piece of
wit, when ye call your adversaries (me and such other) enemies of the Cross.
Folio. 24.
But I think there is no man so mad to believe you, unless ye could tell what
the Cross means. Folio. 24.
Ye say, that ye attribute nothing to the sign of the Cross, without special
relation to the merits of Christ's passion. Then why did ye bring in the
example of Julian and the Jew? Why afterward allege ye, Folio. 92. a.
that man using only the sign of the Cross, puts away all the craft and
subtlety of the Devil? Ye forget your self, ye should have one to wring you
by ye ear. But I will bear with your weakness: although to confirm your
better aduisemente, ye close up your tale in the first Article, with as vain,
a supposal, as in your dreaming devising, ye conceived before, that as God
gives victory in battle, health in sickness, etc. but by the help of men,
as external means: So Christ works all the effects that shall be, but by
the holy sign of his Cross, If I might crave so much of your mastership, I
would be a suitor: once to have you prove that, which so often you confidentely
affirm. I acknowledge you not for any such Pythagoras, that it shall suffice
me for mine own discharge, to say (...) M. Martial, has said the word: But
I rather think you to be some scholar of Anaxagoras, which have learned to
make Quidlibet ex Quolibet. An apple of an oyster. Pardon me therefore, if I
trust you no further, than I have trial of you.

To the second Article.
A Fool on a time, came to a Philosopher, and asked him, What is honesty?
whereto he would make him no answer: for, said he, thou demaundest me a
question of that, that thou have nothing to do withal. And since your wisdom
in the second Article, does prove nothing else, but that, which ye profess ye
will have nothing to do withal, it may seem folly in me to make you any
answer to it. In the next side of the leaf before, these words ye have.
Folio. 24. a.
There be two kinds of signs of the Cross: The one made of some earthly
matter, to be set up in Churches, and left in the sight of the people: The
other expressed or made with man's hand, in the air, in form and likeness
of the other, and imprinted in men's foreheads, breasts, and other parts of
the body: and used as further occasion requires. Of which two signs in this
treatise I mind to discourse. Now if either of these signs was prefigured in
the law of nature: foreshewed by the signs of Moses law: denounced by the
Prophets, or showed from heaven in the time of grace: then think that you
have said something: and I have done you wrong in reproving of you. But the
passion of Christ, and manner of his death was only prefigured. What is this,
to the sign? And if it were so (which you shall never prove) that the sign it
self: the God of the Roode lofte: the Cross of the altar were prefigured,
what is that to your purpose? What a consecution is this, M. Martial? The
Crucifixe is prefigured in Moses, in the Prophets, and in the time of Christ.
Therefore no remedy but a Crucifixe must be had in the Church: borne in
procession: and crept unto, on good Friday. Then, let me reason with you. The
treason of Judas was foretold by Prophecy Psalm. 108. Fiant dies eius pauci,
and Episcopatum eius accipiat alter. Let his days be short (says David:) and
let another occupy his rome: which to be vndestode of Judas, the Acts of the
Apostles prove. And in the time of grace there was no less foreshewed: Joan. 6.
when Christ said, Vnus ex vobis diabolus est: One of you is a Devil: Ergo, we
must reverence the treason of Judas, yea some sign thereof we must have
amongst us. In psalm. 108.
The manner of his death was also prefigured, as Augustine affirms, how his
belly should burst, and he desperately, die. Therefore let us have one holyday
of betraying, another of bursting. For if prefiguring in law of nature,
denouncing by the Prophets, foreshewing from Heaven in time of grace, be able
to enforce the necessary use and estimation of any thing: then why should not
this, and many other plagues of God, be honored, as well as the sign of the
Cross? Wherefore I will breiflyrunne over your authors, and note by the way,
sometime how fondly ye apply them. When men from a certain reveled truth,
will run to their own fantasies and devises, no marvel if sometime they
over shoot them selves: and when they leave the histories of the Scripture,
and seek for Allegories more than need: they breed oftentimes obscurity,
and bring men in doubt further than before. Yet I deny not, but as Augustine
says, De Ciuitate dei Libro 13. Cap. 21. Gallath. 4 1. Cori. 10.
there may be a spiritual understanding beside a sense litterall. Otherwise
the Apostle did not well in figuring the two Testamentes by the two Children,
one of the bond woman, an other of the free. Nor we could admit his
exposition of Moses Rock, to be Christ him self. But in this case where every
man is lead by his own sense, his exposition is most to be allowed, who
speaks most according to piety.

Damascene Damascene.
does resemble the tree of Life in Paradise, Folio. 25.
to the Cross. And as in one sense I condemn it not, so in another I like it
not: for I see that you be deceived by it. He (showing how Christ as a good
Physician did cure by contraries) made, as it were, our life to spring out of
his death: and therefore compared the tree of life to the passion. But the
words that are inferred, savor not of the Scripture. for ye say. Seeing Death
came in by the tree, it was conueniente that Life and Resurrection should be
given again by a tree. Paul speaks otherwise. Per vnum hominem intrauit
mors, and per hominem resurrectio. 1. Cor. 15.
By one man sin entered in, and by one man resurrection: Not by one tree,
though one death upon a tree, was a mean thereof. Augustine in diverse places
makes the tree of life to be the wisdom of God: as in his second book de
Genesis contra Manich. Cap. 9. And in his thyrtenth book de Ciuitate Dei. Ca. 21.
Likewise, as often he does resemble it to Christ himself. As in his first book
and fiftenth Chapter contra aduersarios legis and Proph. speaking of Paradise,
where Christ and the Thief should meet, says: Esse ibi cu^ Christo, est ibi
esse cum vitae ligno. To be there with Christ, is to be there with the tree of
life. And whereas Cassiodore, upon the first Psalm, does refer the tree
planted by the river side, unto the Cross that bare Christ: how much better
Augustine on the same place expounds it of Christ himself, Qui de aquis
decurrentibus, id est, populis peccatoribus trahit eos in radice disciplinae
suae, Which of ye running waters, that is to say, the sinful people, draws
men unto him in the root of his discipline. For whereas Christ is the wisdom
of the Father, this exposition is consonant unto Scripture, which of that
wisdom says, Lignu^ vitae est, amplectentibus eam, She is the tree of life,
to them that lay hold on her. But if the wood of the Cross be worthyly
called The tree of life, Folio. 25. b.
because our Lord Christ, who is our life was hanged there, why should not
the Ass be the beast of life, because our Lord Christ who is our life, did
ride upon her? Ye will say peradventure that the Ass was no instrument for his
death: but for his kingdom she was. And why not the instrument of his
kingdom, as well as of his priesthode be honored of us? I say it to this end:
that if ye think, the fathers of the Church, speaking of the Cross, to be
understood so grossly as ye take them, many fond absurdities shall arise
thereof. They meant of the death of Christ, that, which you attribute to the
material Cross. They by a figure did ascribe to the sign, that, which is
propre to the signified thing. I omit some authorities that you do allege,
because they neither do make for you, nor against me. Cyrillus says. Folio.
26. a.
The holy Cross brought us up to heaven: And that the Cross is that Arc of
Noah, by which we are saved from the flood of the water of sin,
ouerflovving us. etc. I think there is none so senseless as your self, but
consters his words otherwise than you. To easy, God wot, is that way to
heaven, whereto we may be carried a pickbacke on a Roode. To sone shall we fall
from state of our felicity, if a rotten piece of wood, or cancred metal,
must support us in it. To dreadful shall this drowning in our sins be, if no
better arc than of a Cross material, shall preserve us from it. Let the
Doctors dally in figures as they fansy, let us not depart from the verity of
the word. If they speak one thing, and mean another, let us take their
meaning, and let their words alone. Great difference there is, when a doctrine
is plainly taught, and when they descant upon a text. Folio. 26. b. Folio.
27. a.
Wherefore the standard of Abraham according to Ambrose: The wood of the
sacrifice according to Cyrill: The blessing of Jacob atcording to Damascene:
The rod of Aaron, according to Origin by which all (is said) the Cross was
prefigured, I wittingly omit. For what, if a thousand things else were (as men
ymagined) figures of a Cross (in which case a man's invention might have
scope enough, and find in the scripture many more such figures, than they have
spoken of) shall this bring such authority to the Cross, (which is the thing
that you do shoot at) that the sign of the Cross shall be in all places set
up and honored? Folio. 28.
The lifting up of Moses hands, Exodi. 17. somewhat will I speak of: thereby
to declare that such young men as you, speaking much of the Cross, know not at
all the sign of the Cross. That the lifting up of Moses hand did signify
prayer, is evident by consent of all men. Chrysostom de orando ad Deum, lib.
1. says: Quomodo Moses Israeliticum populum in bellis seruauit? An non arma
quidem cum exercitu discipulo tradidit, ipse vero deprecationem opposuit
hostium multitudini? Nos interim docens, preces iustorum plus valere, quam
arma, quam equitatum. etc. In english thus. How did Moses preserve the people
of Israel in the wars? Did he not deliver unto his scholar, his armor, and
host: but he himself set his earnest prayer against the multitude of his
ennimies? Thereby teaching us, that the prayer of the righteous, is more
auayleable than arms or horsemen. And in his sermon of Moses. Definit Israel
vincere Mose disistente in prece, vt dum diuersa populis exhiberentur,
orationis potentia nobis monstraretur. Israel leaves ouercomming (quod he) when
Moses left his praying: that when diverse effects were showed unto the people,
the power of prayer might be showed unto us. And truly if we mark the place
it self, much better doctrine may be pyked of it, than to prefigurate I wot
not what manner of Cross unto us. The lifting up of Moses hands with the rod
therein, is nothing else, but prayer that procedes of faith, according unto Gods
word. So David says. Psalm. 140.
Let the lifting up of my hands be as an evening sacrifice. The heavy hands,
whereof the story speaks, do signify the sluggishnesse and fainting of our
flesh, in all virtuous and honest exercise. But as Moses faynting had a stone
put under him, so we must have Christ that spiritual stone, to support our
weakness: as Aaron and Hur stayed up Moses hands, so the ministers of the
word, must confirm the hearts, Objection.
of them, that make their prayers, with the merciful promises of almighty God.
But Augustine says that beside all this, the figure of the Cross was
foreshevved there. That am I well contented to admit. But your englishing of
the text, I will not admit. For where as the Latin has Manibus in Crucis
figuram extensis, you to expound it thus, his hands held up a Cross: is to
absurd and foolish. For to stretch out his hands in form of a Cross: and to
hold his hands a Cross, is two things. The stretching forth is at the arms
end, as Christ's was on the Cross, with the whole distance of body betwixt
them. The holding of the hands a Cross, is with one, over the other. Wherefore
by your reason, Moses made a Cross, but it was a Saint Andrews Cross. Or if
you will have the figure of the Church Cross represented here, then Moses put
one of his hands under his other elbowe, which the text bears not. But O
blindness of Popery, that neither understand the fathers writing, nor can
give a reason of your own ceremonies. Moses stretching out his hands, made a
figure of the Cross. But your learning can not reach to know what the old
figure of ye Cross was. It is like to the Greek Y which our countreyman and
late Cardinal M. Poole understood well enough. And therefore in his new
gallery at Lambheth, in ye glass windows, he drew this figure Y, in token of
the Cross, as is yet to be seen. But what is this figure like to the Roode or
Crucifixe? What have ye gained by this allegation, but utterly bewrayed your
ignorance? And certaynely if Gods word would suffer us (which in deed is
against it) to have and occupy the sign of a Cross, yet the form that we
use, is against all president of Scripture and antiquity. Which, when I come
anon to the exposition of the letter Thau, shall appear more plainly. Folio.
28. b.
But your fresh argument inferred of the place before, moves me to laughter
with an indignation. For it sauoures nothing of the school, save that it has,
Ergo, before the conclusion, which every alewife can do as well as you. It
has neither mode nor figure, wit, nor common sense. For this is your reason.
The Devil is discomfited by ihe Cross of our Lord, which was prefigured by
the hands of Moses: But by Moses hands the sign of the Cross was
prefigured, Ergo by the sign of the Cross Devils are ouercommed. I need not
to show the error of your argument, for it is to manifest, and has nothing
else but error in it. If thus ye had said, Devils are discomfited by that
which Moses hands prefigured, But Moses hands prefigured the sign of the
Cross, Ergo by the sign of the Cross, Devils are discomfited, I would have
better allowed your argument, and denied your Minor, which is the second
proposition: for Moses hands prefigured not the sign of the Cross, but the
Cross it self, which is the death of Christ. Look on the words of your author.
But one fault is to familiar with you, that what soever is spoken of effect of
the passion, you do attribute to the instrumente and sign. So the wood of
Marah, prefigured the glory and grace of the Cross: not of the sign, but of
the thing it self. For the bitterness of death is not taken away, by a
material Cross or sign in the foreheade, but death by death is swallowed. 1.
Cor. 15.
Hitherto of your Cross figures under the law. Now that the same was
denounced by the Prophets, ye run to the places of Ezechiell and Jeremy:
which although I have answered at the full in the latter end of the first
Article, yet somewhat must I add for your further learning. The letter Thau to
be a kind of Cross (as you out of Tertullian allege) I grant. Folio. 30. a.
But how it can be applied to the sign of our Cross I see not. For the figure
which you make, somewhat like unto our common Cross, is the Greek (...) or
the Latin T. But the Prophets spoke Hebrewe, and the Hebrewe charactar is a
very pair of gallows. Your cross is Figura duarum linearum in se inuicem
ductarum, ninurum vnius perpe^dicularis, sub altera diametrali: The proportion
of two lines drawn together, one directly downward and another Cross
overthwart. Whereof if ye will have any figure of old time before you, go to
the Egiptians Idol Serapis, which had it, just pictured in his breast, as
Suidas and Orus Apollo testify. But that the Latin T or Greek Tau, and
Hebrewe Thau, be all alike, none will say, but such a great cleark as you. For
in deed as the Hebrewe letter is different in fashion from the Greek, so in
signification they were quite contrary. The Hebrews by their Thau did figure
death, the Greeks by their (...) did signify life. Therefore Isidorus writes,
that in old time when they would note in their registers such, as were slain
in the wars, they would mark them with the letter, as thrust through with a
dart, or else of (...) which is death. But when they would note any one alive,
they would put their letter (...) this Cross mark T upon him. Also Asconius
Paedianus says, that when a Iewry gave up their verdite of gilty or not gylty,
such as were condemned to death, were marked with, but such as were quit, were
marked with the T. Wherefore there is no reason, why your Roode or Crucifixe,
can by any mean be applied to ye mark which Ezechiel speaks of. First,
because none have ye Prophets mark but such as be godly and lament
wickedness. But many of the devils children, grinagods and such other, be
crossed, and cursed to. Then also the proportion is so far different, that
there is no likeness betwixt them. But for the likeness of the effect, they
may be well compared together. For as they only were saved which were so signed
with the letter Thau, so none be saved now, nor yet ever were, but such as have
the print of Christ's Cross within them, merits of his passion, and faith in
his blood. Well does Hierome show, In Ezech. Cap. 9.
the causes why the sign Thau should be made in the foreheads of the elect:
first, vt perfectam in viris gementibus et dole^tibus scientiam demonstraret,
quia extrema apud Hebraeos est Viginti and duarum litterarum: that is to say.
To show a perfect knowledge in them that mourn, and be sorry: because it is the
last letter of.xxij. among the Hebritians. That as that letter does end the
Alphabete, So when Christ died on the Cross (which that letter signified) all
things were ended necessary for our salvation, Joan. 19.
according to the word Consu^matum est. It is finished. The work of our
salvation was then fully wrought. Again says Hierome, because this letter is
the first in the word, which signifies Law, among the Hebrews. Illi hoc
accipere signaculum, qui legis precepta compleuerant. They received this mark,
which had fulfilled the precepts of the law. So that the fashion of ye letter
is not so much as the mystery: which accords well to that which I said
before. Yet neither the fashion, nor the mystery, makes ought for your
purpose, M. Martial. Now I marvel what toy came into your idle head, when
for a proof of the undoubted sign of the Cross, ye bring forth ye words of
the Psalm. O Lord the light of thy countenance is sealed on us. Do ye think
that the light of gods countenance, is a piece of wood in the Roodeloft, or a
Crucifixe on ye altar? Or else do ye think that ye light of Gods countenance,
can be fixed with a finger in ye fleshy foreheade? If none of these be true,
what shall I say to you. You have made a whip, your self shall be beaten with it.
Hieroms words be these. Praecipitur sex viris, vt praeter eos qui possunt
dicere, Signatu^ est super nos, lumen vultus tui Domine, cunctos interficia^t.
Commandment is given to the six men (of whom Ezechiell speaks) that they
kill all, but them that can say. O Lord the light of thy countenance is sealed
on us. The light of Gods countenance is his favor toward us. The^ is it signed
in us, when ye sense thereof does come unto us, and breed a confidence and sure
hope within us. If the light of Gods countenance be the self same with the
letter Thau, and the letter Thau no other but the sign of ye cross, the^
whosoever have the sign of the Cross, have hope, have confidence, have faith
in God. But this is utterly false, as experience it self does teach us.
Therefore ye letter Thau, though in a mystery, it betokened the death of
Christ, yet has it no relation to the sign of the Cross. For answer to the
other places of Esaias and Jeremy, I refer you to ye which I said before. Now
to come to ye time of grace, I had need to beware of you. Folio. 31.
Ye come in with that, which ye have good testimony to be true in deed, that a
Cross in the fourth signification, such a cross as ye speak of, was showed
from heaven to Constantine ye great, with these Angels words, In hoc vince, In
this ouercom. Objection.
Nor the good Emperor savv this only, but as Eusebius vvriteth, was comau^ded
to make a sign of it, carried it in his sta^dard, and afterward did cause his
me^ in their armor to grave it. Solution.
But whatsoever it has pleased God for his glories sake at any time to do,
must not be drawn for example unto us. Privileges extend no further, than to
the persons comprised in them. Signs and miracles were showed to some, which
neither be granted to other, nor ought to be asked of al. Moses had a sign to
confirm him in his enterprise against Pharao: But Iosue had not so. He only
had a bare commandment, when he entered upon ye land of Chanaa^. Gideon was
confirmed by miracle to fight against the Madianites: So neither Iephte, nor
Sampson were. Paul was by a sign from heaven called: So was not Peter nor any
of his successors after. Wherefore if thus it pleased God to enbolden ye heart
of Constantine to fight against Maxentius the tirant, that he would show him
such a sign from heaven: not to confirm his faith, which by the word was to
be established, but to put him in assurance of a thing beside ye word, that is
to say, victory against his enemies: what president is this to prejudice my
cause? He newly was converted to the faith: be was weak therein: and therefore
he doubted of such success in his affairs, as, for his Church cause God
appointed to grant him. For which cause an extraordinary mean was used. And
God applied himself to the capacity of them yt he dealt withal, giving such a
token to the^, as might well assure the^ of conquest in his name. In hoc signo
vince, said God, In this sign, yt is to say, in his name, whom this figure
represents, overthrow thine enemies. It was not the sign yt gave the
victory, Constantine never thought it. He taught his people otherwise to say,
as it apeareth in ye solemn prayer which he willed the^, with lifting up of
eyes and hearts to heaven, daily to make. For as soon as ever he had vanquished
the tirant, he returned unto Rome, and first of al, Eusebius de vita Constable.
lib. 1.
Victoria authorigratiaru^ actionem persoluit, he gave his thanks to the author
of victory: then afterward he set up his cross in ye market place, to the end
it might there remain a testimony of the power of God, yt whosoever did behold
the same, might by and by conceive of whose religion this Emperor was, and in
whose name he ouercam his foes. Which visible sign at ye first gathering of
the Church together: newly come from the Gentiles (among whom the cross, and
therefore Christ crucified, was utterly co^te^ned) was thought very necessary,
yt by this outward mean he might draw them by a little and a little, to think
better of Christ, and so to serve him. But what is this to the Cross in
Churches? Yea, what is it at all to us? God spoke this to Constantine. He did
well to follow him. God has not spoken thus to us. Wherefore should we imitate
it? Shall we that have had the Gospel preached so long amongst us, we, and our
forefathers, stand in need of such extraordinary aids as they, that never
knew God, nor heard of him? Whatsoever our need is through our own defaulte,
surely we ought not to have them: God is not pleased with them. In.23. Math
Hom. 44.
For as Chrysostom said concerning the like superstitions, as you do now
maintain (carrying about of S. John Gospels, keeping little pieces of the
Cross of Christ, and esteming of such other relics) I may as justly say to
you: that it is a madness to seek after such things, as heretofore have
been: and an impiety now to use them. Chrysostom makes this objection to
himself. Did not the handekercher of Peter and shadow of his body passing by,
preserve them that were sick? Thereto he replies himself and says: Etiam
anteque dei notitia in hominibus esset, ratio erat vt per sanctitate^ hominu^
dei pote^tia cognosceretur: nunc aute^ insania est. Yea before ye knowledge of
God was in men, it was reason, that the power of God should be known, by the
holiness of men. But now it is madness. Even so say I to you, that although
in the time of Constantinus, the sign of ye Cross, as he did use it, was not
only tolerable, but also necessary: So now it is not only superfluous: but
(in respect of our abuse) impious. Thus much for Constantines apparition But
whereas ye apply his example unto us saying, that as he, Folio. 32.
so long as he served God, and honored his Cross, ever had good success: so
even had we in all conflictes, as long as we served God truly, and contemned
not his Cross. I say that your comparison is not pleadeable: each part
conteyneth some piece of untruth. Like a hasty hound ye run at riot, and in
making of likenesses, ye be to lycentious. Constantine was commanded to have
the sign of the Cross: no marvel then, so long as he obeyed, if he also
prevailed. But still ye put Non causam pro causa. Ye impute his victories
as well to the honoring of the Cross, as to the service of God: whereas of
honor done to the Cross, no word was before spoken. He carried it: he
reverently spoke of it: thereby to testify his faith in Christ: but he crowched
not to it, he put of no Cap to it. Now for our victories, which (you say) we
achieved, as long as we served God truly, and with horrible blasphemies
contemned not his Cross. Alas ye take the matter all amiss. For as long as we
so esteemed ye material Cross (as you think good we should) so long we
committed most horrible blasphemies, and served not God at al. Notwtstanding we
had successes granted us, such as in matters yt concern this life, be not
denied to ye very infidels: for as Augustine says: Qui dat foelecitate^ in
regno caeloru^, De Ciuit. Dei. Li. 5.
non nisi solis pijs: regnu^ hoc terrenu^ and pijs and impijs confert sicut ei
placet, cui nihil unjust placet. He yt gives blessedness in ye kingdom of
Heaven, not but to ye godly: conferres this earthly rain, both upon the Godly,
and upon the Godless: even as pleases him, to whom nothing is unjustly
pleasing. He that gave empire and rule unto the Hebrews, that worshipped but
one God: gave dominion and kingdom also to ye Persians, ye worshipped more
Gods. He yt gave increase of Corn and Grain, to ye worshippers of him, gave
plenty also to the honorers of the Idol Ceres. He that prospered Marius,
auaunced Caesar: He that furthered Nero, did good to August. On ye other side,
he that gave empire unto Vespasian, brought in Domitian: He that maintained
Constantine, did suffer Julian. So that on both sides, good success in this
world is granted, and we cannot gather, a liking or mislyking of God, by it.
Yet if a man should call you to account, and judge according to Chronicles
record, you should be condemned in your opinion. For when the Cross was most
magnified, we had Cross luck among. How came it to pass that the proverb has
been, Bustum Anglorum Gallia, Gallorum Italia: France has been the burial of
English men, and Italy of the Frenchmen? How prosperde, I pray you, the
Catholics in the North, when every priest and parish clark came out with a
Cross: every poor soldier that followed the camp, was al to be crossed: and
the only cause of their Insurrection was altogether masking and crossing? I
could rehearse, times more then one, when our countrymen have had small cause
of triumph, and yet the Cross was esteemed to. When the Normans did invade the
land, not all the Bishops, and popeholy clergy with all their Crosses, could
once withstand them. When civil discords arose within the realm, on both sides
were Crosses, and both sides went to wrack. Nor you have cause to condemn this
age, as cast out of favor with Almighty God, if good success in external
things, be sign of favor. Note.
If plagues of God, had been frequent among us, and all things had gone
backwarde with us (as thanks be to God, they have not) if God, and man, both
earth, and air, had fought against us (as we by proof do see they have not)
yet could I with better cause have imputed it, to your wilfulness and
tirranny (ye Papists) which brought men continually to the Cross of fire,
then to the foregoing of a Cross in the coat. For why should not both heaven
and earth, cry vengeance on us, since the earth is embrewed with the bloodshed
of saints, murdered by you: and air, is infected, with breath of you living.
But God has hitherto for his childrens cause, differde the punishment, dew
for your mischiefs. Look for it one day, when neither Cross nor Mass shall
deliver you. But why do you falsely abase, the goodness of our God toward us?
Why do you spitefully empaire ye glory of our Queen, and her prosperous
reign? What honor she gat at Leith without effusio^ of blood, how can you be so
impudent as to dissemble? What quiet peace, what godly friendship, is between
the realms of England and Scotland purchased now: now that your Religion is
in both places abolished: whereas in the time of popery, there was never but
hatred and mortal war, all the world does see and justly may say, that in
the time of the Gospel, God has more abundantly blessed us, then ever he did
since the land was inhabited. And of the doings at New-hauen, what an honorable
peace insewed (contrary to ye wish and will of the enemies of God and of their
country, the Papists) we do now feel, thanks be to God: and you can not
deny. But in the Catholic time (as you call it) what success had you, when
Calleis and Guines, so hardly won, so long kept, with such glory and gain to
the English name defended, was easily in one.iij. days, with shame lost? More
will I not rehearse of our desperate losses, in that tyrannous interraigne. I
return to your visions. Julian, Folly. 33. a.
(as you cite out of Sozomenus) had a shovvre of rain that ouertooke him, and
every drop that fell either upon his coat, or any other that accompanied him,
made a sign of the Cross. Again, When the said Julian counsayled the Jews
to repair the Temple of Jerusalem, destroyed by the Romans, God to make them
desist from that wicked purpose of theirs, caused the ground where they had
dug a great trench, for the foundation, to be filled with earth rising out
of a valley. And when this notvvithstanding, they continued their work, God
raised a great tempest of vvinde: and skattred all the lime and sand which
they had gathered, and caused a great earthquake, and killed all that were not
baptized: and sent a great fire out of the foundation, and burned many of the
laborers. And when all this, nothing discouraged them, a bright glittering
sign of the healthful Cross appeared in the element, and the Jews apparel
was filled with the sign of the Cross. The application of these two
histories (which for this purpose I set out at large that they may the better
be considered) will make you glad to scrape them out of your book. For ye fare
as a fool, that walks in a net, or as ye children whose head being hid, they
think their bodies can not be seen. Although ye cast some shadows over you,
and think that your head is hid in an hole, yet your ears be so long, that
they do bewray you. When thus ye have heaped up as many mystical figures of
the Cross, as you and your learned Counsel can, ye gather a fine conclusion
of them, that God wills all his, Folio. 34.
highly to esteem the thing, which those figures signified: and to believe,
that as those figures wrought temporal benifites to the Israelites, so the
truth (that is the Cross it self) shall work unto his elect and chosen
Children, believing in his Son Jesus Christ, and having his sign printed in
our foreheads, the like benifits, effects and virtues, spiritually, and much
more greater. First who told you, that the truth of these figures, was ye
Cross it self, unless by a figure ye take the Cross for the crucified? Then
that those figures wrought temporal benifites, how can you prove? Sure if they
were causes of any good that came, they were Causae stolidae as Tully calls
them, mean and isntrumental causes, as the Axe is cause of the wood cleaving,
and not efficient. Thirdely if ye would have concluded well, Distinguenda
fuissent ambigua, those words that diversely may be taken, should have been
severed into their diverse significations, that we might have known how to have
understood your mastership. When ye join the truth and the Cross together,
what Cross can I tell, you speak of? If it be according to your promise
before, ye Cross in the fourth signification (for thereof ye said, you would
only entreat then is not your Cross the truth it self, but a figure still:
whereas ye couple the belief in Christ, and his sign printed in our foreheads
together, what sign is that? the Cross with a finger? If ye mean it so, ye
make an unmeet comparison, the one being necessary, the other idle and
unlawful too. This am I sure, your meaning is by covert speech to deceive the
simple, and cause them to derive the glory from the truth, and transfer it
to the figure: to have in reverence your idle sign, and let the thing
signified be forgotten. As for the figures of the old law, mark what
Tertullian says, and thereby shall you learn a better meaning of them, than
your mean skill considers: Aduersus Martio li. 3.
for thus he says. Sacramentum mortis figurari in praedicatione oportebat,
quanto incredibile, tanto magis scandalo futurum, si nude praedicaretur:
quantoque magnificum, tanto magis adumbrandum, vt difficultas intellectus
gratiam dei quareret. It behooved the Sacrament of the death of Christ, to be
sigured in preaching. For how much more it is incredible: so much more
offensive should it be, if nakedly it had been preached: and by how much it
was more glorious, so much, the more it was to be shadowed, that the hardness
of understanding, might seek for the grace of God. So far Tertullian. But
how little grace of God you have, in sticking still to the easy letter, and
never seking the glory of the death, is to well seen by your doings. The sign
of the Cross was showed to Constantine, he was not yet become a Christian: It
was expedient to have a miracle. We do profess great skill and knowledge, and
shall we not believe without a sign? That which was once done shall it be asked
ever? That which was commanded to one alone, shall it be drawn a president
for all? Folio. 34.
The sign of the Cross was shevved to Constantine in his great anxietie (ye
say) to instruct us, that in all anxietie of mind, and pensiveness of
heart, the Cross of Christ shall be our comfort.

So far I grant. And the sign (you say) to be a mean to overthrow our
enemies. Where find ye that? God has more means of comfort then one: he
delivers his that are in danger by diverse ways. We read that when
Alexander the great, Josephus li. 11. Ca. 8.
for denial of Tribute to be paid unto him, was utterly in mind to destroy
Jerusalem: and was marching thither with an huge army, which no power of
theirs was able to resist: Iaddus which was the chief bishop then, put all his
pontifical attire upon him, and caused ye rest of his clergy to do the like,
and went forth to meet the tyrant so. Alexander no sooner saw him, but he
lighted from his horse, fell flat on the ground before him. The lusty roysters
that were about him, meruailing at this so sudden change, from wrath to
worshipping, from force of arms to submission and prayer, specially to a
Priest, whereas the Prince vainly supposed himself to be a God, and where he
minded before in heat of his displeasure utterly to have destroyed them, now
to become contrary to his nature, an humble suppliant to them: Alexander made
answer thus. When I lodged in Dio a City of Macedon, such a personage as this,
of like stature, like apparel in all points appeared to me, and willed me to
set upon Asia, promising that he would guide me in the voyage, and in the
enterprise always assist me. Wherefore I can not but greatly be moved at the
sight of him, to whom I owe my duetye and service. Thus God delivered his
people then. Thus God appeared to Alexander the great, in a priests attire. Now
if it be lawful to use your order, and of every particular and private case,
to gather a general and like rule: I may as well conclude, that the vision of
Alexander, instructs us in all our troubles and distresses, to have the sign
of a Priest in his masking garments: as the vision of Constantine to have the
sign of a Cross. For God used the one mean, as well as the other: and no more
commandment is of the one, then of the other. Gregory reports a notable
history, Dialog. Li. 3 cap. 1.
how God sometime delivered a sort of poor prisoners, out of the hands of
barbarous aliens: not by the sign of a Cross, nor yet by secret vision as
before, but by a stranger fact of his providence. When the Vandales had
spoiled Italy, and carried from thence many captives into Africa with them,
Paulinus a godly man, and Bishop in those parties, gave the pore souls
whatsoever he had, for their relief. And when he could extend his charity no
further, but al was gone: a wydowe on a day came to him, lamenting her estate,
that her son was carried away prisoner, and by the kings son in law:
wherefore she besought him, to give her somewhat for his ransom, if happily
his Lord and taker would accept it. But the good man devising with him self
what he might give for her comfort: found nothing but his own person, and
therefore he said, good wife, I have nothing for thee, save only my self:
Take me: say I am thy servant, and give me up for a bondsman in thy sons
steed. The woman hearing this of so great a personage, thought rather that he
mocked her, then pitied her. But he persuaded her to do after his advise,
forward they went, the wydowe as the misteris, the Bishop as the bond man. To
Afric they came: They met wiih the kings son in law: The wydow makes her
humble suit, to have her son restored to her. But he does not only refuse to
assent, but disdain to here such a caytiffe as she was. At length she besought
him, so much to tender her, as to accept for her sons exchange, a servant
that she had brought him, presenting the bishop. When the gentleman had beheld
his sweet face and fatherly countenance, he asked him of what occupation he
was No occupation, quod he, but I can keep your garden well: whereupon he was well
contented to accept the servant, and the only son was given up unto the
mother. Thus was the pityfull wydowe gladded. The reverend Father became a
gardener. Now when the kings son in law should use to resort into his
garden, he questioned often with him, and finding him very prudent in his
aunsweres, forsook the company of others his familiers, and rather chose to
talk with his gardener. Paulinus then, accustomed every day to bring sallads
to his Lords table, and having his dinner with him, go to his work again.
When thus he had continued a certain season, it fell out on a day, that as his
Master was in secret talk with him, he said on this sort: See what ye do,
make good provision, how the kingdom of the Vandales, may be disposed and
governed. For the King (sooner than ye are ware, and very shortly) shall dye.
When this he heard, because he was beloved of the king more than the rest, he
conceled it not, but uttered all that he understood by his gardener, whom he
reputed to be very wise. When the king heard it, he answered. I would feign
see the man that you talk of. Then said his son in law, Paulinus Master:
He uses to prepare me, sallades for my dynner, and to the end ye may know
him, I will take order, that he shall bring them unto the table, where your
highness shall sit. And even so he did: whom as sone, as ever the king had
espied he began to tremble, and calling aside his son in law, revealed his
secret unto him, saying: True it is, that thou haste heard. For this night in
my dream, I saw certain judges sitting in the place of judgment against me,
among whom, this man was also one: and they awarded the scourge from me, which
I sometime took in hand against other. But ask what he is, for I think him
not to be any common person, as he seems, but rather a man of great
worthiness and estimation. Then secretly, the kings son in law did call
Paulinus to him, and enquired earnestly what he was. To whom the good man
answered: I am thy servant, whom thou did take a substitute, for the
wydowes son. But when more instantly he lay upon him, to utter, not who he
now was, but what condition and estate he was of, in his own country: at
length with much a do, he confessed that he was a Bishop. When his master and
Lord heard it, he was stricken in a great fear: and ask (quod he) what soever
thou will, that thou may return into thine own country, bountifully
rewarded of me. To whom Paulinus answered. One benefit there is, whereby thou
may most gratify me: if thou release all the prisoners of my city. Which
thing was accomplished: and the captives sought throughout all the country,
were sent home again, and ships full of grain with them. Thus God for
delivery of his servants, used the ministry of a captive Bishop: And shall we
gather of this, that in like extremities, we must have a bishop to become a
gardener, and with sallets in his hand, wait at his masters table? Yet as
good reason for this, as for the use of the Cross, grounded on Constantines
apparition. A wise man, of this and such like examples, would have gathered an
other manner of rule general, and said: that by this we learn, how God never
forsakes his, but by secret means unknown to the world, works their
comfort and delivery. The Cross was commanded to Constantine to be set up
and used in his wars. Therefore (say you) his pleasure is at this present
day, Folio. 34. b.
to have the sign of the cross made, and set up in open places, used in
vvarres. etc. How prove ye this M. Martial? Forsooth, ye say, Quia Jesus
Christus heri et hodie and vsque in secula. Because Jesus Christ is yesterday,
to day, and he for ever. By the same reason I prove, that we need not at this
day the sign of the Cross: for Christ is able otherwise to defend us: his
power is not abated: he is the same that he was before, and a thousand ways he
has beside, to help us. But I gladly conclude with you, that the sign was
showed from heaven at Jerusalem, to declare that the faith and doctrine of the
Christians, was both preached by men, and showed from heaven, and that it
consists not in the persuasible words of human wisdom, but in the showing
of the spirit and power. The drops of rain that fell upon Julian, made a
printe of the Cross in his garment, and the rests. Therefore (say you) it is
necessary for every man to be signed and marked with the cross. But the
Cross noted them to be persecutors, Ergo it is necessary for us to be noted as
persecutors. Ye see how your own examples kill you: there is nothing that ye
bring but makes against you. Ecclesi. hist lib. 5. Oap. 1.
In deed Sozomenus writes, that some did interpret the Crosses on that sort,
Christianorum doctrinam esse caelestem, and oportere omnes Cruce signari. That
the doctrine of christians was heavenly: and that all men ought to be signed
with the Cross: But God forbid we should have such occasion to be so marked.
For none were marked, but such as had reueged their faith. So that the Cross
does not always portende goodness, nor is the sign peculiar unto Christians.
If the sign had been of such force as ye make it, Julian the Apostata would
not have gone forward with his attempted mischief. But forward he went,
though the Cross continued on his coat still. Wherefore the Cross is no
proof of virtue. Folio. 35.
The same may be confirmed, by the story that follows. For the glittering
sign of the Cross in the element, the crossing of the Jews coats when they
would have reedified their Jerusalem, was but a token of Gods wrath and
vengeance: and although it was Signum salutaris Crucis, the sign of the
healthful Cross: yet was it not healthful to them that ware it: but rather a
testimony of Gods just judgment against them. Wherefore, as God miraculously
did work, and used this sign to contrary effects: sometime for comfort,
sometime to dispeire: sometime for the godly, sometime to the wicked: So must
we not, contrary to reason, gather an universal, only of the one side: and
contrary to his will, abuse it at our pleasure. If it had been always granted
to the godly, and to none but them: If it had been always a sign of succor,
and not of destruction: your argument then should have had some appearance of
troth or likelyhode. Now by your own examples, where the wicked only be
signed with the Cross, where the Cross does work nothing but confusion: the
groundwork of your cause is miserably shaken, and you be turned over in your
own trip. Of all your examples, ye infer your own fansy: what you do think
Gods meaning was, to show such signs of the Cross, both under the law, and in
the time of grace: but of your meaning ye bring no proof at all, either out of
Scripture or Doctors, that ye brag of. Only for us, your idle supposall (as
you think) may serve. Louain has licenciate you, Gods word the ground of
religion.
to make what lies ye lust. The substantial ground that I spoke of before,
whereupon we ought to build our religion, is the word of God: without the
which, no fact of man, no particular example, can prove any thing. Then, if ye
would have the sign of the Cross received into Gods service: ye should as
well prove Gods will therein, and bring his direct authority to us. It
suffiseth not to say. This was once so: but rather to show, This was well
so: nor any one example can bind us now, without express commandment in
Gods book for it, extending to us: and during for ever. But you deal with gods
book as Epiphanius reports of heretics: Qui multos decipiunt, Contra Her
Lib. 1. To. 2.
per male compositam dominicorum verborum adaptatorum sapientia^, Which deceive
many, by the wisdom of the Lords words ilfauouredly applied. As if a man
should take an Image of some notable personage: lively set forth and adorned
with pearl and stone, and afterward should deface the counterfeit of a man in
it, and make a dog or a fox of it. Then if he should remove the jewels and
garnishing of the one, to the picture of the other, and say to them that look
upon it: This is the picture of such a man or such, and for proof thereof
would bring the pearl and stone so cunningly cowched: would ye not think him
to be a crafty fellow, and yet believe him never a whitte the sooner? Even so
fare you: For in stead of the text, ye bring forth a contrary misseshapen
gloss: and then ye apparel it with a few pearls of Scripture, applied as
well, as a precious Diamond, to the picture of a grinning dog. And yet a dog
is but a dog, although he had a bishops best Myter on his head: no more are
you, but leude liars, for all the patch of truth sowed on your cloak of fables.
Bleare not therefore the peoples eyes: deceive not your selves: learn the true
service of God, out of his word, and go no further. The Cross of Christ is
necessary for us: his death and passion is only our joy and comfort: our life
and our redemption: but the material or mystical sign thereof, is more than
needs: to dangerous to be used. We have the word, the ordinary mean, to
lead us into all truth: we must not beside the word seek signs and tokens.
We have the bodies, what grope we after shadows? The end of Ceremonies.
Ceremonies were given unto the Jews, to be a mound (as it were) between the
Gentiles and them: to sever the people of God from other, not only by inward
things, but also by outward: that the people of God should be with in that
enclosure, the other without: and these outward rytes and obseruaunces, were an
assurance unto the Jews: that they were lawefull heirs of the promise, and
not the Gentiles. But Christ came into the world, to gather one Church of both
peoples: and therefore pulled down the wall that was between them: Decretae
ceremonialia. The Decrees of Ceremonies. Christ followed herein the policy of
Princes: which, if they will gather into society of one kingdom, as it were,
diverse peoples: they will take away the things that made the difference
before: diversities of coins and laws: So Christ minding to make one people
of the Jews and Gentiles, utterly did abolish all legal ceremonies. And Paul
compares them to a hand writing, whereby we be bound to God, that we can not
stand in argument against him, and deny our debt. But by Christ this debte is
so remitted, that the obligation is cancelled, yt handwriting is put out as the
Apostle says: now when the instruments are cut in pieces, the obligations
cancelled, Colos. 2.
the debtor is set free, which we have purchased by Christ's death. Wherefore
we read, that the veil of the temple tare: to the end the people might
understand thereby, that their sins were remitted, and they discharged from
burden of the law. But when the wicked and faythles nation continued after
Christ's death, to exercise in the temple ceremonies, which had their end
before, and would thrust them unto men as percell of religion, and worshipping
of God, Christ using the ministry of the Romans, so destroyed the temple,
that for these fiftene hundredth years, they have had no place, no respite to
repair it. And when they did attempt the matter, they were (as you alleged)
by diverse means destroyed and disappoynted: namely, by the dreadful
apparition of a Cross. Whereof ye might have gathered, that God so misliked
the superstitious ceremonies of the temple, that he would not suffer the stones
of it to stand. The like plague shall ensue to all, that having light, will
follow darkness: that being free, will bring a slavery upon them: that being
delivered by Christ from these outward things, and having Christ, yet will be
wedded to these outward things, as if that God were pleased with them.
Wherefore remember Saul, let no disguised cloak of a good intent, cover an ill
act, contrary to the word. Leuit. 10.
Nadab and Abiu brought in strange fire, not commanded of the Lord. The fire
of the Lord therefore consumed them. 2. Sam. 6.
Vzah when the Oxen did shake the Arc, of a good intent did put his hand unto
it: and was stricken dead for his offense. Melior est obedientia, quam
Victimae, said Samuel: Better is obedience, than sacrifice. Better is a naked
service, with the word, than a a gorgeous solemnity, not commanded by the
word. Quicquid ego praecipio vobis, Deuteronomy. 12.
hoc ta^tum facite. Whatsoever I do command you, (says the Lord) do that,
and that only: Non adds quicq^ nec minues. Thou shall not add any thing to
it, nor take away any thing from it. When Christ shall appear in brightness
of his glory: when he shall sytte as a just judge, at his second coming, to
ask a straight account of all your life, faith and religion: what can ye
answer? what will ye say unto him? We have garnished thy temple with gold and
silver, we have set up candels upon thine altares, we have sainsed thy saints,
we have erected, esteemed, honored thy Cross: What shall he then reply to this?
Esaias. 1. Leuit. 26. Esaias. 52. 1. Cor. 6. 2. Cor. 6.
The word of his Prophet Esaias, Quis requisiuit ista, de manibus vestris? Who
did require these things at your hands? My temple ought your own hearts to
be: as I my self pronounced, and my Apostle Paul bare witness with me. This
should have been adorned with chastity, simplicity, fear of my name, love of
my mercies, innocence of life, integrity of faith. Such resting place, and
such ornaments thereof, have I required, but you have them rejected. No altar
of squared stone have I appointed: my self on the altar of the Cross
abolished it. I only ought to be the altar now, whereupon your sacrifice of
praise and thanksgiving, should be laid: and light of your good works shining
to the world be set upon. But me and my death ye have adnihilated, to magnify
your own imaginations: my saints should have been paternes of holy life and
true faith unto you: not have usurped my rowme and office to become mediators,
and be called upon. The sweet perfume of prayer, should have arisen from the
saynsure of your heart to me: and no flinging of coals about the Church to
other. But you have sticked only to the Jewish and hipocriticall obseruaunce:
The truth exhibited in time of grace, ye have not received. The memory of my
death by preaching of the word, and due administration of Sacraments in the
Church, should have been continued according to my will: The members of my body,
the lively counterfets of mine own person, the poor, the naked, the
comfortless christians, should have been relieved, clothed, encouraged: but by
your Imagry you have excluded my word: by your Roodes, Crosses and crucifixes,
utterly (as much as in you lies) defaced the glory of my death: depart ye
therefore away from me, ye workers of iniquity: let now the God that you have
served, save you: Enter into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and for
you his Angels. This when God shall lay unto your charge, this fine shall
follow of it: and when in the terrible conflict with Satan, ye shall call
your consciences to account: and see those idle toys that you have trusted
to, to be void of comfort: what shall ye then do, but be driven to dispeire,
and say to the mountains: fall down upon us. Luke. 22.
Wherefore if yet there be any place of repentance left for you: if malice and
obstinacy have not utterly secluded Gods grace from you: take up by times:
Seek Christ in his word: forsake your will worshippings: Set not your follies
in the service of God, against the wisdom of the Almighty revealed in his
word. You think, your hold is good: God knows it abydes no stresse: Ye say,
ye seek the Shepherd: I prove, ye find the Fox.

To the third Article.
FOr declaration and proof of your third Article: Folio. 36. b.
which is, that every Church, Chapel, and Oratory, erected to the honor and
seruise of God, should have the sign of the Cross: ye bring four reasons:
whereof the two first be too unreasonable, grounded upon folish fables. The
third is insufficient to confirm a doctrine. The fourth is a custom of error
not consonant to truth. For the first ye allege one of Abdias tales, whom you
affirm, to have seen Christ in the flesh: Folio. 38. b.
to have follovved Simon and Jude into Persia: and to have been made Bishop of
Babylon by the Apostles. Abdias.
To speak somewhat of your famous father, that he saw Christ in the flesh,
what marvel was it, if he were one of the.72. disciples, as you and Lazius
(that found the lying legend, in his proface upon Abdias) witness. Concerning
his auncienty, no marvel if ye cite him. For if ye make account of his years,
by probable conjecture out of his book, ye shall find him almost as old as
Mathusale. He lived long after S. John's time: for he cites authorities out of
his Gospel, Ii. 5. in fine.
diverse. And speaking of a miracle done at S. John his tomb, how Manna sprang
out of it, he says Quam vsque hodie gignit locus iste, that is to say: Which
Manna this place brings forth to this day. Then if it were so strange a
matter as he would have it seem: many years were run, between the death of
the Apostle, and writing of his book. But John himself was an hundredth year
old lacking two, when he dyed. For as your Abdias says: Cum esset annorum
nonaginta septem. etc. When he was four score and seventeen year old Christ
appeared to him: and so forth. And Abdias, if he were one of the.72.
Disciples, was called to his ministry the self same year, that John was to
his Apostleship. So that by all likelyhoode, he was then as old as John, and
living long after John: How old was he, say you? But a man of those years
being broken so much in travail, as he was, to do as he did, was a miracle of
it self. For if ye credit his own writings he was at saint Andrews death in
Achaia. For in his life he says, Lib. 3. circa finem.
Diutissime dominum clarificans and gaudens, nobis fle^tibus reddidit spiritum:
He long gloriefyng the Lord and rejoicing, while we were weeping, gave up the
ghost. Whereupon the marginall note has. Ex hoc apparet, Abdiam huius
historiae authore^, passioni interfuisse. It appears by this, yt Abdias the
author of this history, was present at the passion. Likewise he was with Thomas
in India, where he was a witness of all his doings. For speaking of a miracle
showed in prison, he says: Serui dei dormire non poterant, quos sic Christus
excitabat, Lib. 9.
neque patiebatur nos somno dimergi. The servants of God could not sleep,
whom Christ had raised so, nor suffered us, to be drowned in sleep. Then, if yt
Nominative case plural (us) includes him that told the tale, Abdias then was
also there. Beside this, he was at the death of saint John in Ephesus, for he
says: Lib. 5.
Gaudebamus quod tantam cernebamus gratia^: dolebamus quod tanti viri aspectu
and presentiae spetie defraudebamur. We rejoiced for that we saw so great
grace, we sorrowed, that we were bereued of the sight and presence of so great
a personage. And there is noted in the margent. Et hoc argumentum est, Abdiam
interfuisse morti Iohannis: And this is a proof, that Abdias was at the death
of John. Notwithstanding all this, he went out of Iewry, with Simon and Jude
into Persia: Lib. 6.
There (as he witnesses of himself.) He was present at al their doings, and
was made Bishop of Babylon by them. For thus he writes Ordinauere autem
Apostoli in ciuitate Babylonis episcopum, nomine Abdiam, qui cum ipsis venerat
a Iudaea. The Apostles appointed bishop in the city of Babylon, one whose name
was Abdyas, which came from Iewry with them. Now I beseech you how is it
possible, that he which immediately came out of Iewry, and had his charge in
Babylon, should be at one time (as it were) in so diverse, and so far distante
parts of the world? In Achaia, in India, in Ephesus, in Persia, and if we give
credit to historiographers, also in Scythia. For as touching Andrew, Lib. 3.
cap. 1.
at whose martirdom, he affirms he was: Eusebius out of Origin, and
Sophronius, as we read in Ptolome, Lib. 2. ca. 39. and. li. 3. ca. 1. Ennead.
7. lib. 4.
and Nicephorus, do al witness that he went into the coast of Scythia, far
distante from Grecia. And as for his death, Sabellicus does say: that he
suffered in Scythia. Then either was your author a liar, or a leude bishop: to
forsake his charge, and be such a la^dleaper. But a liar he was. For comparing
the times of the Apostles deaths, and distaunce of places where they were
resident, it is impossible his sayings to be true. Furthermore, that the
antiquity of this Abdias should be such as ye talk of, is more than a miracle
to me: since neither Irene, nor Eusebius, nor Hierom, nor any one of the
received fathers, (being nerest to ye same time and writing of the same matter)
do once mention him: Yea to say the truth, both Scripture and Fathers, be
direct against him. Lib. 5.
For where he makes S. John to say, virtutu^ opes habere non posse, qui
voluerit diuitias habere terrenas. That he can not have the substance of
virtues, that will have the substance of the earth: it accords not with the
doctrine of Christ. For we read in his word, of many that were rich, and yet
were virtuous notwithstanding. That John should allow ye fact of Drusiana, Math.
19, 1. Cor. 7. Colos. 3. Math. 18.
which being a married wife, withdrewe her self from her husbands company
without his consent, is contrary to the rule of Christ, and his Apostle Paul.
That he does attribute to the same Apostle, the prescription of thirty days,
for sufficient repentance, is otherwise than Christ has taught us. For he
will have us to forgive Septuagies Septies seventy times seven times. That S.
John should use so fond miracles, as to make whole again broken jewels, to
turn trees and stones into gold, has no apparaunce of truth in it. That in
his life time a Church was builded at Ephesus, dedicated to him, and called by
his name, may be proved false by a thousand testimonies. For beside that it
was derogation to Gods honor, it was contrary to the use of the primitive
Church. And al men agree, that until ye reign of Constantinus, there were no
chapels, or oratories erected in honor of any saint. Augustine plainly
affirms: yt in the Church of Christ, martyrs have the highest rowme. De ciui
dei lib. 8 cap. 27
Nec tamen nos (says he) eisdem martyribus templa sacerdotia, sacra, and
sacrificia constituimus: quoniam non ipsi, sed deus eorum, nobis est deus. Yet
we build not up temples, appoint officers, service, and sacrifice for the said
martirs: because not they, but their God, is our God. Again in an other place,
somewhat more plainly Nonne si templum alicui sancto Angelo excellentissimo de
lignis and lapidibus faceremus, anathematizaremur a veritate Christi: Contra.
Max. Arr Episc. lib. 1.
and ab Ecclesia dei: quoniam creaturae exhiberemus, eam seruitute^, quae vni
tantum debetur deo? Si ergo sacrilegi essemus, faciendo templum cuicumque
creaturae, quomodo non est deus verus, cui no^ templum sacimus, sed nos ipsi
templum sumus? If we should make a temple of wood and stone, for any holy
Angel, yea though he were the most excellent of all, should we not be accursed
from the truth of Christ and from the Church of God: because we exhibited ye
service to a creature, which is dew to God alone? Therefore if we should
offend in sacrileage, by building a Church to any creature, how can it be,
but he is the true God, to who^, we make no temple, but our selves are temples?
By which places we prove, that in his time there was no Church or chapel
builded for any Saint: yt it was reputed a cursed thing, contrary to truth
and the Church of God: that they commyt Sacrileage, which do build any.
Finally, yt Churches and oratories are not erected for God himself, but to ye
use of man. Wherefore in the tale of saint John his Church, your doctor doted.
Now what say you to this yt Chrysostom affirms? Petri quide^ and Pauli and
Ioannis and Thomae manifesta sunt sepulchra. To. 4. in. cap. ad Heb. 11. In Ho.
26.
Aliorum vero cum tanti sint, minime cognitum est vbi sunt. The sepulchers of
Peter and Paul, John and Thomas, be well know, but of the reast, as great as
they were, it is not known where they were. But your Abdias sets forth the
matter plainly, where every one of them was laid into the ground. Wherefore
ye must either condemn Chrysostom, or him. And yet in these, the doctors
agree not. For to go no further than to S. John, of whom I spoke last, Abdias
says, that he dyed not, but was put quick in his grave, and there he
commanded mould to be cast upon him. Omnes benedicens ac valefaciens, Lib 5.
in fine
deposuit se viue^tem in sepulchro suo, and iussit se operire. Blessing them
all and taking his leave of them, he laid himself down quick in his grave,
and bade them cover him. In Cattal. Scrip Eccle
But Hierome says: Sexagesimo octauo post passionem domini anno, mortuus
Ephesi, iuxta eandem vrbem sepultus est. the three score and eight year after
the passion of our Lord, he dyed at Ephesus, and was buried hard by the said
city. What shall we now think of your Abdias? Whom you know, to have been
one of the 72. Disciples? but Eusebius says, Lib. 1. ca. 12.
that no such matter is known: whom you affirm out of his own books, to
have been made bishop of Babylon: But I have proved out of the same, that he
could not be in so many places and so far distant: whom you do think to be
worthy credit: but evident it is that he speaks naught, but repugnancy to
the Scriptures: and more than any father beside himself aloweth. For further
proof whereof, examine your dedication, of which ye make so great atcompt: and
it shall be no leuite (as you would have it appear) if a man stayde by the
grace of God, The true manner of dedicatio^.
refuse to lean to so weak a staff. A church is consecrated, or made an holy
place, not by superstitious words of magical enchantement, not by making of
signs and characters in stones: but by the will of God, and the godly use. His
will is set forth in his word unto us, wherein he has commanded his people to
assemble themselves together, and has annexed a promise to it, that he will be
there in the midst of them. The use that makes a place holy, is to have the
word purely set forth in it: the Sacraments duly to be received: and prayers
humbly to be made therein. Take away the commandment, take away the right
use, the place remains profane still: yea, though a thousand Angels should
be said to Cross it. Shall we think that any place, any creature of God, is
of it self unclean? Shall we think that Devils lie in stone walls, that once
be sprinkled with a little holy water, will be packing straight? When God had
made al ye creatures of his: Vidit quod essent omnia valde bona, Genesis. 1.
He saw that all things were very good. And Augustine, in his co^fessio^s.
Singula bona sunt, and omnia valde bona quae tu fecisti, Lib. 7. ca. 12.
Every thing by it self, and all things are exceeding good, (he says) which
thou haste made O Lord. And as for the place, it is prepared for men and not
for God. For God dwells not in Temples made with hand. Act. 17. lib.
Peristephanon.
But as the Martyr says in Prudentius. Aedem sibi ipse mente in hominis
condidit, viuam, serenam, etc. He made a temple to himself within the mind of
man, living and clear. Then is not any earthly place, holy of it self: but in
as much as holy things are done therein, it is called holy. S. Paul speaking of
meats, says: that they are sanctified. Per verbum dei and orationem, 1. Timo.
4
by the word of God and prayer. But yt a sanctification, should come to a
creature, by making of ye sign of a Cross, is more than Abdias himself, or
you, can out of Scripture, or good authorite auouche. Solomon made a temple to
the Lord: and no Angel of God came down to halowe it: nor any priest was
called to conjure spirits out of it. Hallowed it was, when according to Gods
will and ordinance it was used. Constantyne built diverse Churches, and yet
this example he never followed. Nor although he had the Cross in admiration, as
which was from heaven reveled to him, yet did he ever bring the Cross into the
Church. Wherefore your Bartholomeus dedication. I have in as good credit, as
ye rest of the tales that Abdias tells concerning S. Bartholomewe. For this he
affirms: that the devil giving marks of him to his friends, said among the
rest. Viginti sex anni sunt, ex quo nunquam sordidantur vestimenta eius,
similiter and sandalia eius per viginti quinque annos nunquam veterascu^t. In
Vita. Barth. lib. 8
Now are there xxvi years, since that his garments never filed, nor his
shoes, for these xxv. years ever waxed old. We read that the like miracle
was showed to the children of Israel, when as they were in wilderness, and
had no ordinary mean to come by necessaries. But that S. Bartholomewe, a king
his nephewe: a trim fellow: with precious stones in every corner of his cote, in
such credit with a Prince, as he was with Polymius: in such a populous country
as India was, (which things al, Abdias does write of him) should have his
garments kept from wearing: was more than neded, more than with reason may be
believed. Again Abdias witnesses, that S. Bartholomew came in to the king
Polymius, when the doors were shut: which never was heard tell of but only of
Christ. And now by his doctrine, we may fall a reasoning of the dimensions of
S. Bartholomewes body. Then in ye same legende he reports also: that Mary the
mother of Christ, did make a vow of chastity: with many other points most
strange and dissonant from all Godly learning. But see how these lying losels
do detect themselves. Abdias says, that Astyages, brother to Polymius caused
S. Bartholomew sustibuscoedi, Lib. 8. circa. finem. Lib. 8. a^no a Christo. 80.
coesu^que decollari: to be al to be batted, and afterward to be beheaded: but
he shows not where, save only in some piece of India. Nicephorus an other of
your authors, says. Hierapoli in cruce^ actum. that he was hanged at
Hierapolis. But he that makes Suppleme^tu^ Chronicoru^ writes. In Albana
maioris Arme^iae vrbe, primo coesu^, dein excoriatu^: yt in Albana, a city of
greater Armenie, first he was slain, and afterward was flayed. So by this
means, the poor Saint should first be beheaded, I wot not where in India:
the^ afterward lose his life, on ye gallows at Hierapolis: And last of al,
have his skin pulled over his ears in Armenia, a good while after yt his head
was gone. It is a sport and yet a spyte to see, how me^ of your profession
(Master Martial) yt vaunt your selves to be friends to the Cross of Christ,
ca^ do nothing almost but lie. Wherefore these things co^de^ning utterly your
authors credit, I need to wade no further in co^futatio^ of his Church
halowing. It co^futeth it self, with shame enough to you. Only I marvel, Folio
38. a.
yt as the Angel (as you say) ingraued with his finger in the square stones,
the sign of the Cross: and further, from God commanded the^ to make such a
sign in their foreheades, commanded not as well (which had been more to purpose)
to make ye like signs in other stones, in dedicatio^ of other Churches. I
would wish in ye next print it might be put in, yt your popish Church halowing
(whereof I will speak anon) might seem to have some president for it. But for
S. Bartholomew, I have said enough. And ye same answer may suffice for S.
Philip, as his example is out of ye said Abdias brought. For as S. Hierom
says, Super. 23. Math.
(touching ye name of Zachary, of who^ me^tio^ is made, Math. 23. that some
would have him to have been ye.xj. of the Prophets: But some other to have been
ye father of S. Ihon baptist.) hoc quia de scripturis no^ habet authoritate^,
eade^ facilitate co^te^nitur, qua probatur. This because it has not authority
of ye Scripture, is as easily contemned, as proved. So may I say, for ye words
which ye father upon S. Philip: Folio. 39.
In the place where Mars seems to stand fast, set up the Cross of my Lord
Jesus Christ, and adore the same: because it is contrary to ye Scripture, and
is but ye report of a lying legend, I may, with good cause, reject ye authority.
For neither was ye change alowable, to destroy one Idol, to make an other, (as
in the first article I proved) nor to adore it, was in any wise tolerable, as
afterward more at large appears. Wherefore your reason, being (as it is)
absurd and foolish, we be not driven to any such shifte, as ye talk of, to
say that faith should be fixed in a wall. We know no such melody, to move as
you say, hard stones, or make brazen pillars to understand: though your
magical minstrelsie has been such, that rotten stocks have spoke at your
pleasure, spoken good reason (as you have esteemed it.) Remember ye not the
Roode of Winchester, that cunningly decised a controversy, between the Monks
and married priests, pronouncing in latin (for he was better taught then his
masters the Monks,) Non been sentiunt qui fauent presbyteris. They think not
well that favor the priests? Who was that Orpheus, that wrought that
understanding there? Dunstane, or ye Devil, or both? It has been always a
Popish practice, to make Roodes and Images to roll their eyes, to sweat, and
to speak, (whereof infinite examples might be brought.) But that of men,
professing the Gospel, of protestants (as ye call them) there has been any
such delusion, is not in any writing of any age to be found. Wherefore ye do
us wrong, in burdening us with such untruths, unless by remembrance of your
own follyes, ye will force us (as it were) to open and disclose your shame.
But let me come to your counsels. The first ye fetch from the record of Iuo,
and Gratian, alleging a Synod kept at Orleance in France. Ye do right well
to cite your authors: otherwise I might have suspected the authority. For in
all the Canons of the council it self, we read not the words that make for
your purpose. But you do wisely, not to pass the compass of your own
profession, and therefore say no more than the popish decrees do teach you.
But if a man may be so bold in your own faculty to appose you: how do the
words of this your counsel prove, that every Church must have the sign of
the Cross? Folio. 40.
Forsooth (say you) because it is decreed, that no man build a Church, before
the Bishop of that diocese come and set up a Cross. By the same reason, the
ring of the church door is a piece of Gods service too. For as the fixing of a
Cross, the pitching of a stake (as it were) in the ground, does show that
the Bishop has limited out the compass of the Church: so the other is a
proof of Induction of the Priest. Yet, as this sign of possession taken, is
no part of duty within the Church discharged: so the other sign of
authority to build, given: is no part of service within the building to be
done. And this is the point which in this article ye go about to prove, that
every Church and Chapel, must have a Cross erected in it, to the honor and
service of almighty God. But this Cross serves an other turn, to a civil
policy, and no point of religion: For least that men should presume to build
Churches without authority ecclesiastical, it was decreed, that the bishop of
the diocese, should view the place, appoynte where the body of the Church
should be, and leave his mark behind him. Which mark, might as well have been
his crosier, as his Cross: but that the one was less chargeable than the
other. If ye credit not me, turn over your Decree. There shall ye find, that
order is taken for things necessary, before the Church be builded. But we do
inquire what is necessary service in a Church hallowed? Wherefore I see not,
how that Council provincial, triginta trium Episcoporum, of three and thyrty
bishops, as the book does tell us, can make any thing for you. But if there
were most plain determination, for the Cross, in that or any other such like
Council: I am no more bound to the authority thereof, than you will be to the
English Synodes, held in king Edwardes days, and in the Queens Majesty's
raygne that now is. Yet the duty of a subject (if ye were honest) might drive
you to this: whereas there is no cause, yt might enforce my consent to the
other. Now for your second at Tovvres, whose Canon is this: Vt corpus dn^i in
altari, non in armario, sed sub Crucis titulo, co^ponatur. Which you do english
after this sort: Foli. 40. b.
That the body of our lord, consecrated upon the altar, be not reposed and set
in the reuestry, but under the Roode. Where we may learn, two schole points of
you. First that armariu^ is latin for a Reuestry. Then that titulus Crucis, is
latin for a Roode. But if your scholars have been taught heretofore to
translate no better, a rod, a rod, had been more meet for the usher. For
armariu^ may well be taken for a library: for a closet, or almerie: but no more
for the reuestry, than for the belfry. Yet will I not greatly in that word
contend with you. Be it yt their folish meaning, was for a reuestry: yet
doubtless they were not so mad, as to put titulus Crucis for a Roode. Titulus
crucis is ye title of the cross. And I marvel, that you would not rather
expound it for a Pixe, than a Roode: being driven by this, to carry gods body
sacred, from the altar, into ye Roode loft. We have not heard before this time,
that the sacrament was reverently kept under the Roode, that the altar refused,
the Roode loft should be reverenced. Now as concerning the sixth general Counsel
kept at Constantinople in Trullo whereby (ye say) it may be gathered, that the
sign of the Cross was kept and had in Churches: I pray you allege the canon
of that Council, out of which ye gather it. I am not ignorant, that in the
Popes law it is cited so. But I am not yet persuaded, that it is so. Belike the
patchers of those ragged relics, missetoke the name of the.vj. for the.vij.
For as it is certain that in the syxt Counsel of Constantinople, there was a
long discourse contra Monothelitas, against them which affirmed, there was but
one will in Christ: so in all the actions that are come abroad to ye sight of
the world, there is not so much as mention of the cross. It is an easy matter
to say: Such a Council defined so the case, and bring no proof at al, nor so
much as a word, to rule the case over. This is to slight dealing, in so great a
cause, as you will have the Cross to be. But on the other side, as you have
brought but the bare name of three Councels for you: whereof there is none that
confirms your error: so if I bring three councels in deed, as famous as they;
which in plain words, by public and free assent, shall overthrow it: will ye
be then content to give over? How soever your frowardness in this behalf shall
lead you: yet, that other may understand, how men of sou^der judgment have
assembled themselves also together, and always resisted the herosie of Imagry, I
will only rehearse three other to you. Eutropius Rer. Romans Lib. 22.
Constantine the fyft, son to Leo surnamed Isauricus (otherwise by a nickname
of Iconolatrae called Iconomachus, of Image worshippers an Image enemy) in the
year of our Lord.746. called a Council, at his princely palace of
Constantinople: where Eutropius reports, that the bishop of Ephesus, the
bishop of Perga, the bishop of Constantinople with other more to the number
of.338. Prelates were (as apeareth by ye subscriptions, or as Sigebertus
Sigebertus in Chro.
reports) 330. There they sat, deliberating upon the matter, from the.x. of
February til the.viij. of August. In the end they concluded as touching the
Image of Christ, thus: Si quis diuina^ Dei verbi secundu^ incarnatione^
figura^. etc. The acts of which council I will therefore insert at more large
into my writing: because they co^tayne very learned reasons against the picture
of Christ, to be made: or Image of any other, in place of Gods service used.
Sanctorum patrum and vniuersaliu^ Synodorum, puram and inuiolata^ and a Deo
traditam fidem nostram, and co^fessionem obseruantes, dicimus: non debere
quenquam diuisionem aut confusione^ vltra verum sensum and voluntatem
inexprimibilem; and incognoscibile^ illam vnione^ duarum secundu^ Hypostasim
vnum, naturaru^ co^minisci. Quae nam est haec insana opinio pictorum, vt lucri
turpis and miseri causa, ea quae effici nequeant, studeant co^ficere: vt and ea
quae ore and cord sunt tantummodo confessa, impijs manibus figurare intendant?
Arbitratus autem sic est, ipsam Imaginem Christum vocando. Est autem Christus
hoc nomine, Deus and homo: Sequitur, vt Imago Dei sit and hominis. Et
consequens est, vt aut iuxta opinionem vanitatis suae, deitatem, quae
circu^scriptione creatae carnis circumscribi non potest, circumscripserit: aut
inconfusam illam vnitionem, impietatis confusione confuderit: and geminas
blasphemias in deitatem, and per descriptionem and confusionem intulerit.
Iisdem ergo blasphemijs earum adorator inuoluitur, and ve illud vtriusque
praemium, quod scilicet and cum Ario, Dioscoro, Eutyche, and Acephalorum
haeresi errauerint. Damnati autem a cordatis viris in eo, quod
incomprehensibilem and incircumscriptibilem diuinam Christi naturam ipsi
depingere studuerunt, ad aliam aliquam praua inuentione apologiam confugiunt,
quod solius carnis quam vidimus and palpauimus, and cum qua versati sumus,
illius inquam Imagine^ exhibemus, quod sane impium est, and Nestoriana
diabolica inuentio. Considerandum est and hoc: Quod si iuxta orthodoxos patres
simul caro, simul dei verbi caro, nunquam partitionis notitiam suscepisset, sed
totaliter tota natura diuina assumpta, and totaliter and perfect deitate
arrepta fuisset: quomodo in duas diducetur, and ab impijs illis qui istud
facere conantur, priuatim separabitur? Cosimiliter vero and de sacra eius anima
se habet. Postquam enim assumsisset deitas filij, in propria hypostasi carnis
natural, inter deitatem and carnis crassitudinem, anima mediam se interposuit:
and quemadmodum simul caro, simul verbi Dei caro: sic simul anima, simul verbi
Dei anima. Et ambabus simul conspectis, videlicet anima and corpore,
inseparabilis ab ipsis deitas extitit, and in ipsa etiam disiunctione animae a
corpore, in voluntaria passione. Vbi enim anima Christi, illic etiam deitas:
and vbi corpus Christi, and illic quoque deitas consistit. Siquidem igitur in
passione inseparabilis ab ijs mansit deitas, quomodo insam isti and quauis
imprudentia irrationaliores, carnem deitate coniu^cta^, and deificatam,
diuidunt: and hanc vt nudi hominis imaginem pingere conantur? Et ex hoc in
aliud impietatis barathrum labuntur. Nam carnem a deitate separantes, and per
se subsistente^ eam inducentes, aliamque personam in carne constituentes, quam
in Imagine representari dicunt, quartam personam Trinitati adijciunt, and
diuinam assertionem praedicant impiam. Itaque fiet illis qui Christum depingere
nituntur, vt aut deitatem circumscriptibilem, and cum carne confusam dicant:
aut corpus Christi expers deitatis and diuisum: praeterea persona^ per se
subsistentem in carne asserant: and ita Nestorianae Deo repugnanti haeresi
similes existunt. In tale^ igitur blasphemiam, and impietatem cadentes, pudore
suffundantur, auersentur se ipsos, and talia facere desinant: nec hij solum qui
faciunt, verum etiam qui falso nomine factam and dictam ab ipsis Christi
imaginem venerantur. Absit a nobis ex aequo and Nestorij diuisio: and Arij,
Dioscori, Eutychis and Seueri confusio, male sibi ipsa repugnantia, and quae
vtraque ex aequo impietatem procurant.

Which words in English be these.

We, following therein, the pure and inviolable faith, delivered from God,
received of holy fathers and general Councels, do say: that no man ought to
ymagine, a division or confusion, contrary to the true sense and will not able
to be expressed: and the same union being above reach of knowledge, of two
natures agreeable to one person. For what a mad opinion is this of paynters, who
for fylthy lucres sake, endeavor to make those things that can not be made:
and go about with their wicked hands, to express counterfets of those things,
which are only with heart and mouth acknowleged? Undoubtedly such was the
judgment of him, that called the Image it self, Christ: But Christ is by this
name both God and man: it follows then, that it is the Image of God and man.
And that also follows: that either according to their vain opinion, he has
circumscribed the deity (shut up the Godhead within a compass) the which can
not be circumscribed (or limited his rovvme) as is the nature created: or that
he has confounded, by confusion most wicked, that uniting and knitting
together of the two natures, which are inconfusible, (and in themselves
distinct) and so by his description and confusion, has committed against the
godhead a double blasphemy. Such therefore as worship them, are enwrapped in the
same blasphemies, and the curse is reward to either of them: in that they have
erred with Arrius, Dioscorus, and Eutiches: and such also as are infected with
the heresy of the Acephali. Notwithstanding they being condemned of men of
understanding, in that they have attempted to paynt the divine nature of
Christ, which is not only not to be measured and bounded in, but also not to be
comprehended (or by wit comprysed) do flee through their ungracious invention,
to some other defense. That we do set forth alone the Image of that nature
only, of that (I say) which we have seen, handled, and been conversant with.
And that is very wicked and a devilish devise of Nestorius. This also is
further to be considered: that if so be according to the mind of ye right
believing fathers, ye flesh, which is not only flesh, but the flesh of the
son of God, did never learn the way to be divided, but the whole nature of
the divinity received, and perfect deity thereunto was taken: How shall it of
these wicked ones, which endeavor this thing, be divided into two: and each by
it self be separated? Like is the state and condition of his sacred soul. For
after such time as the Godhead of the son, had assumpted in proper person,
the nature of flesh, the soul placed her self a mean, between the deity and
the grossness of the flesh: and as that flesh was not only meare flesh, but
also the flesh of God the word: even so the soul, not only an human soul,
but also the soul of God ye word. And both together being seen (that is to
say, the soul and the body) the godhead remained as inseparable from them, yea
and that even in the separation it self of the soul from the body, in that
passion, which willingly he suffered. For wheresoever the soul of Christ is,
there is also the Godhead. And where the body of Christ is, there is also ye
Godhead. If that therefore the Godhead could not be separate from these in the
passion, how do these mad men (as rash, and altogether unreasonable) make a
division of flesh, joined with the divinity, and deified? and attempt to paint
the same as ye Image of a natural man only, and no more? And forth of this,
they slip into another bottomless pit of impiety. For in that they do
separate the human nature from the divinity, and do bring in the same
subsisting by it self, and thereby do make another person in the flesh, the
which they say to be represented in the image: they do join a fourth person to
the Trinity, and give sentence that the word of God is wicked. Therefore it
must needs follow of them which attempt to paynt Christ, that either they must
say that the godhead is circu^scriptible (such as may be contained within a
certain compass) and so confounded with the flesh: or else affirm, that the body
of Christ is void of ye godhead, and divided, and moreover a person by it self
subsisting in the flesh: and so join with ye heresy of Nestorius, impugning
gods truth. Forasmuch then, as they fall into such blasphemy and impiety, let
them be ashamed, let them abhor themselves, let them cease to practice such
things: neither they only which do make them, but those likewise which do
worship that which they make and untruly name, the Image of Christ. Let
therefore be far from us, (as reason requires) as well the division of
Nestorius, as also the confusion of Arius, Dioscorus, Eutiches, and Seuerus,
wickedly disagreing one with another, and on either side causing an impiety.

And a little after the said Council has:

Imaginum falsi nominis praua appellatio, neque ex Christi, neque Apostoloru^,
neque patru^ traditione caepit: neque precatione^ sacram vllam, qua
sa^ctificari possit, habet: sed manet communis inhonorata, quemadmodum ab
artifice pictore absoluta est. Quod si autem quidam ex eo errore existentes
dixerint, recte ac pie a nobis dictum esse, in subuersione imaginis Christi a
nobis facta, propter indisseparatam and inconfusam essentiam duarum naturarum
in vna hypostasi conuenientium: tamen iterum dubitare oportet, propter Imagines
ter inculpatae and supergloriosae dominae deiparae, Prophetarum, Apostolorum,
and Martyru^, cu^ sint meri nudique homines: neque ex duabus naturis, diuina
scilicet and humana, in vna hypostasi consistant, quemadmodum in folius Christi
imaginibus fieri renuntiauimus. Dubitare autem oportet, propter Imagines ter
inculpatae and supergloriosae Deiparae dominae, Prophetarum, Apostolorum, and
Martyrum, cum fuerint nudi homines, and non ex duabus naturis constituti, quid
nam conueniens, aut co^modum ad has dicere potuerint, subuerso priore
argumento. Profecto nihil est quod hic habet. Sed quid dicimus de subuersione?
Quandoquidem catholica nostra Ecclesia, media existens inter Iudaismum and
Gentilitatem, neutram illis consuetam sacrificationem accepit: verum nouam
pietatis and mysticae constitutionis a Deo datae, formam and viam ingreditur.
Nam cruenta Iudaeorum sacrificia and holocaustomata non admittit, and
Gentilitatis in sacrificando omnem Idololatria and statuarum copiam auersatur.
Haec caput and inuentrix abhominabilis istius artis fuit. Nam cum spem
resurrectionis non haberet, dignum sibi ludierum excogitauit, vt per eu^ lusu^
absentes tanque adhuc praesentes exhiberet. Siquidem igitur nihil noui sapit
haec res, profecto tanque alienum daemoniacorum hominum inuentum, ab Ecclesia
Christi longissime abijciatur. Cessent itaque ora omnium, quae loquuntur impia,
and contumeliosa, contra hanc nostram Deo gratam sententia^, and decretu^.
Sancti enim qui Deo placuerunt, and qui ab eo dignitate sa^ctitatis honorati
su^t, etia^si hinc tra^smigrauerint, non tamen eos odiosa mortua ars vnque
faciet rediuiuos. Sed quicunque ex Gentiliu^ errore illis statuas aut Imagines
erigere fuerit conatus, blasphemus iudicabitur. Quomodo autem and valde
laudatam Dei matrem, quam obumbrauit plenitudo deitatis, per quam nobis eluxit
lumen quod adiri nequit, matrem inquam ipsis coelis altiorem, Sanctiorem
Cherubin, vulgaris Gentiliu^ ars pingere audet? Rursus, quomodo eos qui cu^
Christo regnaturi sunt, and in sedibus cum eo sedebunt iudicaturi orbe^
terrarum, conformes eius gloriae, quibus non erat dignus mundus, vt diuina
miracula asserunt: quomodo inquam eos non timent per artem Gentiu^ exhibere?
Profecto non fas est Christianis, qui spem resurrectionis habent, Daemonu^
culturae consuetudinibus vti. Et eos qui in tanta and tali gloria
resplendebunt, non decebat ignominiosa and mortua materia, ignominia afficere.
Nos autem ab alienis, nostrae fidei domonstationes non recipimus, and in
Daemonibus testimonia non requirimus. Ad haec exquisita and exputata nostra
sententia, tum ex Scriptura diuinitus afflata, tum ex patru^ electoru^
testimonijs efficacibus, co^uenientibus nobis and asserentibus piam nostra^
intentione^, exhibebimus nostra^ definitionem, quibus non contradixerit is, qui
conatur haec in dubium vocare: qui vero ignorant, discat is, and erudiatur, quod
scilicet a Deo sunt. Principio verbum diuinae vocis, sic dicentis,
praemittimus: Deus est spiritus: Quicunque Deum adorauerit, in spiritu and
veritate adoret. Et iterum: Deum nemo vidit vnquam, neque vocem eius
audiuistis, neque formam eius vidistis. Beati sunt qui non viderunt, and
crediderunt. Et in veteri testamento, ait ad Moysen and populu^: Non facies
tibi idolum, neque omnem similitudinem, quaecunque sunt in coelo supra and in
terra infra. Quam ob causam in mo^te, in medio ignis, vocem verborum vos
audiuistis: similitudinem autem non vidistis, sed tantummodo voce^. Et
mutauerunt gloriam immortalis Dei, per Imaginem, non solum ad mortalis hominis
similitudinem effictam: and venerati sunt, and coluerunt ea quae condita sunt,
supra eu^ qui condidit. Et rursum: Si enim cognouimus Christu^ secundum carnem,
iam non cognoscimus: per fidem enim ambulamus, non per speciem. Et hoc quod ab
Apostolo aperte dictum est: igitur fides ex auditu, auditus autem per verbum
Dei. Si enim cognouimus Christum secundum carnem, iam non cognoscimus. Per
fide^ enim ambulamus: non per speciem. Eadem etiam and Apostolorum discipuli
and successores diuini patres nostri tradunt. Epipharius enim Cyprius, inter
antesignanos praeclarus, sic inquit. Attendite vobis, vt seruetis traditiones,
quas accepistis. Ne declinetis, neque ad dexteram, neque ad sinistra^. Quibus
infert haec: Estote memores, dilecti filij, ne in ecclesiam imagines inferatis,
neque in sanctorum coemiterijs eas statuatis, sed perpetuo circumferte Deum in
cordibus vestris. Quinetiam neque in domo communil tolerentur. Non enim fas
est, Christianum per oculos suspensum teneri, sed per occupationem mentis. Idem
in alijs quoque sermonibus suis, de imaginum subuersione multa dixit, quae
studiosi quaerentes facile inuenient. Similiter and Gregorius theologus in
versibus suis dicit: Flagitiu^ est, fide^ habere in coloribus, and non in
cord. Ea enim quae in coloribus existit, faciliter eluitur: quae vero in
profundo mentis, illa mihi amica. Ioannes aute^ Chrysostomus sic docet: Nos per
scripta sanctorum fruimur praesentia, non sane corporum ipsorum, sed animarum
imagines habentes. Nam quae ab ipsis dicta sunt, animarum illorum Imagines
sunt. Maxima vero ad recti inuestigatione^, inquit Magnus Basilius, meditatio
scripturaru^ diuino afflatu nobis datarum. In his enim and rerum argumenta
inueniuntur, and vitae beatorum virorum perscriptae, veluti imagines quaedam
animatae secundum Deum politica imitatione operum exhibentur. Et Alexandriae
lumen Athanasius, dixit: Quomodo non miseratione prosequendi sunt, qui
creaturas adorant: quod illi qui vident non vide^tibus cultum exhibent: and
audientes, non audientes orant, precanturque? Creatura enim a creatura nunquam
seruabitur. Similiter Amphilochius Iconij episcopus sic inquit. Non enim nobis
sanctorum corporales vultus in tabulis coloribus effigiare curae est, quoniam
his opus non habemus, sed politiae illorum virtutum memores esse debemus.
Consentanea his etiam Theodorus Ancyrae episcopus sic docet. Sanctorum formas
and species ex materialibus coloribus formari, minime decorum putamus: horum
autem virtutes, quae per scripta traditae sunt, veluti viuas quasdam imagines
reficere subinde oportet. Ex his enim ad similiu^ imitationem and zelum
peruenire possumus. Dicant enim nobis, qui illas erigunt statuas, quaena^
vtilitas ex illis ad se redit? An quod qualiscu^que recordatio eos habet ex
tali speciali co^te^platione? Sed manifestu^ est, quod vana sit eiusmodi
cogitatio, and diabolicae deceptionis inue^tu^. Similiter and Eusebius Pa^phili
ad constantia^ Augustam, petente^ Christi imagine^ ad se ab illo mitti, talia
dicit. Quonia^ au^t de Christi imagine ad me scripsisti, vt tibi inittere^:
velim mihi significes, quam nam putes Christi imaginem? vtrum illam veram and
incommutabilem natura illius characteres ferentem, aut hanc quam propter nos
assumpsit, seruilem formam pro nobis induens? Sed sane de diuina forma non
arbitror etiam ipse ego te esse solicitam, cum fueris ab illo edocta neminem
patrem cognouisse, praeter filium, neque ipsum filiu^ condign quempia^
cognouisse, nisi qui illu^ genuit pater. Et post alia: Sed oi^o serui requiris
imaginem formae, and carnem quam propter nos induit: sed and ha^c gloria
deitatis suae commixtam esse didicimus, and passam, mortua^que. Et post pauca:
Quis igitur gloriae eiuscemodi and dignitatis splendores lucentes and
fulgura^tes, effigiare mortuis and inanimatis coloribus, and vmbratili pictura
posset? Cum neque diuini illius discipuli, in monte illum contemplari
quiuerint: qui cadentes in faciem suam, non posse se eiuscemodi spectaculu^
inspicere confessi sunt. Igitur si carnis illius figura tantam ab inhabitante
in ea diuinitate accepit potentiam, quid oportet dicere tunc, cum mortalitatem
exuit, and corruptionem abluens, formam serui in domini and Dei gloriam
transtulit, post mortis scilicet victoriam, post ascensum in caelos, post cum
patre regio in throno a dexteris confessum, post requiem inineffabilibus and in
nominandis sinibus patris, in quam ascendentem and desidentem caelestes
potestates illi benedicti vocibus acclamabant, dicentes: Principes tollite
portas vestras, aperiamini portae caelestes, introiuit rex gloriae? Haec igitur
ex multis pauca Scripturae patru^que testimonia, in hac definitione nostra,
parcentes sane copiae, ne in longum res protraheretur, collocauimus. Reliquis
enim quae infinita sunt, vole^tes supersedimus, vt qui velint ipsi requirant.
Ex his igitur a Deo in spiratis scripturis and beatorum patrum sententijs
stabiliti, and super petram cultus diuini in spiritu pedes confirmantes, in
nomine sanctae and supersubsta^tialis viuificantis Trinitatis, vnanimes, and
eiusdem sententiae nos, qui sacerdotij dignitate succincti sumus, simul
existentes, vna voce definimus, omnem imaginem, ex quacunque materia improba
Pictoru^ art factam, ab Ecclesia Christianoru^ reijciendam, veluti aliena^ and
abominabile^. Nemo hominu^ qualiscunque tande^ fuerit, tale institutum, and
impiu^ and impurum posthac sectetur. Qui vero ab hoc die Imaginem ausus fuerit
sibi parare, aut adorare, aut in Ecclesia, aut in priuata domo constituere, aut
clam habere, si Episcopus fuerit, aut Diaconus, deponitor: si vero solitarius,
aut laicus, anathemate percellitor, imperialibusque constitutionibus
subijcitor, vt qui diuinis decretis impugnet, and dogmata non obseruet.

The English of which words is this:

The wicked calling of Images, by a false name, neither had his beginning by
tradition from Christ, nor of his Apostles, or yet the ancient fathers,
neither had it any holy prayer, where through to be sanctified: but it
remains profane, even as it is wrought and finished of the Paynter. But if
certain (delivered of that error) affirm, that we have Godlily and uprightly
said, in throwing down the Image of Christ, because of the inseparable and
inconfusible substance of two natures joined in one person: Yet
notwithstanding some occasion of doubt remains in them, as touching the
Images of the virgin most glorious and undefiled, the mother of God, of the
Prophets, Apostles and Martirs, seeing that they be only men, and no more:
neither do consist of two natures: that is to say, the divine and human
joined in one person, as before we have signified to be in Christ, and the
contrary thereof practiced in his Images: There grows in deed some matter of
doubt, as touching the Images of the most glorious and undefiled mother of God,
of the Prophets, Apostles and Martirs, seeing that they were only men, and not
framed of two natures: what they be able to say to any purpose with reason unto
these. The former argument overthrown, certainly they have nothing at all in
this case to say. But what say we to overthrowing Images? For as much as our
catholic Church, being a mean between the Iudaisme and Gentilitie, has
received neither of the manner of sacrifices accustomed to the^: but has entered
into a new way and order of Godliness, and mystical constitution given and
delivered of God: for it does in no wise admit the bloody sacrifice and burnt
offerings of the Jews, and it does utterly abhor, not only al Idolatry in
sacrificing, but also multitude of images of Gentility, (for this was the head
and first most abominable deviser of this art: which (having no hope of
resurrection) invented a toy, worthy it self: whereby always the absent might
be showed as present) therefore since this practice smells not of any
novelty, doubtless let it be removed most far of from the Church of Christ,
as a strange and foreign devise of men, possessed with the Devil. Let the tongs
then of al such, surcesse, which spewe forth wicked and blasphemous things to
the derogation of this our judgment and decree, most acceptable to god. As for
the holy men who pleased God, and which were honored by him, with the dignity
of holiness, although that they be departed hence, yet that dead and hateful
practice, shall never make them again alive. But whosoever (poisoned with the
error of the heathen) shall attempt to set up Images to them, he shall be
adjudged as one that has committed blasphemy. And how dare the rascal
occupation of Gentiles, presume to paynt that most prayseworthy mother of God,
whom the fullness of the Godheade has ouershadowed, through whom has shone
upon us that light, which can not be come unto: that mother, (I say) higher
than the Heavens, holier than the Cherubins? Again why fear they not (I say)
according to the art of Ethnicks to counterfeit them, which shall raygne with
Christ, and shall sit on seats with him to judge the world: conformed unto him
in glory, of whom the world was unworthy, as the Godly miracles affirm?
Verily it is not lawful for Christians (which believe the resurrection) to use
the order of worshipping of devils. Neither yet does it beseme, by vile and
dead kind of matter to reproach them, the which shall shine in so great and
passing glory. As for us, we use not to receive of strangers demonstrations of
our faith, neither yet in Devils to require testimony. Furthermore (our
sentence searched and discussed both out of the scripture enspired from above,
and out of ye effectual testimonies of piked fathers, agreing with us, and
affirming our good intent) we will exhibit in this case our resolute
determination: which he shall not be able to gaynesay, which laboreth to call
these things in question. As for him that is ignorant, let him learn and be
instructed, that these things are taken out of the word of God. First we place
before the rest, this sentence of gods voice, saying: God is a spirit:
whosoever will worship God, in spirit and truth, let him worship. And again.
No man at any time saw God: neither have ye heard his voice or seen his shape.
Blessed are those which have not seen, and yet believed. And in the old
Testament, he said to Moses and the people: Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven Image, neither the likeness of any thing in Heaven above, or in the
earth beneath. For the which cause, you heard the voice of his words in the
mountain, in the midst of fire, but his shape ye saw not: but only heard
his voice. And: They have changed the glory of the immortal God, by an Image
framed after the shape of a mortal man, and they have honored and worshipped
the things which are created, above him which has created. And again. For if
we have known Christ according to the flesh: now we know him not. For we
walk by faith, and not by the outward appearance. And this also which is most
plainly spoken of the Apostle: Therefore faith comes of hearing: but hearing
comes by the word of God. For if we have known Christ according to the
flesh, now we know him not. For we walk by faith, and not by outward
appearaunce. The very self same things our Godly Fathers, (the scholars and
successors of the Apostles) do teach us. For Epiphanius of Cypres, (most
famous amongst the foremost) thus says: Take heed unto your selves, that ye
keep the traditions, which ye have received: See ye lean not, neither to the
right hand, nor to the left. Unto which, he adds these words: Remember dear
children, that ye bring no Images into the Church: neither place them, in the
sleeping places of the saints: but see that continually ye earye about in
your heart, the Lord. Neither yet let them be suffered in a common house. For
it is not lawefull for a Christian, to be holden in suspense by his eyes, but
by the contemplation of his mind. The same father also in many other of his
sermons, has declared many things touching the overthrow of Images: which ye
studious seeking for, shall easily find. Likewise also Gregory the divine,
says in his verses: It is a thing most abominable, to believe in colors, and
not in heart: For that which is in colors is easyly washed away: but such
things as are in the depth of the mind, those like I well. John Chrysostom
also teaches thus: we through writing, enjoy the presence of the Saints,
although that we have not the Images of their bodies, but of their souls, for
those things which are spoken by them, are Images of their souls. Basilius
also the great says: that ye chiefest thing serving to the outfinding of
truth, is the meditation of the Scriptures, given unto us by divine
inspiration. For in these, not only arguments of things are found: but also
the written lives of holy men are printed unto us, as certain lively Images,
and that through the polityke imitation of their works, according to God. Also
Athanasius the light of Alexandria, said: how are they not to be lamented,
which worship creatures? that those that see, yield service to those which are
blind? those that hear, do pray and beseech those, which are altogether deaf?
For the creature, shall never be saved of a creature. Likewise Amphilochius
bishop of Iconium, thus says: We account it a matter of no estimation, to
counterfeit in tables with colors, the bodyly countenaunces of the Saints,
because that of these we have no need: But we ought rather to be mindful of
the policy of their virtues. Agreeable also hereunto, does Theodorus bishop of
Ancyra, teach, in these words: We judge it nothing seemly at all, to make the
forms and shapes of holy men with material colors: but it is requisite, that
we often repair and make fresh their virtues, which by writings are delivered
unto us, even as though it were certain lively Images. For by these, we may
come to the zealous following of the like. Let those tell us, which set up the
same. Images, what profit they have by them? whether they have any kind of
remembrance, by such special kind of beholding them? But it is most apparent,
that every such thought is vain, and an invention of devilish deceyt. Likewise
also Eusebius Pamphili, signified after this sort, to Constantia the Empress,
craving of him to send the Image of Christ unto her: For as much as ye have
written to me of the Image of Christ, that I should send it unto you: I would
you should show me, what thing you think the Image of Christ to be? whether
that same true and unchangeable creature, bearing the marks of the deity: or
that, which he assumpted for our sakes, taking on him the shape of a
servant? But as touching the picture of the deity, I judge ye be not very
careful: in as much as ye have been taught of him, that none has known the
Father, but the Son: and that none has worthyly known the Son, but the
Father which begatte him. And after other things: but ye altogether desire the
Image of the servants shape, and of the flesh which he took on him for our
sake: but we have learned that this is coupled with the glory of the Godheade,
and that the same suffered and dyed. And a little after: Who can therefore
counterfeit by dead and insensible colors, by vain shadowing Paynters art,
the bright and shining glistering of such his glory? whereas his holy disciples
were not able to behold the same in the mountain? Who therefore falling on
their faces, acknowledged they were not able to behold such a sight. If
therefore the shape of flesh, received such power of the Godhead, dwelling
within the same: what shall we then say, when as it has now put of
mortality, washing away corruption: and has changed the shape of a servant,
into the glory of the Lord and God? What shall we say now, after his victory
over death? after his ascending into heaven? after his sytting in the kingly
throne on the right hand of his Father? after rest, in the not vtterable
secrets of the Father, into the which he ascending and sytting, the heavenly
powers, those blessed ones, with voices together do cry: Ye Princes lift up
your gates, ye heavenly gates be ye opened, and the King of glory shall enter
in? These few testimonies therefore of Scriptures and Fathers, out of many, we
have placed here in this our determination: avoiding in deed multitude, least
the matter should be too prolixe: and abstayning of purpose from the residue
(which be infinite) that those which lust may themselves seek them. Being
therefore thoroughly persuaded, by these Scriptures (inspired from God, and by
the judgments of the blessed Fathers, staying our feet upon the rock) of
the worship of God in spirit: we which are girded with the dignity of the
priesthode, being of one mind and judgment, assembled together in one place,
do with one voice determine in the name of the holy, supersubstantiall and
quickening Trinity, that every Image made by Paynters wicked art, of any kind
of matter, is to be removed forth of the Church of Christians, as that which is
strange and abominable. Let no man from this time forward, (of what state
soever he be) follow any such kind of wicked and unclean custom. Whosoever
therefore from this day forward, shall presume, to prepare for himself any
image, or to worship it, either to set it in a Church, or in any private house,
or else to keep it secretly: if he be a Bishop or a Deacon, let him be
deposed: but if he be a private person, or of the lay fee, let him be
accursed, and subject to the Imperial decrees, as one which withstandeth the
commandments of God, and keeps not his doctrine.

Whereupon the Councels determination so far as concerns this case, ensues
thus:

Si quis non confessus fuerit Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum, post assumptionem
animatae rationalis and intellectualis carnis, simul sedere cum Deo and patre,
atque ita quoque rursus venturum cum paterna maiestate, iudicaturum viuos and
mortuos, non amplius quidem carnem, neque in corporeum tamen, vt videatur ab
ijs a quibus compunctus est, and maneat Deus extra crassitudinem carnis,
anathema.

Si quis diuinam Dei verbi secundum incarnationem figuram: materialibus
coloribus studuerit effigiare, and non ex toto cord oculis intellectualibus,
ipsum sedentem a dextris patris, super solis splendorem lucentem in throno
gloriae adorare, anathema.

Si quis incircu^scriptilem verbi Dei essentiam, and Hypostasin, propterea quod
incarnatus est, naturalibus coloribus in Imaginibus, ad formam hominis
depinxerit, and qui non theologice sensit eam post carnem non minus
incircumscriptibilem remansisse, anathema.

Si quis indiuisam Dei verbi naturae and carnis secundu^ hypostasin vnitionem,
videlicet ex vtrisque vnam inconfusa^ and impartibilem perfectione^ factam, in
Imagine depingere conatur, vocatque eum Christum (Christus enim nomine vno and
Deum and hominem significat) and ex ea reconfusionem duarum naturarum monstrose
asserit, anathema.

Si quis carnem hypostasi verbi Dei vnitam diuiserit, and in nuda excogitatione
mentis eam habens, ex eo conatus fuerit illam in Imagine depingere, anathema.

Si quis vnicum Christum in duas hypostases diuiserit, ab vna part Dei silium,
and ab altera part Mariae silium collocans, neque continuam vnitionem factam
confitens, and ob id in imagine tanquam per se subsistentem Mariae filium
depinxerit, anathema.

Si quis ex vnitione ad diuinum verbum deificatam carnem in Imagine pinxerit,
veluti diuidens eam ex assumpta and deificata deitate, and indeificatam ex hoc
eam conficiens, anathema.

Si quis in forma Dei existentem Deum verbum, serui formam in propria hypostasi
assumentem, and per omnia nobis similem factum sine peccato, conatus fuerit,
materialibus coloribus figurare, veluti si nudus homo fuisset, and hoc modo ab
inseparabili and incommutabili deitate seiu^gere, veluti quaternitatem
inducturus in sanctam and viuificantem Trinitatem, anathema.

If any person shall not acknowledge our Lord Jesus Christ, after the taking
of living, reasonable and understanding flesh, to sytte together with God and
his Father, and that he shall so return again, with ye majesty of his
Father, to judge both quick and dead, not any more flesh, and yet
notwythstanding having a body, that he may be seen of those of whom he was
pricked, and that he does remain God without ye grossness of flesh, Let him
be holden accursed.

If any person shall attempt to counterfeit the divine figure of God, the word,
as he became man, with material colors, and does not worship with all his
heart, with eyes of understanding, him, sitting on the right hand of his Father,
glistering above the brightness of the sun, in the throne of his glory, Let
him be holden as accursed.

If any person do paynt, Incircumscriptible is that which ca^ not be measured
or compassed within any certain bounds.
the incircumscriptible nature and substance of God the word, and his person,
with natural colors, in Images after the fashion of a man: because that he
took flesh, and does not also think, after the doctrine of true Divinity, the
same divine nature, after the assumpting of flesh, to remain notwithstanding
incircumscriptible, Let him be holden as accursed.

If any person do enterprise, to paint and set forth in an image, the
indivisible uniting in one person, of the natures of God the word and flesh,
that is to say the perfection made of both twain, which neither is to be
confounded of either, nor one from the other to be severed, and does call the
same Christ (for Christ in one name does signify both God and man) and by that
means most monstruously does affirm, the confusion of the two natures, Let
him be holden as accursed.

If any person shall divide the human nature, united to the person of God the
word, and having it only in the ymagination of his mind, shall therefore
attempt to paynt the same in an Image, Let him he holden as accursed.

If any person shall divide Christ, being but one, into two persons, placing on
the one side, the son of God, and on the other side the son of Mary,
neither does confess the continual union that is made, and by that reason
does paynt in an Image the son of Mary, as subsisting by himself, Let him be
acccursed.

If any person shall paynt in an Image, the humayne nature, being deified, by
the uniting thereof to God the word, separating the same as it were from the
Godhead assumpted and deified, making the same as though it were deified, Let
him be holden as accursed.

If any person shall presume to counterfeit in material colors, God the word,
being in the shape of God, and taking on him in his propre person the form of
a servant, and by all things made like unto us (yet without sin) as though yt
he were but only bare natural man, and by this means to divide him from the
inseparable and unchangeable godhead, as though he would bring in a quaternity,
into the holy and quickening Trinity, Let him be holden as accursed.

And so far the Council of Constantinople, concerning this case: whose
authority if you admit not, yet let their reasons take place, or be answered:
let the word of God, which they faithfully alleged: the testimony of fathers,
which they roundely br^^^ht out, take away this wicked and abominable
worsh^^ping of God with an Image. Let not the natures of Christ be confounded.
Let not the one from the other be severed. Christ on the Cross was both God
and man: That on our Cross, is but an Image only of a man. Christ on ye cross
was yt son of God: that on our cross, is but the image of the son of Mary.
Christ has an inseparable and unchangeable Godheade: that on our Cross
makes.ij. persons of one.iiij. persons in Trinity. Therefore accursed be that
Cross to the Devil. And thus much for the first Council.

Now about the same time, Concilium Elibertinu^.
when the controversy was hot in Greece, they began also to stir in Spain:
and there at a City called now Granata, was a Council held of nynetene
Bishops, and syx and thyrty Elders. The chief among them, was Foelix bishop of
Aquitane. When they maturely had weighed the matter, with one assente they
agreed on this point: Placuit, Can. 36.
picturas in Ecclesia esse non debere, ne quod colitur aut adoratur in
parietibus depingatur. Which words in english are these: Our pleasure is that
there should be no pictures in the Church, that the thing be not painted on the
walls which is served or worshipped. The like also is repeated after, Can. 41.
Folio. 40. b,
But these (ye say) were condemned by the seventh general Council kept at
Nice, where three hundredth and fifty Bishops (men of great virtue, profound
knowledge, and deep sight in divinity) were. But that was also condemned
after, by another Council, assembled at Frankforde in the year of our Lord. 7
9 4. where all the learned of Charles his dominions, of France, Italy, and
Germany, were present: whyther Adrian the Pope sent also his Embassadoures,
Theophilacte and Stephan. Where Charles himself was in propre person, upon
occasion of the said Council of Nice, which the Pope had sent him to be
approved. But he does call it, Stolidam and arrogantem Synodum, A doltish and a
proud Synod: And the decree there made touching the adoration of Images
(which you M. Martial, do teach so stoutly) Impudentissimam traditionem. A
most impudent and shameless tradition. I refer you to the four books of
Carolus, in which at large is set forth, not only the vanity of those reverend
Asses, which went about to establish Images, but also the effect of the Council
of Frankford, not utterly abolishing (which was their imperfection) but plainly
condemning the adoration and worship of them. But in this case, where Council
is against Council, and necessary it is, that one of them be deceived: which
must we trust to? I know that the latter age, has received the worse: the
seventh of Nice. But we must not follow the authority of men, were they never
so many: but ye direction of God his spirit, and truth revealed in his holy
word. What moved the faithful to refuse the second of Ephesus, and willingly
embrace the Council of Chalcedon: but that examining their decrees by
Scripture, they found Eutiches heresy confirmed in the one, which the other
condemned? So when the manifest word of God, shall try where the spirit of
God does rest, there must the credit, and there only, be given. And to the
end that al readers hereof may understand and see, what vanity there was in
the Prelates of Nicene Counsel, what more than vanity is in the magnifiers of
so mad a company: I will set forth the allegations of the Image worshippers, and
the confutation which the servants of God made: yt every man thereby may judge
so, as the spirit of God shall lead him, Car. Mag. Li. 1. Cap. 20. and To. 2.
Co^. Council. Nice. 2.
and as himself shall see good cause? First of al, their general position was:
That the Images of Christ, the virgin Mary, and other Saints, were sacred and
holy: therefore to be worshipped. Hereto the Synod answered: That the
Antecedent, the former proposition, was false: in as much as they are neither
holy in respect of the matter whereof they be made, nor of the colors that be
laid upon them, nor yet for any imposition of hands, nor by any canonical
consecration: Therefore they be not at al holy, much less therefore to be
worshipped. The^ noble John the legate of ye Esterlings, brought forth, another
reason: God made man after his own Image and likeness: therefore Images are to
be worshipped. Hereto ye catholics justly replied: yt he made a false argument
Abignoratione Elenchi: by applying that, to Imageworshipping, which made
nothing at all to purpose: For both out of Ambrose and Augustine, they proved,
that man is called the Image of God, not for his externe shape, which Images
well enough may represent: but for the inward man, the mind, the reason, the
understanding, and virtues consonant to the will of God. For Ambrose says:
Quod secundum Imaginem est, In Psalm. 118. Ser. 10.
non est in corpore, nec in materia, sed in anima rationabili. That which is
according to the Image of God, is not in the body, nor in the matter, but in
the reasonable soul. Likewise Augustine. Accedit vtcunque anima humana
interior, In Psalm. 99.
homo recreatus ad Imaginem Dei, qui creatus est ad Imaginem Dei. The inward
soul of man, the new borne man, which is made after the Image of God, comes
after a sort near unto God his Image. But that wheresoever a similitude and
likeness is spoken of, there is also an Image to be meant, Octog. triu^ quest.
ca. 74
Augustine disproueth; Vbi similitudo, non continuo Imago, non continuo
aequalitas. etc. Where a similitude or lyknesse is, not by and by an Image, not
by and by equality. So that the folly of him was great, to abuse the scripture
to so impertinent a purpose. But the Nice masters proceed and say. That as
Abraham worshipped the sons of Heth, Genesis 25. Exodus 18.
and Moses Iethro the priest of Madian: so must Images be worshipped of men.
Hereto the Council (as Charles the president thereof affirms) answered:
Dementissimu^ est, Lib. 1. Cap. 9.
and ab omni ratione seclusum, hoc ad astruenda^ Imagina^ adoratione in
exemplu^ trabere, quod Abraham populum terre and Moses Iethro sacerdote^ Madia^
leguntur adorasse. It is a thing of most madness and utterly severed from all
reason, to bring for example, to confirmation of Imageworshipping, that Abraham
is red to have worshipped the people of the earth, and Moses Iethro the priest
of Madian.

The Saints of God in token of their obedience and humility, sometime have
bowed themselves, have showed some piece of courtesy to such as pleased them,
and had authority in the earth: But what is this for the honor done to a
dead stock? Why is this example made to be general, extending to all, both
quick and dead, both good and badde, where as the Saints themselves
sometime abhorred this worship to be given them: sometime refused to give it
unto other? Imagines vero, nusquam nec tenuiter quidem adorare conati sunt. But
as for Images, they never attempted in any place, or in any so slender wise to
worship them. De Doctri. Christ. Li. 1. Cap. 1.
Let them learn of Augustine, that Abraham and Moses doing as they did, were
examples of humility, not paternes of impiety. Let them learn that there is
no less diversity between the worshipping of an Image, and worshipping of a
man, than is between a living man, and a man painted upon the wall. Let them
learn, how love, reverence and charity toward men, is in the Scripture
commanded often: The bowing, the kneeling, the service to an Image, is in every
place forbidden and accursed. The Papists figure to make the Scripture serve
their purpose.
But a familiar figure the Papists have to make the Scripture to serve their
faustes: Acyrologiam, which you may call Abusion. Impropre speeches. As, where
so ever in the Hebrewe text, they read any word that betokens Bowing,
Saluting, Blessing, they do full wisely turn it (worshipping.) And is this
honest and upright dealing? Yet how they dally on this sort both with the
world, and with the word of God: the next allegation of theirs, declares,
Jacob suscipiens a filijs suis vestem talarem Joseph, Carol. Mag. de Ima. li.
1. ca. 12.
osculatus est eam and cum lachrimis imposuit oculis suis. Ergo. etc. Which
words in english according to their translation, be these. Jacob receiving of
his sons, Joseph his long garmente, he kyssed it, and with tears laid it
upon his eyes: And therefore Images are to be worshipped. And is not this a
reason, that might have been fette out of a Christmas pie? Will any man
hereafter find fault with Papists deprauing of the Scripture, since they take
the^ leave to make what Scripture they list? Where find they this text in all
the Bible, that Jacob kyssed his sons garmente, and laid it upon his eyes?
The place is the.xxxvij. of Genesis, where only we read, that the sons of
Jacob brought unto their father, Joseph his party colored coat, and said:
this have we found: see now whether it be thy sons coat or no. Then he
knew it, and said: It is my sons coat. A wicked beast has devoured him.
Joseph is surely torn in pieces. And Jacob, rent his clothes and put sack
cloth about his loins, and sorrowed for his son a long season. Where is the
kissing of the coat, and laying it on his eyes? But if kyssing had been there,
what is that to worshipping? But to kiss and to worship is all one with them.
They worship where they kiss: let them kiss where they worship not.
Another worthy father of that sacred assembly, because he would have a fresh
devise, coined out of hand another piece of Scripture, saying: Car. Mag. de
Imag. Li. 1. ca. 13.
Jacob summitatem virgae Joseph adorauit. Jacob worshipped the top of Joseph's
rod. Therefore we may worship the picture of Christ. Let me ask of his
fatherhode, where he fyndeth the place? Let him put on his spectacles: and
poare on his Portasse. If this be lawful, that every noddy that comes to a
Synod, may chop and change the word of God as he will: what need we to care
for Moses writing, or Esdras, restoring or Septuagints translating, or the
Apostles handeling of the Scripture? The great virtue and profound knowledge of
those Synodicall men may serve and suffice us. And to prosecute ye cause of
Jacob, another ryseth up and puts in his verdite, saying: Benedixit Jacob
Pharaonem, Car. Mag. Li. 1. Cap. 14.
sed non vt Deum benedixit: adoramus nos Imaginem, sed non vt Deum adoramus.
Jacob blessed Pharao, but he blessed him not as God: We worship an Image, but
we worship it not as God. This man had wit without al reason: he compared the
blessing that the holy Patriark gave unto the king: the bounden man, to the
well doseruer: the subject to the superior: unto the worship of a senseless
Image, that stands in the wall, and does no more good. But another brought in
a sounder proof, and framed his argument after this sort: Cap. 15.
Impitiatorium, and duos Cherubin aureos, and ariam testamenti iussi. Dei Moses
secit: Ergo licet sacere et adorare Imagine. Moses by ye commandment of God
made the propitiatory, and the two golden Cherubins, and ye arc of witness:
Therefore it is lawful to make and worship Images. This fellow began in good
divinity, but ended in foolish sophistry. For in the conclusion, he put more
than was in the premises. Moses made this and that: Therefore we may both make
and worship. Where does he read that they were worshipped? Yea, how can those
examples be applied unto Images, since they be set in the face of the people,
only to this end, to be gazed on: but ye arc of witness with ye furniture
thereof, was in ye oracle of the house, in the most holy place, covered, that it
might not be seen without: Number. 4. 2. Par. 5.
Again, the Cherubins were but a peculier ordinance of God, and therefore
could not prejudice an universal law. But to proceed, it is written in the
law (say they) Ecce vocaui ex nomine Beseleel filij Vr, filij Hor de tribu
Judah, and repleui eum spiritu sapientiae, Car. Mag. Lib. 1. Ca. 16. Exodus 31.
and intelligentiae, ad perficiendu^ opus ex auro and argento: Ergo, licet
adorare Imagines. I have called by name Bezaliell the son of Vri, the son
of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, whom I have filled with the spirit of God, in
wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all workma^ship, to
find out curious works to make in gold and silver: therefore it is lawful to
worship Images. A reason as if it had been of your making, M. Martial. Ab
ignoratione Elenchi. Therefore the Synod answered, that it was not only an
extreme folly, but a mere madness, to apply the figures of the old law,
which only were made as God devised, and had a secret meaning in them: to the
Images of our time, which every caruer, goldsmyth, and painter make, as their
fansy leads them, to an ill example, and to no good use in the world. But
what should I stand in exaggerating of their folly: I will truly report the
reasons of the one part, and abridge what I can the aunsweres of the other.

Sicut Israeliticus populus, serpentis aenei inspectione seruatus est,
Iconolatra. Car. Mag. Lib. 1. Ca. 18.
Sic nos sanctorum effigies inspicientes, saluabimur. As the people of Israel
was preserved by the loking on the brazen serpent, So we shall be saved by
loking on the Images of Saints, quod the Image worshippers.


The Aunsvvere. They that repose their hope in Images, Iconomachi Romans 8.
are condemned by the Apostle, (quod the fathers of Franckforde Council) Spes
quae videtur, non est spes. That hope which is seen, is no hope. Furthermore,
the brazen serpent was not commanded to be worshipped: therefore the
worshipping of an Image is falsely inferred of it. Thirdely, the brazen serpent
was commanded of God: But no piece of Scripture does bear with Images.


The Reason. Si secundum Mosis traditionem praecipitur populo, Iconolatrae.
Car. Mag. Lib. 1. Ca. 17.
purpura hyacinthina in fimbrijs, in extremis vestimentis poni, ad memoria^ and
custodiam praeceptorum: multo magis nobis est, per adsimulatam picturam
sanctorum virorum, videre exitum conuersationis eorum: and eorum imitari fidem:
secundum Apostolicam traditionem. Which, word for word in english, is thus.
If according to Moses tradition, a purple violet be commanded to the people,
to be put in their purfles and skirtes of their garments, for a memory and
keeping of the commandments: much more must we by the counterfeit picture of
holy men, see the end of their conversation, and imitate their faith according
to the tradion Apostolic.


The Aunsvvere. Iconomachi.
Each part of this argument consists of untruths. First, by corrupting the
Scripture, in calling it a purple violet, whereas purple is one color, and
violet another. Then, by comparing things unlike together, wearing of a
garment, and worshipping of an Image. Thirdely, in alleging a most untruth of
al, that the conversation of holy men is seen in an Image. For faith, hope, and
charity, (which be the chief virtues of Saints) are things invisible: But
Images and pictures are visible. As for imitation, what it ought to be, 1. Cor.
4.
the Apostle shows us, saying: Imitatores mei estote, sicut filij charissimi.
Be ye followers of me as most dear children, 1. Cor. 11.
And in another place. Imitator:s mei estote, sicut and ego Christi. Be ye
followers of me, even as I am of Christ. Whereby it appears, that the
tradition of the Apostles is, to behold the godly conversation of the Saints:
not in pictures, but in virtues: to imitate their faith, not in feigned Imagrie,
but in sincere good works.


The Reason. Iconolatrae. Car. Mag. Lib. 1. Ca. 21.
Jesus naue duodecim lapides statuit, in Dei memoriam. Ergo, licet adorare
statuas. Iosue did set up.xij. stones for a remembrance of God. Therefore it is
lawful to worship stocks and stones.


The Aunsvvere. Iconomachi.
Iosue meant nothing less than to teach the Israelites to worship stones: but
to put them in mind, that they were the stones of the river, that was dried
for them.


The Reason. Iconolatrae. Car. Mag. Lib. 1. Ca. 22.
Nathan adorauit Dauidem. Ergo, nos Imagines. Nathan did worship David,
therefore we may Images.


The Aunsvvere. Nathan did not worship David set forth in colors or painted
on a wall, but a living creature, Iconomachi
set in the throne of Justice, supplying the rowme of God: Wherefore there is
no comparison betwixt them.


The Reason. Signatum est super nos lumen vultus tui Domine. Item. Iconolatrae.
Car. Mag. Lib. 1. Ca. 23. Psalm. 4.
Vultum tuum requiram. Ergo, Imagines sunt adorandae. Thy countenance O Lord is
signed upon us. And. Thy countenance I will seek after. Therefore Images are
to be worshipped.


The Aunsvvere. If these words of David did any thing appertain to Images,
Iconomachi
we might justly enquire what countenance they have, and how this
countenance may be signed in us. The countenance of God, is Christ his son,
to the knowledge of whom, we must aspire by scripture, and not by picture.
Wherefore since the countenance of God, can not be seen in material Images,
which have no eyes: it is to fond, to apply it to Images. In the same Psalm,
the Prophet has: He that desires life, and will see good days, what shall
he do? Pore upon pictures? seek after Images? No. Declinet a malo et faciat
bonu^. Let him refrain from evil, and do the thing that is good.


The Reason. Vultum tuum deprecabuntur omnes diuites plebis. Ergo, Iconolatrae.
Psalm. 44. Car. Mag. Lib. 1. ca. 24.
Imagines sunt adorande. Al ye rich of the people shall make their homage before
thy face: Therefore Images are to be worshipped.


The Aunsvvere. Homage is done before the face of such, Iconomachi
as can both hear and have understanding. Since neither of these is in an
Image, it can not be that by the face of God, is meant an Image.


The Reason. Dilexi decorem domus tuae. Sed Imagines pertinent ad decorem
templorum. Ergo Imagines sunt diligendae. Iconolatrae. Psalm. 26. Car. Mag. Lib.
1. Ca. 28.
I have loved (says David) the beauty of thy house. But Images pertayne to the
beauty of Churches: Therefore Images are to be loved.


The Aunsvvere. Iconomachi
The house of God, is not ye material church, of lime and stone: but the
congregation of faithful people, in whose hearts he dwells: nor the beauty
hereof consists in outward garnishing, but spiritual virtues: not in Imagry,
but in piety. They which renounced the world, and withdrewe themselves from
the sight of evil, had no Images to deck their houses. They dwelt in simple
and vile cotages: And yet they loved the beauty of Gods house: wherefore the
beauty thereof does not consist in Images.


The Reason. Iconolatrae. Car. Mag. Lib. 1. ca. 30. Psalm. 48.
Sicut audiuimus ita vidimus. Ergo Imagines sunt adorandae. As we have heard,
so have we seen, (says David.) Therefore Images are to be worshipped.


The Aunsvvere. Iconomachi
The promises of God, to them that fear him, to be their refuge, help, and
deliverance, were the things that they had heard foretold by the Prophets,
and seen in themselves. And if they had not felt a stronger effect of Gods
power, than a sorry picture could have brought unto them, they should have
continued all the days of their life, in body, slaves: in soul, ignorant.


The Reason. Iconolatrae. Psalm. 74. Car. Mag. Lib. 2. Cap. 1.
Damnantur inimici qui malignantur in sanctis Dei. Ergo, Imagines contemnentes
damnantur. Those enemies that do work evil to the saints of God, are
condemned: Therefore such as despise Images, are condemned.


The Aunsvvere. Iconomachi.
To omit the phrase of Malignantur, for Malum inferunt. What a gross ignorance
was this, to put the Saints of God, for the Sanctuary it self? Wherefore
the Synod answered: The Psalm entreats of such as had spoiled the temple
of Jerusalem: had taken away the furniture thereof, which God had commanded:
What is that to Images? He neither speaks of the Saints of God: nor Images
are the Saints of God.


The Reason. In ciuitate tua, Imagines ipsorum ad nihilum rediges: Ergo,
Iconolatrae. Psalm. 72. Car. Mag. Lib. 2. Ca. 3.
Imagines sunt adorandae. Thou shall bring their Images in thy City to naught:
Therefore Images are to be worshipped


The Aunsvvere. The city of God, sometime is taken for the soul of man,
Iconomachi.
inhabited of God: Sometime for his congregation upon earth. Sometime also for
the heavenly Jerusalem: Augustinus Tom. 8. in Psalm. 72.
As in this place: That as they have defiled the Image of God upon earth: So
their own Images shall not appear in heaven, but be reserved in everlasting
pain.


The Reason. Scriptum est: Exaltate dominum deum nostrum, Iconolatrae. Psalm.
99. Car. Mag. Lib. 2. Ca. 5.
and adorate scabellum pedu^ eius, quoniam sanctus est: Ergo, Imagines sunt
adora^dae. It is written: Exalt the Lord our god, and fall down before his
fotestole, for he is holy: Therefore we must fall down to Images.


The Aunsvvere. It is no proof that Images should be worshipped, Iconomachi.
because it is written, that we should fall down before the fotestole of God.
For we must not esteem his fotestole according to the use of men: nor deem
that God is circumscript with quantity, or needs a thing to bear up his feet
withal. We must not think that any thing is to be worshipped but only God: the
same God that tells what his fotestole is, saying: Caelum mihi seeds, terra
autem scabellum, Psalm. 66. Act. 7.
Heaven is my seat, and the earth my fotestole. But shall we worship the earth
which is the creature of God? No, but as Ambrose says: by the earth is ye
flesh of Christ signified, which he took from the earth. It is therefore leudly
applied to Images, which appertains to the mystical service of our Lord
Christ.


The Reason. Iconolatrae. Psalm. 98. Car. Mag. Lib. 2. Ca. 6.
Scriptum est: Adorate in monte sancto eius: Ergo, Imagines adorande. It is
written. Worship him in his holy hill: Therefore Images are to be worshipped.


The Aunsvvere. Iconomachi
The Prophet says not, The hill is to be worshipped but God to be worshipped in
his holy hill. And if he had said, worship ye hill, yet wise men would have
constred it for God, and not for Images. For the Church it self, the
congregation of faithful people, is that hill of his, that Sion wherein he
dwells: Then in that hill we must not superstitiously worship Images, but
Christ himself the captain of that hill: who to purchase that hill unto him,
vouchsaued not only to take our shape, but in our shape to suffer death.


The Reason. Iconolatrae. Car. Mag. Lib. 2. Ca. 10.
Scribitur in Canticis: Ostende mihi faciem tuam: Ergo, Imagines ostendendae.
It is written in the Canticles: Show me thy face: Therefore Images are to be
showed.


The Aunsvvere. Iconomachi
The Church it is, whom Christ there speaks to: whom sometime he calls a
dove, sometime his fair one, sometime his love. The Church (that is to say)
his elect and chosen, he wills there to rise, that is to say, believe: to
hasten to him, to fructify in good works: to come, that is to say, receive an
everlasting reward. The face of this church is not corporal, but spiritual:
not by proportion of Imagry, but by properties of virtue to be discerned. Then
is it an impudent application, of the face of this church to Images, unless
what soever is there spoken mystically, must be taken carnally.


The Reason. Iconolatrae. Esaias. 19. Car. Mag. Li. 2. Ca. 11.
Erit altar in medio Aegypti: Ergo, Imagines in medio templi. There shall be
an altar (says the Prophet) in the midst of Egypt: Therefore Images in the
midst of the Church.


The Aunsvvere. This prophecy was performed in Christ: Iconomachi.
who in ye midst of Egypt, that is to say, the world, has erected his
altar, his faith and belief, by which we may make our prayers to him.
Stolidum estergo, say they, It is a doltishe part to apply it to Images.


The Reason. Nemo accendit lucernam, and ponit eam sub modio: Ergo,
Iconolatrae. Math. 5. Car. Mag. Li. 2. Ca. 12.
Imagines habendae sunt and colendae luminibus. No man lights a candle, and
puts it under a bushel: Therefore Images must be had and worshipped with
candels.


The Aunsvvere. Ores inconsequens et risu digna. O matter impertinent,
Iconomachi.
and worthy to be laughed at.


The Reason. Ecce virgo concipiet and pariet filium: Iconolatrae. Esaias, 7. Car.
Mag. Li. 4. Ca. 21.
Hanc autem Prophetiam in Imagine nos videntes, videlicet virginem ferentem in
vinis quem genuit, quomodo sustinebimus non adorare and osculari? Behold says
the Prophet, a virgin shall conceive and bring forth a son: And whereas we
behold this prophecy in a picture, seeing a virgin carrying her son in her
arms, how can we forbear but worship it and kiss it?


The Aunsvvere. The perfourmance of this prophecy, Iconomachi
must not be seen in uncertain Images of man's hand, but fastly be fixed in
the heart of man. Nor the mysteries thereof to be sought in pictures, but in
holy scriptures. And as for worshipping or kyssing a senseless thing, who will
presume so to do (say they) Quis tale faciunt perpetrare audebit? Who shall
dare commyt such an heinous fact?


The Reason. Imaginis honor in prima^ forma^ transit: Ergo, Imagines
honorandae. Iconolatrae. Car. Mag. Lib. 3. Ca. 16.
The honor done to an Image, passes into ye first shape after which it was
made. Therefore images are to be honored.


The Aunsvvere. Iconomachi Math. 25.
A strange case, never heard tell of before, never to be proved hereafter.
Christ said not: That which you have done to Images, you have done to me: but
whatsoever you have done to one of these little ones, ye have done to me. Nor
thus he said: He that receives an Image receives me: but he that receives
you (mine Apostles) receives me. Math. 10. 1. Joan. 3.
Nor, Christ his Apostle said: Let us love Images: but love one another.
Wherefore it is a vain dream, contrary to all scripture and reason too, that
honor done to a senseless thing, shall pass to him, that neither peradventure
has the like shape, nor ever is present with it. But if it were possible (as
they falsely affirm) that honor and reverence done to an Image, redoundeth to
the glory of the first sampler: How can we ymagine that Saints are so
ambitious, that they will have such honor done to them? If in the flesh they
did abhor it: In the spirit shall they accept it?


The Reason. Iconolatrae. Car. Mag. Lib. 3. Ca. 17.
Suscipio et a^plector honorabiliter sanctas et venera^das Imagines, secu^dum
seruitiu^ adorationis quod consubstantiali and viuificatrici trinitati emitto;
and qui sic non sentiunt neque glorificant, a sancta, catholica, and Apostolica
ecclesia segrego: and anathemati submitto, and parti, qui abnegauerunt
incarnatam and saluabilem dispensationem Christi very Dei nostri, emitto. I do
receive (quod Constantinus bishop of Constance in Cypres) and honorably
embrace, the holy and reverend Images, according to that service of adoration
and worship which I give to ye Trinity of one substance together, of one
quickening power: And those that think not so, nor glorify them so, I separate
from the holy catholic, and Apostolic Church. I pronounce them accursed, as
such as take part with them that denied the incarnate and saluable
dispensation of Christ our true God.


The Aunsvvere. Iconomachi
O horrible blasphemy, What man in his right wits, would ever say such a
thing, or consent to the saying? that a vile Image, or a blind picture should
be honored, as the eternal and almighty Trinity? That an earthly creature
should have the service, that is only due to the heavenly creator? Who could
abide him, Nauscantem potius quam loquentem, Spuing rather than speaking? What
honest ears would not rather detest, than delight in the hearing of him? It
only suffised his fatherhode to affirm the damnable and shameless heresy. It
only suffiseth to rehearse his absurdities, to make all christians, mislyke
with him and maintainers of such lies and devilish devises. For, suppose that
it were good to have Images: and to honor them. Shall it therefore be made
equivalent with a matter of our faith, without the which we can not be saved?
Shall we be accursed for that which Scripture never taught us? but is direct
contrary against the Scripture? Dominum Deum tuum adorabis, and illi soli
seruies. Thou shall honor the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 6.
and him only shall thou serve.


The Reason. Qui deum timet, honorat omnino, adorat and veneratur, Iconolatre.
Car. Mag. Lib. 3. Ca. 28
sicut filiu^ dei, Christum deum nostrum et signum Crucis eius, et figuram
sanctorum eius. He that fears God, does honor, worship and reverence the
sign of the Cross of Christ, and figure of his saints, no otherwise than the
son of God, even Christ our God.


The Aunsvvere. This is a different phrase, Iconomachi.
a contrary opinion to al ye Scripture. The holy men of God did ever teach the
fear of God, and never taught the service of an Image. Psalm. 111.
David says not: He that fears God, worshippeth Images: but, he that fears
God, greatly delights in his commandments. So that the fear of God
consists not in worshipping of Images, but in obseruaunce of the law of God.
And if none fear God, but the same worship Images, what is become of the
Saints before time, which never had them?


The Reason. Iconolatrae. Car. Mag. Lib. 3 cap. 15.
Imago Imperatoris est adoranda: Ergo, etiam Christi et sanctoru^. The Image of
the Emperor is to be worshipped: Therefore the Image of Christ and his
saints.


The Aunsvvere. Iconomachi.
By that which is of it self unlawful, they go about to confirm a thing more
unlawful. For it is not to be proved that the Image of man is to be worshipped,
yet if that were granted, great odds there is in the comparison. The Emperor
is local: and being in one place, can not be in another: But God is every
where. And to comprise him within the compass of a stone wall, or a little
table, which is all in all: and whole every where: whom the earth contains
not, nor heavens comprehend, is too profane a case: cousyn to infidelity.


The Reason. Iconolatrae. Car. Mag. Lib. 4. cap. 1.
Qui adorat Imaginem, and dicit hoc est Christus, non peccat: Ergo Imagines
adorandae. He that worshippeth an Image, and says: This is Christ, sins
not: Therefore Images are to be worshipped.


The Aunsvvere. Iconomachi.
He that makes a lie, sins: But he that affirms so vile a thing as an
Image is, to be Christ himself, makes an impudent lie: Therefore he that so
says, sins.


The Reason. Iconolatrae. Car. Mag. Li. 2. cap. 29. Cap. 28. and Cap. 30.
Imagines, sacris vasis, Cruci dominicae, and libris Scripture divine,
aequiparantur. Ergo adorandae. Images are comparable with the holy vessels,
with the Cross of Christ, and books of holy Scripture, therefore to be
worshipped.


The Aunsvvere. Iconomachi.
A sort of leude comparisons. For as for holy vessels, they were commanded: So
are not Images. And yet not the vessels commanded to be worshipped. Therefore
to gather a worshipping of Images by them, is folly. Then also the Cross has
wrought miraculous and merciful effects to our salvation: So can Images do
none. And yet by the way, they plainly declare: per Crucem, Car. Mag. Li. 2.
cap. 28.
non lignum illud significari, sed totum opus Christi, and afflictiones piorum:
that by the Cross, there is not signified the piece of wood, but ye whole
work of Christ, and afflictions of the Godly. The Scripture also (by the
inspiration of the holy ghost) was delivered to men, and brings a most
certain commodity with it. Images, as they sprung from error of Gentilitie,
so have they no profit but perverting in them.


The Reason. Jacob erexit lapidem in titulum: Ergo, Imagines adorandae.
Iconolatrae. Car. Mag. Li. 1. cap. 10. Genesis 31.
Jacob took a stone and set it up as a pillar. Therefore Images are to be
worshipped.


The Aunsvvere. Although this be a lubberly reason, Iconomachi.
(to use the term of Charles the great, who plainly called it Rem non
mediocris socordiae,) yet somewhat will I say according to mine author, to show
the difference between Jacobs fact and their affection.

One thing it is, the holy Patriarchs by some notable mark to foreshew things
that were to come: And another, to have an idle workman, to make an image in
remembrance of things past. One thing it is, to be inspired with the holy
Ghost: and a far other, to have the art of caruing or grauing. One thing it
is, to trust to Gods working: and another, to put an occupation in practice.
One thing it is, that Jacob set up a pillar: another that a workman shall set
up an Image


The Reason. Jesus ad Abgarum Imaginem suam misit: Ergo, Iconolatrae Car Mag.
Li. 4. cap. 10.
Imagines adorandae. Jesus sent his Image unto Abgar: Therefore Images are to be
worshipped.


The Aunsvvere. It is no gospel, that Jesus sent his picture unto Abgar.
Iconomachi.
And Gelasius himself sometime Pope of Rome, numbreth both the Epistle, that
Christ is said to have sent unto him, and also the report of the picture,
inter Apocripha, among the writings not received to be red publicly in the
church, nor serving to prove any point of religion: Wherefore the reason is
insufficient.


The Reason. Iconolatrae. Car Mag. Lib 3. Ca. 25.
Images did miracles, and are comparable to the hem of Christ's garment, by the
touching whereof, the woman was healed of her issue of blood: Therefore to be
worshipped.


The Aunsvvere. Iconomachi
That Images did any miracles, is a very lie. Yet if miracles they had done, it
is not enough to prove them to be worshipped.


The Reason. Iconolatrae. Car. Mag. Lib. 3. ca. 21. and Cap. 26. et li. 4. ca.
12.
That they did miracles is proved by examples. The Image of Polemon preserved
one from the act of Adultery. The dream of an Archdeacon whom an Angel in his
sleep commanded to worship an Image. A Monk lighted a candell before the
Image of our Lady, and.v. or.vj. months after he found it burning.


The Aunsvvere. Iconomachi
For the first, there is no reason to induce us, that the tale is true: yet if
it were true, there is no less difference between the miracles of Christ, and
miracles of Polemon, than is between the person of Christ, and person of
Polemon. For the second. It is an unwise and unwonted thing, to confirm by a
dream, a doubtful case. Whether he dreamed it or devised it, there is no
proof at all, no witnesses of the matter. And yet if he so dreamed in deed:
our doubt by good reason, may be no less. But it is well enough: a dronken
devise to be confirmed, with a drowsy dream. As for the third. The
circumstance of the fact it self, the person, the place, the time considered:
we may justly derogate all credit from it. For neither we are assured of the
honesty of him that told the tale: nor it is reported where, or when, or after
what sort it was done. Wherefore it sou^ds so like a lie, that a true man ought
not to believe it. Yet if it were a most certain truth, that a candell
burned.v. or.vj. months together, we ought not to ground thereof an adoration
of a thing unreasonable. Balaams Ass, Number. 22.
opened his mouth to reprove his master, preserved the children of God from
cursing: Shall then the tongue of the Ass, or his tail be honored?

Thus have ye heard how the Nice Council confirmed as they could, by
Scripture and by miracles, not only the having, but worshipping of Images. Ye
have heard in it, how the learned fathers, assembled at Franckforde,
answered their idle and impudent allegations. But least I should seem to
suppress any thing, that in apparaunce makes for our adversary, I will show
what fathers and doctors of the Church Hireneis chaplens brought forth for
the^. First of all Augustine. Who says. Quid est Imago Dei, Iconolatrae.
nisi vultus Dei, in quo signatus est populus Dei? What is the Image of God,
but the countenance of God, in which the people of God is sealed? Therefore
Images are to be worshipped.


The Aunsvvere. The Image of God is Christ his son, Iconomachi
according to Paul Qui est Imago Dei inuisibilis. Which is the Image of the
invisible God. And to apply that, to a stock or a stone, which is peculiar
unto Christ, is horrible. Nor Augustines meaning was so: but as it is euidente
by his own words: Car. Mag. Lib. 2. Ca. 16
he speaking of Christ, whom he calls the Image and countenance of the
father, says, that in him we be sealed, Qui dedit pignus spiritus in cordibus
nostris. Which gave the pledge of his spirit in our hearts, whereby we are
sealed into the right of his children, against the day of redemption.

Then brought they forth an authority out of Gregorius Nyssenus: to which the
Synod answered: Car. Mag. Lib. 2. Ca. 17
that in as much as his life and doctrine was unknown to them, Car. Mag. Li. 2.
cap. 17.
they could not admit his testimony, for approving of a thing in controversy.

Car. Mag. Li. 2. cap. 20.
They alleged also Cyrill upon John, but corrupting his sentence, deprauing
his sense, that as the words were brought unto them, it was as hard to pick
out construction, as to find a pynnes head in a cart load of hey.

Car. Mag. Li. 3. cap. 20.
Likewise they dealt with Chrysostom, alleging that he should say, Vidi
Angelum in Imagine. I saw an Angel in an Image. Whereto was answered, that it
was nothing likely, because Angels are invisible.

Car. Mag. Li. 2. cap. 15.
Nor otherwise with Ambrose: Nam and ipsius sententiam, ordine, sensu,
verbisque, turbarunt. For they troubled his sentence, both in the order, the
sense, and the words. Nor this is my private opinion: The whole Counsel
affirmed it so. And the acts are evident to prove no less.

Car. Mag. Li. 2. cap. 13.
As for the example that they brought of Siluester, how he presented the Images
of the Apostles to Constantinus, it makes nothing for them: He showed him
peradventure pictures to look upon, no Images to adore.

Car. Mag. Li. 3. cap 31.
But I must not forget how they brought an example of a certain Abbot, which
made an oath to the Devil, that he would not worship the picture of Christ, or
of his mother. But afterward he brake his oath, saying, that it was better for
him to haunt all the Brothel houses in the city, than to abstain from
worshipping of Images. I need not to rehearse the Counsels answer to it. There
is no such babe, but sees their heastlinesse. Only their greatest reason, that
does remain is this.


The Reason. Iconolatrae. Car. Mag. Li. 4. cap. 25.
Epiphanius discoursing upon all the sects of heretics, does not accoumpte
them for any, that worship Images. Therefore it is no heresy to worship
Images.


The Aunsvvere. Epiphanius discoursing upon all the sects of heretics, does
not accoumpte them for any that condemn Images. Therefore it is no heresy to
condemn Images. But that ye same Epiphanius, did not only mislike with
worshipping of Images, but also with the having of the^, shall appear
hereafter. It suffiseth now that I have set forth to you the best part of the
acts of the noble Counsel, ye see the learned reasons that they made: the deep
and profou^d judgments: the pyth, the strength, the marowbones of their
matter, wherwyth they did so begrease themselves, that now they shine so
glorious in your eyes. If men had devised matter to mock them wythall, I
suppose they could not have found any, so absurd as they brought with them.
Yet these be they, that represented the state of ye universal Church. These be
they that could not err. These be they that you only depend on. These be the
three hundredth and fyfty bishops, that condemned the three hundredth and eight
and thyrty that were before assembled at Constantinople. These be the Judges,
that gave sentence against the Counsel gathered in Spain. These be the worthy
pillars, that bear up the Cross and Images. And if a man considered by what
spirit they were led, when they came to Nice, he neded not to marvel at ye
strange and horrible success of their doings. For who then bare the sway? Who
did assemble them, but that Athalia that Iesabel Irene: which was so bewitched
with superstition, that al order, al honesty, al law of nature broken, she
cared not what she did, so she might have her Mawmots. She burned her fathers
bones. She murdered her own son. She perverted by violence al order of
lawful Counsel, that she might go a whoring with her Idols still. When
Constantine the fifth, father to her husband Leo, (by marriage of whom, she
most unworthy came to her estate) had lien dead and buried a good while in his
grave, she dug him up: she showed her cruelty on his carcass, she cast his
bones into the fire, and caused his ashes to be thrown into the sea: This did
the good daughter, the defender of Images, because her father, when as yet he
lived, had broken them in pieces, affirming, simplicity rather than
sumpteousnesse, to be most sitting for the Church of Christ. Thus raged she
during the none age of Constantine her son, and made the palace of
Constantinople, a sink of sectaries: a follower of deformed Rome. But when the
Emperor himself (her son) grew to discretion, he trod in his fathers and
grandfathers steps: and did so much mislyke with his mothers Mawmetry, that he
began to bridle her insolent affection: he took the sweard out of her mad
hands, and threw down the monumentes of superstition, which she (with such
diligence and cost) had erected. Whereupon, the malice of her wicked breast
was so incensed, that she spared not to set on fire her own house: to conspire
the death of her own child: only to maintain her Images in the Church.
Therefore she not only forgate her duty to her Prince, her love to her son,
but she joined with a sort of cut throtes: she utterly cast of the nature and
condition of a woman: she became more savage than a wild beast. For beside that
she craftily betrayed the Emperor, she traitorously bereued him of his
inheritance the crown: she most unwomanly scratched out the eyes of the same
her own son: she most abhominably cast him into prison: most detestably at
length she murdered him. Thus was the living for the dead, the Prince for a
puppet: the natural child destroyed for the naked unnatural use of Imagry.
And to declare the wrath of God justly deserved for this execrable fact,
Eutropius reports thus: Obtenebratus est sol per dies septemdecim, and non
dedit radios suos, ita vt errarent naues maris, omnesque dicerent, quod propter
excaecationem Imperatoris, sol obcaecatus, radios suos retraxerit. The sun
was darkened for xvij. days, and gave not forth his light: so that the ships
of the sea wandered, and all men affirmed, that for the putting out of the
Emperors eyes, the son being blinded, wythdrew his beams. The cause of which
terrible and strange effect: the only practiser of all the foresaid outrages, was
only that Irene, that president of Nicene council: for that only cause, for
which she gathered that conspiracy together. And when she saw, that without
extorcion and violence, she was not able to compass her wicked enterprise, she
fell to tyranny: she stopped the mouths of her adversary part: and either
banished them out of the way, or kept them in such hold, that they should not
hurt her. And was not this a goodly counsel then? The cause so unlawful? The
caller so horrible? The parties so beastly? The order so unconscionable? Brag,
Folio. 41. b.
as ye please, of your Nice council. Undoubtedly they gave unwise counsel.
Nor it rested in them, to bind or loose in heaven what they would. They did
not answer ye points of their commission, therefore they had not ye effect of
power. Which thing considered, I trust you will detest their simplety: who for a
picture, have defaced Scripture: who for a fansy of their own brain, have
fallen into a fre^sy of to much superstition: apparelling their Idols with
garments of Gods service, and cloking their Idolatry with a face of true
worshipping. Now that I have battered about your ears this your Ajax shield,
which ye thought to use as a special defense the name of councils, general,
and prouincial, of which, some do make nothing for you, the rest ought not to
have authority with any: let me now, I say, descend unto your doctors. Ambrose
affirms that a Church can not stand, Sermon. 56. Folio. 42. a. Ambrose.
without a Cross. And thereupon ye infer, that a Cross must needs be in the
Church. I grant ye, Master Martial: and yet have ye gained nothing. For
though he speak, of the sign of a Cross, yet it restes to be proved yt he
meant of your Cross: he makes many mysteries of the Cross: as ye hoysed
sail, the earyng plow, the blowing winds from each quarter of the earth, the
lifted up hands of ye faithful people: and every one of these, according to
Ambrose his allegation is a very Cross. Then may ye have any one of these,
and have a Cross: yea impossible it is almost to do any thing, but that ye
shall have the sign of a Cross. Hiero. in. 15. Marci.
Aues quando volant ad aethera, forma^ crucis assumu^t: homo natans per aquas,
velorans, forma crucis vehitur: Nauis per maria antenna, cruci assimilata
sufflatur. As Hierome says: when the birds fly into the air, they take the
form of a Cross. A man when he swymmeth in the water, or prays, is carried
after ye manner of a Cross. The ship in the sea, is blown forward with the
sayleyard, hanging Cross wise at the mast. Also Arnobius, answering the
heathen, that in despyte laid unto the Christians charge, Libro. 8.
that they honored Crosses, said plainly: Cruces nec colimus, nec optamus.
Crosses we neither worship, nor wysh for. But on the contrary side, he proved,
yt they had as many Crosses, as the Christians. For, their banners and
ensigns, what were they but gilded and adorned Crosses: Their spoils of
enemies carried on the spears point, the noble signs of their valiant
victory, represented not only the fashion of a Cross, but also the Image of a
man nailed on it. So that the sign of a Cross is naturally seen in the ship
sailing: the ploughe earing: the man praying. And among the rest, I think (as
you say) that there is no Church can stand without it. For unless ye have
the Cross beams and the Cross pyllers, with one piece of timber shut into an
other, (which is the very sign of a Cross) I can not tell, how the building
can abide. But what is this to your Roode and Crucifix, or to a sign drawn
with a finger? If a Cross be so necessary, the^ look on the roofes and walls
of your houses, and there shall ye find as substantial a Cross, as in the
Roode loft or upon the altar. If the sign of a Cross must needs be
worshipped (as you in every place do teach) then by Ambrose his reason, we are
as well bound to adore and worship the sail of the ship: the plough of the
field: the winds of the air, and the arms of a man. For in the same place
alleged by you, where the Cross is extolled, these signs are mentioned: Hoc
dominico signo scinditur mare, terra colitur, caelum regitur, homines
couserua^tur. By this sign of our Lord, the sea is cut: ye la^d is plowed: the
sky is ruled: and men be preserved. Yea the very effects that you do
attribute to the Church Cross, S. Ambrose ascribes to the mast of a ship: and
yet no man did ever crouch unto it, unless it were to keep him from the
wether. Wherefore your ignorance or unfaithfulness, is too apparent, in that ye
father the words of Ambrose: If a Church lack a Cross, by and by the devil
does disquiet it, and the vvynd does squat it (for his words be these) Cu^ a
nautis scinditur mare, prius ab ipsis arbor erigitur, velu^ distenditur, vt
cruce domini facta, aquaru^ fluenta rumpantur: and hoc dominico securi signo
portum salutis petunt, periculu^ mortis euadunt. Figura enim sacrame^tiquaedam
est, velum suspensu^ in arbore, quasi Christus sit exaltatus in cruce, atque
ideo confidentia de mysterio veniente, Folio. 42.
homines ventorum pro cellas negligunt, peregrinationis vota suscipiu^t. Sicut
aute^ Ecclesia sine cruce stare non potest, ita and sine arbore, nauis infirma
est. Statim enim diabolus inquietat, and illa^ ventus allidit. At vbi signum
crucis erigitur statim and diaboli iniquitas repellitur, and ventorum procella
sopitur. The English is this: when the sea is forovved of the mariners, first
they hoise up the mast, and spread abroad the sail, that the Lord his Cross
being made, the waves of the water may be broken: and they (secure with the
sign of our Lord) rech unto the haven of health, and escape the danger of
death. For the sail hanging upon the mast, is a certain figure of an holy
sign. As if that Christ were exalted on the Cross: and therefore through
confidence of the mystery, conning men do not care for the storms of vvyndes,
they undertake their appointed pilgrimage. And as a Church can not stand
without a Cross: So is a ship vveake without a mast. For straight the devil
does disquiet it, and the vvinde squat it: but where the sign of the Cross
is hoysed up, the iniquity of the devil is dryue^ back, and tempest of vvinde
is calmed. Whereupon I beseech you does he infer, (the devil does disquiet and
vvinde squat it?) not upon ye mention of a ship, without a mast? whereupon did he
talk? of the Church Cross, or ye ship Cross? If the mast of the ship did no
more preserve and save the vessel, than the Crucifix on the altar, or Cross in
the roodlofte can do the Church: neither should the ship, be preserved in ye
water, nor the Church at any time be consumed with the fire. We neded not to
fear (if your opinion were true) the burning any more of Paul's. Make a Cross
on the steple, and so it shall be safe. But within these few years it had a
Cross, and relics in the bowl, to boot: yet they prevailed not: yea the
Cross it self was fyred first. Wherefore S. Ambrose his rule (as you most
fondly do take him) holds not. If ye say yt his rule does hold
notwtstanding, because Paul's was burned in the time of schism: I answer, yt
in your most catholic time, ye like plague happened, twice within the compass
of.l. years: and therefore S. Ambrose was not so foolysh, to mean as you
imagine. As for Lacta^tius Lacta^tius.
(whose verses ye bring to confirm the use of a Roode in the Church) I might
say with Hierom. Vtinam tam nostra potuisset co^firmare, Ep ad Paulinum. In
Hieremia^. 10.
quam facile aliena destruxit. I would to God he had been able as well to have
confirmed our doctrine and religion, as he did easily overthrow the contrary.
For many errors and heresies he had, among the which, I might reken this:
flecte genu lignumque crucis venerabile adora, bow down thy knee, and do honor
to the worshipful wood of the Cross. For upon the word of ye Prophet Hieremy
Lignum de saltu pracidit He has cut a tree out of the forest, S. Hierom
takes occasion to speak of the Gentiles Idols, adorned with gold and silver,
of who^ it is said: Psalm. 113.
A mouth they have, and speak not: ears they have and hear not. And least it
might be thought, that the making and honoring of such, appertayned peculiarly
unto ye heathen, he said: Qui quidem error, ad nos vsque transiuit. Which error
in deed, has come over unto our age. And the^ infers this. Quicquid de
Idolis diximus, ad oi^a dogmata quae sunt co^traria veritati referri potest. Et
ipsi enim ingentia pollice^tur, and simulachru^ vani cultus de suo cord
co^fingunt. Imperitorum obstringunt acte^ and a suis inuentoribus sublimantur.
In quibus nulla est vtilitas, and quoru^ cultura proprie gentium est, and eorum
qui ignorant deum. Which words are in English these. Whatsoever we have
spoken of Idols, may be referred unto al doctrines contrary to the truth. For
they also do promise great things, and devise an Image of vain worship, out
of their own heart. They blind the eye of the ignorant, and by the inuenters of
them, are set a loft. In which there is no profyt, and the worshipping of
which, is an heathenish obseruaunce, and a manner of such, as know not God.
Wherefore the words alleged by you (as out of Lactantius) suffised to
discredit him, because he will have a piece of wood to be worshipped. Omitting al
his other errors, and that Gelasius the Pope in consideration of many his
imperfections rekeneth his books inter Apocripha, such as may be read, and no
doctrine be grounded on. But I will answer to you otherwise: disprove it, if
you can. I verily suppose, that those verses were never written by Lactantius.
The causes that induce me to this, are these: In catalogo.
S. Hierom making mention of al his wrytinges, (yea of many more than are come
unto our hands) makes no mention of this. Again, Churches in his time were
scarcely builded: for he lived in the reign of Dioclesian: by whom he was
called into Nicomedia as Hierom writes. Afterward when he was very old, he
was scholemaster to Crispus, Co^stantinus so^n, and taught him in France. Now
in the reign of Dioclesian, the poor Christians had in no country any place
at al, whether they might quietly resort, and stand still a while loking on
the Roode, Folio. 43.
with his arms stretched, hands nailed, feet fastened. They had neither
leisure nor liberty, to be at such idle cost. They contented themselves with
poor cabanes, whereto they secretly resorted, and yet notwtstanding had them
pulled on their heads. Eusebius writing of ye persecution under Dioclesia^,
Lib. 8. ca. 2.
says: Oratoria a culmine ad pauime^tu^ vsque, vna cum ipsis fu^dame^tis
deijci, diuinasque and sacras scripturas in medio foro igni tradi, ipsis oculis
vidimus. We saw with our eyes, yt the oratories, (he calls the^ not temples,
for so they were not) were utterly thrown down, from yt top, to ye ground: yea with
the very fou^datio^s of the^: and yt the sacred and holy Scriptures, in ye
mydst of the market place, were committed to ye fire. The^ was it no time for
them, to make Images of Christ, whose faith (without peril) they could not
profess: nor solemnly to set up Roodes, where privately they had no place
thereto. And this was in the most flourishing time of Lacta^tius Yea afterward,
in ye beginning of Co^sta^tinus reign, Maximinus gave license first, ye
Christians might build Dominica oratoria. The Lords places of prayer And ye
first temple yt Co^sta^tinus built, was at Jerusalem ye.xxx. year of his
reign: wherefore me thinks impossible it is, that Lactantius should write:
Eus. lib. 9. cap. 10. Sozom. li. 2. cap. 26.
Quisquis ades medijque subis in limi na templi with the rest of ye verses
rehearsed by you. Then how different ye doctrine is, both from that which
himself teaches, and generally was received in his days, ye lewd verse.
(Flecte genu lignu^que crucis venerabile adora) shows: for in his boks he
plainly affirms, Diui. Insti. li. 2. ca. 1. cap. 9. Diui. Inst. lib. 2 ca 19.
yt no man ought to worship any thing on the earth. And further he says, yt
whosoever will retain the nature and condition of a man, must seek God aloft:
in heaven not in earth: in heart, not in workma^ship of hand. His argument is
this. Si religio ex diuinis rebus est, diuini aute^ nihil est, nisi in
celestibus, rebui, care^t ergo religione simulachra: quia nihil potest esse
caeleste in ea re, quae fit ex terra. If religion consist of holy things and
there be nothing holy but in heavenly things, then Images are void of
religion, because in that thing, which is made of ye earth, there ca^ be nothing
heavenly. You will grant me now, yt a Roode is made of some earthly matter, of
stone, or timber. The^ does Lacta^tius repute it unholy, and to have no
religion at al in it. And will he have us to bow ye knee to adore and worship an
unholy thing, a thing of no religion? Eusebius Eusebius.
living in ye same age, and somewhat after him, thought it a strange case, to
see an Image stand in Caesarea, Folio. 8.
which image notwtstanding, was not yet crept into ye Church: as in ye preface
I have approved. Furthermore Arnobius Arnobius.
scholemaster to Lacta^tius, has a number of places to disprove this
assertion. For he tells, how ye Infidels laid to ye Christians charge,
Aduersus gentes. li. 8.
that they hyd him, who^ they honored, because they had neither temples nor
altars. But he shows what temples they had erected then, in nostra ipsoru^
dedica^du^ me^te, in nostro imo co^secrandu^ pectore. To be dedicate to him in
our own mind, consecrate to him in ye bottom of our breast. Whereupon he
infers. Quem colimus Deu^, nec ostendimus nec videmus: imo ex hoc Deum
credimus, quod eum sentire possumus, videre non possumus. The God that we
worship, we neither show nor see, but rather by this, we believe him to be God,
because we can feel him, but we ca^ not see hi^. Yea to go no further, tha^ to
ye cross it self, to ye Roode that ye talk of. Arnobius affirms plainly.
Cruces neo colimus, nec optamus: vos plane qui ligneos deos consecratis, cruces
ligneas, vt deoru^ vestroru^ parts forsitan adoratis. We neither worship nor
wysh for Crosses: you yt cosecrate wodden Gods, peradventure worship the wodden
Crosses, as parts of your Gods. Whereby is evident, as well by ye undoubted words
of Lacta^tius himself, as otherwise by ye testimony of. S. Hierom, and witness
of Eusebius, and doctrine of Arnobius: first yt the verses should not seem to
be his. The^ yt by all likelyhode there were no Churches in Lacta^tius his time,
and therefore no Roodes in Churches. Thirdly, yt no holiness, no religion is in
any earthly matter, and therefore in no Roode. Lastly, yt neither crosses nor
crucifixes, were either worshipped, or wished for: but yt it was thought a mere
ge^tility, to bow down unto the^. As for S. Augustine. Ser. 19. de sanctis,
Augusstine. Folio. 43.
he speaks nothing else, but of the mystery of the Cross, as you your self
allege: Crucis mysterio, basilicae dedicantur: By the mystery of the Cross
(and not by the sign of the Cross, as you do ignorauntly translate it)
Churches are dedicated. Now you be to learn, what is a mystery: learn it of
Chrysostom, Chrisostomus. in. 1 ad. cor. ca. 2. Ho. 7. b
who says: Mysteriu^ appellatur, quonia^ non id quod credimus intuemur, sed
quod alia videmus, alia credimus. It is called a mystery, because we see not,
that which we believe, but that we see one thing, and believe another. Then is it
not the sign (which you do take for the material thing) but the mystery, that
makes the dedication: not the thing that we see, but yt which we believe: the
death of Christ, which in the congregation he will have showed, until his
coming. 1. Cor. 11.
As for the lifting up of a coople of fingers which you do call a benediction,
or the material Cross set up at dedication, they be nothing profitable, without
the mystery: but with the mystery, they be very perilous: nor we do read, yt
ever Augustine (although he mentions the Cross often) does ever speak of a
man's Image on it, with side wounded, and body bludded. Cruce^ nobis in memoria^
suae passionis reliquit, he says, he has left us the Cross in remembrance
of his passion. But so immediately in the same se^te^ce upon the same words, he
infers also. Cruce^ reliquit, ad sanitate^: he has left us a Cross, for
our health. But as the sign of ye Cross, is no ordinary mean whereby God
uses to confer health upon the sick: so has he not ordained it to remain in
the Church, for any remembrance of his death and passion. His word he left
us, to put us in mind hereof: and to the end our eyes might have somewhat
still to feed upon, that Christ might never be forgotten of us, he has left
among us the lively members of his own body: the poor, the naked, the
comfortless Christians, who being always subject to the Cross, might both
excite our thankfulness toward him, and prepare our selves the better for the
Cross. As for the roode, and Crucifixe on the altar, which have hands
nailed, arms stretched out, fete pierced, with a great wound in the side, and
a bloody stream issuing out, they may well be compared to the Gentiles Idols:
Which have mouths, and speak not: eyes, and see not. You will answer (I dare
say) that ye know well enough, the Cross is nothing, but a piece of metal: And
he that hangs in the Roode loft, is not Christ in deed, but a sign of him:
So did the heathen know, that al their Idols were silver and gold, the work
of men's hands: yet ye holy ghost did often tell them of it, as if they had
forgotten it: because that the lyuelyer the counterfeit is, the greater error is
engendered. Some of the Gentiles would excuse their Idolatry, by alleging: that
they did not honor the matter visible, but ye power invisible, as Augustine in
ye person of the Idolater does say: No^ hoc visibile colo, sed nume^ quod illic
inuisibiliter habitat, I worship not the thing that I see, In psa. 113.
but the power that I see not and dwells therein. So among the Christians,
some have been so fond, through making of Images, and applying the shape of man
or woman to them, that they have thought greater virtue to rest in one, tha^ in
another: and therefore from one, would resort to another. But by the censure of
S. Augustine, the Apostle condemns them al, saying: Non quod Idolu^ sit
aliquid, 1. Cor. 10.
sed quonia^ quae immolant gentes, demonijs immolant, and no^ deo: and nolo vos
socios fieri demoniorum. Not that the Idol is any thing: but that these
things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not unto
God: And I would not that ye should have fellowship with the devils. Therefore in
the Christian I may justly say, that the opinion it self of holiness in an
Image, is very devilish. But you, M. Martial, have a better evasion: ye
ascribe not so much to the substance it self, Fol. 41. a.
and matter of an Image, but with the Nice masters ye use it to this end: that
ye may come to the remembrance, and desire of the first sampler and pattern
which it resembles and withal, you exhibit some courtesy and reverend honor
to it, because honor and reverence done to an Image, redoundeth to the glory of
the first sampler: and he that adoreth and honoreth an Image, does adore and
honor that, which is resembled by the Image. So did the Gentiles cloak their
Idolatry, as Augustyne plainly reports. Yet were they nothing the less
Idolatrers. For this he says of them. In psa. 113.
Videntur autem sibi purgatioris esse religionis, qui dicunt nec Simulachrum,
nec daemonium colo, sed per effigie^ corporalem, eius rei signum intueor, quam
coiere debro. They seem to be of more pure religion, which say: I neither
worship the Image, nor the power thereof, but by the corporal likeness, I
behold the sign of the thing, which I ought to worship. Yet notwithstanding,
because they called their Idols by the names of Vulcanus and Venus, as we our
Images, by the name of Christ, and of our Lady: because they did, some outward
reverence to their Idols, as we unto our Images: both for them and us, as
Augustyne says: Apostoli vna sententia poenam damnationemque testatur. One
sentence of the Apostle, witnesses our punishmente and condemnation. And what
sentence is that? Qui transmutauerunt veritatem Dei in mendatium, and colurunt
and seruierunt creaturae potius quam creatori, qui est benedictus Deus in
secula. Which turned the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served
the creature, forsakyng the creator, which is the blessed God for evermore. But
how is the truth turned to a lie, and the creature rather served than the
creator? It follows in the place alleged: Effigus a fabro factas, appellando
nominibus earum rerum quas fabricauit deus, transmuta^t veritatem Dei in
me^datium res autem ipsas pro dijs habe^do and venerando, seruiunt creaturae,
potius quam creatori. By calling the pictures made of the workman, by the name
of those things which God has made, they change the truth of God into a lie:
And when they repute and worship the things themselves, as Gods, they serve
the creature, rather than the creator: Wherefore Augustine noted very well,
that Paul (priore part sententiae simulachra da^nauit, posteriori autem
interpretationes simulachrorum) in the first part of his sentence condemned
Images, and in the latter, the interpretation and meaning of them. So that if
your cause be all one with the Gentiles, and excuse one: and yet both of them
condemned by the Scripture and convinced by authority: It follows that no
Roode, nor Crucifixe in the Church, ought to be suffered: for it is Idolatrye.
Of the same metal that the Cross is made, we have the candlestickes, we have
the censors: yet they which most do think yt God is served with candlestickes
and censors, attribute not yt honor unto them, yt they do to the Cross. What
is ye cause? S. Augustine declares. Illa causa est maxima impietatis insanae,
quod plus valet in affectibus miseroru^, similis viue^ti forma, quae sibi
efficit supplicari, quam quod eam manifestu^ est no^ esse uiuentem, vt debeat a
viuente contemni. Plus enim valent simulachra ad curua^da^ in foelice^ anima^,
quod os habe^t, oculos habent, aures habent, nares habe^t, manus habe^t, pedes
habent, quam ad corrigenda^ quod non loquentur, non videhunt, non audient, no^
odoraba^t, no^ co^trectabuut, non ambulabunt. This is the greatest cause,
says he, of this mad impiety, that the lively shape preuayleth more with the
affections of miserable men, to cause reverence to be done unto it: than the
plain sight, that it is not living is able to work, that it be contemned of
the living. For Images are more of force to crook an unhappy soul, in that
they have mouths, eyes, ears, nosthrels, hands and feet: Then otherwise to
strayghten, and amend it, in that they shall not speak, they shall not see,
they shall not hear, they shall not smell, they shall not handell, they shall
not walk. And so far Augustine. Which words might utterly dehorte us from
Imagery: and drive both the Roode and the Cross out of the Church, Psa. 134.
if we were not such as the Prophet speaks of, become in most respect like
them. For with open and feling eyes: but with closed and dead minds, we
worship, neither seeing, nor living Images. More could I cite, as well out of
him, as out of the rest before alleged, for confirmation of this truth of
mine. I could send you to the.4. book of Aug. de ciuit. Dei. ca. 31. Where he
commends the opinion of Varro, that affirmed, God might be better served
without an Image than with one. I could allege his book de haeres. ad Quod
yult deu^. Where he me^tioneth one Marcellina, whose heresy he accompteth to be
this: yt she honored ye pictures of Christ, and other. I could refer you to
his book. de Con. Euan. Li. 1. Ca. 10. where he says. Omnino errare
merueru^t, qui Christu^ no^ in sa^ctis codicibus, sed in pictis parietibus,
quaesicru^t. They have been worthy to be deceived, yt have sought Christ, not
in holy books, but in pai^ted walls. These I say, with diverse other, I could
bring forth, but yt I think that this suffiseth, to prove that ye fathers were
not so fo^dly in this case affected, as you would have it appear to other.
Folio. 4 4.
Concerning Paulinus, I will not greatly contend with you: but that in his
days, which was.448. year after Christ, there was in some Churches the sign
of the Cross erected. Epi. 3. ad. Aprium.
But as I said before, it suffiseth not to say: This was once so. But proved
it must be, that This was well so; Paulinus commends ye woman, yt separated
her self from her own husband, without consent, under cloak of religion. And
has the word of God the less force therefore, which says: Whom God has
coupled together, Mat. 19. Ad Cithe. rium.
let no man put a su^der? Paulinus affirms; that the book of the Epistles
which the Apostles wrote, laid unto diseases headeth them: and shall we think
that in vain it is, that the Lord has created medicines of the earth? Eccle.
38.
He that is wise will not abhor the^. He that will follow whatsoever has been,
is a very fool. I know that Iustinia^ takes order (which is yet but
politic) that no man build a Church or monastery, but (as reason is) by
consent of the bishop: and that the bishop shall set his mark, which (by his
pleasure) should be a Cross. But what is this say I, to the Roode or
Crucifix, in places consecrate, where God is served? The same answer that I
made before to the Synod which was kept at Orleance, may serve to this
Emperoures constitution: although it be not prejudicial to truth, if he that
lived, by your wise computatio^ a thousand year after Christ, in deed five
hundredth and thirty, at the least in time of great ignorance and barbaritie,
In catalogo post prefatione^. Folio. 45.
should enact a thing contrary to a truth: Yet to say the truth, I see no
cause why I should not admyt his grave authorite, since he neither speaks of
Roode, nor Crucifix, nor yet of mystical sign on the forehead: which are the
only matters, that you take in hand to prove. Loath would we be to cite him
for our part (inasmuch as we depe^de not upon men's judgments) unless he
spoke consonant unto the Scriptures: and brought better reason for other
matters with him, than you or any other allege for ye Cross. For the truth
of an history, we admyt him as a witness for us: for establishing of an error,
we will not admyt him or any other, to be a judge against us. It suffiseth you
to use the name of Justinian, how small soever the matter be to purpose. But I
will bring you for one, two, that (not in doutful speech, but in plain terms
and under grievous pain) have decreed in all their seigniories and countries, a
direct contrary order unto yours. Not, that there was no Cross the^ used
(which might well answer Justinians case) but yt there should not be used any.
Petrus Crinitus ex libris Augustalibus. De honesta disc. lib. 9. cap. 9.
Does make mention of the law: the same which Valens and Theodosius concluded
on. His words be these: Valens and Theodosius Imperatores, praefecto
Praetorio, ad hunc modum scripsere: Cum sit nobis cura diligens in rebus
omnibus superni numinis religionem tueri, signam saluatoris Christi, nemini
quidem concedimus coloribus, lapide, aliaue materia fingere, insculpere, aut
pingere, sed quocu^que loco reperitur, tolli tubemus grauissima poena eos
mulcta^do, qui co^trarium decretis nostris and imperio, quicquam tentauerint.
Valens and Theodosius Emperors, wrote on this sort to their lieftenant: Whereas
in all things, we have a dilligent care to maintain ye religion of God above: we
grant liberty to none, to cou^terfet, engraue, or paint, ye sign of our
Savior Christ, in colors, stone or any other matter: but wheresoever any such
be found, we command it to be taken away: most grievously punishing such, as
shall attempt any thing, contrary to these our decrees and commandment. Here
is another manner of order taken, than out of any writing of received author,
ca^ justly be alleged for your part. In Cathech. suo.
So yt with Erasmus I may justly say, yt not so much as man's constitution does
bind, ye Images should be in Churches. Ye see (M. Martial) I have not
co^celed any one of your authorities. I have omitted no piece of proof of
yours, and yet authority being rightly sca^ned, does make so much against you,
yt your proufes be to no purpose at al. Folio. 46. a,
As for ye use of yt, which you call, the Church and is in deed ye Sinagoge of
Satan, I need as little to cumber the readers with refuting of, as you do
meddle with approving of it. Only this will I say, that ever since Siluesters
time, such filth of Idolatry and superstition has flowed into ye most parts
of al Christendom, out of ye sink of Rome, that he neded in deed as many eyes
as Argus, that should have espied any piece of sincerity: until ye time, yt
such (as your worship and wisdom according to your catholic custom when ye
scalding spirit of scolding comes upon you call heretics and nuscrea^tes)
began to reform the decayed state, Folio. 46. b,
and bring things to ye order of ye Church primitive and Apostolic. Decr. 1.
part did. 3. parag veritate.
Wherefore if ye stick upon a custom, consider your decree, Nemo consuetudinem
rationi and veritati praeponat, quia co^suetudine^, ratio and veritas semper
excludit. Let no man prefer custom before reason and truth: because reason and
truth always excludes custom. Parag. qui contempta.
And in ye same distinction out of Augustine is alleged this: Qui co^te^pta
veritate, praesumit co^suetudine^ sequi, aut circa fratres inuidus est and
malignus, quibus veritas reuelatur: aut circa deum ingratus est, inspiratione
cuius ecclesia eius instruitur. Na^ dominus in Euangelio: Ego sum inquit
veritas: no^ dixit, Ego sum co^suetudo. Itaque veritate manifestata, cedat
consuetudo veritati: quia and petrus qui circu^cidebat, cessit Paulo veritatem
praedicanti, igitur cu^ Christus veritas sit, magis veritatem quam
consuetudine^ sequi dedemus: quia consuetudinem ratio and veritas semper
excludit. He that presum^^ (says Augustine) to follow custom, the truth
contemned, either is envious and hateful against his brethren, De baptis.
paruulorum
to whom the truth is reveled: or unthankful unto God, by whose inspiration
his Church is instructed. For our Lord in ye gospel said: I am ye truth. He
fayd not: I am custom. Therefore, when ye truth is opened, let custom give
place to truth: for even Peter that circumcised, gave place to Paul when he
preached a truth. Wherefore since Christ is the truth, we ought rather to follow
truth, than custom: because reason and truth always excludes custom. Then
be not offended good sir, I pray you, if following better reason, than you have
grace to consider: more truth, tha^ is yet reveled to you, we refuse your
catholic scisme and impiety. Be not spiteful to the^, yt know more than your
self. Be not ingrate to God, yt in these latter days to knowleage of his word,
has sent more abounda^ce of his holy spirit: dwell not upon your custom.
Bring truth, and I will thank you. Speak reason, and I will credit you. No^
annoru^ canities est laudanda sed moru^, Ambros. in epi. ad Theo. and valent.
Folio. 64. b In orat. funebri de chitu. Theodo. Lib. 5. ca. 20,
nullus pudor est ad milior a transire. Not ye aucie^ty of years but of manners
is co^me^dable, no shame it is to pass to better. The tale of ye superstitious
(whom you call virtuous lady) Helena, I shall speak more of, in ye eight
Article. Certain it is, ye superstitious she was, as is proved afterward in ye
eight Article, who would gad on pilgrimage to visit sepulchers etc. Likewise
Co^stantinus her son, was not thoroughly reformed. For as Theodorete
Theodoretus. Lib. 5 ca. 20.
reports: after he came to Christianity fana non subuertit: he overthrew not
ye places of Idol worshippinges. Wherefore it is no marvel, if they building
Churches, should have some piece of Ge^tilitie observed, a Cross or a Roode
loft. Yet where mention is made, that Helena did find the Cross, we find not
at all, that she worshipped the Cross, Ambros. de obitu. Theodosij.
but rather the contrary. For Ambrose says. Inuenit titulum, regem adorauit,
no^ lignum vtique, quia hic Ge^tilis est error, and vanitas impiorum. She
found the title: she worshipped the king: not the wood pardie: for this is an
error of Ge^tilite, and vanity of the wicked. And where we read, Euse de vita
Constable. lib. 4.
that Constantinus the great, for his miraculous apparition and good success,
did greatly esteem ye Cross, graued it in his men's armures, and erected it in
the market place: yet we never read, that he made a Roodeloft, or placed the
Cross upon the altar. And think ye that Eusebius would have forgotten this,
which did remember far smaller matters, if any such thing, of a truth had been?
Wherefore, whatsoever you deem of other, or whatsoever your own wisdom be,
your supposal in this case, is neither true nor lykely to be true. Peradventure
ye suppose, yt your hot interrogations of Shall we think? Folio. 47.
and constant asseuerations of No man of vvisdome can think, will make us by
and by yield unto a lie. But we are no children: we are not to be feared with
rattels: ye must bring better matter than your own thinking, and sou^der
proufes than Siluester his writing, or else your Cross shall be little cared for.
We know what idle tales and impudent lies, of Constantines donation, Peter and
Paul's apparition, with such other like, are in the decrees, ascribed to
Siluester. And thence ye fetch your authority, that Constantine made a
Church, in honor of. S. Paul, and set a Cross of gold upon his cophyne, Folio.
47.
vvayghing an hundredth and fifty pound vveyght. O what an oversight was this
in Eusebius, that writing his life, auauncing his acts, suppressed such a
notable and famous piece of work? O what a escape was this of Sozomenus, that
making mention of his little chapel, forgot the great Church? But as the
Prophet says: Hiere. 10,
an Image is a teacher of lies: so must your Imagery be defended with lies, or
else they will fall to naught. I perceive ye be driven to very narow shifts,
when ye bring the authority of a bishop of Orleance, to auouche the auncientie
of ye sign of a Cross. Sweet flowers be rare where nettels be so made of. But
alas what has he, that furthereth your cause? Take away the term of
Legitimus, whereby he calls it a lawful custom, and I will not contend for
any piece of his assertion. I know that it crept not into the Church first in
the time of Charles, to have the sign of the Cross used. I know the custom
received in some places, was three hundredth year elder than he. Yet not
without contradiction at any time. Wherefore in this and such other cases, where
either against ye universal Scripture, a custom general is pretended, or a
private custom, without the word established: let the rule of S. Augustine
take place rather. Omnis talia que neque sanctaru^ scripturaru^ authoritatibus
continentur, nec in concilijs episcoporum statuta inueniuntur, Epist. 119.
nec consuetudine universe ecclesie rob^^atu sunt, sed diuersorum locorum
diuersis moribus innumerabiliter variantur ita, vt vix aut omnino nunquam
inueniri possint cause, quas in eis instituendis homines secuti sunt, vbi
facultas tribuitur, sine vlla dubitatione resecanda existimo. As such things
as neither are contained in the authorities of holy Scriptures, nor are found
enacted in counsels of ye bishops, nor are confirmed by custom of ye universal
Church, but according to the diverse orders of diverse places, innumerably do
vary, so that the causes, may scant; or not at all be found, whereby men were
induced to ordain them and I think yt they ought without all controversy be
cut away. Then since the sign of the Cross of Christ, is not commanded in
holy Scripture: since no more councels have confirmed the use of it, then have
condemned it: finally since the universal Church never has received it, but
only some private places where the great Antichrist of Rome prevailed: nor they
themselves able to allege a just and lawful cause of this their ordinance and
will worship: I conclude and say, that the sign of ye Cross, out of al
Churches, chapels, and oratories, out of all places, deputed peculiarly to God
his service, ought to be removed.


To the fourth Article.
ANd whereas ye be now, beaten from the walls of your greatest forte, and run
into the castle: ye leave of meddeling with Roode or Crucifix, and fall to
defense of the sign mystical: I must lay some battery to this hold of yours,
and I fear me not, but I shall fire you out. That ceremonies were of old
received in the Church, and among the rest, the sign of the Cross drawn with
a finger, I deny not, I do confess. When men were newly converted from
Paganism, and each man was hot in his profession: the Christian would not only
with his heart belief, and tongue confession, show what he was, but also in despyte
of his masters enemies, declare by some outward sign and by Crossing of
himself, testify to the world, yt he was not ashamed of Christ crucified.
Hereof have I witness Tertullian in Apologetico, and in his book de corona
militis. Whereupon the fathers of a zeal and devotion, admitted (almost in all
things) this sign of the Cross: received it into God his service, as a
laudable ceremony, and wyshed al men to use it. Hieronymus ad Eustochium and
Demetriadem. Prudentius in Hymnis. Yet ca^ it not be denied, but some were to
superstitious in this case: ascribing more to ye outward sign, tha^ to ye
virtue signified: and so they made of a well meaning custom, a magical
inchau^tment. Nor only the simple did in this case abuse themselves: but such
as had more learning than the rest, and ought to have been good scholemasters to
other, taught superstitious and vnfounde doctrine. I report me to Ambrose, if
he be ye author of the funeral oration for Theodosius: and also to Ephrem. de
poenit. Cap. 3. Et de armatura Spirituali. Cap. 2. which effect, if we had not
seen by experience in our days follow, we would not for the ceremony contend
so much. But whereas we see the people so prone to superstition, that of every
ceremony they make a necessity, that they bend not their hearts, to the
consideration of the heavenly mysterye, but defix their eyes, and repose their
affiaunce in ye earthly sign, we are forced to refuse the same. For doctrine
in this case will not prevail, if the thing yt they trusted to, be not taken
from them. So that the thing, which the aunciente fathers (in a better age,
with less abuse) were concented to admit: must not so strayghtly be enforced
upon us, in a worse time, to maintain a wicked error. For as Augustyne says.
Non veru^ est quod dicitur: Semel recte factu^, Ad Marcellinum. Epist. 5.
nullatenus esse mutandum. Mutata quippe temporis causa, quod recte ante factu^
fuerat, ita mutari vera ratio plerumque flagitat, vt cum ipsi dicant recte no^
fierisi mutetur, co^tra veritas clamet, recte non fieri nisi mutetur, quia
vtrumque tunc erit rectu^, si erit pro temporum varietate diuersum Quod enim in
diuersitate personarum vno tempore accidere potest, vt huic liceat aliquid
impun? facere, quod illi non liceat, non quod dissimilis sit res, sed is qui
facit: Ita ab vna eademque persona diuersis te^poribus tunc opartet aliquid
fieri, tunc non oportet non quod sui dissimilis sit qui facit, sed quando
facit. It is not true yt is said. A thing that was once well done, must in no
wise be altered. For when the cause of the time is changed, good reason does
require, the well done thing before, so to be changed now: That where they say,
it can not be well, if it be changed: the truth on the other side cries out,
that it can not be well if it be not changed. For that which may chance at one
time in diversity of persons, that one may do a thing without offense which an
other may not, not that the matter is of it self unlike, but ye party that does
it: so in respect of diverse times, of the self same person now may a thing be
done, and now may it not be done: not that he is different from himself that
does it, but the time, when he does it. Wherefore I like well that counsel of
Gregory, which he gave to Augustine the Monk, who^ he sent into England to
plant a Religion. Nouit fraternitas tua, Did 12 cap. Nouit.
(says he) Romanae ecclesiae consuetudinem, in qua se meminit esse nutrita sed
mihi placet, vt sieve in Romana, sieve in Gallicorum, sieve in qualibet ecclesia
inuenisti, quod plus omnipotenti Deo possit placere, solicit eligas, and in
Anglorum ecclesia quae adhuc in fide noua est, and in constitutione precipita
quae de multis ecclesijs col ligere poteris, infundas Non enim pro locis res,
sed pro rebus loca ama^da sunt: Ex singulis ergo quibus cu^que ecclesijs, quae
pia, quae religiosa, quae recta sunt elige and hac quasi in sasciculum
collecta, apud Anglorum me^tes in consuetudine^ depone. Your brotherhode
knows the custom of the Romish Church, wherein ye remember ye have been
brought up. But my pleasure is, that whatsoever ye have found, be it either in
the Church of Rome, or French Church, or any other, that more may please
almighty God, ye carefully choose the same: and the best constitutio^s that you
can gather out of many Churches, pour into the Church of England, which is as
yet raw in the faith. For the customs are not to be embraced for the country
sake: but rather the country for the custom sake. Chose ye therefore out of al
Churches whatsoever they are, the things that are Godly, religious and good,
and these being gathered into one bundel, repose them as customs in the
English men's hearts. So that of ye wise, it has been always reputed folly,
to stick to prescriptio^ of time or place. Only the lawfulness of the use,
has brought more or less authority to the thing. Wherefore ye have no
advantage of me, in that I granted the use of Crossing, to be ancient in the
Church. For if it had been well in our forefathers, yet by Augustines rule, it
might be ill in us: and therefore to be altered. And stiffly to defend one
certain custom, without apparent commodity to the Church, is by Pope Gregory
himself disproued. Only I am sorry, that imperfections of wise men have given
such president of error to the wilful. I am loath to say that the fathers
themselves, were not so well affected as they ought. But ye drive me to lay my
finger on this sore, and continually to scratch it. The tale of Probianus,
which ye cite out of Sozomene in the Tripartite history, Folio. 48.
has small appearance of truth in it. For if he adored not the material
Cross, he was ye better Christian for yt: but if he believed not the death of
Christ, then was he not converted unto ye faith at al. For without Christ, and
the same crucified, our faith is all in vain. Wherefore when it is said, that
he would not worship the cause of our salvation, either the writer of this
hystory, does il apply this to the word material: or you do ill apply it to
your purpose. It should seem to be a tale, framed out of Constantinus
apparition: when folish worshippers of the Cross would still have more miracles,
to confirm their Idolatry. But as thieves that have robbed, do leave always some
mark behind them, whereby they may be known, either what they were, or which
way they be gone: so this author of yours, leaping over the pale, has left a
piece of his cloak behind him, and ye may tracke him by ye foot. For if he
meant (as your devise) that ever since the death of Christ, whatsoever good
has been wrought to mankind, either by good men, or holy Angels, the same
has been wrought, by the sign of the Cross: then Angels by like have bodies
to bear it, have hands to make it. But Angels being ministering spirits, Heb.
7.
have from ye beginning wrought many virtues for man's behoufe: have been by
Gods providence, a defense of the faithful, and overthrow of the wicked: yet
can they not make any material Cross, such as is set up in Churches: nor yet
mystical, such as men use to print in their foreheades: wherefore, either ye
collector of this tale was a liar, or you a fond applyer. Howsoever it falls
out in ryme, yet the reason is good. But rather of the two I would excuse the
author, who by the Cross, meant Christ his passion: and lay you in the fault,
which understood him not. For doutlesse if there were such an apparitio^ to
Probianus (as I am not yet persuaded of) yet that the meaning of it, should be
such as you say, to drive him to the worship of a Cross in earth, has
neither religion, nor reason in it. Constantine himself, which was as newly
converted to the faith, neither was commanded to do the like, nor ever did it.
Cyprian, Augustine, and Chrysostom, entreating al of the passion of Christ, do
use the term of ye Cross, as the Apostle himself does. Folio. 50. b
1. ad. Cor. 1. and ad. Gal. 5. Vt cruxsit praedicatio de crucifixo. That when
they name the Cross, by a figure they mean the Crucified. Notwithstanding I
grant that in ministration of sacraments, and some time otherwise, they
seemed all to use a certain sign of Cross: not sign material, Folio. 49.
but such as me^ do prynt in their foreheades: shall we therefore be restrained
to that, whereof there is no precept in Scripture, nor they themselves yield
lawful cause? But admit their authority. Think you, they did attribute so
great virtue, to the wagging of a finger? That the holy ghost could be called
down, and the devil driven away by it? Think you, they would have neglected
Churches? refused Sacraments? doubted of their health? if a priest had not
broken the air first, and with his holy hand made an overthwart sign? Learn
more good (ye Puine) than so fondly to think, and falsely report of the holy
fathers. Read their learned writings with riper judgment. Examine duly the
very words, which ye do allege, as making for you: and ye shall see (good
young scholar) that ye have not learned your lesson well. Cyprian ye say
writes. Whatsoever the hands be, De cardionalibus operibus Christi suspectu^
opus.
which dyp those that come to baptism, whatsoever the breast is, out of
which the holy words do proceed, Operationis authoritas in figura crucis
omnibus sacramentis largitur effectum. The authority of operation, gives
effect to all sacraments, in the figure of the Cross. I acknowleage the
place. It is in his work de cardinalibus operibus Christi: quod inter suspecta
and notha est. But weighe ye reason: first he excludes (as touching any
merit) not only ye hand, but the heart of the priest. He cares not what he be:
so that he do the thing that he comes for. The institution of Christ retained,
God works inwardly that, which no outward fact can give. If the hand be
evil can the work of the hand be good? In no wise: unless the work be
commanded. Then show the commandment for the sign of the Cross, if ye will
have Cypria^ to mean of it. Experience in part we have of more witchcraft and
sorcery, wrought by ye sign of the Cross, tha^ by any thing in the world
beside. Wherefore it is neither the Priest himself, nor any thing that he does,
no not ye sign of ye Cross made, that gives effect unto the Sacraments. De
Baptismo Christi.
Cyprian in plain words affirms this: Veniebat Christus as Baptismu^ non
egens lauacro, in quo peccatum non erat, sed vt sacrame^to perennis daretur
authoritas, and tanti virtutem operis nulla personarum acceptio commendaret:
quoniam remissio peccatorum, sieve per baptismum, sieve per alia sacramenta
donetur, proprie spiritus sa^cti est, and ipsi soli, huius efficientiae
priuilegium manet. Verborum solemnitas, and sacri inuocatio nominis, and signa
institutionibus Apostolicis, sacerdotum ministerijs attributa, visibile
celebrant sacramentum, rem vero ipsam spiritus sanctus format and efficit, and
consecrationibus visibilibus inuisibiliter manu^ totius bonitatis author
apponit. Mark well the words, in English, they be these: Christ came to
baptism: not wanting a washing, in whom there was no sin: but to ye end that
a continual authority might be given to the Sacrament, and no accepting of
persons, commend the virtue of so great a work. For remission of sins, be
it either given by baptism, or by other Sacraments, properly appertains to
the holy ghost, and the priuileage of this effect remains unto him alone. As
for ye solemnity of words and calling upon the name of God, and signs
attributed to the Apostolical institutions, through the mynistery of the
priests, they make a visible Sacrament: but the thing it self, the holy ghost
does frame and make: and to the visible consecrations, the author of all
goodness, inuisibly does put his hand. Here do ye see that the effect is
given to the holy ghost, and only to the holy ghost, which you do attribute
either to ye priest, or to the sign of the Cross. But let me deal with you
as you deserve a while. Let me forget, that you are a bachelor of law: let me
forget, that you were. M. usher. Let me go to work, as with a scholar of
Winchester. C. What is the saying of S. Cyprian syrra? M. The authority of
operation gives effect to al Sacraments in the figure of the Cross. Folio.
49.
C. What is the principal verb John? M. gives. C. What is the nominative
case? M. Authorite. C. Well then, it is authority that gives effect. But what
authority John? M. Authority of operation. C. To whom refer you this
operation? M. Forsooth to the priest, that makes the Cross with his thombe. C.
Down with him. De sacram lib. 1. Ca. 5.
Give me the rod here. Have ye forgot that ye learned out of Ambrose? Aliud
est elementum, aliud consecratio: aliud opus, aliud operatio. The element is
one thing, and consecration another: The work is one thing, and operation an
other. The work is done by the priest, but the operation by God. So Ambrose
says also, that the consecration is. Non sanat aqua nisi spiritus sanctus
descenderit, Ibidem.
and aquam illam consecrauerit. The water heals not, unless ye holy ghost
descend, and consecrate that water. And is thy wit so short, that thou
remembrest not, the text of Cyprian, that I told thee even now? One
expounds the other. As there he said, The effect of Sacraments properly
appertains to the holy Ghost, and that privilege is his alone: So here he
says, the authority of operation, gives effect to Sacraments. Well: go
forward. In figura Crucis, English me that John. M. In the figure of the
Cross. C. What is that? M. Forsothe the red mark that I see in my masters
Masseboke. C. Down again. Is your wit so good? must ye be beaten twice for
one sentence? Co^ster it. M. Autoritas operationis, the authority of operation,
largitur effectum, gives effect, omnibus Sacramentis, to all Sacraments, in
figura Crucis, in the figure of the Cross. C. Why young man do ye bring in the
sign of the Cross there? Shall I take you in hand again? The Cross must go
before in procession, I tell you, conster it by the points as the words do lie.
M. Operationis authoritas, the authority of operation, in figura Crucis, in
the figure of the Cross, largitur effectum, gives effect. etc. C. That is
another matter. Well now. The authority of operation, (that is to say, the
power of the holy Ghost) in the figure of the Cross, gives effect to
Sacraments. But is the power of the holy Ghost, in ye red mark of your masters
Masseboke? No, but it is in the figure of the Cross: that which ye Cross
figureth, even Christ himself. So ye have learned a true doctrine now: That
the power of the holy Ghost in Christ, gives effect to Sacraments. Bear it
away, least ye bear me a blow. But now I remember my self you shall not tarry
long for it, Hem tibi. Do ye use to make a down point before ye come to ye end
of a sentence? Do you not see a comma, a Coniuction copulative, and a chief
piece of the matter follow? and will you falsely leave it out all? Take the book
in your hand and read. M. Autoritas operationis in figura Crucis, omnibus
sacrame^tis largitur effectu^ et cu^cta peragit nomen, quod omnibus nominibus
eminet, a sacrame^torum vicarijs inuocatum. The authority of operation, in the
figure of the Cross, gives effect to all sacraments: and the name above all
names being called upon of the deputes of the sacraments, goes through
withal. C. If ye had remembered your self (sir boy) and taken this latter
clause with you, you would not have attributed, operation to ye priest, nor
effect of sacraments to the sign of the Cross: nor have been laid over the
form for it. But ye feel not the stripes: I am very sorry for that: verily
verily, ye have well deserved them. For if S. Cyprian, would not ascribe so
much virtue to the name of God, that it should be able to do all: (otherwise
than called upon, which respects the faith of the receyuer) shall we think
that he had a sorry breaking of the air, whereby the Cross is made, in such hie
reverence and admiration? On a time the same father was demanded his
judgment, whether such as were baptized bedred, were Christians, Cyprianus
Magno Epist. 64.
or no? whereto he answered: Aestimamus in nullo mutilari and debilitari posse
beneficia diuina, nec minus aliquid illic posse contingere, vbi plena and tota
fide, and dantis and sume^tis accipitur, quod de diuinis muneribus hauritur. We
think that the benefits of God, can not in any thing be mangled and made ye
weaker: nor any thing less can happen there, where the grace that is drawn
from the spring of Gods goodness, is apprehended with full and perfect faith,
as well on the giuers behalf as on the receyuers. If such as were baptized in
their beds, having but a little water sprinkled upon the^, wanting a great
number of ceremonies, which Cyprian thought Apostolic and necessary: were in
as good case as the rest: Quia stant and consummantur omnia, (as he says)
maiestate Domini and fidei veritate, Because all things do stand and be brought
to perfection, by the majesty of God and sincerity of faith: shall we think
that the idle ceremony of a Cross, can give effect to sacraments, and
sacraments be imperfect without a Cross? Your own doctor does overthrow you.
But ye cite two authorities of S. Augustine, to confirm your error. For the
first where he says. Folio. 49. b.
With the mystery of the Cross, the ignorant are instructed and taught, the
font of regeneration is hallowed. etc. I answer as I did before, according
to the true meaning of the word (mystery) that the meaning of the cross which
we believe, and see not (for so Chrysostom Chrisos. 1. ad Cor. cap. 2. Hom. 7.
says) and not the visible and material Cross, works the effects
aforesaid. For you will grant me that the sign of the Cross is but an
accessory thing. The substance of the sacrament may consist without it.
Augustine Aug. in. Io. Tract. 40. et de catacl. cap. 3
says not: Accedat Crucis signatio ad elementum, and fit Sacramentum. Let the
sign of the Cross concur with the elemente, and it is a sacrament. But,
let the word come to the element, and it is a sacrament. And yet he does not
attribute so much to the elemente it self, or to the word, as you do to the
sign of the Cross. For of Baptism he says: Vnde ista tanta virtus aquae, vt
corpus tangat and cor abluat, nisi faciente verbo? Non quia dicitur, sed quia
creditur: Nam and in ipso verbo, aliud est sonus transiens, aliud virtus
manens. Whence comes this so great virtue of the water to touch the body, and
wash the soul, but by the working of the word? not because the word is
spoken, but because it is believed. For in the word it self, the sound that
passes, is one thing, and the virtue remaining, another. If only faith bring
effect to sacraments, if the word it self be not auayleable without
belief, shall we think that S. Augustine made such account of the sign of a
Cross? In deed he made great of the mystery of the Cross, because on it
only depends faith. But the mystery, you have nothing to do withal. For
unless it be a material Cross, or a Cross made with a finger in some part
of the body, ye profess that in this treatise ye will speak of none. Folio.
24.
And now to the second allegation out of Augustine. As the manner of signing
with ye Cross was in his time usual: so would I wish for your own sake, that ye
could content your self with his significations, and wade no further in so
dangerous a puddle, than he has dypped his foot before you. Well does he
please himself in a subtle devise of his, when he will refer the Apostles
words. Ephe. 3. to the figure of the Cross, meaning by the breadth yt there
is spoken of, Charity: by height, Hope: by length, Patience: by depth,
Humility. But these make no more for Paul's meaning, than the Geometrical
proportion that Ambrose, out of the same place gathers. Only there is some
edification in the words: and though ye apply them to your most advantage,
Folio. 48. b.
yet can ye not infer your purpose of them. For you would have it appear,
that no Sacrament, were made and perfected rightly, without the sign of the
Cross. Trac. in. Ioa^ 118.
But Augustine goes not so far. Only he says. Nihil eorum rite perficitur.
None of them is solemnly done, and according to the received order. For are you
(M. Lawyer) ignoraunte of this common position among the Ciuilians, Quod
(recte) iusticia^ causae (rite) solennitatem respicit? That this term (recte)
has respect unto the righteousness and truth of the cause, but (rite) which
is the word that Augustine uses, does go no farther than to the order and
solemnity thereof? So I grant you well, that in Augustines time, if there
wanted a Cross, there wanted a ceremony: and yet were the sacraments perfect
notwithstanding. In our Church of England, a Cross is commanded to be made in
baptism: yet was it never thought of any wise or godly, De Conscr. Did. 5.
Cap. Nu^quid no^.
that baptism was insufficie^t without it. Go to your Canon, where order is
taken Vt omnia Sacramenta Crucis signaculo perficiantur: That all Sacraments
shall be made perfect with the sign of the Cross: Yet in ye gloss upon the
same place, ye shall find twice in one leaf, these words: Non remouet quin
aliter possint sanctificari, and valere ad remissionem, sed refert factum nec
aliter fit solennis baptismus. He does not take away this, but that otherwise,
(that is to say, without the sign of the Cross) they may be sanctified, and
the thing be auayleable unto remission. But it is requisite that the thing be
done (that is to say the sign of the Cross be made) nor otherwise it is a
solemn baptism. This is the Popes law, and your gospel. Wherefore I beseech
you (good solemn sir) be not so hard master to us: that for default of
solemnity, Folio. 50. a,
we shall be defaulked of fruit of Sacraments. As for Chrysostom (I have
answered you often) he speaks of a Cross that you have nothing to do withal.
It is to heavy for you to bear. It is not to be seen as yours, but to be felt
as ours. Then trouble not your self more tha^ ye need. We are agreed by this
time, Chrisostom, and you, and I, and al, that a Cross we must have. The
matter is certain: but the metal we doubt of. I promise you, I cannot broke
the charming of Simon Magus, nor ha^mering of Alexander ye coppersmith.
Wherefore ye must bring better proves than these, or else ye shall be sure to
fail of your purpose. If ye will have any gain at all, run in better order:
least all that behold you, cry Extra oleas. Ye range beyond the bounds. Ye
have filled your cheeks with a great deal of vain wind: and when ye have
gaped as wide as ye can, what bring ye forth? a vision of Probianus? a proper
lie. And what conclude ye of it? That in as much as neither Angels, nor men,
have ever done any thing for the weal of man, without the sign of the
Cross: therefore no Sacraments can be made without it. But Angels say I, have
no hands, to make such crosses as we do, nor such as you do treat of. Therefore
instruct your Angel better, when soever ye will call him to speak on your side.
As for your other authors, what shall I say to? Ye mysco^ster Cyprian. Ye
understand not Augustine. Chrisostom makes nothing for you. Therefore awake out
of your dream at last, and good morrow M. Martial. Ye noted out of Cyprian
that because he has Operationis autoritas, Folio. 50. b.
the authority of operation: thereupon is grounded, an authority and
commission from God, to make and minister his Sacraments. But this was in your
dream. For whosoever has ye use of eyes or his right wits, will see and
consider, that there is meant, no priest gesturing, but holy ghost working. Ye
noted out of Augustine, that in his time Churches, fonts, and altares were
halovved, children confirmed. etc. But if ye go to halowing and confirming of
our days, and compare it with that which was used then: Eusebius. Li. 4. de vita
Co^stantini and Athanas. in Apol. 2.
ye shall see no more likeness, tha^ is between chalk and cheese. We read how
Constantinus, that lived in the same age with Augustine, about.xl. year before
him, hallowed his church at Jerusalem. He called together the fathers, that
were assembled at Tyrus: he courteously intertayned them: he royally feasted
them: he charitably, did deal unto the pore: he liberally did endue the
church. What did the bishops on the other side? They prayed and preached. Some
red their lessons of divinity: some did reveal their secret conte^plations:
other some did make their learned sermons: and the rest did occupy themselves in
prayer, for ye peace of the church and preservation of the Emperor. And
although this order seems to have sprung a Iudaeoru^ encanijs, of the Jews
observance in their dedication, without commandment of God to us, and
therefore a Wilworship: yet read we not of any magical enchantment, or any such
popish Pageant, as Episcoporum Pontificale, teaches. In Augustine his time
they neded no more for hallowing of a Church, but a sermon and prayers,
Consecration of Churches by popish order. In Pontificali de consecratione
Ecclesiaru^.
in which peradventure (that I may feed your humor) they made ye sign of a
cross with their finger. But since his time, and ever since popery has had
the upper hand, a great number of things else have been exacted by law, and
thought more necessary, than any of the other two. As an holy water sprinckle,
a bucket, salt, water, wine, ashes, mortar, tyleshardes, bones, baggage,
frankincense, oil, cream, searecloth, cloutes, xxiiij. crosses, xxiiij.
candels. These toles to work withal being in a readiness, the bishop coms
(for none can do the feate but he) and first he coniures water and salt: Vt sit
omnibus sumentibus, salus mentis and corporis: and quicquid ex eo tactum vel
respersum fuerit, careat omni immunditia, omnique impugnatione spiritualis
nequitia: That to all the receyuers, it may become health of mind and body, and
that whatsoever be touched or sprinkled therewt, may lack al uncleanness, and
al assault of spiritual wickedness. That devils, diseases, corruptions of
airs, infections of bodies, and what soever may be prejudicial to health, and
welfare, may quite be voyded, whersoeuer any drop of this water falls. A
sovereign medicine, not only sufficient to discredit physic, but also to decay
priests occupation. Wherein I marvel at their discretions, right provident
otherwise for the purse, that by auau^cing one thing of less importance, they
would derogate authority from the more helps to hell, so many wholesome
suffrages, so many saints intercessions, so many meritorious and devout
Masses: that I speak nothing of the blood of Christ, which among the rabble of
Romish heretics, is a thing of a thousand least accounted of. But what shall I
stand in serching their absurdities, in whose life and doctrine there is nothing
else but devilish and absurd? Thus when ye sorcerer has made his first charm,
he goes thrice about the church, casting of holy water on the stone walls.
First low: then hye, then highest of all: and at every time knocks at the
Church door with a Cross in his hand, saying: Tollite portas Principes
vestras, Psalm. 23.
which words (as they translate them) be, Ye Princes lift up your gates. Whereas
David says: Tollite portae capita vestra. Ye gates lift up your heads. But a
small matter, to falsefie the Prophet, who^ they never truly understood yet. As
for this text, is a shipmans hose with the^. Sometime they apply it to Christ,
going down to hell: sometime to magistrates, to make a way open to Christ:
sometime also, to Salomons temple. Well: when thus in a mockery M. bishop has
knocked twice, and twice gone sole^nly about the Church, with as much devotion as
a horse: at the third time, the great door opens: for he shut in one before,
of purpose, to open it when his quew came: Then sets he up a Cross in the
midst of the church, and makes another charm: saying, yt the piece of wood,
(which he calls the Cross of Christ) may be a stay and defense for all
suppliants there, yt that piece of wood may triumph there and for evermore.
Then must the ashes be thrown into the Church, (O horrible witchcraft) and the
bishop must write with his Crosier, his A.b.c. in Greek, upon the ground:
After this, a confection is made of salt, wine, and ashes: such a drug, as I
would wysh no worse for my Lords own holiness, when so ever his queysie
stomach does loathe better nouriture of the word of God: for doubtless it is
restoritie to such. See what he says to it: Vt vinum cum aqua and cinere
mixtu^, armatu^ caelestis defensione virtutis. etc. That wine mixed with water
and ashes, may be armed with defense of heavenly virtue. Then Oil and Cream
is put into the holy water. Sure that is a purgative, and a strong one belyke.
For the Marble stones be anointed with it: and a verse of the Psalm Psalm. 45.
song. The Lord has anointed thee with ye oil of gladness, above thy
fellows. O stony hearts. To apply the words, which the spirit of God properly
spoke of Solomon, and under Salomons person, of Christ, to a greasy stone, that
every man does tread on: every dog berayes. Then does the quire sing: Erexit
Jacob lapidem. Genes. 28. Psalm. 67.
Jacob reared up a stone, whereof they know not the signification. Also they
bleate out with wide throtes, Ibi est Benjamin adolesce^tulus in mentis
excessu. There is little Benjamin out of his wits, as they translate it. And
think ye that they were well in their wits, which for Dominator eorum, would
put in Mentu excessu? Whereas they should have said: There is little Benjamin
their gouernoure. To say: There is young Benjamin ravished of his wits? But
this is scripture of Church hallowing. This is the purpose. These be the
textes. The prayers are the same, that Solomon used when he was commanded to
make the temple: save that they will have a crop of Colocyntida, to mar a
whole pot full of pottage. For they add unto these, Invocation of Saints,
derogation to God, and abuse of his creatures. When this is done, the rotten
bones and relics are hallowed, with like ceremonies and sole^nities as they had
before. And then they put on their masking coats, and come like blind fools,
with candels in their hands, at none days, and so proceed to the holy mass:
with renting of throtes, and tearing of notes, cha^ting of priests, howli^g of
clerks, flinging of coals, and piping of organes. Thus they continue a long
while, in mirth and iolyty: many mad parts be played. But when the vice is
come from the altar, and the people shall have no more sport: they conclude
their service with a true sentence Terribilis est locus iste. This place is
terrible. And have they not fair fysht, think you? to make such a do, to
bring in the devil? O blind beasts, O senseless hipocrites, whom God has
given over unto themselves, that they shall not see their own folly, and yet
bewray their shame, to all the world beside. And is not this, your Church
halowing, that ye talk of? This is it, that your Church has? ordained Now
that ye may prove in particularitie, that which generally, ye did avouch
before,) The sign of the Cross to be used in all Sacraments) ye come to an
enumeration of them all. And I dare say ye be glad to catch such occasion, to
treat of the vii. Sacraments: yet dout I not, but before I have done with
you, I shall make ye contented to cut of.v. of them. First, as touching ye use
of baptism, ye begin with Dionisius, Dionisius Areopagita Folio. 52. b Eusebius.
Eccl. Hist. li. 3. ca. 4. and. lib. 4. cap. 21.
to whom ye give ye surname of Areopagita, and honorable title of Saint Paul's
scholar. Eusebius in deed makes mention of such a one, and says that he was
the first bishop of Athens: and this he speaks of the report of an other
Dionisius of Alexandria. But as for any writing of his, he has no word at
all. And doutlesse if it had been true, which you affirm, he would not have
suppressed it. S. Hierome makes mention of two, In catal Scripit Eccles.
of that name. One that was at Corynth, in ye raygne of Marcus Antoninus verus,
and Lucius Commodus. An other, that was scholar sometime to Origene, and bishop
afterward of Alexandria, in the raygne of Galienus. But not a word yet among
all their writings (which he most diligently does rehearse) either of the
heavenly, or ecclesiastical hierarchy: out of which, ye cite, all your
authorities. Wherefore it is a bastard book, unjustly fathered upon. S. Paul
his Dionise, whereas ye style it self, and matter there entreated of, do argue
that it is of no such antiquity. For to go no further tha^ to those words
that you do allege of his, Folio. 52.
how the bishop assigns some man to be godfather to him, that is to be
baptized, here is a plain lie. For the use of godfathers was not invented
forty year after. It is evident by consent of all men, yea, the decree it
self bears witness with me, De Cons. Did. 4. Cap. In catechismo. Platina
in vita Higini.
that Hyginus was first founder of Godfathers: and among all the received
writers of that age, ye shall not lightly read of any gossipping. But suppose
it be true, that our records have, that Hyginus hatched this egg, he lived at
the least an hundredth and forty year after Christ. And how can. S. Paul his
scholar, whose life your self can stretch no longer than to the.96. year
after Christ, speak of yt which he never thought on? In the names of the
authors alleged by Martial.
which was so long devised after? But to the matter. I know right well that
within. CC. year after Christ, there were crept into the Church, many idle
Ceremonies, and the simplicity of Christ his ordinance refused. Each man as he
had either credit or authority, presumed of himself, to add somewhat to
Christ's institution: and the flesh deliting in her own devises, delivered the
same with as straight a charge, as if that Christ himself had taken order for
it: notwithstanding, if ought beside the authority of Scripture, were so
ancient in deed, (as I last spoke of) and admitted at any time into God his
service: yet were we no more bound to observe the same, tha^ the fathers
themselves have yielded to it. For if they have repelled the traditions
Traditions no ground of doctrine. Traditions vary.
of their elders, and after established some other of their own: their example
proves no use Apostolic or necessity, to have been in the one: and their
president authoryseth, that we may as lawfully dysanull the other. Enforce not
therefore a doctrine of a custom, traditions always have varyed: and many
such, as Cyprian, Tertullian, Augustine, with other, have thought to be
necessary for salvation: the Church of Rome it self, has not thought
expedient to be used for instruction. Christ gave commandment, Baptism to
be ministered, Math. 28.
in the name of the father, and of the son and of the holy ghost. Acts. 10.
The Apostles continued in the same order. Ceremonies or circumstances, we
read of no more in Scripture: save only the water, without all coniuratio^,
consecration, Luc. 3.
or insufflation: the persons Baptized: the preaching of God his promises and
faith in Christ, and prayer of the faithful. Now, come ye bowne to
Tertullians time: and ye shall find many strange inventions. Three dyppynges
in the water: Tasting of milk and honey: Lib. de. Cormil.
Abstaynyng from all other washing for a seven night after In Hieromes time,
Lib. 15. Com. in Esaiam. Epist. 72. Epi. ad. Bonifacium. De pec. mer. and
remis. cap. 20.
there was no honey used, but in liew thereof, wine and milk were given. In
Cyprians time, there was consecration of water, and such estimation of oil,
that no man was thought to be a Christian, that was baptized without it. In
Augustines time, the witnesses made answer in the infantes behalf, to the
Articles of the faith, demanded of them: and yet the infant himself was
suffered immediately to be partaker of the supper of the Lord, and the same
thought as requisite, as was his baptism. Notwithstanding, the latter age,
(yea the Church of Rome which you call catholic) has taken most of al these
away. Then what do ye wyndelesse fetch about to prove. Folio. 53, but that the
sign of the Cross has been used in baptism, and therefore now to be had in
reverence? By the same reason, honey, milk and wine shall be restored in
baptism, and every infant receive the communion. For greater authority you
have not for the Cross, than I for these. In deed Rabanus Maurus, a Bishop of
Ments, living in the most corrupt age of the Church, in the same place that you
have quoted, De inst. cler. cap. 27.
does not only make me^tio^ of the Cross sign, but refusing the traditions of
the learned fathers, (of which I spoke even now) brings in his own: as Salt,
Spittle, Tapers, and such other like. Salt was by the law commanded to the
Jews, and if it had been Christ his pleasure, that his ministers should have
had respect unto ye Iewishe ceremonies, the^ either Christ would have
commanded it, or the Apostles would have used it. But neither of these is
true. Therefore it is a vain devise. The spittle whereby they defyle and infect
the child, John. 9.
is taken out of the miracle Ioannis nono. But the Apostles saw that done: and
yet none of them al, dawbed his spittle upon the ears and nosthrels of them,
whom they baptized. Christ his spittle, there is none but would wish, both for
himself and for his: but ye spittle, sometime of a pestilent infected priest,
most times of a stinking drunkerde, always of a sinner, I know not who would
be so feign of. God keep my friends child from it. As for burning of tapers at
none day, is mere folish, and taken out of the fond Gentilitie. In the old
time, the Christians in their asse^blies, used burning candels, at time of
Gods service: But in ye night time, because they durst not resort together in
the day time. And it had been vnco^fortable and discommodious to sit in the
dark. Whereupon S Hierome answers: Cereos non clara luce acce^dimus, Aduersus
vigilant.
sicuti frustra calumniaris, sed vt noctis tenebras hoc solatio te^peremus, and
vigilemus ad lumen, ne caeci tecum dormiamus in tenebris. We light no tapers in
the broad day, as thou do vainly slander us, but that, by this comfort, we
may temper the darkness of the night, and may watch at the light, least with
thee, we sleep in the dark. Thus does S. Hierome say for his tapers. Let them
answer to him (as doutlesse they shall to God) that otherwise do use the^.
Thus have I showed, how simply, Christ did set forth his holy Sacrament: how
diversely men have swarued from his order: and therefore in ceremonies ought not
to prejudice us. But your Church Cacolique, not content with the ordinance of
Christ and his Apostles, not sticking to the ceremonies of the received
fathers, have chosen rather of their own fantastical and idle brain, to use
Crossing and coniuring, begreasing and bespuing of the poor infantes. Therefore
I like not the generation: their order I deteste. And now to Confirmation,
Confirmaion. Folio. 54.
which you affirm, to be no new devise as new bold biblers babble. But I
shall prove to be no Sacrament, as yo^g leude liars lay for themselves. And
first, where ye snatch a piece of Augustine, wherein he calls the Chrisme a
Sacrament, I answer: that he attributes no more thereto, than otherwise to
prayer, and to the word of God. Yea the Master of ye Sentences himself
teaches you: that many things improperly be called Sacraments, which must
not in reasoning, be numbered among the Sacraments of Christ his Church. But if
on this sort every sign visible, and the same holy, be a Sacrament with you:
then shall every Image in the Church, be a Sacrament. For they be signs, and
you say they be holy. Mark. 10.
As for the example of Christ, who embraced little children in his arms, and
laying his hands upon their heads, blessed them, I answer: that as every
fact of Christ, does not serve for our imitation, but instruction: so must we
not make a Sacrament of each of the^. For so the breathing upon his Apostles,
John. 20.
whereby he gave them the holy ghost, should be a Sacrament. Only, this sign
may be a president for us, that children appertain to the kingdom of God, yt
they ought not be denied the sign, which are partakers of the grace, and
therefore should be baptized. Then afterward, if ye will have them confirmed, I
allow it well: retayning that order, which in the primitive Church was, and in
the English Church is used. That children, after certain years, be presented
to the bishop, and rendering an account, of that faith of theirs (which by their
suerties in baptism they professed) have hands laid on the^: De bap. cont
Don. lib. 3. Cap. 16.
which is nothing else, but prayer made for them. Quid enim est aliud, (says
S. Augustine) manuum impositio, quam oration super hominem? For what is laying
on of hands else, but prayer over a man? One thing will I ask of these apyshe
imitators: if they will ground upon Christ his doing their Confirmation: how
dare they presume to do more than Christ did? Whence have they their oil? Who
gave the^ authority, to exhibit what sign of the holy ghost they would? What
promise have they of grace, annexed unto their Sacrament, unless they have
shut the holy ghost in their grease pot? They apply, I know, whatsoever is
spoken of the grace of Gods spirit, to this. But ineptly. For Christ says
simply: Luc. 11.
that God will give his good spirit to them that ask it. And to the
faithful, that he will not leave them fatherless, but send ye spirit of
truth unto the^, Ioh. 14.
and himself dwell with them. But they do restrain this unto their ceremonies:
that whosoever is not anointed of the^, is not accepted of God: no nor he is a
perfect Christian. For this they write. Omnes fideles, per manus impositionem
episcoporum, spiritum sanctum post baptismum accipere debent, De conse. Did.
5. ca. 1.
vt pleni Christiani inueniantur. All faithful, must receive the holy ghost
after baptism, by the imposition of ye bishops hands, that they may be found
full Christians. And in the next decree: Spiritus sanctus qui in font
plenitudinem tribuit ad innoce^tiam, in confirmatione augmentum praestat ad
gratiam. The holy ghost, that in baptism, has given fullness to innocencye.
in confirmation performs increase to grace. But let the^ show me, what
warrant of God his word they have for this? what promise of God is sealed in
us by this their new found Sacrament? Is Christianity now, to be fet out of
popery? Is the truth of God, contained in the Scriptures, insufficient to
inform us? Is there no full Christian unless he be anointed? Alas, where are
so many Apostles, so many martyrs become, yt never were anointed? Is baptism
insufficient without co^firmatio^? Is baptism available as the decree has,
only for them yt should dye straight, and confirmation for them yt should live
longer? Does baptism only regenerate us to life, but confirmation furnishe us
unto the fight? what is it the^, ye Paul has? We are buried with Christ by
baptism into his death, yt like as Christ was raised up from the dead, by ye
glory of ye father, Romans 6.
so we also should walk in newness of life. This partaking of death and life
with Christ, is nothing else, but ye mortifiing of our own flesh, the quickening
of the spirit, in yt the old man is crucified, Mar. 7.
and we may walk in newness of life. But by this their devise, they take away
half ye effect of baptism, rejecting therein the commau^deme^t of God, to
establish their own tradition. Wherefore I will reason with you as Christ did with
the Pharisees. Mat. 21.
Is the confirmation (which you call a Sacrament) ordained to be so from
heaven, Mat. 21.
or of men? If it be of men, it is no Sacrament. If it be of God, then show the
word. Ye have the example of ye Apostles in the. cha. 8. and.19. of ye Acts.
Folio. 54 a. Acts. 8.
But no example suffiseth for a Sacrament. The Apostles themselves usurped not
so much. But see how well ye follow the example. When the Apostles, which were
at Jerusalem, heard say, that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent
unto them Peter and John: which when they were come down, prayed for them, that
they might receive the holy ghost. For as yet, he was come down on none of
them, but they were baptized only, in the name of the Lord Jesus. Then laid
they their hands on them and they received the holy ghost. Now, are ye
ignorant what here is meant by the holy ghost? I will tell you. The gift to
speak in diverse languages: to work miracles: and other particular graces of
the holy spirit. And although they had received the common grace of adoption
and regeneration through baptism, yet had they not, these other qualities,
which in the beginning of the Church were granted, and now be denied. So that
laying on of hands, served to good use then, when it pleased God at instance
of ye Apostles prayers to confer the visible graces of his spirit: but now,
that there is no such ministry in ye Church: now that miracles be ceased, to
what end should we have this imposition of hands? the sign without the
thing? If a man should now a days, prostrate himself upon the bodies of the
dead, because Helias and Paul, used this ceremony, in raising of their dead,
should he not be thought preposterously to do? So that it might well be a
kind of Sacrament in ye Apostles time, but the cause ceassing, what should ye
sign continue? Yet ye content not your selves, with the Apostles order: ye
will (as I said before) have somewhat of your own. For neither Peter, nor
John, anointed the Samaritanes: but you do besmere, whomsoever you lay hands
on. Folio. 54. a.
Ye call it Chrisma salutis, the Chrisme of salvation. But whosoever seeks
salvation in the Chrismatory, shall be sure to lose it in Christ. Oil for the
belly: and the belly for oil, but the Lord shall destroy both the one and the
other. Good Lord: what beast but a papist, what papist but a devil, durst
presume to say, that salvation should be fet out of an oil box? The Apostle
calls us from impote^t and beggarly things: Gala. 4. Colos. 2.
and if we be dead with Christ, he says, we must not be burdened with
traditions. Wherefore ye take the matter all amiss, that by the dooinges of S.
Peter and S. John in Samaria, or else by the fact of S. Paul at Ephesus, Act. 19.
do ground your Sacrament of Confirmation. One reason ye have heard: of
Confirmation, Folio. 55. a.
be, as you say, such an ointment, with whose most holy perfection, the gift
and grace of baptism is made perfect: If it be an ointment, altogether holy
and divine, the perfection it self and sanctification, the beginning, the
substance, the perfecting virtue of al holiness given us from heaven: De
consecr. Did. 5. cap. Manus quoque.
is this: Manus quoque impositionis sacramentum, magna veneratione tenendum
est, quod ab alijs perfici non potuit, nisi a summis sacerdotibus: nec tempore
Apostolorum, ab alijs quam ab ipsis Apostolis, legitur aut scitur peractu^
esse: nec ab alijs quam qui eorum tenent locum, cuiquam perfici potest aut
fieri debet. Nam si aliter praesumptum fuerit, irritum habeatur and vacuum. The
Sacrament of laying on of hands, must be held with great worship, which can
not be made of any, but only of the hye priests, nor it is red or known, that
in the Apostles time, it was ministered by any, but only by themselves: nor it
can or ought to be done of any, save only such as supply their roumes. For if
it be presumed to be otherwise, let it be void, and of no effect. But how came
yt bishops by this prerogative? How chance, that every priest may minister
baptism, and the supper of the Lord: but only bishops may confirm? Only the
Apostles did in their time minister these Sacraments: and therefore by that
reason only bishops should have that office now. But are only bishops the
Apostles successors? when ye inhibite any of the lay fee, to take the host in
his hand, this cause ye allege: yt it was delivered only to the Apostles.
Papists contrary to themselves.
In this case, ye admytte every poor priest a successor unto them. But why not
in ye other? Because if any, be less successors to the Apostles tha^ other,
they be your bishops. But to make a devise of your own brain, although in
matters of religion it be not sufferable) yet to make a lie of the holy ghost,
to falsify the Scripture, is more intolerable. And is it not a strange case
that ye holy father writing the law: Gratian collecting it: so many seraphicall
doctors commenting of it: Papists beelye the Scripture.
so long use in all realms confirming it: it should there be written and
suffered to remain, that in ye Apostles time it was never red or known, that
imposition of hands was done by any, but by the Apostles themselves? Why, what
did Ananias? He laid his hands upon Saul, Act. 9.
whereby he received his sight, and was endued with the holy ghost. What bishop
was he? No bishop forsooth. In glosa. preced. Did. Monks Apostles vicegerentes.
But a Monk by all lykelyhode. For by the cannon law, they be always the
Apostles vicegerentes. See you not by this time, your own shame? Shall this
notwithstanding, your confirmation be still a Sacrament, having nothing else
but man's devises, and a sort of impudent lies to support it? If it had been a
truth, that only the Apostles had laid on hands: if it were a good order, that
only bishops should do the like, how falls it out, that the popes themselves,
have dispensed with the matter? Gregory writes thus. Vbi episcopi desunt, Decr
part 1. Did. 95. ca peruenit.
vt presbyteri etiam in fro^tibus baptizatos chrismate tangere debeant,
concedimus. Where bishops want, we grant, that priests also may annoint in
the foreheades, such as be baptized. How is this presumption avoided? how
does the Sacrament now stand in force? But who will seek for any reason
constancy or truth in popery? The example of Christ is pretended. Yet Christ
never bad it: Nor the fact of Christ can be drawn to imitation: nor their
selves will stick unto it. Christ never used oil: They make it necessary.
Christ promised indifferently to all the faithful his holy spirit: They do
restrain it to their own ceremonies. Christ for our behoof, instituted
baptism, that we might dye to sin and live to righteousness: They by
confirmation, have cut away half the effect thereof. The Apostles
withdraw us from the elements of this world: they will have us seek our
salvation in an oil box. The Apostles used imposition of hands, which had
effect, when miracles were in place: they will have the same order, although
they can not have the same end. The Apostles laid hands, but only upon
some, which had the gift of the holy ghost withal: they without respect or
differences of persons, confirm every body. Therefore it is but a mere
tradition, and the same neither Christian nor Apostolic. In the order of it,
they be contrary to themselves. They will have it necessary to salvation: and
yet they let many dye without it. They say, that only bishops are the Apostles
successors: and yet in other cases, they grant, that every priest is a
successor too. They affirm that the Apostles gave them only their president:
and yet Ananias that was no Apostle, is proved to have done the same. They
teach that a bishop must only minister it: and yet they dispense for a priest
to do it. And may not we biblers, be bold to call you bablers? If only these
heresies, lies, absurdities, were in your proufes of Confirmation, they only
were sufficient to confirm you fools. But see a fouler matter, of all
Christian ears to be abhorred. While ye go about to auaunce your invention, ye
deface the ordinance of almighty God, and overthrow the ground work of our
salvation. Confirmation a Sacrament? yea a Sacrament worthier tha^ baptism.
For the master of the sentence says, Lib. 4. Did. 7. Cap. 2.
Sacramentum confirmationis, dicitur esse maius baptismo. The Sacrament of
Confirmation, is said to be greater tha^ the Sacrament of Baptism. And
afterward the cause is added. Quia a dignioribus datur, and in digniore part
corporis, because it is given of worthier persons, and in ye worthier part of
ye body. For only bishops (as is said) confirm: but every priest may minister
baptism. And in baptism, oil is laid upon the head, but in Confirmation upon
the forehead. Where first is to be noted, Papists attribute more to oil in
baptism than to water.
that ye stick in one mire still, ascribing more to the oil your invention:
than to ye water which is Gods element. It suffiseth us to have, as Christ and
his Apostles had, fair water in our baptism: your oil is better for a sallet
than a sacrament: Then also by the way ye fall into another heresy. For when
ye decree, the byshopping of children to be greater sacrament than baptism
is, because every priest may christen, but only bishops may confirm, show ye
not therein, your selves to be very Donatistes, Papists are Donatistes.
esteming the dignity of the sacraments of the worthiness of the minister?
Yet not only the master of the sentence, but also the decree confirms that
doctrine. Melchiades an author of yours and a Pope, says: Sacramentum manus
impositionis, De con. did. 5. cap. de his vero.
sicut nisi a maioribus perfici non potest, ita and maiori veneratione
venerandum est et tene^dum. The sacrament of laying on of hands, as it ca^ not
be made but only of the greater, so is it to be worshipped with greater
reverence, and so to be defended. But O God: Diffinition of Popish by-shopping
what a strange religion is this? A drop of grease, infected and filed with
the stinking breath of a sorcerous priest, inchaunted and coniured, with a few
fumbled words, to be compared to Christ's holy sacrament? preferred to the
water sanctified by the word of God? But this is your manner to deprave the
scriptures in every point: corrupt the sacraments with your own leaven, and
let nothing that good is, stand in due force, for your spiritual policies and
fresh inventions. Give over therefore at length the breast of fornication:
leave sucking of the dregs of superstition and popery: whereto I persuade my
self, that rather fond nurses have inured you, than conscience or reason
persuaded you. For, scriptures have ye none, but the same condemn you: nor
godly Fathers any, but the same be against you. For proof whereof, as I have
hitherto discoursed of your scriptures for Confirmation, and uttered your
doctrines, disagreing from the same: so now will I come to judgment of your
doctors. For Confirmation to be a sacrament ye bring Denise, and Fabianus. Of
which the one I have already sufficientely disproued: The other was but a Pope,
and never received author. But I will set against them, Tertullian and
Augustine: two for two: substauntiall and honest, for suspected and infamous.
Aduersus Martionem Libro. 4.
Tertullian speaking of the sacraments of the primitive Church, rekeneth no
more but baptism, and the supper of the Lord, saying: Quomodo tu nuptias
dirimis, nec coniungens marem and foemina^, nec alibi coniunctos, ad
Sacramentum baptismatis and eucharistiae admittens? etc. How do thou break
marriage, neither coupling the man and the woman together, nor being coupled
otherwise, admitting the^ to the sacrament of baptism, and thanksgiving?
Likewise in his book de corona Militis, Cap. 3.
entreating purposely of the order of the church, begins with baptism, and
shows what ceremonies were observed therein: and then he proceeds to the
supper of the Lord, and (for sacraments) no further. Augustine also most
plainly says: De doctrine. Christiana Lib. 3. Cap. 9
Dominus signis nos non onerauit, sed quaedam pauca pro multis, eademque factu
facillima, and intellectu augustissima, and obseruatione castissima, ipse
dominus and apostolica tradidit disciplina: sicuti est Baptismi sacrame^tu^,
and celebratio corporis and sanguinis domini. Which words in english be these.
Our lord has not burdened us with signs, but Christ himself, and the
discipline of the Apostles, has delivered us in the stead of many, a very
few, and the same most easy to be done, most royal to be understood, most pure
to be observed, as are, the sacrament of Baptism, and celebration of the body
and blood of the Lord. The like whereof, and in effect the same, he has ad
Ianuarium Ep. 118. This is the doctrine of ye true church. This only ancient:
and whatsoever is against it, new. What it pleased men to use in the ceremony
of Confirmation, makes very smally to purpose: And the thing it self being so
shamefully abused as it has been: the sign of the Cross to have been used
therein, is a good matter against you. But sorry I am and ashamed of you, that
still ye bewray your ignorance and folly. Needs will ye have.vij. sacraments,
and yet in your discourse ye confound them: alleging that, for proof of
Confirmation, which the authors only did mean of Baptism. Thus do ye fall
into ye old absurdity: that as before, where so ever ye read this word
(Cross) ye would lift it to the Roodeloft, or to the forehead: so now, where
so ever ye hear mention of oil, ye make it only to serve for byshopping.
Learn (M. Martial) to understand your author, before ye presume to become a
writer. Denise, Tertullian, Augustine, and Cyprian, in the places that ye bring
of Christians annoynting, spoke (as it is evident) but only of baptizing them.
For in their days (as is before approved) oil was received, to the elemente
of water. And specially the words of Denise Denise.
do confute you: For he joins together, The Christening, Folio. 55. b.
the Chrisome, the Chrisme, and the Communion, which all in one sacrament of
Baptism did concur. Then what is this to your purpose, that Tertullian
Tertullia^
has? Caro signatur, vt anima muniatur, The flesh is signed, that the soul
may be defended? Was there never any signing of the flesh, but in
Confyrmation? Your self, I dare say, will not admytte it. But if ye were so
fond as to affirm it, yet Tertullian himself dysproueth you. For the very
next words that follow, be these: Caro manuum impositione adumbratur, the
flesh is ouershaddowed by imposition of hands. And where as diverse things be
spoken of, Confirmation (if in any place) must be understood in the latter
clause, and there is no word of the sign of the Cross. Wherefore, how does
it appear by these your proves, that the holy Fathers used also the sign of
the Cross, in this your holy Sacrament? Augus. lib. de Catach. rudib. ca. 20
Augustine (if you had ever readde him) should not have been alleged of you.
For in all the Chapter he treats, how the Jews were brought to Jerusalem
by those means, as are fygures unto us, mentioning especially baptism,
reepresented in the water of Jordan, and the supper of the Lord by slaying of
the lamb, whose blood was sprinkled on the door posts: upon which words he
immediately infers, Passionis and Crucis signo. etc. Thou must be marked in
thy forehead, with the sign of the passion and Cross of Christ, as it were in
a post. What is this to Confirmation? As much as a text out of Beuys of
Hampton. And as for Cyprian, although the words alleged by you, Folio. 56 b.
be the very worste in all his works, (which argues very small discretion in
your choice) yet are they quite from the purpose too. I omit how Cyprian,
Cyprian.
without a commandment, made in God his seruise anointing necessary:
condemning therein, all htat before him had been baptized, and had not any oil
poured upon them. Forsooth by his reason, not heretics only retourning to the
church, should be partakers of his heretical Rebaptisation, but the baptism of
Christ, of the Apostles, of all them them that we read of in the Scripture,
should be insufficient. For neither will he have the element of water, to be
sufficient to baptize withal, unless it be consecrate, De Heret. bapt. Ep. 72.
( Oportet mundari and sanctificari aquam prius a Sacerdote: The water must be
cleansed and sanctified first of the priest) Nor yet this consecrated water to
serve, unless we have a little oil to boot. Vngi quoque necesse est eum.
etc. It is necessary (says he) that whosoever is baptized, be anointed: that
the ointment being once received, he may be the anointed of God, and have in
him the grace of Christ. Yet we never read that the Apostles used any words
of Consecration, that they thought themselves in that case to be priests, whom
the new testament calls ministers of the word: Ad Tit. ca. 2 and Ro^. 14.
or yt they could repute contrary to the express word, any creature unclean.
Omnia munda mundis. All things are clean to the clean. Christ by his word,
and institution of baptism, sanctified al water, used according unto his will:
No man ought to add to his ordinance any thing: no priest by coniuring can
bring such holiness and perfection unto it, that in his respect, as Cyprian
would have it, it shall be more auayleable for remission of sins. Wherefore S.
Cyprian was to far wide herein, and applied unjustly unto the priest the word
( Aspergam super vos aquam mundam. Ezech. 36.
I will sprinckle clean water on you) which God peculiarly promises of
himself. Then also to enforce a necessity of oil, that baptism can not
consist without it, whereas Christ did not appoint it, nor Apostle use it,
passed his commission, Vt ne quid grauius. But to attribute more unto ye oil,
(man's own invention) than to baptism it self, the ordinance of Christ, I must
needs say, was proud and blasphemous. Yet Cyprian so did, for he said: that
unless they were on his wise anointed, they could not be true Christians. To
have ye anointed of the father, Jesus Christ, within them, was not enough,
unless a little oil had also besmeared them. A pitiful case that so good a
father, so faithful a martyr, should have so foul a blotte, to blemish his
authority. But (as I said) we must not gather out of the fathers writings,
what soever was witness of their imperfection. Yet do I marvel most, what mad
conceyte ye had, to bring this place for the use of the Cross in byshopping of
children. Only S. Cyprian in all that Epistle and diverse other, goes about
to prove, that heretics should be baptized. And this is far from
Confirmation: full little does it confirm your cross. Against the assertion
of seuenfold grace. Folio. 57. a. Chapt. 11.
Now to speak a word of your Seuenfolde grace, which you say, is conferred
at byshopping, I beseech you show me the ground of your devise. I know that you
delight in ye odd number, as al inchaunters have done of old. And therefore
vij. sacraments, vij. kinds of graces of the holy ghost. But wherefore.vij?
Because Esaias numbreth but.vij? And this is the reason of all the Papists that
ever wrote. But I might bid them tell them, Esaias. 11.
as Tom fool did his geese. Esaias numbreth but syx: and the seventh is their
own. Therefore still I prove, that Papists are falsefiers of the word of God.
Papists falsefiers of Scripture.
And yet if the Prophet had rehearsed seaue^ (as it is of every man to be seen
he did not) to gather out of that, a seaue^fold kind of grace, were to absurd:
in as much as other places, attribute of diverse effects, diverse other titles
to the holy ghost: nor the faithful are only partakers of those, that Esaias
does speak of: which are: Wisdom, Understanding, Counsel, Strength, Knowledge
and Fear of God: but also of other: as Chastity, Sobriety, Truth, Holiness,
which in like manner, do flow from the same spring. Then also to thrust the
power of Gods spirit into such a corner, yt it shall have but seven holes to
start to, is to straight a compass, and can not contain him. But this I may
excuse you as the Painter did himself: who being reproved that he had left out
a commandment, whereas he was bydden to write them all in a table, answered:
There is more than ye will keep. So you in rehearsal of your seauenfolde
grace, speak of six more, than you are partaker of. Wherefore to make my
Apostrophe to the readers (as you do) seeing Dionisius is justly disproued,
Folio. 57. b.
to be of no such authority and antiquity, as the Papists pretend: seeing S.
Augustine is depraved of them: S. Cyprian alleged, where he defends an
heresy: The example of Christ and his Apostles, most falsely drawn to proof of
Confirmation: I trust you will more esteem, and better regard the authority of
ancient Fathers in deed, whose plain assertions, I have brought to the
contrary: you will more reverence the word of God, the bread of life, by them
abused to most impiety, than the stinking leven of these lying hipocrites: who
speak of scripture, but esteem it not: who lay the fathers for them, but
understand them not: who pretend antiquity, but are carried about with every
wind and puff of new doctrine, being as S. Ciprian says, Epistola ad
Nouatianos
beginners of schisms: authors of dissension: destroyers of faith: betrayers
of ye church: and Antichrists in deed: who going about to deface ye catholic
religion commanded by Christ: taught by the Apostles: continued in the church
by the holy ghost: have defaced (as it were) ye truth of Christ's ordinance, to
place their own dreams and devises: as it apeareth by the number of their
sacraments: by declining in all points from ye order of Christ and his Apostles:
by oil, cream, salt, spittle, candels, and such like, added unto baptism: by
preferring byshopping of children, before it: by making oil of their own
addition, of more effect and virtue than the element of water, sanctified by
the word of God: Finally ascribing perfection of Christianity, which
consists in ye spirit, to the outward work of coniuring and Crossing. Now M.
Martial, to come to your holy orders, which among your sacraments ye put in the
third place. I marvel that ye are so barren in the ground which of it self is
so fruitful, that whereas ye number but.vij. sacraments, this one, has
begotten by spiritual generation six more. For the master of the sentence (whom
ye and al your faction do follow) makes.vij. degrees of orders. Lib. 4. Did.
24. Cap. 1.
Et hij ordines sacramenta dicuntur. and these orders (says he) be called
sacraments. He says not that they do al concur to make a sacrament. So by this
means we have now.xiij. sacraments. A plentiful increase. And to set forth the
more the dignity of their calling, in every one of these holy orders, they have
Christ himself a companion with them. But whereas sacraments must have a promise
annexed to the^, a promise immediately from God: if any of these orders, or they
altogether should make a Sacrament, some piece of Scripture should be brought
for proof of it. Neither Angels nor men can make a sacrament: Therefore they
lie when they do call their orders sacraments: in as much as they which are
called among the^ ordines minores the inferior orders, by their own confession
were never known in the primitive church, but long devised after. In confess.
Polonica. Cap. 51.
Hosius himself, out of whom you took your authorities, as well of Augustine,
as of Leo, to prove your orders a Sacrament, confesses in the same place,
that of old time Ordines ij minores, inter sacros non numerabantur: These
inferior orders, were not rekened among the holy ones. But now they be holy
all, and Sacraments al. If I should rehearse the idle ceremonies that are
observed in every one of them: The Jewish disagrements of the doctors
themselves, when each man has a sere assertion of his own, defended with toth
and nail: The clouted religion of old patches of Iudaisme, Paganism, and
Christianity together, whereby they commend this their sacrament to the world:
I should cumber the readers to long with unfruitful matters, and busy my self
more a great deal than needed, to confute that, which you M. Martial, (such
is your modesty) are ashamed to allege. How the ministry of the word may
be called a sacrament. 1. Tim. 4.
The ministry of the word commended unto us by Christ himself, I can well
admit to be a sacrament, and therefore allow, in a right sense, the title that
Augustine does give unto it. For therein is a ceremony, that is taken out of
the word of God, and a sign of spiritual grace conferred, as Paul does
witness: yet am I not contrary to my self herein, who before affirmed, that
there were only.ij. sacraments of the Church: Baptism, and the Lords supper.
For when in general we treat of sacraments, we truly say, yt there are but.ij.
because there are no more ordinary, and appertayning to al ye faithful. But
ordering of ministers, is a special thing, contracted to a few, belonging only
to a peculiar function: So may it well be called a sacrament, and yet be denied
to be a sacrament of the church. But where I attribute to Christian ministry,
so much as I spoke of: there is no cause of pride for popish priests. For they
swerve so far from Christ's institution, that they serve not at al for any
godly purpose. Christ did ordain his Apostles to preach, Ioh. 20.
and to that end he breathed on them, showing by that sign, the power and
virtue of the holy ghost, wherewithal he endued them: But the Romish apes,
only retain the sign, the thing it self being far thest from them: and as
for the end which Christ respected, they have least regard of. For, they have
taught their priests, that it is least part of their duetye to preach: most
to do sacrifice, and say Mass. And this does the words of their institution
prove: and a great proctor of theirs Hosius, affirm. For where in the verse of
incantation, De Sacramento ordinis.
they have Potestatem illis dari placabiles offerendi deo hostias, that power
is given them to offer acceptable sacrifice unto God: This do they restrain
only to the Mass. And Hosius does wrestle maruelously about the word, driving
it still from the greek (...), which he will have to signify, sacrifice. So in
the end to raise their own gain they derogate all from Christ his death and
his passion. We know that Christ did offer himself sufficiently: and made a
perfect satisfaction for our sins: we know that he needs not any priests
help, to be as acceptable to his father for his service sake, as Christ for
that one, and only Sacrifice of his body was. Christ gave commandment to be
faithful ministers, not bloody coniurers: Christ gave an iniunction to feed
the flock, not to offer Sacrifice. Christ has promised his holy ghost, not to
purge and take away sins, but to mayntaine the Church, and keep it in good
order. And as for the argument that the most learned papists do build upon,
the greek word, may easily be answered. For Chrysostom when he had
considered how Paul had written, that he was a minister of Jesus Christ
consecrating the gospel (for so S. Augustine turns it) that there might be
an acceptable oblation and Sacrifice of the Gentiles, says: Romans 15.
that the Apostle there did make full mention, of all the Sacrifice that he
could make, using both the terms of (...) and (...), whereupon the Papists
will ground their Idolatrous Mass. This is my Sacrifice, to preach the
Gospel says he: my sword is the gospel, my Sacrifice is the Gentiles. And
now would I feign see, what these inchanters can say, bragging themselves
therefore to be priests, because they can iuggle so finely, that things shall
pass out of their nature by them. The priesthode and Sacrifice that the
Apostles had, was to convert the simple souls, to dawnt ye cruel courages of
men, to make an offering of them unto the Lord: not through gross miracle, or
by bluddy knife, but by the spiritual armure of the power of God: whereby
counsayles are overthrown, and every high thing that auaunceth it self
against God, 2. Cor. 10.
is vanquished. And whosoever will be successors unto the Apostles, must use
this ministry, this trade of doctrine: which if they continue in, being
lawfully called thereunto by God, and have gifts competente to approve their
calling unto the world, they need not to care for the sign of the Cross, to
be imprinted in them, the virtue whereof never departs from them. Certain it
is, that neither Scripture, nor any learned father, commends any blessing,
but of prayer to us. And how your wisdom does esteem the wagging of a bishops
fingers, I greatly force not. I looked rather, that ye should have commended the
oil for anointing, which the greasy merchants will have in every mess. For
the character indelebilis, the mark unremovable, is thereby given. Yet there
is a way to have it out well enough, to rub them welfauoredly with salt and
ashes: or if that will not serve, with a little soap. But ye had very little to
say in the matter, and therefore as soon as you had alleged your doctor Denise
(whose authority notwtstanding we may justly deny) ye plucked down your sail
and cast your anchor there. Folio. 62. a.
Very wisely done of you. For perilous it is to carry to high a sail upon a
rotten mast.

Now for a proof, that the sign of the Cross, should be used also in the
supper of the Lord, (which you blasphemously do call the Mass, which is
nothing else but the Sacrifice of the devil) ye bring the places of the.xxvj.
chap. of Matthew and.xiiij. of Mark, where ye do find this word Benedixit,
that is to say, he blessed. And that this blessing should be but a certain
gesture of the hand, ye cite Albertus Magnus, and compare the places of
scripture together, where it may appear that the self same thing is meant. I
am glad ye admit the conference of places. I perceive you will play small play,
rather than sit out, when Albertus Magnus is worthyed of authority. But how
well you and he do understand the Scriptures, shall by Gods grace, appear
anon. The words of Mathewe be these. Mat. 26.
(...), which words (if ye understand any Greek) be these. Jesus taking the
bread, and giving thanks, brake it. Likewise in Mark (...). Mark. 14.
Jesus taking the bread, when he had given thanks he brake it. In the first
place it is evident, that the word of your old translation, Benedixit, can
not be taken for the sign with a finger, because of the proper word of giving
thanks, which can not be applied, to an externe gesture. Then also the word
of Mark, if ye observe the Etymologi of it, must signify the same. For what
is (...), and what is, (...), what is been, and what is dicere? The words are
compou^ded of well and speak. So that to bless, is to speak well, and not to
cross well: When ye were last at Mass, and heard the priest sing aloude
Gratias agamus, ye might have learned what it is benedicere. For it was at the
first received in the Church, that when they came unto the mysteries of the
Lords supper, they should bless, that is to say, should be thankful for
them. Which thing is proved right well by Chrysostom. Chrisost. In epi. ad co.
1. cap. 10. Hom 24.
Who upon these words. Calix benedictionis cui benedicimus, non ne
communicatio sanguinis Christi est? The cup of blessing which we bless, is it
not the partaking of the blood of Christ? 1. Corin. 10. because blessing is
twyse spoken of, says. Cum benedictionem dico, eucharistia^ aico: and dicendo
eucharistiam, omne^ benignitatis dei thesaurum aperio, and magna illa munera
commemoro i^etenim cum calice inenarrabilia dei beneficia, and quaecunque
consecuti sumus addimus: ita ad eum accedimus, cum eo communicamus, gratias
agentes, quod humanum genus errore liberauit, quod cum spem nullam haberemus,
and impij essemus, fratres and consortes suos ascripsit: hijs and caeteris
huiusmodi gratiarum actionibus, accedimus. Which words of the doctor may be
translated thus: when I speak of blessing I speak of thanksgiving: and
speaking of thanksgiving, I open all the treasure of the goodness of God, and
rehearse those great gifts of his. For with the cup we add the unspeakable
benefits of God, and whatsoever we have obtained. So we come unto him, we
communicate with him, thankyng him, that he has delivered mankind from error,
yt when we had no hope, and were wicked persons, he admitted us brothers and
companions to himself: with these and such other rendringes of thanks, we
come unto him. Here ye see what Chrysostom took blessing to be. Set
Chrysostom against your Albert. But let us see further conference of the
Scriptures. Not only Christ in his last supper used this form of blessing
(which you do make chief point of consecration) but also in other of his
miracles doing, whereof we read in every one of the Evangelists. As where
Matthew, Mat. 14.
Mark Mar. 6.
and Luke, Luc. 9.
speaking of the five thousand beside women and children, fed with five loaves
and two fyshes report, that Christ used such order, as the word imports to
be blessing. (...): S. John Ioh. 6.
entreating of the same matter expounds what is meant by blessing. Mat. 15.
Mark. 8.
For he says (...). And giuinge thanks he delivered. Mat. 15. Mar. 8.
Likewise where mention is made of the seaue^ loaves. Christ blessed also, but
the evangelists set it out by the word of thanks giving (...): And when he
had given thanks, he brake. So that, most evidently appears, by the word of
God, to al reasonable creatures, that it is all one thing, to bless, and to
give thanks. Yea where your self allege the word of Benedixit, in the xxiiii.
chapter of Luke, that Christ lifting up his hands, blessed his Apostles: Ye shall
also find, the next sentence save one, after, Luc. 24.
the same word applied unto the Apostles themselves, that they also did
bless, and bless God. For the text has Erant assidui in templo, laudantes
and benedicentes deum They were continually in the temple, praising and
blessing God. Think you that this blessing was with a certain sign of the
hand? Is this the meaning of the word of god, where still we be warned to
bless the Lord? If this be absurd (as I am sure ye will grant) then grant
ye blessing, is another manner of matter, than crossing. Wherefore since I have
proved by nature of the words themselves, by consent of all the evangelists,
by testimony of the Apostle Paul, by judgment of Christome, that blessing, is
thanksgiving: I may justly conclude, your assertion to be vain and frivolous,
that Christ used crossing, in ministering of his supper. What ryte or ceremony,
was received after, dyuersly, according to the disposition of diverse times and
persons, is not material. For I have sufficiently proved before, that it is not
enough to say, this was once so: but it must be proved, that it was well so. For
I well allow the proceeding of Cyprian against Stephen the heretic, Ciprianus.
Po^pcio. frat. Fp. 74.
which urged (as you do) traditions to be kept. But what said he to it? Vnde
est ista traditio? vtrum de dominica and euangelica authoritate descendens: an
de Apostolorum mandatis atque epistolis veniens. Whence is this tradition of
theirs, (says he?) does it descend from the authority of Christ and his
gospel, or from the writings and commandments of his Apostles? As for that
which is written by Christ, he proved necessary to be observed: likewise
whatsoever is contained in the Acts of the Apostles, or other of their
writings. But otherwise, he would not be bound to admit any thing. And
therefore ye may prate as long as ye lust, what men in this time and that time
received, and without better proof, bind us no whit to obseruaunce of it.

Thus have you made a fair muster. M. Martial with signs and profers, and
proved nothing. While ye travail to bring the Cross to seven Sacraments, you
have discoursed on four, and confounded them all. And as for ye three which
you have put in the rere ward, ye use only this reason. Fol. ^6. b.
All Sacraments of the Church (as Augustyne says) are made with the sign of
the Cross. but Matrimony, Penance, and Extreme unction, are Sacraments of the
Church: Therefore the sign of the Cross is used in them. For answer whereof,
neither is the first proposition, (as you understand it) to be admitted: nor
ye second in any wise is true. Therefore the conclusion does follow but ill
fauoredly. First ye are abused in your own conceit, in esteming the sign of
the Cross, to be a thing of such necessity, as that ye Sacraments may not be
made without it: whereas it is but an accessory thing, devised by man, whereof
in Scripture we have no president. And Augustine would not say (as you fondly
do) that simplely Sacraments are made with the sign of ye Cross: Ser. 181.
De tempore.
but mentioning that, as a piece of a ceremony more than neded, brought in
withal the necessary point, (that you leave out) the calling upon the name of
Christ. For Sacraments consist of the sign, and thing signified. Of the
word, and the ceremony. And in baptism, the water and sprinckling thereof in
the name of the father ye son and the holy ghost, upon the party that is to
be christened, is the whole sign and ceremony to be done. But remission of
sins, participation of life, fellowship with Christ and with his members, also
the gifts of the holy ghost, which are by grace conferred, be the signified
thing, ye promise of mercy so sealed in us. Here is no word of ye sign of the
Cross, and yet is the Sacrament made perfect thus. Nor in Christ's
institution we hear any mention of such a ceremony, nor that Christ in his own
baptism, nor the Apostles in theirs, were blessed with a finger. Wherefore the
Mayor is falsely set. Matrymony no Sacrament.
But the Minor is farther out of square. For before Gregory's time, although
every man granted Matrimony to be an holy ordinance of God: yet who ever
affirmed it to be a sacrament? Forsooth (say you) Ambrose, Augustine, and Leo.
So ye same Ambrose calls the words and works of Christ, whereby he showed
his divinity, hidden otherwise in God, a sacrament. In ep. ad. Tim. 1. ca. 3.
And Augustine has nothing more familier in him, tha^ Sacramenta scripturarum,
The sacraments of the scriptures, whereby he understands the dark speches
and spiritual meaninges of the holy ghost. So that, if ye take a sacrament for
that, whereby any thing is signified unto us, then Matrimonye I grant may be a
sacrament. But see what absurdity ensues thereon. As many parables as we have
in scripture, so many sacraments. The grain of mustarde seed: the goodwyfes
leaven: the door of the house: the shepehearde: ye giant: the thief (for by all
these, the kingdom of God, and Christ are signified) must be sacraments. So
the washing of hands: the shaking of dust from the Apostles feet: and every
act of Christ, may be a sacrament. Then we shall not keep us within ye number of
seaue^ (which you appoint) but ere we have done, we shall have seven score, yea
seven hundred sacraments. But if ye take a sacrament, for such a sign, as God
has ordained for us, to confirm our faith, and seal the promise of his grace
wtin us, the^ are you to far wide. For prouf of baptism we have. Whosoever
believes and is baptized shall be saved. For the supper of the Lord we have.
Mat. 26.
Take eat this is my body. Drink ye all of this, this is my blood which is
shed for many for the remission of sins. And have we the like for matrimonye?
Then take a wife, and thou shall be saved. Then take a wife, and thy sins be
forgiven thee. This is your doctrine (M. Martial.) this is your Louain
learning. But ye say for your self, Ephe. 5.
that S. Paul called it a sacrament. Ye forget your self, he neither used the
term, nor applied it to that purpose. To admit that it were so, as your
ignorant and gross translator has (whereof I will speak more anon) yet your
discretion and skyll, might have considered the correction that folowes, when
the Apostle says plainly, that he speaks not of the man and woman, but of
Christ and his Church: So that the sacrament is referred to them, and not to
Matrimony. But the ignorance of the greek word, has only bred this error.
Where for a mystery it is translated a sacrament. I marvel greatly that the
name of sacrament, should be so seriously urged in this place, being otherwise
in all places of the scripture beside neglected. For your said old translator,
has in ye same Epistle to the Ephesians, Ad Ephesians. 1.
and.j. cha. Vt notu^ faceret nobis sacramentum voluntatis suae that he might
notify to us the sacrament of his will, (for the mystery of his will). By the
same reason now the scripture it self, whereby Gods will is reveled to us,
shall be a sacrament. And in the Epistle to Timothe, ^ Timo. 3.
your old translator has. Magnum est pictatus sacramentum, quod manifestatum
est in carne. Great is the sacrament of godliness, (for great is the mystery
of godliness) which is, God is manifested in the flesh. By which reason the
incarnation of Christ should be also a sacrament. Nor there shall be any end
of sacraments, if wheresoever we read of mystery, we shall understand the
sacraments of the Church. Your wisdom supposes, that because a mystery and a
sacrament do not so far differ, but ye that which is called a mystery, may
also be a sacrament, Folio. 87. a.
therefore your ground is good enough, that matrimony is a sacrament. This do
ye prove, Martials reason.
by a sad tale of old mother Maukin, that thought her saint Edmund to be no
minstrel because he was a minister, whereas in these latter days a minstrell
(as you say) may be a minister, and serve both turns for a need. But if
mother Maukin, had been such a daukin, as to think every minister, to be a
mynstrell, as you do every mystery to be a sacrament, thou Martial and Maukin,
a dolt with a daukyn, might marry together, and the vicar of saint fools be
both minstrell and minister, simul and semel, to solemnize your sacrament.
Folio. 67. b.
But we must not dally with the signification of the word with you, but we
must consider what is the definition, and what is required in a sacrament: and
then we shall find, nothing lack in matrimony, that is or ought to be in any
other sacrament. It is (you say) a uisible sign of invisible grace. But what
is that grace? Salvation, justifying or sanctification, conferred upon them
that are partakers of it? If it be so, some thing it is, that ye say. But it is
not so. For he that is married, is not in that respect, more the child of God,
than if he were unmarried. He that is married, has no peculier promise, that for
his marriage sake, his sins are remitted him. And yet these things are
requisite in a sacrament, that by the visible sign, some such promise as this
may be sealed in us. I will bring against you for this point, no other
divinity but your own. The master of the sentence says: Sacramenta non
tantum significandi gratia instituta sunt, Lib. 4. Did. 1. Cap. 2.
sed etiam sanctificandi: Quae enim significandi gratia tantum instituta sunt,
solum signa sunt and non sacramenta, sicut fuerunt sacrificia carnalia, and
obseruantiae ceremoniales veteris legis. etc. Sacraments are not only ordained
to signify, but also to sanctify: For those that are only appointed to
signify, are only signs and no sacraments, like as ye carnal sacrifices and
ceremonial obseruances of ye old law were. So yt he which otherwise defe^deth as
many heresies as you, overthrows your reason, which do make (Matrimony) to be
a sacrament, because it is a sign of invisible grace. For so were al ye
sacrifices, so were all the ceremonies of the old law. And in deed he confesses,
yt they and such like are called sacraments, Licet minus proprie, though not
so properly. And so do I grant you, yt it may be called a sacrament,
Absurdities in popish doctrine concerning the Sacrament of Matrimony. Decr. 2.
part Cause. 27. Que. 2. in. glo^
and yet not such, as we here speak of. But mark how great and how many
absurdities follow of your doctrine. First where ye make wedlock a sacrament,
ye go against your selves, and destroy the holy number of vij. making.viij.
Sacraments at the least. For wedlock out of wedlock has engendered an other,
and begotten.ij. sacraments. This is not my devise. I read it in your decrees.
For in the treatise of Matrimony and the act thereof, it is written. Duo sunt
sacramenta: vnum Dei and animae: Aliud Christi and ecclesiae. Dei and animae,
in sponsis: Christi and eccesiae, inter viru^ and vxore^. There are.ij.
Sacraments: One of God, and ye soul: an other of Christ, and the Church. The
Sacrament of God and the soul, is in the parties espoused: The Sacrament of
Christ and ye Church, is between the man and ye wife. So that the very talk of
Matrimony, has gotten young ones. And by this we may see, ye foolish end of
wavering heads, tossed with dout full fluddes of opinions. Sometime ye will have
but.vij. Sacraments, and always this is a defended principle: yet in your
books sometime ye make viij. sometime as many as a man will imagine.
Furthermore, whereas ye make a Sacrament of wedlock, An other absurdity.
how falls it out, that afterward ye condemn it, as a piece of vnclea^nesse?
Ye say when a man will marry, then he goes to the world. Ye write ye marriage is
a carnal thing: Ye maintain in your laws, yt in Matrimony are profane
lusts, defiling concupiscence: that a man in ye state can not please God,
cannot be heard of God. And yet still, ye will have it a Sacrament. Innocentius
Pope in his decree says. Neque eos ad sacra offitia fas sit admitti, Decr
prima part. Did. 82. cap. proposuisti, Leu. 20.
qui exercent etiam cu^ vxore carnale consortiu^: quia scriptu^ est: sancti
estote, quoniam ego sanctus sum: dicit dominus deus vester. Nor let it be
lawful for them to be admitted to holy rowmes, which use carnal company with
their wife: because it is written: be ye holy, for I am holy, says the Lord
God. Where first (I beseech you) mark, how ye lawful use of Matrimony, is
called carnal company: The^ also how despitefully, ye place of Scripture: Be
ye holy for I am holy, is applied against Matrimony. The words were spoken by
God, unto ye Hebrews, wha^ he forbad them, yt they should not offer up their
sons to Moloch: yt they should not follow the sorcerers and the witches: and
in the latter end of ye chapt. it is repeted again, where incest with mother,
sister or such like, is condemned. Wherefore by wresting this to lawful marriage,
what did they, but condemn ye married, of ungodliness. Yet God commanded ye
priests of ye old law to be holy, whom notwithstanding, he never did
restrain from marriage. But Innocentius goes forward in his decree, and says:
Multo magis igitur sacerdotes, quibus and sacrifica^di and orandi judge officiu^
est, semper debebunt ab huiusmodi co^sortio abstinere: Quia si contaminatus
fuerit carnali concupisce^tia, quo merito se posse exaudiri credit? cu^ dictum
sit: Omnia munda mundis, coinquinatis autem and infidelibus nihil est mundum
sed coinquinata est eorum men's and conscientia. etc. Therefore much more
priests, which have a continual office to sacrifice and pray, ought always to
abstain from such company. For if he be defiled with carnal concupiscence, by
what merit of his, thinks he, that he ca^ be heard, whereas it is said: al
things are clean to ye clean, but to the^ yt are defiled, and to the
unfaithful, nothing is clean, but their mind and conscience is defiled. And
can there be any thing spoken or devised more co^tumelious against the state of
Matrimonye, then that such as are married, are thereby defiled with carnal
lusts, and their prayers can not be heard? What shall the honest couples
throughout all Christendo^ think of this? that when in the fear of God, they
use the ordinance that God has willed them, that day they need not to make
their prayers, for the Pope says, they shall not be heard. Wherefore al me^ by
this man's holy order, must either utterly refuse prayer, Luc. 13. Colo. 4. 1.
Cor. 7.
or refuse to give due benevolence to their wives: which both are shameful
inconuenie^ces. I omytt that in the same decree, he applies to the married, this
sentence of Paul: Qui in carne sunt, deo placere non possunt. They that are in
the flesh can not please God. The^ woe be to the married: Did 82. Ca. quia ali.
they are out of Gods favor, and therefore condemned. I omyt ye Siricius
calls the use of matrimony obscoenas cupiditates, filthy lusts. I omyt that
another Innocente by name (but nocente, and noisome in deed) says: that to
mary a wife, is cubilibus and immunditijs deseruire, Did. 28. cap. d^cernimus.
to serve wantonness and uncleanness. Thus do they deface the ordinance of
God, to commend their own unchaste and filthy state. Yet will they have
matrimony to be a sacrament. A sorry sacrament, that by your law is nothing
else but carnal company, carnal concupiscence, uncleanness, wa^tonnesse,
filthy lusts, seuering us from Gods people, making our prayers not to be
heard. How say you (M. Martial) are you yet ashamed of your profession? will
you stand to this still, that matrimony is a sacrament? Then let me proceed a
little further with you. Wherefore do you exclude your priests from marriage?
The third absurdite for the sacrament of martrimonye.
why are ye so injurious unto them, that they shall not partake the holy
sacrament? Shall they alone be graceless, where so great grace as you say is
given? Or else are your sacraments so singular and self will, that they can
not in one subject agree together? But ye do not exclude them from the
sacrament (you say) but only from the carnal knowledge. But the carnal
knowledge (say I) by your own authority, is a chief part of the Sacrament,
and therefore ye exclude them from the sacrament it self. For these be the
words of your Cannon law, Decr. 2 pie. causa. 27. Quest. 2.
Cum societas nuptiarum ita a principio sit instituta vt praeter commixtionem
sexuum, non habeant in se nuptiae coniunctionis Christi and ecclesiae
Sacramentum. Whereas the fellowship and society of marriage is so ordained from
the beginning, that beside the commixtion of seres, marriage has no sacrament
of the conjunction of Christ and his church together. etc. Whereby it appears
that the carnal knowledge between man and woman, (which you forbid your
priests, though not absolutely, yet only so as they might lawfully use it) is
that sacrament of yours. The.4. absurdity for the sament of matrimony.
Therefore ye do wrong to your shorn and anointed, to forbid them marriage,
your new made sacrament, if for no other respect but this, Vt sacris vestris
operentur. But ye have a remedy for it, damnable and devilish. I will not
speak it for shame, God make you honest. Again yet, where ye touch that
Matrimony is a sacrament, yea the company it self of man and wife together in
the act of matrimony, to be a sacrament: and every sacrament (you say)
conferreth grace: how does this hold together, that in the act of
matrimony, in the company of man and wife together, ye deny the presence of
the holy ghost? for your law affirms it to be sin, though a sin venial.
Shall it now be a sacrament, Dec. 1. part did. 13. Cap. item aduers in glo.
and anon no sacrament? Shall all sacraments confer grace, and this be a
sacrament and confer none? shall it be holy, and yet profane? a sacrament,
and yet a sin? Last of all to prove that in all your devises of error and
hypocrisy, The fifth absurdity for the sacrament of matrimony.
ye seek for nothing else but to color and cloak abominations: consider what
an heap of mischieues is covered with this face of holiness: When ye have
determined that matrimony is a sacrament, ye take the knowledge of causes
Matrimonial unto your selves: for spiritual cases, must not be handled of
profane judges. Then have ye made such horrible laws, to confirm your
tyranny, that they are not only impious to God, but injurious to man. As, that
young folk, wilfully contracting themselves without their parents consent, may
marry well enough: that there shall be no marriage within the seventh degree:
that he that diuorceth an adulterous person, may not marry another: that
gossippes (as we call them) may not be man and wife together: that from three
weeks before Lent, till the octaues of Easter, from Aduent to Twelftyde, and
for three weeks before Midsommer, there shall be no marrying at all, without a
dyspensation. No marvel then if ye have made a sacrament of Matrimony, since
that is the mylch cow, that yeldeth so large a meal of spiritual extortion.
Now to come to Penance, Penance Folio. 68. ^.
which ye make a sacrament, as well as Matrimony. Ye call it a bath of tears,
a dispoyling of the old life, the second boorde after shipwreck. These
titles argue not, that it is a sacrament: nor I contend who gives it these
titles, certain I am, that some of them be blasphemous and abominable. For,
to go no further, than to this, that it is called the second table after
shipwreck, Quia si quis innocentiae vestem in Baptismo perceptam peccando
corruperit, Lib. 4. Sent. Did. 14. ca. 1
per Paenitentiae remedium reparare potest: Because (says the author, whose
name I suppress as well as you) if any have marred his garment of innocence,
which in Baptism he gat, by the remedy of Penance, he may repair it. This is
as much to say: as if the effect of Baptism were taken away by sin: whereas
we be bound, to call our Baptism to remembrance when so ever we sin, that
by the promise exhibited in Baptism, the sinful soul may be refreshed, and
penance out of it gathered. Therefore as the gospel it self does say, Mar. 1.
Dec. cause. 15. quest. 1.
John preached the Baptism of penance to remission of sins: So the fathers
of the Church, do call Baptism, sometime the sacrament of Penance. But to your
reason, Folio. 68. b.
whereby ye prove Penance to be a sacrament. It is a visible sign of
invisible grace (ye say) and the visible sign is the external act of the
priest, absoluing the penitent. By this reason ye prove better, Absolutio^ to
be a sacrament than Penance. And so shall our sacraments multiply still. I beseech
you, what has Penance to do with the priests Absolution? Can there be no
remission of sins, unless ye priest assoyle me? I will prove that manifestly
false, and by your own law. For Confession, goes before absolution, and yet
without confession, there may be good remission. So by this reason, we stand
not in need of ye visible element, the invisible grace is granted without it.
For according unto your canon, De Paen. did 1. Ca. Si cui Folio. 68. b.
Voluntas remuneratur, non opus, The will is rewarded and not ye work. Then is
it a lie, which you affirm, that sins are remitted by mean of the external
work. I know that you be more conversant in ye Popes decrees, the^ in Austins
works: therefore I will show you what Gratia^ gathers out of the^. De Paen.
did 1. Ca. Facilius
The sorrow of my heart, though I speak never a word, nor priest lay hand upon
my head, purchases me pardon. Id quod probatur autoritate illa prophetica: In
quacunque hora peccator fuerit co^uersus et ingemuerit: Non enim dicitur, ore
confessus fuerit, sed tantum co^uersus fuerit and ingemuerit, vita viuet et non
morietur. Which thing is proved (says he) by the authority of the Prophet,
saying: In what hour soever, a sinner shall be turned and lament: for he says
not, when he shall be confessed, but when he shall be converted and lament, then
shall he live and not dye. Ca. qui natus
Likewise after, Euidentissime apparet, quod sola cordis contritione, sine
confessione oris, peccatum remittatur. It appears most evidently, that by the
only contrition of heart, without confession of mouth, sin is remitted. And
yet again. Ca. Quidam Deo.
Confessio quae soli deo fit, quod est iustoru^, purgat peccata. The confession
which is made to God alone, (which is the part of the righteous) purges ye
offenses. By which places all, it is plainly to be seen: first that your
eareshrift (one part of your penance) is to no purpose: then that Absolution,
which is your external work, your Sacrament (as you call it) is no mean of
Remission. Furthermore to rake out this kenell of Popery, Penance is a
sacrament (ye say) Every sacrament a visible sign. The visible sign herein,
is the external act of the priest: the invisible grace, is the remission of
sins to the penitent. So the sign and sacrament is in the priest: but the
grace in the people. But how is this grace conferred? Forsooth by the priest,
the ghostly father. And on whose head so ever the priest lays his hands under
confession, has he remission? Lib. 4. Sent. Did. 1. Cap. 1. and. 3.
Yea forsooth. Quia sacramenta nouae legis, efficient quod figurant. Because the
sacraments of the new law, do bring to pass, that which they figure. Then
every murderer, thief, adulterer, though he never repent, has clear
remission, for he has the sacrament. O shameless impudency. But if it were
so (which is great impiety) that by the external act, remission were obtained,
yet I see not how that should be a Sacrament. Folio. 69. a.
For the matter of this Sacrament (say you) is the external act of the
penitent, co^tayning these three points: Contrition, Confession, and
Satisfaction. Among all these, where is the visible elemente? Vbi est illa
corporalis species, Ser. de bap. Infan.
quae fructum habet spirituale^? as Augustine says. Where is that bodyly
shape, which has the spituall fruit? Has Contrition, Confession, or
Satisfaction a body? Be these subject to the eye, as bread, wine, and water
are? Be they not virtues proceeding from the mind, or things uttered by the
mouth: and will you make them to be things sensible, as boys and girls brought
out in a pageant? Wherefore your sacrament is cut of by the waste. Make as good
shift with the words as you can, your visible and bodyly sign is gone. Unity
in Papists doctrine.
And I marvel how ye dare so precisely speak of your Sacrament of Penance,
affirming the external act, to be the visible sign, of release of sin the
invisible grace: where as your master of the sentence, Lib. 4. Sent. Dis. 22.
ca. 2.
is put to his shifts in this case: and putting two opinions, determines upon
none. Whether the outward act should be the Sacrament, or else the outward and
inward together. As for the outward, which you do rest upon, he fears to
grant, lest this inconvenience ensue, Non omne sacramentu^ eua^gelicum,
efficere quod figurat, that all the sacraments of the gospel, have not the
effect of that which they figure. But who is so bold as blind bayard? Hitherto
have I spoken not so much as I might, to derogation of your devils doctrine,
but so much as your ignorance and oversight, does cause me of conscience to
put you in mind of. For the rest, Folio. 69. b.
ye refer me to the book of the seven sacraments, set forth by the late
King of famous memory, Henry ye.viij. And because this is but a popish devise,
(whosoever ever defend it) I refer you to the same book, to know what ye ought
to think of the Pope.

Now as for Extreme unction, Extreme unction.
which you say was provided of Gods mercy and goodness, that in the last and
perilous extremity we should not be destitute of aid and comfort: In deed
God never forsakes his, he has left his promises to heal the minds
infirmities, and use of physic for diseases of the body. But that oil, can
enter into the soul, or is so sovereign a medicine for the flesh, rests to
be proved: Folio. 70. a. Mark. 6.
The Apostles anointed with Oil many sick folks, and they were healed.
The priests annoint every sick body, and none of them is the better. The
Apostles were commanded to cast out devils, to cure diseases, to cleanse the
lepres, and to raise the dead: the priests never had any such commission. The
Apostles signified by their annoynting, the virtue and power of the holy ghost,
by which the cure was wrought: The priests with their oil, mock the holy
ghost, and make the body but greasier for the grave. If every example that we
read in scripture, shall be followed of us, If every thing that was a sign to
other shall be a sacrament to us: then dust and spittle, shall be a sacrament to
heal sore eyes. Then the poole of Siloah, Joan. 9.
shall be a Sacrament to wash away the filth. Then lying on the dead, Act. 20.
shall be a sacrament to raise them up to life. Wherefore though anointing were
in ye primitive Church used, and the same was a sign of grace conferred, yet
can not this president extend to us, because the commandment concerns us
not, and also the effect and end thereof is ceased. Ye have a common proverb
in your law. Accessorium si qui naturam principalis, that the accessory thing,
does follow the nature of the principal. Anointing was a sign of healing.
Wherefore since the principal is gone, the working of miracles and healing of
the sick, what shall we do with the accessorie, the sign thereof, and
outward annoynting? Ye urge vehemently the institution of God by his Apostle
S. James: but the Apostle meant not, preposterously to draw to imitation, that
which was temporal, and only touched the present state. When the doctrine of
Christ was raw in the peoples mouths, and a new Church began to be
gathered, miracles were necessary, many gifts were granted, and amongst the
rest, Anointing no cause of health.
the power of healing: the ministers whereof used their oil, not as a cause of
health, but as a sign that the virtue proceeded from above, and they were but
instruments of the same: Now since the gift of healing is gone, (as I am sure
ye will confess) to what purpose is it to use the oil? If ye will therein be
the Apostles successors, If ye will follow Saint James his counsel, save
the sick and you can? show the grace of your grease? Anointing must cease,
because the gift of healing ceasseth.
The greasy merchaunts that take this cure now a days in hand, be no more
exhibiters of the grace then granted, than the player on the stage is a King
in deed, when he ^^mmeth dysguised in a golden coat. Christ dyspensed many
things by his Apostles: the effect whereof he denies unto us. And anointing,
better might be used of such as have the power of healing, Surgians or
Physicians, than of such as have no skyll, but only in murdering and in
kylling. Here I rehearse not the contradiction, that in your idle decrees I
find, Contradiction in Papists doctrine.
and is only sufficient to dysproue your assertion: For whylest each man goes
about to establishe his own devise: and each man is contrary to another, ye
show therein that ye be liars all. You say, that Priests only must be the
ministers of this Sacrament. Priests must be called for, Foli. 70. a. b.
Priests must anoynte. But Innocentius a father of your Church, has long ago
decreed the contrary. Anno Do^i. 404.
For Sigebertus in his Chronicle, affyrmeth that he made an Act, Oleo ad vsus
infirmorum ab Episcopo consecrato licere vti, non solum presbyteris, sed
omnibus etiam christianis, in suam suorumque necessitatem vnge^do. That it
should be lawefull, not only for the Priests, but also for all Christians,
to use the oil consecrated of the Bishop for the behoufe of the sick,
anointing therewyth, according to the necessity of themselves and their
friends. But ye allege Saint James James. 5.
for you. Is there any sick among you? let him bring in the Priests of the
Church, (for so ye translate it) and let them pray over him, anointing him
with Oil, in the name of our Lord. Ye abhor the name of the Lord (for by
Stories position, How the Papists in all points svvarne from S. James his
order.
that is the mark of an heretic) and yet all Prophets and Apostles use it.
Then it follows, The prayer of faith shall save the sick, and if he be in
sins, they shall be forgyuen him. Now if a man should grant (which I have
proved to be most untrue) that the annoynting here spoken of, agreed to this
age: yet had ye furthered your cause nothing, in as much as so shamefully ye do
decline from the Apostles order.

If oil be your sacrament and the promise of grace be annexed to it, The
absurdities.
to heal both bodyly and ghostly (as you say) then what hard hearts have
you, that suffer so many to languish in extremity, that come not by your wills
before ye last gasp? Florence, or in the late Synod of Trent, has been
decreed to the contrary, shall not prejudice my truth. For I having reason and
Scripture for me, with the learned and sound determinations, of more fathers of
the Church than these: will not be prescribed by conuenticles and conspiracies.
You pretend authority: we bring the scripture. You call us heretics: we
prove you no less. And which shall take place? Gods word? or men's wills? A
talk? or a proof? If all the fat bulls of Basan did draw together, and the
devil their carter did drive them to Trent, there to feed and stand fast for
their prouender, shall the Lords sheep therefore be starued? shall his work be
neglected? If ten thousand of your affinity, bewitched with the sorcery of
Romish Circe, should hold a council, and call al men to the trough of your own
draffe: should not I acknowledge and confess with Grillus, in who^ (bearing
the figure of a reasonable creature,) inchauntme^t could take no place, that
reason and religion should be preferred to the belly? What reason is in this,
their sentence to hold, who be the parties accused, and yet judges of the
cause? What religion is in this, that for filthy lucre, man's idle ordinance,
shall displace the commandment of almighty God? Wheresoever I see this shame
and disorder (as in all your popish councels it is) I appeal from them, 1. Cor.
4.
I say with Paul Mihi pro minimo est vt a vobis iudicer, I pass very little to
be judged of you. As for the place of Hilarious against Auxentius the Arrian,
how fitly it may be applied unto you (and not to us whom you would seem to
touch) al they that have eyes do see. For you can say nothing, Fol. 71. 72,
but these nevve ministers are heretics, they are Caluinistes, and therefore
devils. Proof bring ye none, but the same is reproved. I trust therefore ye
have credit according. But to you I say. Ye be fallen with Auxentius. ye do
participate with Arrius heresy. Who is the devils Angel tha^? Who is to be
avoided? Nor I am contented only to say it (as you do) though in this respect
my word were as well to be accepted as yours, but I prove it too. For when ye
make an Image of God the word, Creaturam facitis eum, qui omnia creauit, as
Epiphanius says. Ye make a creature of him, Lib. 2. tom. 2 Her. 96.
ye created all things. Wherefore if ye would assente to the decrees of the
first Nicene council, and go no further, these words neded not betwixt you
and me. Fol. 72. b
But when ye take away the name of Nicene, and put Florence or Trente in place
thereof, ye are as true a man, as he that stale a goose and sticked down a
feather. For all councils are not a like. Nor al they that brag of the holy
ghost, are by and by inspired with his grace. For Hilarious your own author
(who^ to no purpose ye brought forth last) has to good purpose, this. Multi
sunt qui simulantes fidem, Hilarious Li. 8. de. Trinit.
non subditi sunt fidei, sibique fide^ ipsi potius constituunt quam accipiunt
sensu humanae inanitatis inflati, dum quae volunt sapiunt, and nolunt sapere
quae vera sunt, cum sapientiae haec veritas sit, ea interdum sapere quae nolis.
Sequitur vero hanc voluntatis sapientia^ sermo stulticiae. Quia necesse est,
quod stulte sapitur, stulte and praedicetur. Many there are (says he) which
fayning a faith, are not subject to faith, and rather do appoint themselves a
faith, than receive it: puffed up with the sense of man's vanity, while they
understand those things that they lust, but will not understand those
things that be true: whereas the truth of wisdom is, sometime to understand
those things that thou would not. But the talk of folly, comes after
this will wisdom: for necessary it is, that foolishly it be uttered, that
foolishly is understood.

To the fifth Article.
ALthough ye bend your self in all this Article, and stretch every vain of
your feeble skyl, to prove a matter which (although it be in part untrue yet,
being granted did not hurt my cause: that the Apostles and fathers of the
primitive Church blessed themselves with the sign of the Cross, Fol. 73. a.
and counseled all Christian me^ to do the same: and that in those days the
Cross was set up in every place convenient for it) yet because ye still
appear in your likeness, and it is so requisite ye be known to the world, a
clouter of a patch of troth, upon a whole cloak of lies: I will not disdain,
to make an easy proof of your three taglesse points: for any greater stresse
they will not abide. And first of all: the term of blessing, is ill applied to
signing in the forehead. For what it is to bless, To bless.
I declared in the Article before: to speak well, profess well, live well. This
is (...). This is benedicere, which you do use always to translate, bless. S.
Augustine August. in psa. 32.
has Benedicam dominum in omni tempore, semper laus eius in ore meo. Quod est
in omni tempore, hoc est semper. Et quod est benedicam, hoc est laus eius in
ore meo. I will bless the Lord in all time: always his praise shall be in my
mouth. And that which he fayeth, in all time, is ever. And that which he
says, I will bless, is his praise in my mouth. Likewise Chrysostom Chrisos.
in Genesis ca. 9. Hom. 29.
Quando dominus benedicitur, and aguntur illi gratiae ab hominibus, tunc
vberior ab illo solet benedictio dari, propter quos ipse benedicitur. Nam qui
benedixerit, debitorem illum facit maioris benedictionis. When God is blessed,
and thanks be given of men unto him, then more plenteous blessing is wont to
be given of him, for their sakes by whom he is blessed. For he that blesses,
makes him detter of a greater blessing. Where ye see plainly, what the nature
of the word is, and in what sense it has been taken of old. But if you have
learned of your old mother Maukyn (of whom ye spoke before) an other sense: if
you have borrowed of foolish custom a new found signification of the word,
to note a signing of a Cross in the forehead: ye do very ill apply it to ye
Apostles time and primitive Church: where we never read Benedice hont se signo
crucis sed signabant se: That they blessed themselves but marked themselves
with the sign of the Cross, yet ye the Apostles did ever practice any such
thing, is not to be found in any approved writer. Your authorities ye fetch
out of Abdias. Such lyppes, such lettise. Him have I proved in the third
Article to be a very liar, a vain foundation to build a truth upon. Wherefore
as loath to be tedious (as you) I will travail no further in confuting of
these.ij. or.iij. leaves together, Fo. 73. 74. 75
which are wholly gathered out of his legendes. If any think any piece of more
credit to be given to him, let him resort to that which I said before, or
read his tales. I wish no better confuter than himself. As for Clement (whom
you say) S. Peter appointed to be his successor. Clement, Folo. 75. Contra
Here Is. Li. 3. ca. 3 Eus. li. 3 cap 13.
I would feign have you to reco^cile your authors before I do fully believe it.
For Ireneus reckeneth Linus first after Peter: then Anacletus, and Clement to
be the third. Eusebius affirms the same. Adding further, that after Linus had
occupied the sea twelve year together, then he resigned his byshoprike to
Anacletus the second year of Titus. Ephiphanius, Epiph. lib. 1. To. 2. He. 27.
although he vary in the name, yet in the order he does agree, saying:
Episcoporum in Roma successio hanc consequentiam habuit, Petrus and Paulus,
Linus, Cletus, Clemens. The succession of bishops in Rome had this orderly
sequel: Peter and Paul, Linus, Cletus, Clemens. And whereas in the same place
report is made, that both Linus and Cletus enjoyed the rowme twelve year a
piece, I marvel that Clement, according to Peter's will, did not immediately
succeed, but tarried for it.xxiiij. year. A great modesty of the man, or much
immodesty of the makers. But to come to the purpose, that which ye cite of his
authority, has no credible author to support it. In deed I find in his
recognitions, a notable place or.ij. for the material Cross. Which I think
convenient to speak of more hereafter in the.x. Article. Folio. 75. 76.
The tales of S. Anthony, S. Martin, Donatus bishop of Eueria, and Paula ye
noble woman of Rome, I pass over with silence: because if they did sign them
selves (as you say) they be no presidentes to enforce an imitation, and yet a
man may dout, whether such things were done as are reported or no. Erasmus his
judgment is, that. S. Hierome wrote the life of Paul the Heremite only for
his exercise. And in the same place, that ye bring for your prouf, where S.
Anthony armed his forehead with the impressio^ of the healthful sign, Fol.
76.
and by and by the mo^ster running svvyftely over the field, vanished out of
sight, we read these words. Hieron. in vita Pauli Eremite.
Haec vtrum diabolus ad terrendum eum simulauerit, an (vt solet) eremus
monstruosorum animalium ferax, istam quoque gignat bestiam, incertum habemus.
Whether the devil did counterfeit these things to fear him, or else, whether the
wilderness being very fruitful of monstrous beasts, do bring forth also
this beast, I know not. So that we may dout of the truth of the hystory. And
most likely it is, (as S. Hierome himself says) that the devil feling the
heremites affection, would make the sign of ye Cross wherein he delited, to be
(as ever since it has been) a cause of further sickness: a stone of offense: a
stombling block to fall at. Therefore he ministered an occasion, whereby he
might run to this sorry succor, and feigned himself to be afraid of it, ye men
might put more affiaunce in it. Wherefore we ought to dout the worste, least
these external means, do make our enemy have more advantage of us, and
our inward faith to be the less. Notwithstanding, if in the doings of elder
age, there were no such offense, Not whatsoever has been, may now be done.
Did. 63.
yet considering how things in time have grown to abuse and superstition,
such as have been tolerablely received, must now of right and conscience be
condemned. Remember the decree of Stephen, whereof I spoke before, that if any
of the predecessors, have done any thing, which at any time could stand
without offense, and afterward is turned to error and superstition, it ought
immediately to be removed. And I see not but Christians may better forsake it,
the^ keep it. I am glad that ye esteem so much S. Hieroms report of Paula. I
trust ye will not reject him when in a greater matter he shall be alleged.
Epiphanius, Epiphanius an enemy to all Images.
a bishop of Cypres who lived about the year of our Lord. 390. writing to
Ihon the patriarch of Jerusalem, has these words. Quod audiui quosdam
murmurare contra me, quia qua^do simul pergebamus ad sanctum locum qui vocatur
Bethel, vt ibi collectam tecum ex more Ecclesiastica facerem, and venissem ad
villam quae dicitur Anablathae, vidissemque ibi praeteriens lucerna^ ardente^,
and interrogassem quis locus esset, didicissemque esse Ecclesiam, and intrassem
vt orarem, inueni ibi velum pendens in foribus eiusdem ecclesiae, tinctum atque
depictum, and habens Imaginem quasi Christi vel sancti cuiusda^. Non enim satis
memini cuius imago fuerit. Cum ergo hoc vidissem in ecclesia Christi, co^tra
authoritatem scripturarum hominis pe^dere imaginem, scidi illud, and magis dedi
consilium custodibus eiusdem loci, vt pauperem mortuum eo obuoluerent and
efferrent. Which words right worthy to be considered, are in English these.
In that I heard certain did grudge against me, for that, when we went together
to the holy place which is called Bethel, to make a gathering there with thee,
according to the manner of ye Church: and came to a village called Anablatha,
and as I passed, saw a candell burning, and asked what place it was, and when I
had learned that it was a Church, and had entered in to make my prayers, I
found there a veil hanging in the Church porch, becoloured and painted, and
having the Image as it were of Christ, or of some Saint upon it: For I do not
well remember whose Image it was: Therefore when I had seen this, that in ye
Church of Christ, contrary to the authority of the Scriptures, there hanged the
Image of a man, I cut it, and gave counsel rather to the Church wardens, to
wrappe some poor dead man in it, and bury him. So far Epiphanius. And a
little after he requesteth the bishop of Jerusalem to give commandment In
ecclesia Christi, eiusmodi vela quae contra religionem nostram veniunt, non
appendi. Decet enim honestatem tuam hanc magis habere solicitudine^, vt
scrupulositatem tollat quae indigna est ecclesia Christi, and populis qui tibi
crediti sunt. That in the Church of Christ, there should be no such clothes
hanged, which come against our religion. For it becomes your honesty (says
he) rather to have this care, to take away the scrupulosite which is unworthy
of the Church of Christ, and people which are committed to your charge. Whereby
we see that certain Images of Christ and other, were in those days crept into
the Church: but the faythfuller bishops did straight remove them. We see also
yt in S. Hieromes time (to approve that which in the Epistle I said before) ye
use of Images, was not publicly received in Churches, but judged disagreante
unto the Scriptures. For otherwise (to use your own reason) S. Hierome would
not have wynked at his fault, nor translated the Epistle without correction,
if he had thought that his dooinge had been ill, or his words untrue. But what
could ye have more evident against your Cross, than that which Epiphanius The
Church Cross condemned by Epiphanius.
most freely said? First, that it is against the authority of the scripture,
to have the Image of a man hang in the Church of Christ. Then, that he desired,
that such painted clothes should not be hanged up, because he thought them
against our religion. Last of all, that he deemed the use of such, to be but
a scrupulositie, unworthy of Christ's Church, unworthy of Christians. We
teach no more tha^ Epiphanius did, yet you condemn us as heretics. Was
Epiphanius ever accounted such? Would Saint Hierome have turned his Epistle
out of the Greek into Latin, if it had contained any unsound doctrine? Would
he have given such a testimonye of him (as we read, he did) if he might have
been stained with any point of heresy? writing to Pammachius, Hieronimus ad
Pammachium.
against John of Jerusalem, he says. Habes papam Epiphanium, qui te aperte
missis litteris haereticum vocat. Certe nec aetate, nec scientiae, nec vitae
merito, nec totius orbis testimony, mayor illo es. Eo tempore quo totum
Orientem (excepto Papa Athanasio atque Paulino) Arrianoru^ and Eunomianorum
haeresis possidebat, quando tu occidentalibus, and in medio exilio
confessoribus non communicahas, ille vel presbyter Monasterij, ab Eutitio
audiebatur, vel postea Episcopus Cypri, a valente non tangebatur. Tantae enim
venerationis semper suit, vt regnantes haeretici, ignominiam sua^ putarent, si
talem virum persequerentur. Thou haste (quoth he) the Pope Ephiphanius (where
is to be noted that the Pope in old time, did signify but a father, and the
name was given not only to them of Rome, but also to them of Cypres and
Alexandria) who in his letters to thee, calls thee heretic. Truly neither
in age, nor knowledge, nor worthynesse of life, thou art greater tha^ he. At
such time as the heresy of the Arrians and Eunomians possessed all the East
(except father Athanasius and Paulinus) when thou dyddest not communicate with
them of the Weste, and such as confessed the truth in midst of their exile, he
being but a poor minister of a religious house, was heard of Eutitius, and
being afterward bishop of Cypres, was not touched of Valens. For always he
was of such worship and reverence, that when the heretics raygned, they
thought it a shame for them, if they should persecute such a man as he. Here
have ye the testimony of S. Hierome for Ephiphanius. Ye have heard what his
opinion was. I would feign know what your judgment is of it. S. Hierome
praised Paula: So did he Epiphanius. S. Hierome wrote the life of Paula: So did
he discourse upon Epiphanius, and translated his doings. Then set the fact of
Paula, against the fact of Epiphanius, and see which is to be preferred. She
made the sign of a Cross in her forehead: He, would have no sign in the
Church remaining. She prostrate her self before the Image on the Cross: he
cut in pieces the cloth that had the Image on it. She without reason, not
according to skyll, gave example of a thing: He by religion and scripture
condemned it. She was a woman, but he a man: she unlearned, but he learned: she
lived after in a corrupter age, he went before, nerer ye sincerity of the
Apostles times. Then if ye urge the one, I will burden you with the other. Yet
admit with Epiphanius, no Cross, no Crucifixe, no Image in the Church: and I
will not stick with a mystical sign of the Cross with Paula. Foli. 78. 79.
Ye reckon up a sort, that used of devotion to make in their foreheades this
cross sign: Ye make no mention of them, that used it not: in zeal as good as
they, and in number more. Wherefore as Dionisius answered, when it was laid
unto him, how many had escaped the peril of the sea, by Neptunes aid, whose
garments and monuments were hanged up to be seen: yea, quoth he, but there
are no monuments of them that perished: Even so say I, though you keep a
calendar of the Crossers, yet where is the register of them that Crossed not?
If I should in number contend with you, I well near might be equal: but if
antiquity should be respected: you should be far inferior. For as for Abdias
fables, all wise and honest esteem as much, as the famous Pamphlets that come
from Louain. But I will not use so slender a defense. I will not (as you do)
cumber the readers with more idle talk than needful proof. For if in any
thing: sure in religion, this sentence takes place: Non viuendum exemplis, sed
legibus. We must not live by examples, but by laws. Yet here ye triumph
maruellously, God wot before the victory, before any blow given. For when ye
have rehearsed the names of certain, which in their days did use this
ceremony, ye vehemently say, Shall we so far discredit and disauthorize these
grave, Folio. 80. a.
virtuous, and learned men, as though they knevv not the Scriptures, and true
interpretation of the same? As though they knevve not light from darkness,
verity from heresy, true religo^ from vain superstition? Alas God forbid.
Alas good man, how fell you out with your self? Who has chased your charity?
Be men discredited, that be not in every point followed? has your wisdom
forgotten that the self same fathers, which twice or thrice ye rehearse by
tale, both did, and taught, more often and more earnestly other things than
that, wherein your self refuse to follow them? I will take pains for your
pleasure to run them over again, in such order as ye put them, that ye shall
not say, but I deal faithfully with you. Tertullian Tertullian. Folio. 79. b.
De corona Militis.
is put in the first rank, he says: When so ever we go forth and move
forwards, when so ever we come in, or go out, when so ever we put on our
apparel, and dravve on our shoes, when we wash, when we sit down at
the table, when we have light brought in, when we go to our chambers and
sit down, whatsoever we have to do, we make the sign of the Cross in our
foreheades. The very next sentence (save one) before, Tertullians traditions.
these words he has also. Die dominico ieiunium nefas ducimus vel de
geniculis adorare: Eade^ immunitate a die Paschae in Pentecostem vsque
gaudemus. We think it a wickedness to fast upon the Sunday, or to serve God on
our knees. And the same immunitie we enjoy from Easter day to Whitsontide. And
before that, Oblationes pro natalitijs annua die facimus We make every year an
offering for our birth day, we keep the wakes. And now M. Martial: how chance
that ye kneel at your Mass on Sunday? why do you not offer up a cake on
monday? Tertullian thought the one a wickedness: the other be commanded as a
necessary seruise. Dare ye so discredit and disauthorize Tertullian? Alas God
forbid. Ye will rather never serve God at all, never fast, never knele: but
drink and be merry, and pipe up John taberer to morrovve shall be my fathers
wake. These toys and such other, as he borrowed of Montane (notwithstanding
afterward condemned by council:) so you of conscience and tender heart will
follow, thinking therein you are a good catholic. The next in your array is
holy Ephrem Ephrem.
He says: Let us paynt in our gates, and printe in our foreheads, faces,
breasts and all parts of our body, the lively sign. In the same book also de
Poenitentia, four times together, he calls Christ Legislatorem, a law
maker. De co^pu^ctione cordis. Lib. 1. Ca. 5. De laudibus Mariae.
And is this Catholic? Where have ye read the like? He prays also to the
virgin Mary, saying: Sub alis tuis custodi me Keep me under thy wings. What
word or sense of Scripture for this? David in four or five places does
attribute the same to God. Psalm. xvj.xxxv.lvj.lx.lxij. But to none other. And
the whole course of Scripture is in deed against it. Yet here ye will follow
him. Then what say you to this? Diverse times he feigned himself to be mad, for
fear least they should lay a bishoprike upon him. Will ye follow him in this?
I doubt your modesty. Folio. 78. Chrisostom.
Chrisostom (you say) does counsel us, with great study and earnest zeal to
set in our foreheads and minds the Cross. So does he every man to have the
bible in his house. How like ye that? Hom. 9. in Epis. ad Coloss. De Lazar.
Co^c. 3 and 4. In cap. Mat 21. Hom. 69.
Every man and woman, as well, and rather the lay fee than the clergy, to be
conversant in Scripture. Admit ye that? That whersoeuer the Bible lies, the
devil can have no power there? Believe ye that? That Monks had their minds void
of al affections, and their bodies like Adams before the fall (wherein is
denied original sin) Confess ye that? If in these points ye think it no
shame to swerve from Chrysostom, think it no discredit to refuse the other.
Folio. 78. Hieron. in 3 Sopho. In Ezech. Ca. 16 co^tra Iouin.
S. Hierom counsels us to make the sign of the Cross. So does he also to
trust to ye merits of ye priest, or else to think there is no due sacrament. He
says that our souls as long as they are young are without sin: and that to
marry twice, is as il almost as to play the harlot. If in these cases ye think
he had the true interpretation of the Scripture, I marvel not if ye trust him
in the other. Folio. 78. August. de pecc mer. and remis. libr. 1. Cap. 20.
But if in these he was deceived, why do ye so earnestly urge him in the
other? Saint Augustine commaundcth us to make the sign of the Cross. So does
he also, that infants should receive the communion. If ye discredit him in
this, who thought it as necessary for them to take the Lords supper, as to be
Christened: will ye think it so great a matter, in such a trifle as the other
is, which without any word, without any binding us to it, he only spoke of, a
little to dissent? Cyrillus ye name, but cite no authority. Folio. 79. b.
When we come to his place, in the latter end of the ninth Article, you shall
hear more news of him. Prudentius he says, Prudentius Cathemeri (...) Hymno
ante cibu^ Folio. 79.
that when we go to sleep, we must in our foreheades make the sign of the
Cross. But in the same book also he says, that it was the woman that subdued
the Serpent, transferring the glory, from Christ unto Mary. And as he does
infer a reason for the Cross, because a mind earnestly fixed on that sign,
cannot be inconstant and waver. So does he for the dignity of Christ's mother,
saying: The virgin that deserved to bring forth God, brings all poison and
ill power unto naught. And the doctrine of the one, is as true as the other.
Wherefore since it is not to be denied, but that every one of the fathers of
the Church (whom I notwithstanding with all my heart do reverence) have had
their errors and imperfections (though not in like degree al) ye do us wrong,
to say we discredit them, if we do not clearly in all things follow them. They
themselves refused that honor and authority: they must be trusted, but yet as
men. As long as they bring their warrant for them, God forbid in deed, but we
should admit them. If we established our traditions, and destroyed theirs: If
we devised a worship of our own, and despised theirs, we were to be blamed: But
when in respect of Gods commandment (which no man ought, on peril of his
life transgress) we reiecte a custom and devise of man, we are not to be
burdened with pride or singularity. Folio. 80.
Your selves think it laweful, to alter and innouate at your own pleasures,
all traditions and ceremonies of elder time: As taking away milk and honey from
Christenings, contrary to Tertullian: and denying infants the supper of the
Lord, contrary to Augustine: with an hundred more, that I could rehearse. And
wherewithal do you supply them? with your own fancies, your own follies.
Yet you neither discredit, nor disauthorize the fathers. We, if we stand not
to every jot, that any one of the fathers heretofore has written, and has
pleased the Pope of his power absolute to admit, are compted heretics,
schismatiques, such as have separated our selves from the Church. In deed we
profess a separation from you, as our Apology does witness, Folio. 81.
Apology of the church of England.
and show good reason why. Therein your finenesse does call us patchers. I wys
all the pack of you has not cloth in your shoppes to make the like. But
separating our selves from you, the enemies of God and of his truth, we join
(as we ought) with the church of Christ. For what is the unity Unity of
Papists.
that you appoint us? The humble obedience of the Church of Rome, whom you will
have to be the mother Church, who^ you do call the boosome and the lap, that
all men ought to run unto, which will be numbered among Gods children. You,
with this unity, content your selves, seking rather, your selves over Christ,
than Christ over the flock to reign: compassing rather, how your selves may
dayntily live in this world, than how the members of the Church may be brought
to heaven. But we must appoynte, such kind of unity, Unity of Christians.
as must not depend upon one particular or private Church: be it either of
Antioch, or of Jerusalem, or of Rome it self, but upon the catholic and
universal Church, which was not only before Rome in antiquity, but shall
continue when Rome is gone. This must we search out of the scriptures. Romans 12.
Vnu^ corpus multi sumus in Christo says ye Apostle, We being many, are one
body in Christ. Christ is the head, and we be the members. How do the members
and the head agree? With one flesh, one blood, one spirit, and one life. As
Christ is in the father, and the father in Christ: so we al by Christ, are one
in God. If one spirit rule us, we must all think one thing. If we be all one
body, we must not hate our own flesh. As brotherly love and charity is
necessary for us to declare by the same that we be Christ's disciples: as peace
and quietness among us all, is a thing most expedient, as a band to knyt us
in the unity of the spirit: so they which are thus united unto Christ, must
not only be quickened with the same spirit, but be comforted and maintained, with
the same faith and hope. Wherefore if you will have us to continue the unity of
your church with you, then make it first a catholic Church: and of a sink of
Idolatry, a follower and furtherer of true religion. It is not by and by the
unity of ye church, which coms under color and name of it. Hierome a doctor
of the Church writes. Sub rege Constantio, Contra Luciferianos.
Eusebio and Hippatio Consulibus, nomine vnitatis et fidei, infidelitas scripta
est. In the time of Constance the king, Eusebius and Hippatius being Consuls,
under the name of unity and faith, infidelity was written. And such an unity
do you deliver us, (not you alone, I mean, but all the rabble of popish
heretics with you) as consists of Idolatry, false worshippings, simony,
with a corrupt body, and a cou^terfet head, even Antichrist himself. You say,
that the unity of the church does hang upon observance of ceremonies, old
rites and customs: We say, that it stands upon faith and spirit. Ephesi. 4.
Which are the truer in this behalf? S. Paul byddeth us to be careful, to
keep the unity of the spirit, til we meet together in the unity of faith.
Augustine entreating of the Sabbath fast, Epist. 86.
says: Interminabilis est ista contentio, generans lites, nunquam fiaiens
quaestiones. This contention is endelesse, still ingendring strife, never
ceassing from doubts. And what I beseech you, do you, that brag of your
unity? dissent from all antiquity, not agree with your selves, contend about
trifles, damn the true faith, derogate all from Christ's death and his
passion, and giving it to your own free will and works. The works that you
command, be your own devises. The works that God commaundes, you have
nothing to do withal. Break Gods commandment, and it is no matter. Break
yours, we dye for it. It is a wonder, how bold you will be to pronounce
heretics to serve your turn. Eusebius. ecclesiast. hist. Lib. 5.
Victor Bishop of Rome would excommunicate and condemn of heresy all the
churches of Asia, because they did keep their Easter Quartadecima luna primi
mensis, when the Jews sweet bread is eaten, and not at the time yt he kept it
at Rome. A sore point I promise you. But you condemn us of heresy, for
preaching of the Gospel, against the traditions and precepts of men. If they,
from whose ordinances we do depart, had either thought their traditions
necessary, or showed scripture whereupon they grounded them, we would not
presume to withstand their authority, or gaynesay their good reason. But when
they deliver them as things indifferent, and plainly profess, that they have
no word of the Lord for them: a hope of commodity may cause us to retain
them, but an apparent mischief must drive us to refuse the^. Tertullian
himself, Tertullia^ de corona militis.
when he had rehearsed a great sort of traditions, among which, this was the
last, that we now do speak of, (the manner of signing with the Cross in the
forehead) immediately infers, Harum and aliarum eiusmodi disciplinarum si
legem expostules scripturaerum, nullam reperies. If thou require a law of
Scripture, for these and such like orders of discipline, thou shall find none.
Wherefore since they build not upon the Scripture, they do not expound upon
the word: when these joys be taught, we can not (as you say) dyscredite and
dysauthorize them, Folio. 79. b.
as though they knevv not the scriptures, and true interpretation of the law.
When you do make a lie of your own, do I discredit your knowledge in the
law? A lawyer may sometime be a liar, as you prove unto us, and yet not the
law to wit. When the fathers bring an invention of their own, do I otherwise
deny them the right sense of scripture? The fathers may have sometime their
fancies, and yet beside the word. Then if their fancies be misliked, is their
exposition of the word condemned, whereas they meddle not with the word?
Apelles shoemaker was worthily checked, when he would be busy above the knee:
but that did not set, but he might have judgment good enough of the shoe. Yet
in a shoe made on another last, ye best shoemaker for all his skill may chance
be deceived. In deed good cause we have, only to depend upon the word of God,
and not be ruled over by time or custom, because in matters of our religion,
as Christ has taken perfect order therein: so has he commanded us to go no
further but him obey. August. de Consen. Eua^ Li. 1. Cap. 18.
Socrates was wont to say, Vnumquemque Deum sic coli oportere, quomodo seipsum
colendum esse praecepisset. That every God was so to be served, as he himself
had commanded to be served. And this was the cause why the Romans, would
never receive the God of the Hebrews. For grounding upon this foresaid
principle, they saw it necessary, that either al their ydols should be excluded,
and only the true God entertained: or he only not admitted, the rest be
honored. For by the word of God they found, that they could not agree
together: and contrary to his word, they would not seek to serve him. If they
had this affect, as Augustine declares, gathered by moral reason, and by no
further insight of faith: Shall we that profess more knowledge and perfection,
be folisher than they, hearing continually Christ and his Apostles inueighing
against wilworshippers? Therefore I say, we ask for the word, you answer us
by will: we call for Scripture, you reach us custom. Epig. lib. 6.
Martial a merry man a poet of your name, a man of more learning and wit than
you, had some time to do with such a lawyer as you. For a neighbor of his had
stolen.iij. goats. The matter was called into the court, the party should
come to prove the indictment. He gat him a counsailler to declare the case.
When the judge was ready to hear it, his counsailer fell a discoursing of the
fight at Cannas, the battayl with Mithridates, the wro^ges and injuries
sustained by the Africanes. Thus when he had filled their ears a great while
with din, thu^ping on the bar and squekyng in his small pipes: Martial
tenderyng his own cause, more than the babbling of his vain advocate, at
length pulled him by the sleeue, and said. And please your worship I gave ye my
fee to talk of.iij. goats. And thus had I need to put you in remembrance.
For where ye appointed to speak of Gods service, ye tell us a tale of this man
and that man, what he did, and they did. And yet not a word what God has
commanded. Fol. 82.
Ye call us curious, when we require Scripture. We can get at your hands
nothing else but custom. And speaking of custom, according to your custom,
ye make a lie: and falsefie Tertullia^. Martial corrupts Tertullian.
For these are your words. We say with Tertullian, that custom increser,
confirmer, and obseruer of faith, taught this use of the Cross. etc. As if ye
increase, confirmation, and observing of Faith, proceeded of custom. His words
are otherwise. For speaking of his traditions he says. S. legem expostules
scripturaru^, nulla^ reperies, tradition tibi praetendetur auctrix, consuetudo
confirmatrix, and fides obseruatrix. If thou demand a law of Scripture for
these, thou shall find none: Traditione shall be pretended to thee as increaser,
custom confirmer, and faith obseruer of them. Where you may see, that custom
is not made increaser and confirmer of faith: but faith obseruer of custom.
Notwithstanding I must still bear with you. For ye be driven to narrow
shyftes, and feign would ye say something. But it is a foul shyft to make a
lie. This custom ye prove came of tradition. For (as Tertullia^ Tertulian de
corona millitis.
says,) how can a thing be used, if it were not first delivered. To grant it
a tradition, I will not stick with you. But Tertullia^ will have the same to be
builded upon reason, or else he refuses it. He makes the Antithesis not
between written and unwritten: but between written and reasonable. And so he
thinks a Tradition not written, to be admitted, so it be reasonable. Therefore
he says. Rationem traditioni, consuetudini, fidei patrocinatura^ perspicies.
Martial is still by his own authors overthrown.
Ye shall see that reason will defend tradition, custom and faith. And
afterward. Non differt scriptura an ratione consistat, quando and legem ratio
commendet. It is no matter, whether custom consist of writing or of reason,
inasmuch as reason also commends law. So that reasonable must be the
tradition. And how shall this reasonable be defined. Tertullia^ himself does
tell you, limiting how a man may make a custom if he conceue and decree
duntaxat quod Deo co^gruat, quod disciplinae conducat, quod saluti proficiat.
Only that is agreeable to God, furthering unto discipline, and profitable to
salvation. If the tradition of the Cross sign, may be proved to be such, I
will yield unto you with all my heart. Consider the reasons, and the examples that
ye Doctor uses. First of the Lords authorite, who said. Cur non and a vobis
ipsis quod iustu^ est iudicatis? Vt no^ de iuditio tantum, sed de omni
se^tentia rerum examinandarum. Why do you not of your selves judge that, that
is rightuous? yt it be not only understood of judgment, but of every sentence
of things to be examined. And it follows. Dicit and Apostolus, Si quid
ignoratis, Deus vobis reuelabit. Solitus and ipse co^silium subministrare cum
praeceptum domini non habebat, and quaeda^ edicere a semetipso, sed and ipse
spiritu^ dei habens, deductore^ omnis veritatis. Itaque consiliu^ and edictu^
eius diuini ia^ praecepti instar obtinuit, de rationis diuinae patrocinio. Hanc
nunc expostula saluo traditionis respectu, quocunque traditore censetur, necl
authorem respicias sed authoritatem. etc. And the Apostle says. If ye be
ignoraunte of any thing, God shall reveal it to you. He himself, when he had
not a commandment from the Lord, was wont to give counsel and prescribe
some things of himself, but as one that had the spirit of God directer of all
truth. Wherefore his counsel and edict has now obtained to be (as it were)
the commandment of God, through supportation and defense of the reason
divine. This reason inquire for, saving the respect of tradition, whosoever be
the deliverer thereof: nor respect the author, but the authority. So far
Tertullia^. And in his words, In a custom maker the spirit of God. In
custo^e, commodity and agreablenesse to Scripture must be considered. Folio.
82. a. Basile.
many notable points are to be observed. First that in all judgments and
examinations of things, we must follow that, that is right and good. The^,
that no man presume to ordain any thing in the Church, unless he have the
spirit of God to guide him. Thirdly, that S. Paul's tradition should not have
stood in force, unless it had been consona^t unto the Scripture. Fourthly, yt
in all customs, we must have an eye unto Gods law, seek what accords to
it, having no respect to the custom maker, but Scripture co^firmer. Thus ye
might have learned how to judge of traditions. Tertullian might have taught
you. But as soon as ever you had made a lie of him, there ye left him. To
Basile, who says. If we reject and cast away customs which are not written
as things of no great value or price, we shall condemn, before we be vvare
those things which in the gospel are accounted necessary to salvation, I
answer: that of Traditions there be three kinds. Three kinds of tradition
Some that necessarily are inferred of the Scripture: such were the Apostles
Traditions: as that a woman in the congregation should not be bare headed:
That the poor should labor with their own hands, and get their living: which
all and such other, although they were not expressly in the word, yet
consequently they followed of the word. And therefore Paul, did not obtrude them
of his authority, but by the Scripture prove them. These and the like I
confess to be necessary: and of all Christians to be retained. Prove ye the
Cross sign to be one of these, and I will recant. In traditions indifferent
what to be observed.
First we must see, that those obserua^ces be not set forth, as a piece of
Gods service: wherein some special point of holiness or religion shall
consist. For they may be kept for order, for policy, for profit of the
Church, but otherwise the Scripture it self, has Gods store and plentye of
things, expediente for his honor and service, our comfort and salvation. Felix
ecclesia, (says Tertullian) Tertul. de. prescrip. aduer. Hereti.
cui totam doctrina^ Apostoli cu^ sanguine profuderunt. Happy is ye Church, to
whom the Apostles poured out the whole doctrine together with their blood.
There is no insufficiency, no imperfection. Therefore we must especially beware,
that in our traditions, indifferent of themselves, we repose no holiness or
devotion. Then also, that we think them not to be of such necessity, that at
no time they may be removed. The Church must still retain her right, to be
judge and determiner of such traditions: either to bear with the^, or else
abolish them, as best may serve for edification. Last of all, this must not be
forgotten, that the people of God; sometime be oppressed with traditions and
Ceremonies: and for outward solemnities, the inward true seruise of God is
neglected. As in the popish Church, on a hye day, there are so many gaudes,
that there is no place for a preacher. Wherefore, the superfluitees, The Church
had to many Ceremonies in Augustines time.
the long train of Ceremonies, must be cut of, least they do hinder the course
of godliness, and by gay show, enge^der a confidence to be put in them. S.
Augustine in his time complained, that the Church was to full of presumptions.
And of them yt have been added since, a man may make many large volumes.
Wherefore these prouisoes had, the order of the Church (I mean not Rome, for
that is no member of it) may be kept in traditions, which are indifferent. But
in this number you cannot justly compryse the Cross. And although of some
fathers it has been accounted such: yet must ye remember (as I said before)
that they did not always build gold and silver, but sometime hay and stubble
upon Christ. Nor every thing that is pretended to be the fathers wrytinges,
must by and by be thought to be theirs. Many bastard babes have been put in
the cradel, either when there was no lawful child, or the same ouerlayed and
stifeled by the nurse. As for example: Fol. 84. a. Athanasius Euagrius. Li. 3.
cap. 31.
Athanasius (whom you cite for proof that the Cross was used in his time)
has many things that be none of his. Euagrius in the ecclesiastical history,
does plainly say, that many works of Apollinarius, were ascribed unto him. And
as for the book which you allege, Questionum ad Antiochium is evident to be
an others. Quest. 23.
For Athanasius himself is cited in it. The words are these. Et haec quidem
multum valens in diuina scriptura magnus Athanasius. And these things did great
Athanasius, a mighty one in the Scripture of God. Would Athanasius have
reported this of himself? Wherefore, in ye ye bring prescription of time, and
writings of the fathers for you, ye do both reason upon an uncertain
principle, and fail in your proof. For the principle, I say: and I doubt not
but ye will subscribe unto me, that whatsoever has been delivered, and
otherwise esteemed Apostolic, is not to be followed, and thought inviolable.
To begin with that, which bred in ye Church a miserable schism, for many
years together, the Easter fast: Easter fast. Read Eusebius in the Eccle.
His. the, v. book the xxiiii. xxv. and xxvi. cha.
was it always, and in every place uniformly observed? Nothing less. All the
Asianes dissented from the Romans, and each of them said, they had a
tradition, yea from the Apostles. The Asians would have Easter day, to be
the.xiiij. of the month Nisan, howsoever it fell: were it either the first,
second, third, fourth, fyfth, or sixth fery. The Romans, would have it only
on that day, which is called Dominicus, the Sabbath. The Asians were the
stronger part: they had Philip the Apostle, and his daughters, John the
Euangeliste, and Polycarpus his scholar for the^. The Romans, had the whole
succession of bishops from Peter forward. Which of these parts will you
approve? Ye are a Romanist, and therefore ye will hold with Anicetus rather,
following the custom that is of him received. But now ye must not condemn the
other, least ye be gilty of the same crime, that Ireneus did reprove in Victor.
For he held it tyranny, to throw the thunderbolt of excommunication for a
little storm ye rose of ceremony. Notwithstanding they squared still. For when
Polycarpus came to Rome, Anicetus being bishop there, many quarrels there were
betwixt them: well afterward composed, but of this point they could not
agree. Neque enim Anicetus Policarpo persuadere poterat ne seruaret, quae cu^
Ioanne discipulo domini nostri, ac reliquis Apostolis quibuscu^ fuerat
conuersatus, semper seruauerat: Nec Policarpus Aniceto suasit vt seruaret, qui
sibi presbyteroru^ quibus successerat, consuetudine^ seruandam esse dicebat. Et
cum ista sic haberent, co^munione^ inter se habueru^t. For Anicetus could not
(as Eusebius says) wyn Policarpus that he should not keep those things, which
(with John the disciple of our Lord, For diversity in traditions and
ceremonies men not to be condemned.
and the rest of the Apostles with whom he was conuersaunt) hitherto he had
kept. Not Policarpus could persuade Anicetus, to yield unto them: who said,
that the custom, of ye elders, whom he had succeeded, was to be kept of him.
And whereas things stood on this sort, yet had they a communion betwixt them.
A worthy example for this our age, wherein such Victorines as you (M. Martial)
will by and by condemn of schism and heresy, whosoever in traditions do not
agree with you. These holy fathers, dissented in opinion of the mean actions:
yet in the end, they joined: and by the way friendly communicated. We, because
we do not in opinion agree, because we go not against our conscience, and the
word of God: are accounted heretics. Act. 24.
But after the way (which you call heresy) we worship the God of our fathers,
believing all things which are written in the law and Prophets. If so great
offense hang upon transgressing of Tradition, we shall condemn all faithful
before us, all congregations, and Rome it self. Policarpus. Traditions how
they vary. Ireneus contra, Her. lib. 5 cap. 3.
For it was a Tradition in Policarpus time, to keep Easter day, sometime on one
day, sometime on another. And Ireneus reports of him: Hic docuit semper, quae
ab Apostolis didicerat, quae and ecclesiae tradidit, and sola sunt vera. He
taught always those things that he learned of the Apostles: and those he
delivered unto ye Church, and they only be true. Yet you observe the Easter on
one day ever: the Sunday (as you call it.) It was a tradition in Tertullia^s
time, Tertul. de. corona militis.
to give milk and honey to Infantes at their Christening: and this he held
Apostolic: yet you keep it not. It was a tradition in Augustines Augustinus
Cassulano.
time, yt me^ should not fast, from Easter, to Whytsontyde: yet you decree the
contrary. It was a tradition in Cyprians Cyprian de lapsis.
time (which Augustine also confirms) that the Supper of the Lord should be
ministered to Infa^tes: and this was thought necessary to salvation: yet you
declyne from this. It was a tradition in Epiphanius time, Epiphaninus aduersus
Aerium.
that for.vj. days before Easter, men should eat nothing, but bread and drink
with a little salt: yet you observe not this. It was a tradition in Basiles
Basilius de Spir. Sanct.
time, (which also Tertullian, does record) ye no man should serve God with
bowing of the knee on the Sabbath day, nor yet all the time, from Easter to
Whitsontyde: yet you mislike with this. Wherefore since Traditions, honored with
the name of the Apostles, accounted of the fathers and doctors necessary, do
notwithstanding so often vary, and you your selves in no wise admyt them: what
reason is it, that we should be condemned for refusal of the like, which with
less reason, more inconvenience, it pleases your selves to confirm and
stablish?

I have hitherto had in hand, your.ij. first points: and stretching them a
little, they be broken both. For neither have you proved sufficiently yt they
of the primitive church, used the sign of the Cross themselves, and
counseled other to do the like: nor if it had been proved, it were sufficient
to drive me to assent. Now to the third, that the said Cross was erected
in every place, although in the third Article I have in part declared the
contrary: yet to your further proof, I must answer something. And so first
to your Martialis Martialis
(though he were last found, after xiiij. hundredth years sleep, and odd,
suddenly astarted) I say king Arthur was a noble king: he had.xij. knights of
the round table: and whether Lancelot du lake were one of the^, I do not well
remember: but he was a Martial man too: he was a doughty knight, he did many
worthy feats, as it follows in the text. Are ye not ashamed to vouch him to
be one of the seauenty and two disciples, Fol. 83. b.
whom neither they of ye Apostles time, nor they that succeeded after, ever
mentioned or knew? Seek for this about the begi^ning of the first Article.
Shall he now by miracle be raked out of a donghyll, where he has lain a
stinking.xiiij. hundredth years? Shall we now disprove Eusebius, and al other
writers, to make your matter good? Yet to say the truth, his words without
wringing or wresting at all, be taken of soberer wits than your own, to
importe much less, than you do talk of. For we may have the Cross in a
sign (according to the words of Christ in his last supper, Do this as often as
ye do it, in remembrance of me) though we have not the sign of the Cross.
Therefore you be forsworn once. For ye fayd, Folio. 83. b
In good faith it could not be so. But what shall I seek for any truth of you,
who shauing your crown, have shaken all honesty and faith from you. You wysh
with a sigh (alack good heart) that the readers should see, how in the time of
Athanasius, Folio. 84. b Athanasius.
Christian men made Crosses, like unto the Cross of Christ, and adored the
same. I should here pass the bounds of modesty, and justly offend the good
readers ears, if I should answer according to your professed impudency, and
shameless deserving. Thought you that your writing should never come to
scanning? Was it not enough for you to beelie them that be most unlike you, the
ministers of the Church of Christ now living: but that you would still falsefie
the Scriptures, and make lies of the fathers? Remember your writings: your
words are these. Folio. 84. a.
Now that it stayed not here, but was set up and had in reverence in other
places, and other ages, it appears by Athanasius: who asking the question,
why all faithful Christen me^ make Crosses like unto the Cross of Christ,
and make nothing like to the spear, read or sponge, being holy as the Cross,
answers and says. Crucis certe figuram, Martial makes.3. lies of
Athanasius together.
ex duobus lignis componentes adoramus. etc. We certes making the figure of the
Cross of ij. pieces of vvood, adore and worship it. These are your words:
yours I may call them, for they be furthest of, from Athanasius meaning. And in
the marge^t, the place is quoted. Quaest. 39. ad Anti. Here be three lies
together. First by suppressing a piece of Athanasius: saying of the spear,
reed, and sponge, that they are, holy as the Cross. Where ye author has,
that they are, as holy as the Cross. The^ remember this (as) Also by
corrupting of the text, putting in the words, of (Adore and worship) which
are not in the book. Last of all, referring us to the.xxxix. question, whereas
there are not so many in all. In deed Quaestione. 16. Quest 16. ad Antio.
these are his words. Quare credentes omnes ad crucis imaginem cruces facimus,
lanceae vero sanctae, aut arundinis, aut spongiae, figuras nullas conficimus:
cum tamen haec tam sint sancta, quam ipsa crux? Responsio. Figuram quidem
Crucis ex duobus lignis compingentes, conficimus: vt si quis infidelium id in
nobis reprehendat, quod veneremur lignum, possimus duobus inter se disiunctis
lignis, and crucis dirempta forma, ea tanquam inutilia ligna reputare, and
infideli persuadere, quod non colamus lignu^, sed quid Crucis typum veneremur:
in lancea vero, aut spongia, vel arundine, nec facere hoc, nec ostendere
possimus. which in english are these: Why do all beleuers make Crosses, after
the Image of the Cross, but make no figures or likenesses of the spear, the
reed or the sponge: where as notwithstanding, these are as holy as the Cross
it self? The answer. We make in deed the figure of the Cross, by putting
of two sticks together, that if any of the infidels, reprove that in us, that
we worship wood, we may by separating two pieces of wood, and taking away the
form of a Cross, account them as unprofitable sticks, and persuade the
infidel, that we worship not wood, but the thing represented by the Cross:
which in the spear, sponge, or reed, we neither can do nor show. Here first
it is evident, that the reed, or spear, is as holy as the Cross, and
therefore as well to be worshippped as the Cross, although the word of
comparison you would feign suppress. Then that there is not any word or half
word for worshipping: yea the whole sequel of the matter, does convince the
contrary. Yet your honesty is such, as to put in of your own (under name of
Athanasius) Adore and Worship. By the Popes own law, (for being such a
falsarie) ye should have your crown pared, and be made an Abbey lubber, Did.
50. ca. Si Episcopus
as long as ye live. And may not I use the words of your zealous spirit, and
say: Ah see good readers what a sotte we have to do vvithall? Because ye
read (or hear say at the least) that a Cross was made, therefore ye
conclude, Folio. 84. b.
it was set in the Roodeloft: for no man (say you) makes him a velvet coat to
lay it up in his press, or his friends picture to be put in the colehouse. But
does any wiseman, when he has a new garment, proclaim it in the market place?
or hang the counter fet of his friend, upon a pole to be seen? By your own
slender reason, as ye judge of the one, so ymagine of the other. Now to come to
ye ecclesiastical history, where mention is made of ye Idol Serapis: I would
the readers should well consider it, For Roodes, Crosses and Images have been
nothing else but cou^terfets of Serapis. Roodes, Crosses, Images cou^terfets of
Serapis Ruffinus Ecclesias. hi. lib. 2. cap 23.
The priests of Egypt, ye votaries of those days, (for Ruffinus calls them
(...) such as had made themselves (and God will) chaste: set me up in their
temple a monstrous Idol, reaching from one side of the wall to the other. To
purchase more credit to it, they had made a little window eastwarde, where the
morning sun might glimmer in, and taking the just heyght of their idol, should
shine no lower nor higher than they would: but that, when their God was shrined,
might be full in his face, and upon his lips. And so by this means a miracle
was wrought, the sun with a kiss, bad him welcome to Church. Again, where
the nature of the Lodestone is to draw iron to it, they made (as curiously as
workmanship could devise) the Image of the son in iron: that whereas the
sun was in the vawte, and the Image directely underneath it, the Image
sometime, might rise and hang in the air. But least the ponderositie of the
metal, might come to his course again, they conveyed it away, and said: The
sun has now taken his leave of Serapis, and gone to his business. These and
such other inventions they had to deceive the people. Such hayes they pitched
to purchase their profit. But these were but gross, in respect of the finenesse
of our parish priests, and popish Chaplens. For they have made Roodes, with
rolling eyes, and sweating brows: with speaking mouth, and walking feet. I
report me to the Roode of grace: the Roode of Winchester: ye very Cross of
Ludlow: and Jack knacker of Witney. Nor marvel if the Cross be so deep in
your books, that can stand a hielone, and walk on the altar, that can run
in the night time from S. John's Chapel, into our Ladies, and will not for
ielousy abide from her. But I would the world should understand, that as the
Egiptians, and Christians, Serapis, and the cross sign, in name do differ: so
the priests of them both be of one religion, Ruffinus. Eccl Hist. lib. 2. cap.
25.
like conversation. Tira^nus a chauntrey priest, serving at Saturnus altar,
had a way to creep into his Gods belly (for he was hollow as most part of our
Images are, mete for to make swines troughes,) and when so ever any
gentlewomans devotion served her, to come to make her oraisons, if ye priest
liked her parson, answer was made from within, that she must abide there all
that night, in pryuie contemplatio^s. The silly husband was glad, that he had
any thing to do his God a pleasure: and therefore would deck her and trim her
up, in her holyday array: and to Church she goes, with penny in her purse, and
taper in her hand, to offer for her sins: The priest, before all the people,
shuts ye Church door, he leaves the woman within, and home he goes. But
afterward by a privy vawt underneath the ground, he conuoyes himself into the
body of the image: and while the lamps be burning, and she praying, he roareth
somewhat out of his trunk, partly to fear her, partly also to make her well
apayde, that she should be worthied to have a God to talk to her. But when he
had wrought what soever he thought good, either to astony her, or entise her to
folly, then suddenly by a vice, all the candels go out, he plays the priest.
etc. Thus in conclusion, many honest men's wives, many worshipful and honorable,
under color of holiness, and by mere hypocrisy, were instruments many
years, to satisfy the pleasure of the filthy priest. At length, a discreter
matrone than the rest, abhorring the vice, and observing the manner of it,
knew the priests voice, and detected it to her husband: hereupon the priest
was apprehended: the Idol ransacked: the starting holes espied: the crimes
confessed: the hypocrisy abhorred. And would to God that the like wickedness,
and far more horrible, daily committed by the unchaste generation of soleliued
priests, might cause alike all countries and nations to detest your shame. Ye
blame lawful marriage: ye think it a life dissolute, and satisfying of the
lusts of the flesh. But how live ye? how live ye? with viler shifts than
Saturnus priest. Adultery? no fault. For the most part ye practice it all. It
is worse, it is worse. I appeal to your conscience (M. Martial) whether ye
know it to be so or no? my self will not speak what I do know. But accursed
be he that taught the boys of Winchester to know yt, which M. Hide (ye
remember) so severely punished. M. Hide late schole master of Winchester.
Jews Euank.
Ye lay unto our charge, pride, carnal lusts, sensuality, much babble of the
Lord, no good works in Christ, in talk much vehemence, in deed no charity:
and of late there has stepped up a famous cleark, who syfting a private fault
in one only person, ye professes the truth, and exaggerating the same,
co^cludech with doting Demipho, Vnum nosti omnes noueris, Know one and know all.
And may I not answer as unto Dauus, ad pristinu^ vel capistrum Daue? But if I
should unrip (as if ye leave not your slau^ders, I will do by Gods grace if life
and leisure serve me) ye lives of your popish doctors, and your own selves, O
Lord, what perjury, what impiety, what incontinencie, what sodomitry, would
burst out together? Folio. 85. a.
But here I stay and will return to Serapis. I told you before, that if ye
would have any president of the cross sign, ye must go to ye Egiptians Idol
Serapis. Ruffinus Eeclesia. his. Lib. 2. ca. 29
The Christians therefore, thinking, that, a mean to bring them sooner unto the
faith, pulled down ye scutchins of the Idol, and in every place set up the
Gross: not to have them fall from one ydolatry to another (which is by worship
of it) but that it might be an introduction unto further knowledge, and
procuring of a credit unto our religion. For the Cross being one of their
letters, which they called (...) Priestly and holy letters, made them for
affection to their own tradition, think the better of ours. For the author
says, Qui tunc admiratione rerum gestarum conuer teba^tur ad fidem, dicebant
ita sibi ab antiquis traditum, quod hec quae nunc coluntur, tamdiu starent,
quamdiu viderent signum istud venisse in quo esset vita. Vnde accidit, vt magis
ij qui erant ex sacerdotibus vel ministris templorum ad fidem conuertere^tur,
quam illi quos erroru^ pro vaestigie et deceptionu^ machinae delectaba^t. They
which by wondering at things that were done, were converted to the faith,
said: that it was told them of old, that these things which now are
worshipped, should stand so long, as they should see, ye that sign was come,
in which there was life. Whereof it came to pass, that rather they, which were
of the priests and ministers of the Church, were converted to the faith, than
such as took a pleasure in sorceries of error, and traynes of deceyte. So that
it was better than a preaching unto them, because they had such a prejudice
thereof. Now if the case were, that heathen should be converted to the faith,
and they before hand had the Cross in reverence, I would in this respect
admit it. But among Christians, where the crucified is daily preached, and
ought to be known without such external mean, Folio. 85. a.
great folly it is to have it. Hitherto of the doings in Alexandria. Now to
come to Constantinople, as touching Chrisostom I have said enough in the first
Article. Only therefore will I add this, which may be a bone for you to pick
on: that whereas he speaks of houses, markets, wildernesses, Chrisostom
demonst co^tra gentiles
hie ways, sea, ships, garments, parlours, walls, windows, armor, and such
other things, where the Cross should be, only he says not, that the Cross
was in the Church. Rekening up, so many, would he have forgotten the chief, if
any such order had been received then? It is not credible. Augustine August. de
Cruce and Latrone.
(if ye were not to wilfully set) should not be urged of you. For he means
nothing less than either the material or your mystical Cross. He plainly
speaks of the passion of Christ: and incident into that, is the form thereof,
which was his suffering upon ye Cross. Crux Christi (says he) feriae sunt and
nundine spirituales. The Cross of Christ is our holy feast and spiritual
fair. Do ye keep the feast unto the piece of wood? Do ye buy any thing of the
external sign? If ye do not, ye mistake S. Augustine. For immediately upon
the foresaid words he infers those yt you allege: Before the Cross was a
name of comdemnation, now it is made a matter of honor: before it stood in
damnation of a curse, now it is set up in occasion of salvation. Where I
grant in deed, that he makes a difference between the Cross in the old
law, and Cross in the new law, but what is meant by that Cross? the
material thing? That is but as you guess: Deuteronomy 21. Gal. 3.
For I am sure of the contrary. The scripture says not, Maledictum lignum,
Cursed is the tree, but Maledictus omnis qui pendet in ligno. Cursed is every
one that hangs on the tree. Wherefore your collection is vain, that as then
the material Cross was a name of ignominy, so now the material Cross is
a thing of honor, did the ignominy consiste in the wood then? no: but in the
person. For if ye were hanged M. Martial, (to use a familiar example) ye shame
were not in ye gallows, but in your self-man. Then the honor is not in ye
material Cross, but him that died on it. And that the words (Nunc erecta est,
is now at this present set up) can not he racked to a Metaphorical sense is
very strange, to me: for if it be true, Heb. 13. Apo. 13.
that Christus idem heri and hodie, that Christ is the same both to day and
yesterday: And yt he is the lamb, Qui occisus est ab origin mundi which was
slain from the beginning of the world: me thinks it is no absurdity to say:
yt now at this present in the time of grace, Christ daily suffers: his
passion is set out as a spectacle unto us. And now to conclude with
Constantine the great, Folio. 86.
whose fact is such a defense unto you, that ye think your self full armed
with it. But without any schole play, with a down right blow, ye may be touched
on the bare. For although Constantinus Constantine.
(not fully yet instructed in the faith) sometime defended his face with the
sign of salvation: sometime shevved forth the victorious banner: sometime
erected it in a painted table: sometime did hang it up before the court gate:
yet we never read, that of so many Churches as (you say) he builded, he
brought ye sign of the cross into any of the^. Then did he not repose any
holiness therein, nor his doings otherwise are to be drawn to example:
unless ye have need to return with him, from Paganism to the faith, and
have as large commission as he. Wherefore since your ignorance understands
not the Fathers writings, since your impudency falsely corrupts them, since
presumptions have always cu^bred the Church of god, and traditions in every
age with every sere bishop varied: we are not to be thought otherwise than
followers of ye Apostles, although we decline from some thing, that men have
called, and in their conceytes reputed Apostolic. Flatter not your self, as
if any were so mad having common sense, to be persuaded with your glorious
words, which in every leaf, have so good trial of your shameless lies.
Learn what the Church is, then talk thereof: be a member of the Church, and I
will make more account of you: Be no preacher to other of their soul health,
unless ye take better order for your own.

To the sixth Article.
THat diverse holy men and women, Martial. Fol. 88.
got little pieces of the holy Cross, and enclosed them in gold or silver,
and either left the^ in Churches to be worshipped, or hanged them about their
necks, thereby to be the better vvarded. To which assertion, considering, what
in ye Articles before has been said and proved, a short answer may serve. For
inasmuch as al your reasons be grounded on a false principle, (authority of
men, which in Gods matters can take no place) ye spend in this Article a
great many more words, than all the matter in your book is worth. Tertullian
himself, Tertullian de virginibus uelandis.
speaking of a tradition more reasonable than this, pretends not authority,
but says yt he will prove, Hoc exigere veritate^ cui nemo praescribere potest,
non spacium temporum, non patrocinia personarum, non priuilegium regionum. Ex
hijs enim fere, consuetudo initium ab aliqua ignora^tia vel simplicitate
sortita, in vsum per successionem corroboratur, and ita aduersus veritatem
vindicatur. Sed dominus noster Christus veritatem se non consuetudinem
cognominauit. Si semper Christus and prior omnibus, aeque veritas sempiterna
and antiqua res. That the truth requires this: against the which no person, no
space of time, no mastershyp of men, no privilege of countries, can prescribe.
For most commonly by the mean of these, custom) that began of some ignorance
of simplicity) is by succession confirmed into an use, and so exception taken
against ye truth. But Christ our Lord called himself the truth, and not the
custom. If Christ be always, and before al: the truth it self is as well
eternal, and of most auncienty. Let the^ consider and mark well this, who
account it new, yt in it self is old. No nouelty, but verity, confounds
heresy. Whatsoever is against the truth, the same is heresy: yea ye old custom
it self, as says Tertullian. Wherefore ye should not presume so much upon ye
credit of Helena, Paulinus, Gregory, yt whatsoever they did, should be a
sufficient president for us to do the like. The fathers of the old and the new
Testament, are not to be drawn for example always. For then why not David
defend an adulterer, and a lecherous captayn willing to dispatch his trusty
soldior? why were it any fault to abjure the faith, or otherwise dissemble with
God, if the like fact in Peter might be followed? Aug. contra. 2. Ep. Gauden.
lib. 2.
Augustine very wisely says. No^ debemus imitari semper aut probare quicquid
probati homines egerunt, sed iuditium scripturarum adhibere, an illae probent
ea facta. We must not always imitate or allow, whatsoever allowed persons have
done, but lay ye judgment of scriptures to it, whether they allow the doing of
it. If the^ I drove you unto this issue, yt ye should prove, by the word of
God, the alleged examples good, ye had need to require a longer term, and
yet in the end, you would make a non suite. For ye shall not find in all the
scripture, any piece of word, or example of any, that can by force be wrested
to ye reseruatio^ of little scraps of wood, or reposing any hope or affiance in
them. Too vain and heathenish is ye obserua^ce: too foul and horrible is that
Idolatry. Yet will I not deface those fornamed persons, upon whose authority
ye ground your self: nor say that otherwise they were ungodly, though in this
point no godliness appeared. Romans 10.
Paul writes of ye Jews in his time thus: Testimonium illis perhibeo, quod
studium Dei habent, sed non secundum scientia^. I bear them record, that they
have the zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. And I doubt not but
these whom you have named, had a zeal of their own: thought to serve God: yet
serving their fansy first, they did offend against the majesty of God, and
were occasion of fall to many that came after. 2. Par. 17.
The holy Chronicles report of Iehosaphat, that he walked in the first ways of
his father David, and sought not Baalim, but sought ye lord god of his father,
and walked in his commandments and not after the trade of Israel. The like
testimony also is given him in the.20. chapter Iehosaphat walked in the way of Asa
his father, and departed not therefrom: doing that which was right in the
sight of the Lord: notwtstanding the hie places were not taken away. Beside
this, 2. Paral. 19.
he made affinity with Ahab, and loved them yt hated the Lord: did any man
therefore for those imperfections, condemn Iehosophat as a wicked Prince? Or
will any man excuse him for the same? On like sort, I will not utterly disprove
your authors, I think not the contrary but yt they were Gods children, although
in this matter for which their authority is pretended, there is none with safe
conscience that can like with them. Iud. 8.
Gideon among the judges of Israel, was the least stained, yet through
devotion (as he esteemed it) he grievously sinned against ye lord. For when as a
mighty cha^pion, he returned home from conquest of Midiam, the soldiers laden
with golden prey: he required their earinges to be given to him. Which amounting
to a great sum, he made an Ephod of it, he deputed it to holy uses: and served
in ye tabernacle. By which means it came to pass, yt al Israel went a whoring
after it, and it was, the destruction of Gidion and his house. So yt we see by
David, by Peter, by Iehosophat, by Gideon, yt men of singular graces otherwise,
sometime do fall into great absurdities, and are not to be drawn to imitatio^.
Which thing I speak unto this end, yt you shall not say, I condemn your
fathers as infidels and idolaters, although unadvisedly, they gave too just
occasion of such offense to other. Yet were it no deadly sin, if I called
Nicephorus and Gregory fabulous: Paulinus and Helena superstitious: which, as I
have already in part proved, so were it easy to be confirmed. But I had rather
as me^ excuse the^, then as Gods follow them. The Pharisees did wear their
philacteries, their scrolles of parchemente, upon their long robes, wherein the
commandments of God were written. A iuster pretense had they to co^tynue ye
Ceremony, (the word of God commanding them that ye the law should never depart
from their eyes) the^ ever any had for pieces of ye Cross: notwtstanding
Christ reproved their hypocrisy, Mat. 25. Luke. 11.
and pronounced upon the^ the heavy woe. Shall not this be done unto al them,
that for a vain glory, devise a wylworshyp? and ascribe their defense to a
rotten stycke, that only depends on the providence of God? If ye thynk the
comparisons are not like, the writing of the commaundeme^ts on the coat, and
enclosing a piece of the Cross in gold, the^ read what Hierome says: lay
down affection, and to condemn your error, speak out your conscience: his
words are these. No^ intellige^tibus pharisais quod haec in cord porta^da
su^t, Hierom. in. ^^^^lat.
no^ in corpore, alioquin and armaria and arce habent libros, and notitiam Dei
no^ habent. Hoc apud nos superstitiosae milierculae in paruulis Eua^gelijs and
in crucis ligno, and istiusmodi rebus, quae habent quidem zelum del, fed non
iuxta scientiam, vsque hodie factita^t. Culicem liquantes, and camelum
glutientes. Where the Pharisees understood not (says. S Hierome) that the
commandments are to be carried in the heart, and not in the body. For
otherwise studies and chestes have books, and have not the knowledge of God.
This, do superstitious women to this day with us, in little gospels, and pieces
of the Cross, and such other things: which have the zeal of God, but not
according to knoweleage, strayning a gnat and swalowing a camel. Here does S.
Hierome compare together, the broad philacteries, and little pieces of the
Cross: he calls them, the pharisees hypocrisy: and these to be wemens
superstitious folly: he grauntith the^ both, a zeal of God, but neither
according to knowledge. And so little did he esteem the relics of ye Cross,
so fond a thing he thought it to be enclosed, carried or worshipped of any,
that he would not attribute the folly unto me^, which ought of congrue^ce have
more discretion, but superstitiosis mulierculis, to such as your old mother
Maukins are. And since you urge authority so much, who is more to be credited?
Helena a silly woman, or Hierome a learned man? Nicephorus a suspect writer, or
Hierom a received doctor of ye Church? Paulinus a bishop, or Hierome (as you
say) a Cardinal? Gregory a Pope, or Hierome a Saint canonised? They carried,
they sent, they reverenced, little pieces of the Cross. But he condemns it,
as more than a woma^nish superstition, as strayning of a gnat, and swalowing of
a Camel. And whereas ye cite Chrysostom, Fo. 90. b. Chrisostom in Them. ad
Gentiles.
that such as could get any piece of the Cross enclosed the same in gold as
well men as vvome^, and made it mete for their necks. It is not to be
thought, that this he spoke as a praise of the parties, but a practice of the
time. For Hierome and he, lived both in one age, and then were men to much
addicted to such idle toys. If ye ask me then, why Chrysostom did not in the
same place disprove the fact: I answer, that he had to do with the heathen,
which caught occasion of every man's private doing, to bring the religion of
Christ in obloquy. Therefore it was no wisdom for Chrysostom, to have reveled
the shame of Christians. Which might have hyndered his cause, very much, and
discouraged the other from coming to the faith. My self if I should convert
an infidel, would not uncover the shame of Papists, but hyde it what I could:
assured of this, that there is no Turk nor Sarazin in the world, that will
forsake his own Idolatry, to fall into a worse of Popery. So that it was not
without good consideration, ye Chrysostom so cleanly did excuse the fact,
which he lyked not, yt he might not offend the^ who^ he sought to win. Think
you yt a Jew can be brought from confidence in his (...) the name of God
written in four letters, if he chance to see a sorry piece of wood had in like
reverence? They were wont to enclose that in gold: even so do you pieces of the
Cross. They thought themselves safe from all perils by it: even so do you by
this. And is there any hope, yt the Jews can think well of ye religion, which
condemns their superstition about the name of God (had in such reverence
among them, that they dare not presume with tongue to utter it) and uses a worse
about a piece of wood? May we not suspect yt there is some piece of truth more
than we are ware of? some piece of secret operation (as Serenus Salmonicus does
write) in the word of ABRACADABRA, to heal one of the fever: if a splinter of
a rotten post, against all kind of mischief, sufficiently may defend us? I
marvel not now, that your soul priest in the tower, was found with hosts,
hanging about his neck in a silken purse, Ad pop. Antio. Ho. 21.
if a piece of wood have such power to save us. I doubt not but shortly you
will also bring in aurea Alexandri numismata the golden coins of Alexander, of
which Chrisostom speaks, to tie to your feet, and S. John's gospels, to hang
about your necks. These superstitions, these witcraftes, Chrisostomus In caput
Mat. 23. Hom. 43.
and sorceries, were used in Chrisostomes time, and are not yet forsaken of
some. But what Chrysostom thought of them, and of such relics as you do
talk of, appears in his second exposition upon Matthew. Where he
expostulateth with the priests, for their philacteries and gospels, saying: Dic
sacerdos insipiens: nonne quotidie Euangelium in ecclesia legitur, and auditur
ab hominibus? Cui ergo in auribus posita euangelia nihil prosunt, quomodo eum
poteru^t circa collum suspensa saluare? Deinde vbi est virtus. Eua^gelij in
figuris literarum, aut in intellectu sensuum? Si in figuris, been circa collum
suspendis: si in intellectu, ergo melius in cord posita prosunt, quam circa
collum suspensa. Tell me thou foolish priest, is not the gospel daily read and
heard of men in the Church? Therefore who has no profit by hearing of the
gospel, how can it save him by hanging it about his neck? Furthermore, wherein
consists the virtue of ye gospel? in the proportion of ye letters? or
understanding of the sense? If in the letters: well do thou hang them about
thy neck: but if in the understanding: the^ would it profit more, reposed in
thy heart, tha^ hanged about thy neck. Thus much Chrisostom. And least
peradventure ye should think, that this only superstition were reproved of
him, he proceeds further, and touches matter that does more nearly concern
our case. Alij qui sa^ctiores se oste^dere volunt hominibus, parte^ fimbriae
aut capilloru^ suorum alligant and suspendunt. O impietas: maiorem sa^ctitate^
in suis vestimentis volunt ostendere, quam in corpore Christi: vt qui corpus
eius ma^ducans, sanatus non fuerit, fimbriae eius sanctitate saluetur: vt
despera^s de misericordia Dei, co^fidat in vest hominis. In english. Some
other, which will show themselves holyer unto me^, do bind together and hang up
a piece of the hem of Christ's garment, or his hear. O wickedness: they will
show more holiness in ye garments, tha^ in the body of Christ: yt he which is
not healed by eating of his body, shall be saved by the holiness of his garmente
hem: that he that dispaireth of the mercy of God, shall put his confidence in
the garment of a man. And think ye not that the coat of Christ, which touched
his blessed body: yt the hear of Christ, which grew upon his holy head, is of
as great virtue as a piece of the Cross whereupon he dyed? Then if Chrysostom
coumpted it impiety, to have such estimation of the coat or hear of our
savior Christ, shall we think that a piece of wood was in such price with
him? Would he enclose ye Cross in gold, or counsel other to do the same, which
held it wickedness, so to esteem a percel of his body? Christ has left us his
body in deed: for a memory of him, for a comfort of us to be received: and shall
we seek for external means, which neither have part of promise, nor be deuoyde
of peril? We read in ye gospel, yt after, Christ was crucified, Joseph
required ye body and interred it: ye Mary's were beholders of his passion and
burial, Mat. 27. Luke 23.
there was no sparing of cost for oyntme^t, yet none of the^ al cared for ye
cross. If it had been such a jewel as you do make it, they would have brought
it, stolen it, or spoken at the least wise of it. Many other things of less
importance (than this is by your supposall) be mentioned in the Scripture, as
necessary or expedient. Only (more than that Simon of Cyrene carried it,) we
read nothing of the Cross, that he dyed on. I remember yt it is a great
argument of yours: How God will not suffer his Church to err. I remember ye
alleged in the Article before, Foli. 87 b.
quod in hanc Apostoli plenissime co^tuleru^t omnia quae su^t veritatis. That
the Apostles most plentifully co^ferred on the Church all things appertayning
unto the truth: as Ireneus does truly say. Lib. 3 ca 4. contr. Her.
How chances it then, yt this truth of the Cross, for four hundredth years
together was hydden from them? From the death of Christ, till the time of
Helena, no man or woman ever talked of it. When she came, she found it.ij.
hundredth years after, it was utterly consumed. I think that such idle
chaplenes, such morowmasse priests as you, so slenderly furnished out of the
storehouse of faith to feed the people, would be glad to deal more of your
popish plenty, if this at the first were gently accepted. We should have
extolled. S. Leonardes bolle, S. Cornelis horn. S. Georges colt. S. Anthones
pigge. S. Fraunces cowle, S. Persons bretche, with a thousand relics of
superstition as well as this. For miracles have been done by these (or else you
lie) nor authorite of me^ does want to these. Longolius a learned man and
Charles the v. a noble Emperor, requested to be buried in a friars cowle, and
so they were. Therefore the friars coule must be honored. Ye remember what the
host in Chawcer said to-sir Thopas for his leude ryme: the same do I say to
you (because I have to do with your Cantorbury tales) for your fair reasons.
One thing remains, which I do you wrong if I omit: the singular virtue that
is not only in every portion of the holy Cross, but also in every sign
thereof: inasmuch as it only drives away all subtlety and crafts of evil
spirits: destroys vvitchcraft: Folio. 92. and. 93.
does as much as the presence of Christ in earth: pocedeth with like efficacy
as the first sampler. Strange effects I promise you. But first I marvel, why
you are offended with us, for preaching only faith iustifyeth, since you do
teach us, that the only sign of the Cross can do as much as it. If only
wood, if only making an overthwart sign, disappoynt the might of adversary
powers: he is but a fool, that will be troubled with sprites: he is but a
beast, that will fear the Devil, Signo crucis tantu^ vtens homo, omnes horu^
fallacias pellit. Man using only the sign of the Cross, puts away all
their subtlety and craft. If a piece of wood that worms do breed in, that
never God nor good man commended otherwise than wood, have such spiritual
water flowing thereinto, which is known to be salvation of faithful
souls: Folio. 93.
shall we be condemned, for attributing the like effect to spiritual and lively
faith? which the word of God, so often, so earnestly, with such promis of grace,
such assurance of safety commends to us? If the sign of a Cross, drawn
with a finger do the same, that the presence of Christ did in earth (as is by
you alleged) O men unmerciful, that suffer so many halte, so many lame, so
many blind, so many sore, to live in misery, and missecary with us. Christ
cured ye like: he by his presence brought health and comfort to all diseased:
why do not you (my Cross masters) the like? If these allegations be true (as
confidentely they be printed of you) why cease your miracles? Confirm us in
your folish faith. When we see the effects, we shall consider of the cause.
Thus have I showed you, that in cases of religion (as this is one) no men's
authority should prescribe unto us: no time, no custom prejudice a truth.
Examples be dangerous to be follo:wed both because they be sometime but
personal, and are not always of Gods good guiding spirit: which, if it be
true in them, of whose faith and holiness we have in the Scripture honorable
commendation: we may the more mistrust of other, whose lives and virtues we can
by no means be so well assured of. As for authorities (though Scripture it
self does suffice the faithful, and such as delight not to be contentious) yet
that men of good judgment, utterly abhorred, as heathenish, devilish, and
Idolatrous, this keeping, enclosing, honoring of a piece of wood, or any such
earthly matter, I have brought you Hierome and Chrysostom, whose plain words
condemn the superstition of you, and al other that you do talk of. Last of
all, I have touched ye gross absurdities that consequently do follow of your
doctrine (which though I have not thoroughly unripped, your beastliness and
vanity being so loathsome to me) yet have I touched sufficiently, to drive you
(if any grace be in you) to consider your duty better, to write with more reason,
or be still with less shame. Is this the profession of your priesthode? Is this
the co^missio^ that men of your coat have? to preach the fables of old
gentility, and stir up the kenel of stinking superstition, which every old
wife is a weary of: every child does scorn at? Learn Christianity of Christ
himself: true order of preaching of the Apostles: seek not so much what men
have done: but, how well they have done. It is written to the Hebrews, Hebr. 2.
that God of old time spoke at su^drie times and in diverse manners, to our
fathers by the Prophets: But in these last days, has spoken unto us by his
dear son. Whereby, what other thing is to be meant, but that God hereafter
will not use the mouth of many, nor heap us prophecy upon prophecy, revelation
upon revelation: but that he did so fully instruct us by his son, that the
very last and everlasting testimony of truth must be had of him. He gave him
therefore a singular prerogative, to be our Prophet, our master, and our
guide, commanding him only, no church, no council, no man to be heard. The
Church (I trust) will take no more upon them, than the Apostles did. What the
synagoge of Antichrist does, I care not: what the true Christians ought to do,
I prove. Christ sent forth his Apostles into the world, and gave them
commission to teach and preach, not what soever they could invent, but what he
had first commanded them. And nothing could be more plainly said, than that
which he speaks in another place: Math. 23.
(Be not ye called Rabbi) as masters or rulers over your brothers faith: for
one is your Doctor and your teacher Christ. Then if nothing can be allowed in
matters of faith and salvation, but that which is grounded on Christ and the
Gospel, all doctrines of men, all Crosses, all Crucifixes, Roodeloftes and
all, which have no color of scripture to defend them, but be most injurious
and contrary to the same, must clean be abolished and put out of the Church.
If Christ did call them hypocrites, Math. 15.
and honourers of him in vain, which teach the doctrines that proceed of man:
surely, you Papists (for fowler name of heresy can I give you none) which
bring us men's authorities, without the warrant of Gods holy word, that bind us
to believe things most contrary to it, are neither shepherds nor sheep of the
fold: but for all your fleese, be ravening wolves. This does Ignatius on this
wise confirm, Omnis igitur qui dixerit prater ea quae tradita sunt, tametsi
fide dignus sit, In episto. ad Hieronim.
tametsi ieiunet, tametsi virginitatem seruet, tametsi signa faciat, tametsi
prophetet, lupus tibi appareat in grege ouium. Who so ever speaks any thing
more than is written, although he be worthy credit, although he fast, although
he keep his virginity, although he do miracles, although he prophecy, yet let
him seem to thee a wolf in the flock of sheep. This has been always the
opinion of the godly. This all the doctors have taught and written. Only you
(good sir) and certain of your factious fellowship, will be wiser than Christ:
bolder than the Apostles: better learned than the Doctors: and give us out new
lessons, that Scripture never thought of. I will not tarry here, in rehearsal
of your errors in other points, which hasten to the end of my reprouf of this.
Only you (good readers) I shall exhort, and for the mercies of Christ, beseech
you, that as ye tender your own health, and wish to be gathered into the fold
of life, ye will hearken to ye voice of your shepherd Christ, and come at no
strangers call: give credit to no man in matters of your faith, further tha^
he brings his warrant with him. Believe no report, for it is a liar. Beware of
the woluish generation, which now being hungry kept, and feeding upon carrein,
breath out nothing else, but horrible blasphemies, and stinking lies. They
prate of good life, themselves most licentious. They burden men with breach of
laws, themselves most rebellious and dissolute. They go about to discredit
us, as teachers of carnal liberty, themselves embrewed with all kind of
filth and abomination. As for all their doctrine and religion, I may say unto
them, as Christ did to ye Pharisees: Populus iste labijs me honorat, cor autem
eorum long est a me. This people honor me with their lips, but their hearts
are far of from me. Their eyes, their hands, their head, their feet, they
frame in such wise, as shall tend to some piece of obserua^ce of the law.
Their winking, their nodding, their moving, their crossing, is all Gods
service, as they do tell us. But where is the heart? Where is the mind and
inward purity that God requires? When they hear, Thou shall not kyl: thou
shall not steal: thou shall not commit adultery: The purest of them all, what
do they? Peraduerture not draw the sword to slay any man: not lay their hands
on other men's goods: not depart their bodies with harlots (which yet is a
marvelous rare bird, to be hatched in the nest of popery) but they compass
mischief and destruction in their hearts: they burn in desire: they fret and
consume away for envy. So, that which is the chief of the law, is least among
the^. That which seems gay to the outward show, is only retained and kept.
And for conclusion: beside that they expel faith, which is yt goodness of al
works: they set up works of their own making, to destroy ye works of God, and
be holier than they. First with their chastity, they destroy ye chastity yt God
ordained, and only requires. With their obedience, they take away the order
that God in this world has set, and exacteth none other. With their poverty,
they pervert humility, and the true poverty of the spirit, which Christ taught
only, which is only, not to love the worldly goods. With their fast,
filling their insatiable paunches, they forget the fast which God commands,
a perpetual sobrenesse to tame the flesh. With their pattering of prayers,
they have put away the prayer that God has taught us, which is either thanks
for benefits received, or desiring help, with trust to be relieved. Their
Crosses, have displaced Christ. Their pictures, have defaced Scripture. Their
Lay men's books, have abolished the law. Their holiness, is to forbid that,
which God ordained to be received with thanks giving: as meat, and Matrimony.
Their own works they maintain: they let Gods decay. Break theirs, and they
persecute to the death: Break Gods, and they either look through their
fyngers, or else give a flappe with a Fox tail, for a little money. Then is
it easy to be espied what they are. Let them dysguise themselves never so
closely, yet by this examining of their natures and properties, they will
bewray themselves. Chrysostom commenting upon the seventh of Mathewe, says:
Si quis lupum cooperiat pelle ouina, quomodo cognoscet eum, nisi aut per vocem,
aut per actum. Quis inclinata deorsum balat: Lupus in era conuertit caput suum
contra coelum, and sic vlulat. Qui ergo secundum Deum vocem humilitatis and
confessionis emittit, Ouis est: Qui vero aduersus veritatem turpiter
blasphemijs vlulat contra Deum, Lupus est. Which is thus in english: If any
man (says he) cover a wolf with a shepes skin, how shall he know him, but by
his voice, or by his doing? The sheep bows down the head to the ground, and
bleates. The wolf lifts up his nose into the air, and barks. Therefore whosoever
ever according to Gods word, speaks with the voice of humbleness and
confession, he is a sheep. But he that contrary to the truth, blatters out
blasphemies against God, is a very wolf. That the Papists are such, as it
does sufficiently appear already, so shall it abundantly (ere I have done) be
proved. Therefore I say. Beware of Papists.

To the seventh Article.
ALthough we ought not in discussing of a truth, ruled over by the word,
greatly contend, what rytes and ceremonies, have of presumption or toleration,
been brought into the Church: yet that you may see before your eyes, what ill
of such presidentes has insued: how one inch granted to superstition, a whole
ell has followed: consider a while your Litanies, and processions: Folio. 93.
b.
The singing and saying of Letany (you say) is commonly called Procession: but
Litanies were received long before processions did come in place. For Litanies,
what are they? but humble prayers and supplications unto God, to procure his
favor, and turn away his wrath: These have been received in the Church of
old: and according to occasion, diversely used.

We read that when Constantinus the Emperor, had purchased peace unto the
Church of God, about a three hundredth and thirty year after Christ: then
publicly the Christians repaired together: then were there in the
congregations (as Eusebius Eusebius eccle. Hist. lib. 10. cap. 3.
reports) Orationes, Psalmodiae, sacrorum operationes, mysteriorum
participationes, gratiarum actiones. Prayers, singing of Psalms, business
about holy things, participation of mysteries, and giving of thanks. And (that
which is worthy to be remembered) he writes of the good Emperor on this sort.
Ca^tare primus incepit, vna orauit, De vita Constable li. 4. A notable example of a
Prince.
conciones stans reuerenter audijt: adeo vt rogatus vt consideret, respo^derit,
fas non esse dogmata de Deo remiss ac segniter audire. Himself began first to
sing, prayed with the rest, and reverently heard the sermons, standing on his
feet, so far forth, that when he was required to set him down, he
answered: that it was not lawful to hear the precepts of God, with
slackenesse and with sloth. Hilarious also.370. year after Christ, writes of
the order of the Church in his time, thus: Hilarious in expos. Psalm. 65.
Audiat orantis populi consistens quis extra eccl^siam, vocem: spectet celebres
hymnorum sonitus, and inter diuinorum quoque sacramentorum officia,
responsionem deuotae confessionis. A man that stands without the Church, may
hear the voice of the people praying, may behold the solemn sound of hymns:
and as the Sacraments are a ministering, the answer of a devout confession.
Likewise Ambrose. Ambros. de voc. gentiu^ Cap. 4.
Praecepit Apostolus fires obsecrationes, postulationes, gratiarum actiones,
pro omnibus hominibus. etc. The Apostle commands.1. Timoth. 2.
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks to be made for all
men. Which rule and law, says Ambrose, all Priests, and faithful people, do
so uniformly observe, that there is no part of the world, wherein such
prayers are not frequent. So that it is evident, that Litanies were then in
use, although we read not of any Processions, Polidor. de inuen. Li. 5. Cap.
10.
till the time of Agapetus Pope, who (as Platina reports) did first ordain
them, Anno. 533. although we read the like of Leo the third about.810. year
after Christ. Surely, whenever Processions began, they were taken of
Gentilitie.

We read often in Liuie, that the Romans in all their distresses, would run
to every sere Idol that they had: would go their circuites, from this place
to that place, and think they did acceptable service unto God. We read in
Arnobius, Arnobius contra gent. Lib. 8.
thus much of their folly. Nudi cruda hyeme discurrunt, alij incedunt pileati,
scuta vetera circumferunt, pelles coedunt, mendicantes vicatim Deos ducunt.
Quaedam fana semel anno adire permit tunt. Quaedam in totum nefas visere est,
quaedam viro non licet, non nulla absque foeminis sacra sunt, etiam seruo
quibusdam ceremonijs interesse piaculare flagitium est. etc. They gad about
naked in the raw winter, other have their caps on: they carry about with them
old targets: they beat their skins: they lead their Gods a begging round
about the streats. They suffer some Chapels to be gone to once a year: some
must not be seen at all: some, a man must not come unto: some other are holy
enough without women: And for a servant to be at some of them, is a heinous
offense. So much Arnobius, concerning the Romans. And think you not that our
Processions, with banners displayed, and Idols in arms be lively described
here? Certayenly amongst the Christened I never readde, that any used
Processions, before the Montanistes and the Arrians. Tertullian Tertullian li.
2. ad Vxorem.
makes mention of the one, and Eusebius Eusebius. eccle. hist libro. 6. Cap. 8.
of the other. Meet it is therefore, that Papists participating with their
errors, should also take part of their idle ceremonies. Concerning Litanies
(as of latter years they have been ordained) you must understand, that some
be called Minores, the less: some Maiores, the greater. The less, were
instituted by Mamertus bishop of Vienna, in the year of our Lord. 469. as
Sigibertus or.488. as Polichronicon reports. The order of them, was but a
solemn asse^blie of people unto prayer, at such time, as we call the Rogation
weke. The cause was pro terrae motu, pro tempestatibus, and bestiarum
incursionibus, quae tum temporis populum contriuerunt, For earthquakes, and
tempests, and inuasio^s of wild beasts, which then did greatly destroy the
people. The greater Litany, was devised by Gregory Gregorius. In dic. 6. cap. 2.
the Pope, Anno. 592. when as the occasion being like as before, the
superstition began to be more. For by reason of a great pestilence following of
a flood: the bishop by ceremonies, thought to appease the wrath of God, and
therefore made septiformem litaniam, a seven fort Litany. One of the Clergy,
another of the monks: one of men, another of their wives: one of maidens,
another of widows: the last of poor and children together. These people so
distinct into seven orders, should come from seven several places, and then it
was thought they should be heard the sooner. But in their procession,
Sigebertus in annum. 591.
four score persons were stricken with the plage, to show how well God was
pleased with them. Notwithstanding how things of a good devotion instituted,
in time do grow to great abuse, these litanies that you talk of, do prove. For
what the order and solemnity of them was, Concilium Moguntiacum.
we read in the council of Mentz celebrated.viij. hundredth and thirtene year
after Christ. The words of their decree be these. Placuit nobis, vt Litania
mayor, obseruanda sit a cu^ctis Christianis diebus tribus. Et sicut sancti
patres nostri instituerunt non equitando, nec preciosis vestibus induti, sed
discalccati, cinere and cilicio induti, nisi infirmitas impedierit. Our will is,
Papists degenerat from all good order.
yt the greater Litany be observed of al Christians.iij. days: and as our holy
fathers have ordained it, not ryding, nor having precious garments on them,
but bare footed, in sackecloth and ashes, unless infirmity do let. So far
the council. Contrary to which, the popish procession is never solemn, but
when all the copes do come abroad, and every wife is ready to scratch an other
by the face, for going next the Cross. And as the devotion of men is less, so
are the words of Invocation used among the Papists worse, which I shall have
occasion anon to speak of: when I come to the Litany that Augustine the Monk
used, at entering into our land. With you: M. Martial, I will proceed in order.
Fol. 93. b.
The Arrians as you cite out of Sozomenus being set beside their Churches at
Constantinople, had secret conuenticles whether they resorted: much like to men
of your occupation in England, which have their Mass in corners. They divided
themselves into companies, and song psalms and hymns made in ryme after their
own guise, with additions for proof and defense of their own doctrine, as
popish portusses and hipocriticall himnals have, such as you in Oxforde were
delited to sing about ye Christmas fire. Which thing (say you) the good bishop
and vigila^t pastor Chrysostom espying, least some of the catholics allured
with the pleasant casure of the meter, and svvete sound of their ryme,
should go to their asse^blies: devised also certain hymns in meter, and made
them sing them in the same tune that the Arrians did: whereby it came to
pass, that the catholics far passed them in number, and in solemnity of
procession. For (says Sozomenus) Argentea crucis signa vna cum caereis
accensis precedebant eos. Before the Catholics went two silver Crosses
with tapers or torches burning. Thus far you sir. And doubtless herein you
have showed a great piece of skill. You have noted in the margent (because we
shall not forgot it) how Crosses and tapers were carried in procession. And is
not the Cross much beholden to you, that now make it a candelsticke? that now
will compare it to a lynke, or a staff torche, or to the pole that caryeth the
cresset? And may not your Louanistes greatly joy in you, that can devise? may
not we also greatly joy in them, that can ouersee and suffer such a proof to
go to print? Give me leave a little to examyne your history. First of all, that
which is the chief circumstance, ye utterly omyt. That the Arrians assemblies
were in the night. Whereupon Sozomenus says. Lib. 8. cap. 8.
Noctu congregati and in coetus diuisi that in the night time they were
gathered together, and divided themselves into companyes. And Socrates says,
Et hoc maxima noctis part faciebant. And this they did most part of the night.
Again where ye say, Lib. 6. cap. 8
that the catholics had two silver Crosses, it is more than ye found in the
text: and peradventure less: for (argentea crucis signa) may be as well many
silver signs of the Cross, as one. But what were those silver Crosses? Such as
ye would make the ignorant believe? Such as you do use to carry in processio^?
If other be so made to credit you: yet we do know to much to be abused by you.
Socrates Socrates ecclesia. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 8,
writes of the matter thus. Ioannes veritus ne huiusmodi cantionibus
simplicioru^ quisquam ab ecclesia auelleretur, opposuit illis quosdame suo
populo, qui and ipsi nocturnis hymnis dediti, and illorum studium hebetare^t,
and suos in fide confirmarent. Videbatur quidem vtile fore hoc Ioannis
propositum, verum cum perturbatione est, and periculis terminatum. Cum enim
homousiani hymni in nocturnis illis hymnodijs illustriores read rentur,
(excogitauerat enim argenteas cruces, quibus erant impositae cereae faces
accensae, ad quam rem Eudoxia imperatrix sumptus suppe ditauerat) Arriani
numero multi and so forth. Which words are in English these. John (bishop of
Constantinople) fearyng least by these songs of the Arrians any one of ye
simple might be pulled from the Church, set certain of his own people against
them: which being also given to sing the night hymns, might both hinder the
purpose of the adversary, and confirm in faith the minds of ye catholics.
This intent of John, seemed to be profitable, but it ended with trouble, and
perils. For when the songs of the catholics, in their night tunes were made
more notable: (for he had devised certain Cross pieces of silver, whereupon
were put burning tapers of wax, whereof Eudoxia the empress did bear ye
charge, ye Arrians endeavored to revenge themselves. Here it is evident,
wherefore these Crosses (that you do talk of) were had, that inasmuch as their
assemblies were in the night, when lights were necessary: and those lyghtes of
theirs, The crosses of Constantinople.
could not be carried on a strayghte piece, they would have a piece to go cross
overthwart, to set many candels on: which being made of silver the lights
glymering thereupon, made a beautiful and goodly show. This is the history.
This was the Cross: these were the tapers of Chrisostomes time. But what is
this to popish procession? As much as if I said. My Lord Mayor has a perch to
set on his perchers when his guess be at supper: Therefore the Priest, when he
is at his prayers, must have a crucifix to go before him. The barber in his
shop has a late^ place to set on his candels to shave men thereat: therefore the
priest when he goes his stations about the churchyard, must have a silver
Cross carried before him, and a couple of boys with tapers in their hands, to
light him at none days. I remember of old that on Tenebre wednesday, or one
of ye solemn days before Easter, ye were wont to have a right counterfeit in
the Church, of Constantinoples Cross, save that the one was of silver, the
other of wood. And this was Judas Cross, whereupon was set a great sort of
ca^dels, which at seruise time were put out in order. But this I think is not
the Cross that ye speak of. For you will have a silver Cross (or copper at
ye least wise) after the pattern of Chrisostomes catholics. But then you must
stick it full of candels to or else you be not like another. And have you not
great cause, M. Martial, upon this example, to infer these words of
triumph and victory. Lo good readers Chrysostom an ancient father, and one
of the most famous doctors of the Greek Church, and renowned for virtue and
learning throughout the world, had the sign of the cross and tapers with
light, Fol. 94 a
carried in his Church of Constantinople, before his people in procession. And
was it in deed a Cross, M. Martial? In which signification of yours? the
first, second, third or fourth? doubtless, you were much over seen; that did
not make the fifth signification of Cross to be the Cross staff that caryeth
the candels. And was this Cross carried in the Church? I had thought it had
been in the streates. For the Arrians could not come into ye Church and yet
they met with them, with flinging of stones, and cracking of pates. The Arrians
had no Cross (you say) why then they went darkling, or were content with a
lantern. Lo, good readers, has not M. Martial, Martial in one stony makes
four lies and yet the matter makes nothing for him. Martials conclusion out
of Sozomenus.
said much to the matter? First that in Constantinople there should be carried
two silver Crosses. And that is a lie. For there is no number mentioned. Then
that they should be carried in procession. And that is a lie. For it was only in
processu, in their marching forward. Thirdly that they were carried in the
Church. And yt is a lie. For it was in the streates. Fourthly, that they were
carried, as ours are, in the day time. And that is a lie. For it was in the
night season. What? four lies together in to small towme? To much of
conscience? But mark the conclusion. Forsooth we gather out of Sozomonus, by
the godly father Chrisostomes fact, that we must carry a candlestick in stead
of a Cross in procession. A proper collection: and yet very true. For the
Crosses of Constantinople, to prove a doctrine of the Church Cross, is as
good, as the cressets on midsommer night, to prove the romors at hye must in
Poules. And thus much for the Cross. Now to the candels If they were of old
used in the seruise of the Church, no marvel at al, since their metings were in
the night time, Eusebius eccl. Hist. lib. 5. cap 1
where to be darkeling it was uncomfortable. We read in Eusebius that in the
raygne of Antoninus verus in France, in Lions, and vienna the Christians were
forbidden to have any houses to dwell in, Euse. Eccle. Hist. li. 5. cap. 1.
to enter with other folk into the bathes, to walk abroad in the streates, or
to be seen in any place. By reason whereof, they were compelled to get the^
caves, and there under the ground to hyde them. But when for their comfort in
Christ, they would resort together, they did it in the night time, for fear of
suspicion: and thereof many slanders did rise upon them, The use of tapers.
for treasons, conspiracies, horedomes, and murder. Yet candels they had, and
necessary they were. Likewise we read, that when Iustina the Empress,
favoring the Arrians, had granted them the use of the Church in Millain,
Augustinus li. Confess. 9. cap. 7.
Ambrose withstode it: and kept it day and night: with watch and ward. Then
Litanies were song, and then were tapers used. But when persecutions ceased,
and men might freely serve God abroad: when rewards were given to the seruers
of him, and seruise appointed in ye day time: that candels should be used,
they had no ground of reason. I see not whence you may have a president of
your burning tapers at none day, so well, as from the sacrifices of Saturnus.
Macrob. Saturn. li. 1. cap. 7.
Aras saturnias non mactando viros, sed acce^sis luminibus excolebant. They
decked and furnished the altares of Saturn, not with the blood of men, but with
burning of candels. And we never read that any returned from Ge^tilitie, but
retained somewhat of their old obseruaunces. If ye urge the old custom, that
so many hundredth years ago, tapers were used in Gods seruise: I will reply,
with reproufe of that custom, by a general council. For in the Synod held
in Spain, called Co^ciliu^ Elibertinu^, is was straightly enjoined, Cap. 34.
Lactantius de vero. cul^^ dei. li. 6. cap. ^.
yt none should light candels in the day time. Lactantius inueighing against
the heathennish or popish superstition ( conueniunt, enim in vno tertio, for
Papists and Paganes agree in a third, that is to say, lyghting of candels unto
their Gods) says. Accendunt lumina velut in tenebris agenti Deo. Sed si
coeleste lumen, quod dicimus solemn contemplari velint tam sentia^t, quod non
indigeat lucernis eorum Deus, qui in vsum hominis tam candidum luce^ dedit: and
tamen quum in tam paruo circulo, qui propter longinquitate^, non amplius qua^
hamani capitir videtur habere mensura^, tantu^ sit fulgoris, vt eu^ mortaliu^
luminu^ acier, non queat contueri and si paulisper intenderis, hebetatos culos
caligo ac tenebrae consequantur: quid tande^ luminis, quid claritatis apud
deu^, penes quem nulla nox est, esse arbitremur? qui hanc ipsam luce^ sic
moderatus est, vt neque nimio fulgore, neque calore vehementi noceret
animantibus tantumque istarum rerum dedit ei, quantum aut mortalia corpora pati
possunt, aut frugum maturitas postularet. Which is to say in English. They
light candels unto God, as if he were in the dark. But if they will behold the
heavenly light (that we call the sun) they may understand that their God
lacks no lyghtes, that for the use of man, has given so clear a light. And
yet, whereas in so small a circle which by reason of the distaunce seems no
bigger than a man's head, there is so great a glysteryng, that the engine of
man's eye, is not able to look directly on it: and if for a while ye fix your
sight thereon, dymnesse and darkness do follow your dased eyes: what light,
what clearenesse may we thynk to be with God, with whom there is no night at
all? who has so ordered this light of his, ye neither by to much shining
beams, nor over parching heat, he should hurt the cattle: and yet of both
has departed so much, as either the bodies of man may bear, or riping of the
fruits require. Wherefore he concludes. Number igitur mentis suae compos putandus
est, qui authori and datori luminis, candelarum ac cerearu^ lumen offerit pro
munere? Is he to be thought to be in his right wits, that to the author and
geuer of light, offers up the light of candels and tapers for a gift? And
can there any thing more plainly be said, to condemn the use of burning
tapers on the Lords table? There must be no tapers on the Lords table.
God has required an other light of us (says Lactantius) and the same not dym
and smokye, but clear and bryghte, proceeding from the mind, which for that
cause is called (...) as much to say, as light: which doubtless is impossible
for any to set forth, but him that knows God. Then if we set up in the day
time a candell for our selves? we be blind fools: if for the use and seruise
of God, we be blasphemous. Terrenum enim facimus eum, and in tenebris agentem,
For we make him earthly, and shut him up (as it were) in a dark prison. Itaque
istiusmodi cultores, quia celeste nihil sapiu^t, etiam religiones quibus
deseruiunt ad terram reuocant. In ea enim lumine opus est, quia ratio eius and
natura tenebrosa est. Therefore such worshippers, because no heavenly thing
sauors with them, call down their religions, which they observe and keep, unto
the earth: wherein we stand in need of light, because the respect and nature of
it, is cloudy altogether and full of darkness. Thus much have I said, to your
first proof of Cross and Tapers at time of Litany. Now where you find your
self agreued, Foli. 94. b.
that we have not likewise your ceremonies in ure, saying: our heretics
now a days, will have no. Cross at the singing of their Lords prayer,
Martial refuses the Lords prayer and consequently the Lord Christ.
because neither their Lord nor they, can abide the sight of the Cross.
Truly, I had thought that we had had all one Lord before: that we had all
depended upon Christ, and justly might have been called Christians: now that ye
refuse him in the plain field, what shall I call you but Antichrists, and
Apostotae. For evident it is, who is our Lord, by the prayer that we use, and
Christ has commanded us: you by condemning the prayer, also deny the Lord.
For) what mean you by this? ( Heretics at their lords prayer have we any
other Lords prayer, than that which is written in the.vj. of Matthew and.xj. of
Luke? If this ye acknowledge, ye might as well have said at the Lords prayer,
or at our Lords prayer, as (at their Lords prayer) but if ye have such a sect
of your selves, that do mislike with ye lords prayer, I would be gladly taken
as an heretic of such: and all your religion I hold accursed. Folio. 94. b.
(They cannot be heretics) say you (that can abide the sight of the Cross.)
And will you abide by that? Ye have proved by this time Luther Luther is proved
no heretic.
no heretic: for always he is pictured full devoutly kneeling before the
Cross. And truly no Papist had the sign of the Cross in more reverence than
he. Wherefore you must restrain your position, or lessen much the number of
your heretics. Justinians Justinian Emperor.
laws, though in civil cases I do gladly admit, and in some matters of
correction, I like very well, (Vt quod paederastis virilia confestim exsecari
voluit) yet in Religion we are not bound to this order. I know that in his time
many superstitions were come in place: and since he lived in the same age with
Agapetus the Pope, first fou^der of Processions, no marvel if he followed some
piece of his fansy. Mamertes, and Gregory that first devised Litanies, although
they make mention of diverse orders and sole^nities that were used in them
(namely of the use of the Bishops Pall) yet speak they no word, that the
Cross should go before them. Wherefore I greatly force not, whether the order of
crosses in Litanies were used somewhat before his time, or first by himself
devised, since we have example of so many faithful, that prayed without it: and
promise that our prayer shall be heard, though we want it. My self will not
discredit the Emperor, which being as Suidas says, (...) utterly unlearned,
deserved well of learning. But what he was, both for his laws and execution of
justice, and religion, read Alciate and Euagrius. Alciat li. 4 Disp. Cap. 7
Euagrius Libro. 4. Ca. 30. et. 32.
The tale and titles of Augustine the Monk (who commonly is called the Apostle
of England) I have not in such credit and estimation, that I think us (as
you say) next unto God most beholden to him, for our faith and religion. For
ever since the time of Eleutherius of Rome, and Lucius of England,
Christianity has been received, and never failed among us. Augustine the monk
commonly called the Apostle of England
In deed some parts of the realm, which now are accounted chief, and then
lay most open to the spoil of enemies, were blinded with Paganish
superstition, and the faithful Christians fled into the mountains. The
Sarons, for the part that they possessed, were most Idolater. The Britons
remained Christians: in so much that when Augustine came among them, he found
seven byshoprikes, and an Archbyshoprike, beside diverse and sundry
monasteries: which all had faithful and learned prelates, keeping their flocks
in most Godly order. Nor utterly was the faith extinguished, where Augustine
la^ded. For Ethelbert the king of Kent, (as Polydor writes) was metely well
instructed, by a godly wife, that came out of France, and a Christian bishop
that attended on her. But Augustine when he came, in place of Idolatry planted
superstition: and where religion was sincerely taught, he labored what he
could of a certain ambitious proud heart to pervert it. For finding in the
city of Bangor, a notable sort of Monks (not idle bellies as of late years
they have been, but learned, and living of the sweat of their brows) in so
much that being divided into seven parts, there were no less than three
hundredth of a company: this Romish Prelate, required subjection of them: and
further would have enjoined them, to become seruitoures in preaching of the
Gospel, to their mortal enemies, the Saxons: which conditions when they
refused, Ethelbert the king, partly in Austins quarrel, partly of an old
grudge of his own, stirred up the rest of the Saxon kings, to make war upon
the^. So they came to Chester, wherein the religious people had assembled
themselves, and when the City was taken, there were twelve hundredth of the good
men, most cruelly slain. And where as their rage was not so quieted, but
needs they would come to destroy Bangor, the Britous confederates assembling
themselves, wythstode them, and slew ten thousand and three score of them.
Hist gene Aug lib. 2. Cap. 2.
Hactenus Galfridus. Which great murder, can not be imputed to any thing so
much, as to the ambition of the Monk. And although Beda recites the history
somewhat otherwise, yet, his witness proves, that Augustine was much to
blame, which would so seriously contend about trifles. For what were the matters
that he exacted. Primo vt eodem quo Romana ecclesia tempore, festum Paschatis
celebrare^t: Secu^do co^munibus ritibus and caeremonijs cu^ Romany in Baptismi
ministerio vterentur: Tertio vt co^municata opera, and co^munibus laboribus
genti Angliae Euangelium praedicare^t. that is to say: First that they should
celebrate the Easter feast at the same time, that the Church of Rome did.
Secondarily, that they should use in ministration of baptism, the self same
ceremonies with the Romans. Thirdely, that they should communicate their
trauayles, that jointly, they should take pains together, in preaching of the
Gospel to the english nation. These conditions, because they were not
received, the people (as he says) were plagued. But in this behalf, the
wonderful judgment of almighty God is worthy to be considered, that
exercyseth his people with plagues among: and although of his mercy sometime he
grant them Alcyonia tempora, some little breathing whiles: yet tempests do
arise anon, and the cross accompanies true Christianity: which in this age
of the Church, wherein Gregory (by surname the great) and Augustine of whom
we last have spoken lived, may well be seen. For after the flourishing time of
Constantinus, wherein most liberty was granted Christians: after the learned
age of Augustine and Ambrose, when all good knowledge was at the ripest:
sodaynely ensued a strange and lamentable alteration, when for light,
darkness: for Gods service, ceremonies: for learning, ignorance and
barbaritie succeeded. That if ye pass syx hundredth year after Christ, ye shall
see nothing but cloud of ceremonies, darkening the sun of eternal truth: and
a sort of wilworships, defacing the true honor of the almighty God. And then
might you seek all Christendom, and scarcely find a learned father,
excepting Gregory and Fulgentius. These two were the best, and almost the
only to be accounted of: and yet these (God wot) showed in what time they
lived: when every man delited, to have a Gods service of his own making.
Folio. 96. a.
And then was our hap to receive this Popes Apostle from Rome, Crucem pro
vexillo ferens argenteam, carrying a silver Cross for his banner, How far we
differ from Augustine the Monk, as well in ceremonies, as in time.
and the Image of Christ painted in a table. Where by the way ye may observe,
that ceremonies, the elder they are, do grow the more. For where as Augustine
brought in but a bare Cross, we have received not only a Cross, but also a
crucifix graued thereon: And whereas he carried a picture but painted on a
table, we have the same carved and embossed. Augustine coming unto them, that
never had heard of Christ, politiquely devised somewhat, wherewithal first he
might feed their eyes: that afterward lending him their ears, he might
instruct their hearts. Wherefore if this fact of his might be excused, by the
state and condition of the country: yet can not we in our Cross carrying, have
the like pretense, and therefore ought not to use the like example.
Notwithstanding, his Litanie was good, and I marvel that ye Romish church is
not at this day contented with the like. He came not in with Ora pro nobis, he
made no intercession to saints for us: but only song this sweet Litany.
Deprecamur te Domine in omni misericordia tua, vt auferatur furor and ira tua a
ciuitate ista, quia peccauimus. In all thy mercy we beseech thee O Lord, that
thy indignation and fury, may be taken away from this city, because we have
sinned. Which Litanie of his, if it be compared with ours, the self same thing
shall be seen in both. But the popish Litanie, as it is different from this, so
is it Idolatrous. Virgin Mary pray for us, Peter pray for us, Paul pray for
us. And so forth to Abbots, Monks, Hermits, Nuns, Friars, and al to pray for
us. I may say to you, as Tertullian Tetullianus in Apologetico. ca. 30
by an Irony said to the Gentiles. Vos religiosi salutem quaeritis, vbi non
est, petitis a quibus dari non potest: praeterito eo in cuius est potestate.
Insuper eos Christianos debellatis: qui eam sciunt petere, qui etiam possunt
impetrare dum sciu^t petere. Nos enim pro salute Imperatorum, Deum vocamus
aeternum, Deum verum, and Deum viuum, quem and ipsi imperatores propitium sibi
praeter ceteros malunt. You devout persons (said Tertullian) seek for
salvation, where it is not to be found. Ye ask it of them that can not give
it, omitting him in whose hands it is. Nor content with this, ye beat down
those Christians, which know to ask health, which also be able to obtain it,
because they know how to ask it. For, we for the Emperors good state and
preservation, do pray to the eternal God, the true God, and living God, whom
the Emperors them selves had rather than all other to be merciful unto them.
This (I say) do we for all magistrates and rulers: for all things necessary
for this life of ours. Nor we think it necessary to observe any other form
and ceremony in our praying, than the same Tertullian sets forth of
Christians in his time, without any Cross at all. Ad coelum (says he)
suspicientes Christiani, manibus expansis, quia innocuis: capite nudo, quia non
erubescimus: denique sine monitore, quia de pectore oramus, precantes sumus
omnes semper pro omnibus Imperatoribus, vitam illis prolixam, imperium securum,
domu^ tuta^, exercitus fortes, senatu^ fidelem, populu^ probu^, orbem quietu^,
and quaecunque hominis and Caesaris vota sunt. Haec ab alio orare non possu^
quam a quo scio me consecuturum: quoniam and ipse est qui solus praestat, and
ego sum cui impetrare debetur, famulus cius, qui eum solum obseruo, qui ei
offero opimam and maiore^ hostia^, qua^ ipse mandauit, orationem de earne
pudica, de anima innocenti, de spiritu sancto profectam. We Christians loking
up to heaven, with hands stretched out, because they are harmless: bare
headed, because we are not ashamed: without any prompter, because we pray from
the heart: always do make our supplications, for all Princes and rulers,
beseching God to send them a long life, a quiet reign, an household in
safety, and valeaunt soldiers, counselors faithful, and people virtuous, a
merry world, and whatsoever themselves wish for beside. These things I can not
pray for of any, but of whom I know I shall obtain: because he it is, that
only perfourmeth: and I am he, that must obtain: his servant, which honor
and esteem him only: which offer unto him a fat and full Sacrifice, which he
has commanded me, a prayer that proceeds from a sobre and chaste flesh, an
innocent soul, and from the holy ghost. In which words Tertullian declares
the order of Gods service in his time, which consisted not in outward shows,
but inward verity: nor in their distresses they called upon any, (as you do
in your Litanies) save only upon him, that only can, and will reward his.
Wherefore your Litanies of late devised, Papists superstitious, and why.
be most unlawful: and notwithstanding your Crosses, you be most
superstitious. Superstitiosi enim vocantur as ( Lactantius says) non qui
filios suos superstites optant (omnes enim optamus) sed aut hij qui superstite^
memoria^ defunctorum colunt, aut qui parentibus suis superstitibus, colebant
Imagines eorum domi, tanquam Deos penates. Nam qui nouos sibi ritus assumebant,
Lactantius divine. inst. Li. 4. Ca. 28.
vt in deorum vicem mortuos honorarent, quos ex hominibus in coelum receptos
putabant, hos superstitiosos vocabant.

For they are called superstitious, not that desire their children to be long
lived: (for so we do all) but either such as have the memory of the dead
fresh with them, and esteem the same: or such as having their parents alive,
did worship their Images at home, as their household Gods. For they that took
new fashions unto them, to honor the dead in stead of the Gods, which men
they supposed to have been received out of earth into heaven, them did they
call superstitious. And forasmuch as you (M. Martial and your fellows) be such
which so diligently retain ye memory of the dead, which call upon the dead,
and make your prayers to them: Lactantius says, you be not religious, but
superstitious. As for the ensign of our master Christ, which (you say) we
labor to have out of the field, Folio 97. a.
because we know the fight of our adversary is incessant, without any truce or
intermission, until this soul of ours do vnbody: we carry this ensign
always with us, we never suffer it to depart from the walls of our heart, but
sleping and waking, eating and drinking, at Church, and at home, we have it
always before us. And this is in deed ye Cross of Christ, not carried on a
staff, not set upon an altar, but fixed in our hearts, with a ioiful
remembrance of his merits for us. Hoc enim vexillo, antiquus hostis, non
Imaginibus victus est: Car. Mag. de Imag. lib 2. Cap. 28.
hijs armis non colorum fucis, Diabolus expugnatus est: per hanc, non per
picturas, inferni claustra destituta sunt: per hanc, non per illas, humanum
genus redemptum est. In Cruce namque, non in Imaginibus, pretium mundi
pependit. Illa ad servile supplicium, non quaedam Imago ministra extitit. Hoc
est nostri regis insigne, non quaedam pictura quod nostri exercitus
indesinenter aspiciunt legiones. Hoc est Signu^ nostri Imperatoris, non
compaginatio colorum quod ad praelium nostri sequu^tur cohortes. For by this
ensign says Charles the great, not by Images, our ancient enemy is overcome.
The material no ensign of Christ.
By this artillarie, not by any counterfets of colors, the Devil is
vanquished. By this, and not by pictures, the dongeons of hell are emptied. By
this, and not by them, mankind is al redeemed. For the price of the world
hanged on a cross, and not in Images. The Cross, and not an Image, was the
matter of a servile punishment. This, and not a picture, is the ensign of our
king, which the bands of our army continually do look on. This, and not a
tempering of certain colors, is the sign and banner of our Emperor and
captain, which our hosts of men do follow to the wars. By which relation of
contraries, it apeareth plainly, what the Cross is, that we ought to
reverence: and what Christ's banner, that we ought to dysplay. Not the Image,
the sign and picture, but the memorial of his death and passion. Wherefore he
concludes. Non quaeda^ materialis Imago, sed dominicae crucis mysteriu^
vexillum est, quod in campo duelli, vt fortius confligamus sequi debemus. It is
not any material Image, but the mystery of the Cross of Christ (the death it
self) which is our ensign, The true ensign of Christ.
that in the field of our conflict, we ought to follow, to the end we may
more manfully fight. And thus you see that all authority and reason condemns
you. There is nothing in Gods seruise, that you myslike in us, but rather ought
to be reputed praise. The relics Folio. 97. b. For Relics.
of Anastasius, brought in with procession, (which ye also do bring to prove
the use of a Cross) show that you stand in great need of good proves, when
you can be contented with so slender aids. I need no more to answer, but
that a superstitious instrumente, was meetest to serve a superstious effect.
Number. 19.
We read in the old testament, that who soever touched the dead corpse of any
man, and purged not himself, defiled the tabernacle of the Lord, and should be
cut of from Israel. And shall in the new testament, the rotten bones of a
dead carcass, make men the holier? If all the Scripture be readde over, and
writings of the fathers, for. CCC. year after Christ, we shall find no
commandment or example in the world, of relics kept, or bones translated.
We read of Moses, the servant of the Lord, that he dyed in ye land of Moab,
and the Angel of ye Lord buried him in a valley, Iosue. 34.
but no man knows of his Sepulcher unto this day. Which thing, was of
purpose, by the providence of God, appointed so: that the Jews might have no
occasion thereby to commit Idolatry. But if the translating of dead bones, had
made either for the glory of God, or commodity of man: the relics of such a
one as Moses was, should not have been hydden. For doubtless of al Prophets,
he was the greatest, by the testimony of God himself. Number. 12.
Who called him faithful in all his house, to whom he spoke mouth to mouth,
and by vision, and not in dark words: yet was not his body shryned, nor his
bones carried in procession, nor any chapel erected for him. Ep. Jude. ^
In deed ye devil did attempt no less, then to make it a matter of
superstition (for we read that there was a strife betwixt him and Michaell
about Moses body) but the Angel of ye Lord withstode it. And although
peradventure by some instruction ye shall hap upon the story of Joseph,
Iosephes body.
who required his brothers, to carry his bones into ye land of Canaan: yet does
it not make for your relics another. For who kneled ever to Iosephes tumbe?
who brought it ever into the sa^ctuary? who lyghted ever any candell to it?
Only to assure them of his faith in Gods promises, and to confirm them that
the land of promise they should enjoy, he wylled the^ as a witness, to take
his body with them. Next unto Moses, among the Prophets, were Samuel and
Elias. Samuel 1. Samu. 25.
dyed (as the Scripture says) and all Israel assembled, and mourned for him,
and buried him in his own house: more we have not. Elias was rapt in a fyry
charet: 2. Reg. 2.
his body was translated, not into the Church, but into heaven: both to
testify the reward of immortality prepared for the faithful, and to cut away
occasion of men's Idolatry. Furthermore Elisha dyed and they buried him. And
certain bands of ye Moabites came into the land that year, 2. Reg. 13.
and as they were burying a man, behold they saw the soldiors: therefore they
cast the man into the sepulcher of Elisha: and when the man was down, and
touched ye bones of Elisha, he revived, and stood upon his feet. Yet after so
great a miracle, his bones were not translated: there was no pilgrimage
appointed to him: there was no chapel erected for him. Ecclesi. 48.
While he lived (says Jesus the son of Syrach) he was not moved for any
prince, neither could anythyng bring him into subjection: nothing could
overcome, and after his death his body prophesied: he did wonders in his life,
and in death were his works meruellous. Yet for all this ye people repented
not. So that this miracle, confirming the doctrine and calling of Elisha,
served as a preaching of penance to them and not to enforce a worshipping of
the body. For which cause it is plainly said: his body prophesied. When zealous
and good Josias, 2. Reg. 23.
had taken the bones of the false Prophets out of their graves, and burned
them upon the altar, seeing the sepulcher of the man of God, he said: let him
alone, let none remove his bones. Great cause in appearaunce, why they should
have been removed thence, where so many wicked had lain buried: but suffered
they were, and honored they were not. In the new testamente, what shall we
think the cause yt so little mention is made either of the burial, or else
assumptio^ of the Virgin Mary, whose undefiled body, was the worthy temple of
the holy ghost? but that ye wisdom of God foresaw, what michiefe and Idolatry
would soon have risen of it. Mat. 14.
Of John Baptist we read, that after he was slain, his disciples came and
took up his body, Act. 8.
and buried it. Likewise of Stephen, when he was stoned, yt certain men yt
feared God, carried him among them to be buried, and made great lamentation for
him: but of their bones reserving, or bodies tra^slating, not a word at al.
Doubtless if such relics had been thought profitable to the church of
Christ, there should not have been such silence of them. Notwithstanding
afterward, upon abundance of zeal, not only the memories of the faithful
martyrs, but also some parcels of their ma^gled bodies began to be kept: to
little use of them, and ill example to their posterity. Wherefore me think,
they made a right good excuse, that denying the body of Polycarpus to the^ that
sued for it, said: Ne Christo relicto, hunc colere inciperent. It should not be
delivered, lest Christ forsaken, Euse Eccel. His. Li. 4 cap. 16.
they should begin to serve him. None of the Saints, but have left behind
them a better memorial, than a scull or a carcass, in writing or in doing. Let
their writings the^, be perused of us: the virtuous conversation of their life
be followed, and they (no doubt) will be best contented. In Euchir. can. 5.
Erasmus entreating of such superstitions, as you do most embrace, said very
wisely, to the soldior of Christ. Veneraris diuos, gaudes eorum reliquias
contingere: sed contemnis quod illi reliquerunt optimum, puta vitae purae
exempla. Nullus cultus gratior Mariae, quam si Mariae humilitatem inuteris.
Nulla religio sanctis acceptior, magisque propria, quam si virtutem illorum
exprimere labores. Vis tibi demereri Petrum and Paulum? Alterius fidem,
alterius imitare charitatem, and plus feceris, quam si decies Romam cursitaris.
That is to say. Thou worshippest the Saints: thou art glad to touch their
relics: but the best thing that they have left behind them, which is, the
examples of a pure life, thou conte^nest. No seruise more acceptable unto
Marye, than if thou imitate the lowliness of Mary. No religion more welcome
and more proper unto Saints, tha^ if thou study to express their virtue. Will thou procure the favor of Peter and of Paul, follow and resemble ye faith of
the one, and charity of the other, and thou shall do more, than if thou
should gad ten times to Rome. So much as touching Anastasius relics. Now,
that I have proved, the Cross of Chrysostom, to make nothing for you; ye
laws of Justinian not to prescribe me: the example of Augustine the Monk not
to bind me: the tra^slating of relics, not to be esteemed of me: it
remains, that your proufes, for having of a Cross at singing or saying
Letany, are insufficient. I have showed you by the way, whose deuyse were
Letanyes: whence came processyons: how far we swerve, both in the one and in
the other, from those wylworshippers, that first invented them. I have declared
no less, the fond abuse of tapers, and shameful superstition of Relics in
the Church, both by Gods word, and testimony of good men, condemned. Wherefore
let us, forsakyng vanities of men's devises, seek God, and seruyse of him in
Scripture. Let us walk before him in innocence of life: let us be followers of
Saints, as they were of Christ: let us in hu^blenesse of our heart make our
prayers unto him, although we have no Cross in procession before us. But for
avoiding of the Cross (the plage of God due for our deserts) let us often use
our Godly Letanie, and let us instantly always say: From the tyranny of the
bishop of Rome, and all his detestable enormities, from all false doctrine and
heresy, from hardness of heart, from contempt of thy word and commandment,
good Lord deliver us.

To the eight Article. That many strange and vvonderfull miracles were
wrought by the sign of the Cross.
IF signs and miracles, which in these latter days, have been ofter wrought
by power of the devil, then by spirit of God, should be brought, to confirm a
doctrine in the Church: no vain Idolatrye of the Gentiles, no wicked
worshippinges among the Christians, but by ye same reason, shall be authorized.
When Accius Nauius the great wisserde, had dehorted Tarquin the old, from
inuocating any thing, until he had been stalled by him, and received at his
hands certain obserua^ces: Liuius Deca 1. Lib. 1.
the king scorning his occupation, wylled him to ask counsel of his birds,
whether it might come to pass, yt he had conceived or no? when answer was
made, that it might, he delivered him a whetstone, and commanded, him to cut
it, with a rasour, in two: which thing he did, and thereupon the sorcerers Image
was erected. When the Veij were overthrown, and their city taken, a soldior
was sent, Liuius. Dec, 1. lib. 5.
to fetch away Juno Moneta from them: and when in sport he asked her, whether
she would go to Rome, the Image answered. That she would. When the mother of
the Gods) according to Sibillaes oracle) was brought from Pessinuns, and the
ship being set on ye sands in Tyber, Decadis. 3, lib. 9.
could by no force or policy be moved, Claudia, (which otherwise was of
suspected fame) besought the Goddess, that if she thought her to be a maid,
she would suffer the ship to be drawn to the shore by her girdell: and so it
was. When Rome was afflicted with a mortal plage, and every where some dyed of
the pestilence, Esculapius conveyed from Epidauro, purged the air, and
conferred them health. When Appius Claudius, Decad. 1. li. 9
(contrary to divine responsall) would have transferred the sacrifices of
Hercules, to common servants: he had by miracle, his eyes put out for it.
When Pyrrhus had spoiled the reuestry of Proserpina, and taken away all the
treasure yt he found: sone after he was drowned, and nothing saved, but only
the good Ladies money. Infinite such examples I could allege, whereby the
heathen were blinded in Gentilitie, as you be now in Popery. But shall we
gather of those, that witches and wisserdes must be consulted with? that Juno
Berecynthia, Esculapius, Hercules, and Proserpina, must have sacrifice, and
seruise done them? If this ye admit not, I will as little grant, the sign of
the Cross to be admitted, for any miracle that has been wrought by it.
Jupiter and Diana, with the whole rabble of Ethnike Idols, did heal many of
their diseases, Miracles are wrought by the devil. And how.
and straungely delivered them. Whereof. S. Cypria^ does make a feate discourse.
You will grant (I dare say) that this was done by power of ye devil. And can
the devil then do such deeds? Ca^ he heal? can he restore? He can, when Gods
pleasure is: and he does among them that are subject to his tyranny: that
will walk in a popish blyndnesse: before whose eyes he casts such a mist, yt
they think themselves in the mean while, to be worshippers of God, and to be
aided of him. For the devil himself has so ill a name, that if he were never
so dear to men, yet they would not profess him openly, nor call upon him by
express words. Wherefore he does so daze the minds of them, yt he has
gotten under his rule, that they think with themselves, they serve no man
less than the devil: when he in deed, pulls them clean away from the
worshipping of God, and salvation that is in him, to make them partakers of his
unhappy state and condemnation. Therefore these wicked spirits, do lurk in
shrines, in roodes, in Crosses, in Images: and first of all peruerte the
priests, which are easiest to be caught with bayte of a little gain. Then
work they miracles. They appear to men in diverse shapes: dysquiete them when
they are awake: trouble them in their slepes: distorte their members: take away
their health: afflicte them with diseases: only to bring them to some Idolatry.
Thus when they have obtained their purpose: that a leude affiaunce is reposed,
where it should not, they enter (as it were) into a new leage, and trouble them
no more. What do the simple people then? verily suppose, that the Image, the
Cross, ye thing that they have kneled and offered unto, (the very devil in
deed) has restored them health: whereas he did nothing but leave of to molest
them, Hac est enim (as S. Cyprian says ipsorummedela, cum cessat ipsorum
iniuria, This is the help and cure, that the devils give, when they leave of
their wrong and injury. Nor truly, we can not justly allege, that such things
were done among the Gentiles only, nor yet only among the Jews, (as we do
read it was. Deu. 13.
) But among the Christians, it both has been and shall be so. S. Paul has a
notable place in his second Epistle to the Thessalonians 2. These. 2.
the second Chap. The wicked man (says the Apostle) shall be revealed, whose
coming is by the workyng of Satan, with all power and signs and lying
wonders. And in all deceauablenesse of unrighteousness among them that
perish. Whereby it is evident, that signs and wonders shall be wrought in the
time of Antichrist, that shall be able to seduce (if it be possible) the very
elect. Have we not warning in the gospel, that some shall come to Christ after
such a sort in the latter day, saying: Domine, domine, Math. 7.
non ne per nomen tuum prophetauimus? Et per non tuum daemonia eiecimus? Et per
nomen tuum multas virtutes praestitimus? Lord, Lord, have we not by thy name
prophesied? and by thy name cast out devils? and by thy name done many great
works? To whom God shall answer notwithstanding: Nescio vos. I know you
not. So that it is not a sufficient proof, to make the thing good, to say:
that miracles were wrought by it. God does abhor adultery: yet by the act of
it, sometime does he suffer a miracle to be done, in the conception, the
generation, the brynging of the child into life. God is offended with theft,
yet does he suffer stolen bread to feed us, which is only the power of his
miraculous and secret working. Now if ye gather, that the use of the Cross
is commendable, because of miracles, done by it: by the same reason, the
adulterer and thief, may defend and maintain their unlawful doings,
because as great and greater miracles are wrought by the^ Notwithstanding I
know, some miracles are better than other some: and great difference there is
betwixt them. Christ and his Apostles wrought miracles: so did Simon Magus and
other sorcerers. But as Gods glory was furthered by them: so private gain was
sought for in these. As, for the heavenly doctrine of Christ, a confirmation
was fet from miracles: so is there no devilish superstition, but the same has
had strange wonders for it. Wherefore. S. Augustine, Augustinus de ciuitat.
dei. li. 10. Cap. 16.
has a goodly rule. Si angeli sacrificia sibi petant fieri, and adhibuerint
signa, ac e diuerso alij teste^tur vni Deo sacrifica^dum, neque vlla miracula
fecerint, ijs vtique non illis credere oportet. If Angels require sacrifice to
be done unto them, and work signs with all: and contrary wise some other
testify, yt Sacrifice must only be made to God, and yet do no miracles, we
must believe these, and not them. And in an other place concerning the Maniches,
he says: Signa vt vobis credatur nulla facitis, Contra faustum.
quamuis si ea faceretis, vobis credendum non esset. Ye work no miracles
(says Augustine to the Maniches) whereby ye may induce us to believe you:
though, if ye did work such, we ought not therefore to credit you. And so say
I to you (M. Martial) you say, the Cross is able to do this and that: we see
it not: no miracles ye work: and yet if ye did so strange things as ye talk
of, we were not bound to believe your doctrine. For miracles alone, are not
sufficient, Miracles alone no proof of doctrine.
to confirm and stablish us in a right faith. First of all, by the line of
Scripture, we must examine the doctrine that is taught us: then if it do agree
to that, we must believe it, yea though we have no miracle at al: but if
miracles do come beside, the^ are the beleuers more established, and such as
yet do not believe, be made the more attente to hear, and have a way made for
them, to come to ye faith. Wherefore in some condition, they be like to
Sacraments. Miracles in some part like to Sacraments.
For both, are added as assurances to promises, as seals to wrytinges. And as
Sacraments do bring no comfort, unless they be received by faith: so miracles
do not avail, except we have first a regard to doctrine. In this diversity,
to make no difference, is oversight: to commend the worse and omit the better,
is falshode. Folio 99. a.
You are (you say) in a great perplexity where ye shall begin, as he that
sytteth at a table, furnished with many delicate dishes, whereof he shall
first taste. And I marvel that you so fine a feeder, will fall to your crambe.
Ye are come to a garden set round about with fresh fragrant flovvers, and yet
ye gather but an handful of nettels, for us to smell unto. Christ, by the
touch of his hand, spettle of his mouth, by a plaster of dyrt (as you call it)
healed the sick, opened the ears of the deaf, restored the eyes of the
blind. And why should not the dyrte of the streats be as well honored as the
Cross of the altar? since the Scripture does commend the dyrte, but makes
no mention at all of the Cross: since better proof we have of miracle wrought
by the one, than ever can be made for the other? If any external means, Three
reasons why miracles should not make for the cross
whereby strange wonders have come to pass, be to be had in admiration, why
not such as Christ and his Apostles used, and the Scripture mentions, rather
than the idle devise of man, whereof there is no lawful president. Again, if
your assertion were true, (that miracles were wrought by the sign of the
Cross) yet were they not only by the sign of the cross: and therefore the
Cross only (according to your treatise) should not without the rest be
magnified. Last of all, if it were true (as ye shall never prove) that such
things (as you allege) were done sometime by the sign of the Cross: yet this
can be no reason, why the Cross should now be had in estimation, unless ye
will have all means and instruments of wonders heretofore wroughte: as the hem
of Christ's garmente, the spettle and the clay: the shaddowe of Peter, and
napkin of Paul, to be likewise honored and esteemed of us. But let me come to
rehearsal of your miracles. Among the^ this is the first. And because I will
have your truth in allegations appear, I will put it down as you have written
it, Martial.
word for word in order. At what time the virtuous Lady Helena, willed as
the story mentions, by revelation from God, Eusebius. li. 10 Cap. 7. and.8.
Eccl. Histo.
to seek the Cross of Christ in Jerusalem, found after long digging in the
mount of Caluary, three Crosses, so confuse, that neither by the title that
Pilate set up in Hebrevve, Greek and Latin, neither by any other means they
could discern which was the Cross that bare our savior Christ: a noble
woman of the city, consumed and spent with long sickness, did he at deaths
door. etc. Ye note for your credit, in the margent, the place whence ye have
the story: and that you affirm to be out of Eusebius his ecclesiastical
history the tenth book, the seventh and eight Chapters. Martial belyeth
Eusebius.
But this is a shameful lie. For Eusebius has no such word: And this is a
better proof of the vanity of your history, that where Eusebius in his third
book de vita Constantini, makes mention of Helena, and the place it self of
Christ's sepulcher, which by the Emperors commandment was cleansed, yet he
speaks not a word of this miraculous invention of the Cross. Yet he lived at
the same time, and was more likely to know a truth, than other. Ye be to blame
therefore to belie Eusebius. In deed Ruffinus in his first book and seventh
Chapter, has the like that ye talk of. But what may be judged of the story,
shall afterward appear.

And first for the virtue of Lady Helena (though I would be glad to
speak as much good of my countrey-woman as I can) yet she was a concubine, (by
your leave) to Constance: as it apeareth in Catalogo Caesarum Cap. 1. which is
inserted into the Ecclesiastical history. Likewise S. Ambrose Ambros. de obitu
Theodosij.
calls her Stabularia^, a woman brought up in an hostrie. And as for her
superstition (which in part I have touched before) it is too evident. But
whatsoever she was, let us go to her fact. If she found the Cross, a time
was when she found it, and the same must be after her conversion, when
Siluester was bishop of Rome: For otherwise, she could not be so virtuous and
religious (as ye talk of.) And Nicephorus Nicephorus Li. 7. ca. 40.
affirms, that by Siluester she was converted to the faith. For which cause
the author (whose credit in this tale ye follow) does write the Invention of
the Cross, to have been in the reign of Constantinus the great. But what
says your Popeholy law to this? Read your decree. In Decre de Consec. di. 3.
Cap. Crucis.
Eusebius Papa. Crucis Domini nostri Jesus Christi, quae nuper nobis gubernacula
sanctae Romanae ecclesiae tenentibus, quinto nonas Maij inuenta est. Eusebius
the Pope. The Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, which of late was found the
third day of May, while I had the governance of the holy Church of Rome, and
so forth. The Papists agree not for the inue^tion of the cross.
Whereby it is evident that your law says, how the Cross was found in
Eusebius time: your author says, it was in Siluesters time. And yet many years
were run betwixt: yea the whole reign of Melciades ye Pope, beside many odd
years of their own continuance in the Romish see. Wherefore you must either say
that your popish law does teach you lies: or else that your author in this
behalf, is a liar. It is always to be observed, how uncertain tales be
delivered of Papists as truths unto us.

Marianus says, that the Cross was found in the reign of Constance, father to
Constantinus.

Ruffinus says, that in Siluesters time it was found out, which by Hieromes
computation, must needs be a good while after the fyfte year of Constantinus
raygne. For only in the fyfte year of Constantinus, Siluester began his
Popedom. And therefore Sigebertus says, Lib 8. Chro.
that he can not see, how this gear may stand together.

In the first Tome of Councels, we have three Epistles of Eusebius Pope of
Rome: whereof the last is ad Thuscos and Campanos, where order is taken, that
the Invention of the Cross, found in his time, should be kept holyday Then God
inspired not the heart of Helena to seek the Cross. It was found to her
hand, yea long before she was converted to the faith. Again, if it were
admitted, that Helena did find it, (being driven thereunto by womannish
curiosity, or a folishe zeal) yet in the rest of the tale, I see no constant
truth. Folio. 99. b.
For you say, that she found, after long digging in the mount of Caluary,
three Crosses, so confuse, that neither by the title that Pilate set up in
hebrew greek and latin, neither by any other means, they could discern,
which was the cross that bare our savior Christ. But Saint Ambrose Ambros.
de obitu Theodosij.
has the quite contrary: For entreating of the same matter, he says: Tria
patibula confusa reperit, quae ruina contexerat, inimicus absconderat. Sed non
potuit obliterari Christi triumphus. Incerto haeret vt mulier, sed certam
indaginem spiritus sanctus inspirat, eo quod duo Latrones cum Domino crucifixi
fucrint. Quaerit ergo medium lignum, sed poterat fieri vt patibula inter se
ruina confunderet, casus mutaret and inuerteret. Redit ad Euangelij lectionem,
inuenit quia in medio patibulo prelatus titulus erat, Jesus Nazarenus rex
Iudeorum. Hinc collecta est series veritatis, titulo Crux patuit salutaris. The
english whereof is this. She found three trees of execution confounded
together, which the ruin and fall had covered: the enemy had hidden away. But
the triumph of Christ could not so be blemished and quite forgotten. As a woman
she did stick in doubt. But the holy ghost inspired a sure way of trial: in
as much as two Thieves were crucified with our Lord. Wherefore she seeks the
tree that was in the mydst. But it might be, that in the spoil of ye place,
the gybbets might be confounded: some chance might change them: some occasion
displace them: wherefore she returns to the reading of the gospel: she finds
that on the middle gallows, this title on the top was set: Jesus of Nazareth
king of the Jews. Hence was the course of truth gathered. The healthful
Cross was well known by the title. So far S. Ambrose. Nothing else but
repugnancy and contradictio^ in popish doctrine.
Now see the repugnancies in this proof of yours. Marianus says that the
Cross was found in the reign of Constance. Ruffinus ascribes it to the time
of Constantine. Eusebius does challenge the glory of the miracle unto his time.
Siluester denies it, and says that in his time, it was first sought and
found. The Canon law does hold with Eusebius. The ecclesiastical hystory
takes part with Siluester. You cite the story, that by the title which
Pilate set up, the Cross by no means could be discerned. And S Ambrose says
plainly that by the title the Cross was discerned. Whom shall we credit
now? What shall we build upon so uncertain ground? You made a lie of
Eusebius Pamphilus, that in his ecclesiastical history he should report the
story that he does not. Eusebius the Pope and the Canon law, prove that you do
lie, referring the invention of the Cross, to Siluesters time, who converted
Helena. whereas it was found a good many years before in Eusebius reign, or else
do they lie. Wherefore since Eusebius of Caesaria, that was most likely to know
the truth living in ye same age, writing of ye same matter, makes no mention
how the Cross should thus miraculously be found: since your own authors agree
not in their tales, but in every circumsta^ce of time, of persons, of manner of
the doing, vary: I may justly doubt, whether Helena were inspired of God to
seek the Cross, or that by any such strange miracle the Cross was found. As
God works nothing in vain (as you say) So not every vanity that you devise,
God works: say I. From the whole Cross, Folio. 10 1.
ye descend to every piece thereof: as that it should have the like efficacy
and force, for that it was once embrevved with the water and blood of our
savior Christ. But if every piece of wood, that is stoutly affirmed to be a
piece of the holy cross, were once imbrewed with the blood of Christ: then
Christ in his body had as much blood, as any great river has drops of water.
Many lies be made of pieces of the Cross.
What land in Christendom, what city, what monastery, what private parish,
but has had some piece of it? Helena sent the one part of it to Constantine
her son. Ruffinus ecclesi. Hist. lib. 1. Cap. 7. Sozomenus. li. 2. Cap. 1.
which was set upon a pillar at Constantinople. The other part, she enclosed in
a silver cophin, and that she commanded to be kept at Jerusalem.
Notwithstanding a halting wench, that waited sometime on Lady Helena, and
afterward ran away from her mystresse, stay a piece of the said Cross, and
brought it to Poytiers in France. An other piece fell down from heaven, and
is kept as a relic in the holy chapel of Paris. Another piece, as much as an
Angel could lug on his back, was brought to Rome, and a whole Roode was made
thereof. Finally the Cross has so replenished all places of the world, that
if all the pieces were gathered together, no ship, no hulke of greatest burden,
were able to bear them. And yet pore Simon of Cirene, carried sometime the
whole. If ye go to the constant opinion of men: the Cross is yet remaining
(most of it) at Jerusalem. Wherefore we must go fight against the Turks, and
recover the holy Cross. But being so ma^gled as it has been: what by theft,
and what by friendship, impossible it is that any thing should remain of it:
yea, though it were so big as Noah's arc: unless it be like the Monster
Hydra, yt for every head cut of arises.vij: for every splinter taken from it,
another greater piece as byg as an Oak does grow. Ruffinus Li. 1. Cap. 8.
The ecclesiastical history says: Ligni ipsius salutaris partem detulit silio,
partem vero thecis argenten condita^ dereliquit in loco. That Helena brought
one part of the healthful wood unto her son, and the other part she left
in the place at Jerusalem, enclosed in a silver cophin. To this accords
Theodor. eccle. Hist. li. 1. Cap. 18. and Sozomenus li. 2. Cap. 1. So that by
them it should appear, that where as she sent but one piece of the Cross to
Constantine, which was reserved at Constantinople, Supra columnam porphyream
upon a red marble pillar, ye greatest part thereof Maxima portio as Sozomenus
writes, was left at Jerusalem. Lib. 9.
But Iacobus Philippus Bergomensis says: that a piece of it was brought to
Rome, and the same (as it should seem) that the other authors affirm to have
been left at Jerusalem. For his words be these: Crucis ipsius partem
detulit, quam quidem and thecis argenteis, atque gemmis preciocissimis exornari
fecit, quamque denique Romam veniens, secum cum magna veneratione detulit. She
brought a piece of the Cross (says he) which she caused to be garnished with
silver cover, and precious stones: which also at length, coming unto Rome, she
brought with great worship, with her. Whereby we are brought in doubt, where
Helena did bestow the Cross: and what became of any part of it, our doctors
agree not. The nails that Christ was crucified vvithall.
Furthermore as concerning the nails wherwithall Christ was fastened to the
Cross, a greater controversy does arise. Theodorete. ec. hist. li. 1. ca. 18.
writes thus. Clauorum alios galeae regiae inseruit qui presidio essent capiti
filij sui, and hostium tela repellerent: alios frenis equestribus coniunxit.
Some of the nails Helena did put in the Kings helmet, which might be a defense
to her sons head, and repulse the weapons of his enemies: other she put to
his horses bridle. But Sozomenus says: Lib. 2. Ca. 1.
Galeam ex illis, and frenum equorum fabricasse, that the Emperor himself
made him an helmet and an horse bridle of them. So that first they agree not
in this: whether it should be the mothers devise, or the sons: Then also,
whether the nails were clenched in the helmet, and joined to the bridle: or
else, that a whole helmet and bridle too, were beaten out of them. Ambrose
Ambrosius de obitu Theodosij^
varieth from them both: for he affirms, De vno clauo frenos fieri praecepit.
De altera diadema intexuit. Vnum ad decorum, alterum ad deuotionem vertit. She
commanded of one nail a bridle to be made. She woue ye other into his
coronet. One to the show, the other she turned to devotion. And as for the
third, she kept. Now to carry a thing in sign of honor, as it were in a
triumph, is one thing: to make it a special point of defense, another. A
sallet is one thing, and a cap another: an helmet, is one thing, and a crown
another. To join a nail unto my bridle, is one thing, to make a bridle of a
nail, is another. Beside this Bergomensis is different from them all. For in
his Chronicle, he speaks of three nails: whereof the first, he says,
Constantinus ipse in frenum equi sui transtulit, quo in praelio tantu^modo
vtebatur. Alterum vero in galea sua collocauit. Et tertium in Adriaticum mare,
ad comprimendas saeuientis maris procellas deiecit. Constantine himself
tra^sposed into his horses bridle, which in the wars he only used. Another he
placed in his helmet. The third he cast down into the gulf of Adria, to
assuage the storms of the raging sea. So that Sozomenus dissenteth from
Theodorete. S. Ambrose teaches a contrary to them both. And Bergomensis,
agrees with none of them all. The truest opinion, is, that there were not past
three nails in all. Which three you see how they were bestowed One was put
into an helmet, or into a crown: another was annexed to a bridle, or else a
bridle beaten out of it: The third was cast into the bottom of the sea.
Notwithstanding I know not how it comes to pass, but every one of these is
extant to this day: and although the helmet be gone, the bridle consumed, the
sea continues: Yet the very self same nails be come abroad again, and
reserved as relics. Yea more than ever were driven on the Cross, unless
they will make of.v. wounds.xv. For Calvin (whom I am not ashamed for
honors sake to name, and none of you all is able to disprove) in his book of
Relics, proves of his knowledge, that in Italy, France, and Germany, there
be at the least.xiiij. remaining. And I could easily bring forth the.xv. which
was here in England in Queen Mary's days, with a taper burning solemnly
before it. Thus is the Cross, and every nail thereof, an anuile to strike men's
lies upon: this is the constancy in me^nes doctrine. By this may be gathered,
that popish fantasies are, as Poets fables: and as much credit to be given to
them otherwise, as to the legendes of Lucian. Fol. 103. a.
Ye urge a miracle, for every little piece and splinter of the Cross, inasmuch
as a Church and a religious house, was preserved from burning by it. Paulinus
does tell the tale. But if such a thing happily were done, when miracles did
stand in force, and men stood in need of them, yet were they not made, to
establish a worshipping, or having at all of a Cross with us, but to confirm
a faith in the crucified Christ in them: and to teach us, not to do the like,
Fo. 104. a. b.
but to believe the like. Many tales have ye heaped up, as that a woman should
be preserved from rape and vvitchecrafte, by the sign of the Cross, and name
of Christ. That a woman was brought safe out of the stevves, Fo. 105. a. b.
by the grace of Christ, and sign of the Cross. That a canker in a vvomans
breast, was healed by the Cross. That a Dragon was killed with the Cross.
That S. Martin made certain Gentiles stand still, and preserved himself from
the fall of a tree, by the sign of the Cross. Finally that a souldior was
killed for forsaking the bearing of the sign of the Cross. Fol. 106. a.
The credit of these stories al I remit to the authors. Only I affirm, yt
they prove not your cause: for it is no good reason. The sign of the Cross
has done this miracle and this, ergo the sign of the Cross must be set up
and honored. If ye could avouch, that the sign of the Cross, were able now to
do the like, I would admit your case the rather: though absolutely (as I said
before) miracles do not enforce a doctrine. The woman of which Epiphanius
reports when she was in the bathes, felt one, Li. 1. Her. 30
by enchantment touch her, whom she saw not, and made the sign of a Cross:
which was no cause of her preservation, but witness of her faith that did
preserve her. And this, Epiphanius himself testifies: Signauit se in nomen
Christi, vt quae Christiana esset, She signed her self into the profession and
name of Christ, as who was a Christian. And after, he says not, that the
signing served her: But per signa ulum and fidem. By the sign of Christ, and
by faith, the woman received help. And faith doutlesse without the sign, had
been able to have wrought as much as that, but yt it pleased God, to show a
miracle, which (to an other end) he would by some visible sign to be
expressed. The end was, to show the virtue of belief in Christ, and to
convert an heathen man which could not see the secret faith, yt so prevailed
against inchantmente, and therefore stood in need of an outward sign. Lib 1.
Tom. 2. Her. 30.
Wherefore Epiphanius in the same place concludes Hoc tertium instructionis ad
fidem opus, Iosepho contigit. This third work happened unto Joseph, for
instruction of his faith. So that when it pleased God to use a miracle, for
conversion of an infidel, we must not gather that he has left an example for
us to do the like: yet is not such power ascrybed to the sign, as you collect:
but the virtue remained in the name of Christ. Notwithstanding as often in ye
Scripture causa per effecta, fides per opera declaratur, ye cause is declared
by the effects, as the faith by works: so many times and specially for the
worlds instruction, the inward purity and persuasion, is notified to men, by
the outward fact: which fact needs not now to be the sign of ye Cross,
since we live not among Turks and Sarazins, but al me^ without it, know of
whom we hold: in whom we do believe. Thus have I answered the place of
Epiphanius: and by this you may learn, never to allege a place, but to
consider better the circumstaunce of the same. I think a man should have much
a do with you, if ye were able at this day, to show the like virtue and effect
of a crucifix, as has been of old reported. Yet this ought to be approved,
before we do confirm the necessary use thereof. A catholic of yours, for all
his confidence in the Cross, would be loath to adventure his daughter in a
common brothell house, (as your tale is, Foli. 104. a.
of the woman of Corinth) although he had taught her never so much to Cross
her. Peradventure she might be as good a maid, as she that took such pleasure
in Massing and in Crossing, that out of the Church she would never come,
unless it were to a man's bed. Only I marvel, if the sign of the Cross be so
sovereign a medecin, to preserve chastity, Why papists are more lice^tious
and aduouterous than other.
why so many of your order that most delight therein, make stews as it were of
their own houses: none so great lechers as ye superstitious: none more
incontinente than popish priests. And they think they have warrant of your
religion for it. For in that tyra^nous interraigne of Antichrist.viij. year a
go, when a priest of Oxforde was accused to Cardinal Pooles commisioners of
an horrible offense, not to be named of a Christian, but commonly practiced,
among the papists. Nefas est accusare sacerdotem, cried out the Datary. It is
a wickedness to accuse a Priest, of such crime or such. But the matter was
evident, the parties confessed it. And what was awarded him? forsooth to ask
his fellow, whether he were a thief: to tell a tale in an others ear, which
was as good as himself. So that confession salued that sore straight. About
the same time, an old fornicator, in red Cross streate in London, declared ye
effect of your religion, which is, to breed a security in sin: for being
taken in adultery, by such as are yet alive, and have good cause to remember
it, he sped himself as fast as he could to Church, would needs have a Mass,
and when he had heard it, he came home again. His wife laid ye matter
bitterly to his charge, his friends most grievously did expostulate with him: and
when he had nothing to excuse himself, nothing to lessen ye fault withal, he
said. There is none of you all, though you would see me hanged, but knows I
believe in the Sacrament of the altar: well then I believe well, I thank God of
that. Yet he thought his belief in the Sacrament of the altar, was enough for
him, though otherwise he played the varlet egregiouslye. You think that a
sign of a Cross, suffiseth, (as it did for Lucia^, and the Jew, though no
faith in Christ, no goodness do come with all. And this may be supposed to have
encoraged your devout fathers, to live so licentiously as they have done.
Wherein if I had jews Euans his vain, I could with truths make those ears
to glowe, which now do glory in his shameless lies. The sign of the Cross
(say you) makes that harlots would live chaste. Fol. 116. a. What chastity in
crossing papists.
How happens it the^, that a friend of yours (a bastard, or bishop, or both was
peradventure) which is not I warrant you without a Cross or twain, should
have from his bedsyde a privy posturne? Not, that when his Bacchus had bathed
him, his Venus might warm him? How falls it out, that a chief maintayner of
your saction, that ioyeth as much in ye Cross sign as you, lothed always his
lawful diet, and delyted most in stolen venery? What hap was this, that
sometime a warden of your college, ye daily devoutly would knele before the
silver Cross, and attempted as earnestly to bring al Christians to the wodden
Cross, should keep both the mother and the daughter in Oxforde: and after for
periurye wear a paper in Windsore? I will no further offe^de chaste ears, with
rehearsing ye shame of your unchaste generation. Only will I say (and if ye
further urge me, in particularity will prove) that as I am now entreating of
miracles: so ever in my time it has been greatest miracle, to see a chaste
votary. But to return to your allegations: if ye will have us credit you in
your doctrine, then let us see the fruits: let miracles be wrought, let the
Cross make you honest, and I will verily affirm it a miracle. If the sign
of a Cross do heal diseases, and kill dragons: if it keep us from the fall of
trees, and make our enemies stand still before us: Then fare well physic: I
will occupye no weapons, Miracles past, no proof of present use. In Euan. Io.
Hom. 29.
I will fear no danger: I will conquer where I lust. A vanity it is of you,
M. Martial, to bring for proof, of a present use, that which was done so long
ago. Remember what father Gregory does say. Nolite fratres amare signa quae
possunt cum reprobis haberi communia: sed charitatis atque pietatis miracula
amate, quae tanto securiora sunt, quanto and occulta, and de quibus apud
dominum eo mayor fit retributio, quo apud homines minor est gloria. Brethren be
not in love with signs, which may be had common with the reprobate: but love
ye rather the miracles of charity and true godliness: which, the more secret,
the more secure: and for the which, the less estimation that there is with
men, the greater is the reward with God. In the first beginning and gathering
of the Church, many things were necessary, which now be nedelesse. Miracles
were used then, which outwardly be denied now. When we go about to plant a
tree, so long we water it, A similitude.
until we see that it has taken root, but when it is once substantially
grounded, and branches spread abroad, we take no more pain to water it: on
like sort, as long as ye people were altogether faythlesse, this mean of
miracles was of indulgence granted them: but when spiritual instruction had
taken better place, the corporal signs surceassed straight. Wherefore the
Apostle says: Linguae in signu^ sunt, non fidelibus sed infidelibus. 1. Cor.
14.
Strange tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to them that
believe not. And plainly to argue that a thing is good, because a miracle is
showed by it, or else to approve a present use by that, which nedefully
sometime was done, has to many absurdities and inconveniences to be yielded to.
S. Augustyne, Aug: de. vni. Eccle. cap. 16.
denied that argument of Petilian: he would not admyt ye doctrine of the
Donatistes, although they had wroughte all wonders in the world. Non dicat,
says he, ideo veru^ est, quia illa and illa mirabilia fecit Donatus, vel
Pontius, vel quilibet alius, aut quia homines ad memorias mortuorum nostrorum
orant and exaudiuntur, aut quia illa and illa ibi contingunt. Let not the
adversary say: therefore it is true, because Donate or Pontius or any other has
done these and these wonderful and strange things: or else because men do
make their prayers at the tumbes of our dead, and be heard: or because such
things and such things do happen there, (for these may be as well figme^ta
mendacium hominum, vel portenta fallacium spirituu^. The feigned devises of
lying men, or strange wonders of deceitful spirits. As well we may have
any sign of Idols, as the sign of the Cross if miracles may make it.
Wherefore if miracles prove ye use of a Cross, why should they not confirm
the doctrine of the Donatists? Yea if miracles may commend a thing, I will not
only have the sign of a Cross, but the sign of a devil. Macrobius in his
Saturnalibus. li. 1. ca. 7. Speaking of the Sacrifices used in the raygne of
Tarquine the proud, says: Effigies Maniae suspensae pro singuloru^ foribus,
periculu^ si quod immineret familijs expiabant. The Images of madness hanged
before every man's door, made clear for all daugers, that hanged over the
householde: wherefore I will thus reason, with you.

Either the miracles that you do speak of, were false tales, or else they were
truths. If they were false tales, a true man ought not to allege them, nor a
Christian believe them. Whether it be true or false that M. Martial reports
of the Cross, it cannot prove the lavvfull use thereof.

The Scripture warns us, that in the latter days, there shall be strong
spirits of illusion, so that the elect themselves (if it be possible) may be
seduced. Wherefore if the devil, at any time by the priests, as of old time
by the wisemen of Egypt, have wroughte wonders about Roodes and Images: no
doubt, but by showing unwonted things, he goes about to allure us to things
unlawful. And therefore such miracles should not be credited. But on the
other side, if it pleased God to use the sign of a Cross in deed, as a mean
to work some miracles in the world, yet is it no sufficient cause, to
confirm the having, much less the honoring of it now. To mollify the hearts
of visible and mortal men, God used visible and mortal means: not to confirm
a reverence to them, but to establishe an honor and seruise to himself. God
spoke unto Moses Moses
out of a fyrye bushe. Shall now the fire or the bushe be honored? A good
cause is brought, why God appeared in a bushe, Bushe.
rather than any thing beside: that the peoples eyes might teach them that,
which their hearts and souls ought to believe. For the thorns of the bushe,
did signify the sins for which the law came. And as the bush pricks not
in the root, but is gentile and smoth, though the body and branches be full
of thorns: so are not our sins of our first creation, but by growing in the
flesh, we have gathered them unto us. As the bushe was not confumed by the
fire, but the fire glisteringly did set forth the bushe: so were not sins
abolyshed by the law, but only notified: not taken away, but laid open
before us. For the law could no more, but tell us our disease: only the grace
of Christ, does cure us. As God appeared in form of fire, and not in an
earthly shape: so must we learn to follow God, to raise our thoughts and
desires upward, and not be depressed with downfall cares.

As God vouchesafed to appear in a mountain, thereby to put us in mind of
his heyghte, far passing Princes and all worldly sublimytie: so must we
consider the worthiness of our calling, and be well assured, yt such a hill must
be climbed of us, as has all the earth subject underneath it. Wherefore as so
great miracle was wroughte by fire, in a bushe, on a mountain, not to enforce
an estimation of the means, but only to drive me^ to the ends aforesaid: so
by the Cross, miracles have been wrought, not for the wods sake, not for the
metal, but only for confirming of a faith in Christ. This faith then, let us
retain, and let ye Cross alone. Exodus 4.
Moses avoided ye wrath of god, and escaped death, by cutting of the foreskyn
with a sharp stone: and this is as much, as Saint Martines sign, whereby he
avoided the fall of a tree. Shall now a sort of stones be brought into ye
Church, and honored of us? Moses did see the Angel of the Lord ready to
destroy him, because he (dwelling in the land of Midian) neglected the
circumcising of his son: and he that was a messanger of the God of Abraham,
had not in his child, Circumcision.
the sign of the faith of Abraham, wherein the Jews might and did glory. This
circumcision then, whereby such peril miraculously was shunned, was done by a
stone: not that an earthly stone should be the more esteemed, but Christ the
corner stone be signified: by whom al sins and transgressions be cut of,
Exodus 7.
and by whom the danger of eternal death only is avoided. The rod of Aaron
Aarons rod.
was often turned into a serpent, often returned into the own nature, which in
a figure, represented Christ, from life to death, Exodus 15.
from death arising unto life again: or else, that as the rod by dividing the
red sea, made a passage open into ye land of promise: so Christ through
baptism into his death, has prepared the way into life for us: shall now the
rod of Aaron, because it wrought such miracle, be set up in the Church? The
vvod of Marah.
The tree that was cast into the waters of Marah, did make them sweet: in token
that the bitterness of the law, was taken away by the death of Christ, and
now the minds of the faithful people be replenished through it with
spiritual and aboundaunte pleasure: shall therefore the sign of that piece of
wood now be worthied of honor? The Jews were preserved from the serpents
stinges, Number. 14.
by loking on the brazen Image, representing also the death of Christ, which
from infection of damned spirits, The brase^ Serpent. Nume. 20. The water out
of the rock.
saves his elect: shall now a piece of brass, or sign of a serpent, be set up
in Churches and reverently adored? The Rock smitte^ with Moses hand, gushed
out of water, and the streams flowed in the parched fields, to satisfy the
drought of the thirsty people: whereby is signified, Christ to be the stone,
cut out of the quarrey Sine manibus precidentium, without any workmans hand,
which by the lively liquor of his eternal testament, quenches the thirst of
incredulity: crying continually, Si quis sitit, veniat ad me and bibat. Joan.
7.
If any man thirst let him come to me and drink. Shall now for this respect
the rock or river be exalted, and set in place of Gods service? The fleese of
Gideon Iud. 7. Gideons fleese.
was only moysted with the deawe, when all the earth beside was dry: again it
was only dry upon the fleese, when the deawe fell upon all the ground: to note
the Gentilitie of all the world destitute of grace, void of that heavenly and
spiritual deawe, when only the fleese of Israel, the people of the Jews,
were comforted with ye showers of Gods word and promises. Again: that for want
of true belief, the foresaid people should wither with the drought of
infidelity, when the heathen folk should be all to be sprinkled with the
deawe of heaven, as now we are by preaching of the gospel: But where the
threshing place of the barn, and fleese of Hierobaal, were the means whereby
the miracle was wrought, shall any of them both be now magnified of us?
Sampson with the Iawbone Iud. 15. Sampso^s Iavvbone
of an Ass, slew a thousand men, and out of the cheek tooth thereof, the
water ran, to assuage his thirste: in signification, how Christ our advocate
and mediator, has overthrown the adversary power, has by one death
destroyed all the enemies of life, and has refreshed the dry souls of
faithful people, which be the members of his body, with the spiritual drink
of affiance in him. Shall we now have Iawebones and cheek teeth, 2. Reg. 2.
Elias cloak. 2. Reg. 5.
in the Church? Elias with his cloak divided the water of Iorda^ insinuating
unto us, how Christ by his incarnation, has made a way to baptism, that by
faith in him, we may walk on the dry land of security, dreadelesse of the
waves of sin: Shall therefore a cloak be hanged up, and a candle lighted
before it? Naaman Naamans washing.
the Syrian, by washing himself in Jordan, was cleansed of his leprosy: And
shall the sign of Jordan be worshipped of us? The hem of Christ's garment. The
shadovve of Peter. Paul's handkerchefe.
The hem of Christ's garment, conferred health upon the woman, touching it: And
shall ye sign of this be had in estimation? The shadow of Peter, healed also
some that passed by: Likewise the kerchefe, and handkerchefs of Paul, cured
diseases, and drove out evil spirits: shall now the sign of a shadow,
shall a sorry clout, be so much made of? Therefore if miracles of old time
past, wrought (as I may grant you, though absolutely I am not bound to believe
all that you do bring) by mean of a Cross, shall be sufficient cause, to
make the sign thereof, or the self same thing, to be erected and honored:
then shall the fyry bushe, the Mountain of the Lord, the Circumcision of
Moses, the Rod of Aaron, the wood of Marah, the brazen serpent, the water of
the rock, the fleese of Gideon, the Iawebone of Sampson, Mat. 9. Act. 5. Act.
19.
the cloak of Elias, the washing of Naaman, the hemme of Christ's coat, the
shadow of Peter, the handkerchefe of Paul, be set up in the Church
themselves, or their signs. For by none of these, but miracles were done: and
as good reason in this respect to set up in the Church, any one of these, as
otherwise the Cross. As I have showed you the effect and end of other
miracles, reported in the Scripture: So when it pleased almighty God, to bring
more nations to one faith in Christ, and used the Cross as a mean to work the
like by, you must as well understand the meaning, not to bring the wood, into
an admiration, not to teach us the service of a sign, but to confirm the
faith in the crucified, and due obedience to him that was signified. Fol. 108.
a.
A Jewel (you say) a precious stone of some strange virtue if a man have
it, must be kept vvarely, nor the stone be suffered to be broken. And shall
we Christen men break the Cross of Christ? etc. An herb in the garden
medicinable for this or that disease, must not be rooted out. And shall we
root out of our gardens the holy sign of the Cross? and so forth. Well M.
Martial: let me ask you this question: If ye have but a glass, and repute it
a diamond, does your estimation bring virtue to the thing? If ye had a good
herb, and the same be now withered, will ye make as much of it, as if it
were in the prime? The Cross that ye make so great account of, that ye covet
to have set up in Churches, has not the virtue and power that ye talk of: It
can not heal: It can not preserve: It can not daunt the affections of the
flesh: It can not drive the wicked spirits from us. As the mean is gone, of
the foresaid effects: so are the effects themselves ceased. Possible it is,
that in time paste, men did some good, by signing them with a Cross: now is
it not according to your position, medicineable against al Coniuration,
Enchauntment, Sorcerie, and Witchcrafte: but rather daily used in all these:
Wherefore your proves be to weak: your miracles to no purpose: Your Doctoures
much like your self. The Heathen, the new Indians, the Jew, the Apostata,
Folio. 108.
These are desirous of the sign of a Cross, These signed themselves with a
Cross on the forehead: Therefore the sign of the Cross must be used and
honored. As like as if I said: These were Idolaters, they knew no true
worship, the devil deluded them, and therefore we must follow them. May I not
therefore with iuster cause than you, complain: and say as you do, O tempora, O
miserable days, O times too licentious? when every Erostratus, may become
famous, by burning of Dianaes temple? when every insolent and idle brain, if
he can inuey against the state of his country, defame them that in learning
and virtue be far unlike himself, shall presume to write, and be suffered to
print his ignorant allegations, and impudent untruths, to deface the Gospel,
to set a gogge seditious and new fangled heads? You would have men judge no
better of us, but that we go about, to overthrow the religion of Christ, take
away the memory of his passion, Fol. 109 a. b.
and say that there is no Christ at al. This do ye set forth by an example of
Andrew Lampugna^, which gat an audacitie to slay the duke of Millain, by
striking often his Image: and by a similitude of a chamber of presence, wherein
who so comes, and pulls down the cloth of estate, or otherwise breaks
Princes arms in pieces, he is no loyal and faithful subject. Let the world
judge betwixt you and us, who seek less the defacing of Christ and his Gospel,
who would more abolishe the memory of his death. We by continual preaching of
it, or you by often paynting of it? We by referring al glory unto God, or you
by transferring all praise unto your selves? We by setting forth our state of
salvation so, as Christ himself has taught us, saying: Search ye the
scriptures: or you by following the devils doctrine, and perverting the word,
affirming: That we daily must gaze upon pictures. There be other means to
remember Christ (as in the Preface I have at large declared) than by laying.ij.
sticks a Cross, or breaking the air with a thumb on my forehead. Papists
deny Christ.
Nor they deny Christ, which affirm him to be God, and therefore in Heaven
seek him: but such as make an Image of him, seuering thereby his divinity from
humanity, and only as man upon earth honor him. Wherefore your history is ill
applied. Galeatius Maria (as your own author says) being duke of Millain,
Paradinus in symbolis.
was a wicked tirant, a common rauisher of all honest women, a violent
oppressor of al his subjects: therefore God stirred the hearts of some, to
conspire his death. And for the same cause the word of that arms is, vel in
ara, that God in every place, yea to the altar it self: pursues the revenge
upon the ungodly. And therefore the man which otherwise stood in dread of the
Prince, was by another mean heartened. But God stirs the heart of none, to
work any vengeance on Christ his son: therefore the comparison is not like.
Again Lampugna^, gat him the lively Image of the duke: we have the Image I
wot nere of whom: sure the Image of Christ it is not: but in respect of the
abuse, a damnable Idol. Then if the striking at the Image of Christ, be sign
that Christ himself is hated: consider with your self who is more faulty, who
is more despitefully set herein? You, or we? We pecke at a stone or a piece of
wood, which has no likeness in the world of Christ: you burn and butcher the
lively members of Christ's own body, the perfect counterfets of him departed
hence. We pull down the dumb and the deaf Idols, the instruments of abuse:
you murder the saints, you destroy ye Prophets: you spite that any lives
honester than your selves. Who now (I beseech you) be more enemies of Christ?
Who be more like to fall into Apostacy? the ouerthrowers of Idols, or
destroyers of saints? the myslikers of a dead stock or stone: or murderers
of quick and living men? You request me to tell you, Folio. 109. b.
if a man come into a chamber of presence, and pluck down the cloth of
estate, and break the Princes arms in pieces, is it not his intent to have
the Prince deposed? In deed sir if the Prince have set it up, and give
commandment that it shall there stand, it is too great an offense to break
it. But if the Prince have proclaimed the contrary, that none shall presume to
draw his arms, or set up any cloth of estate for him: and yet
notwithstanding, some in despite or mockery, shall hang up a beggarly and
stinking clout: or in stead of his royal arms, erecte some monument of
reproufe and shame, if I came in place, I would pull it down, and be the
faythfuller subject for that. And this is the very state of our cause. Christ
and his Apostles (as I have proved before) have utterly forbidden Images: there
is no Cross, that has any likeness of our redemer on it. Christ has taken
order only by his word to be set forth unto us. Therefore the Cross of
wood, stone or metal, may without offense be removed of us. For it is not the
cloth of estate of his: the arms and recognisance of his kingdom: It is a
wicked invention of the Papists, a crafty delusion of the devil: to supplant
Christ, to take away the knowledge and true service of him. Alexander (as
Horace says) Edicto vetuit, Episto. lib. 1.
ne quis se praeter Apellem pingeret, aut alius Lysippo, duceret era fortis
Alexandri vultum simulantiae, gave charge, that but Apelles, none in colors
should him dress: Or but Lysippus, should in brass his countenance express.
Then if a simple botcher had attempted to draw him, contrary to his
commandment, should he not have committed pety treason trow you? On like
sort Christ has given out his word, whereby he has witnessed of himself,
Joan. 4.
he has strayghtly enacted, that whosoever worship him, Joan. 5.
in spirit and verity they shall worship: they shall not more symplie
conceive of him, than of the Majesty of a God, the second person in Trinity,
with our flesh carried up into Heaven with him. Now comes the workman with
his tools, and makes a corporal and lying shape, to bring an outward and
earthly worship. Alexander the Coppersmyth, cries out for his advantage: Romans
1. Epi. 1. ca. 5.
Simon Magus the Sorcerer, contendeth for his share. S. Paul is against it. S.
John condemns it. What shall we now do? go to the lying Image, and forsake
the true? forbid the word, and bring in a picture? have our hearts here in
earth, where our God is in Heaven? Quisquam ne tam ineptus est, vt putet
aliquid esse in simulachro dei, Lactantius de falsa rel. lib. 2. Cap. 2.
in quo ne hominis quidem quicquam est praeter vmbram?

Is any man so foolish as to think, that any piece of God or godliness is in
an Image, wherein there is no point incident into a man, beside the shadow?

Shall this be the arms and cognisaunce of our master, in nature whereof,
there is nothing like him, in use whereof, there is nothing but myslyketh him?
I doubt not but the Cross, if it had any sense or understanding, would bow
down it self to the maker of it, and not abide the maker to do honor to it.
For had not the maker bestowed some cost and workemanshippe upon it, it might
well enough have been locked in the copher and laid in the chimney. Then, what
preposterous thing is this? They that have sense, to set up the senseless? the
reasonable creatures, to worship the unreasonable? the living, to fall down
before the dead? the workmanshippe of God, and children of his kingdom, to
adore a corruptible piece of earth? An ill effect of a vile occupation.

O curuae in terras animae and coelestium inanes. Persius.


O crooked souls bente to the earth, and void of heavenly things.

We rather ought to erect our hearts and eyes thither, where our end is,
whither we look to go, than be defixed on that, which presently does cumber us,
and long we shall not enjoy. Humi miscri volutamini (as Lactantius does say)
and poenitet quadrupedes non esse natos, De fall. reli. lib. 2. Cap. 2.
cum deorsum quaeritis quod in sublimi quaerere debuistis.

Ye wretches tumble upon the earth, and seem to be sorry that ye be not made
fourefoted beasts, when ye seek below, that which ye ought to find above.

For your Crosses and Crucifires, your Images and inuentio^s, what pretext so
ever they have to commend them, what color and cost so ever to garnish them,
yet are they but earth: from thence they came, and thither they will. What
should ye then be subject unto things inferior to your selves? Quum vos
terrae summittitis, Lactantius ibidem.
humilioresque facitis, ipsi vos vltro ad inferos mergitis ad mortemque
damnatis: quia nihil terra inferius and humilius, nisi mors and inferi: quae si
effugere velletis, subiectam pedibus vestris terram contemneretis corporis
statu saluo: quod iccirco rectum accepistis, quo oculos atque mentem, cum eo
qui fecit, confer possetis. Co^te^nere aute^ et calcare terra^ nihil aliud
est, qua^ simulachra no^ adorare. When you submit and abase your selves unto
the earth, ye throw your selves voluntarily to hell, and condemn you to
death: for nothing is inferior and worse, than the earth, but death and hell:
which if ye would avoid, ye should contemn the earth that is under your
feet, preserving the state and condition of your body: which for this respect
ye have received upright, that ye might resemble and compare both eyes and
mind, with him that made them. But to contemn and despise the earth, is
nothing else, but not to worship Images, which are made of earth. Thus much
Lactantius. Now if Christ be so slenderly received of us, and all his
benefits so lightly passed over, that our memory must be helped, and unless
we have somewhat subject to our eyes, we shall sone forget him: we have the
poor, we have beside the seals of his mercy, the sacraments of his grace,
which when he delivered he said: Hoc facite in mei commemorationem. 1. Cor. 11.
Do this in remembrance of me. For as often as ye eat this bread and drink
this cup, says the Apostle, ye show the Lords death till he come. Wherefore
let this confirm our memory, that Christ thought needful for us: let us not
seek any further aids, than Christ (expert of our infirmities) has left us.
If Christ and his death be duly preached to us, no force if all Crosses be
cast into the fire. But if preaching of Christ and hearing of his word do
fail us: a sorry Cross can but delight our eyes, and straight corrupt our
hearts. The miracles that have been done, although they may in part without
any shame, be doubted of: without any impudency denied: yet granted to be
true, must not be brought for confirmation of a Cross, least the like be
alleged to make Simon Magus a Saint. In deed we read, Eusebi. li. 2. cap 13.
Mat. 7.
that for the like effects, he had an Image in Rome set up to him, with this
inscription, Simoni deo sancto. To Simon the holy God. But Christ also speaks
of the like, which in the latter day shall come unto him, saying: Lord have we
not cast out devils in thy name, and by thy name done many great works? To
whom notwithstanding, Christ shall answer this: I never knew you, depart ye
from me, ye workers of iniquity. Therefore your miracles, if they be false, be
devilish: if they were true, yet now are impertinent. But if we should deny
them as untrue (wherein we might have good authority to support us) should we
therefore according to your gathering, deny the omnipotencye of God, Fol. 111.
a.
as though he could not work any such miracles? Why, we rather do aduau^ce it
much, acknowledging that God with out such external means, is able to work
more effects than these. Only beware you, least by ascribing to much unto the
mean, ye be ignorant of the end, and disgrace the author. We see by
experience, that virtues wroughte or so supposed to have been, by the sign of
a Cross, has caused sensing, kneeling, offering, and al kind of wicked
Idolatry to the Cross. And so, where Christ should have been only praised, a
piece of wood is honored. A good matter it is to receive a benefit, and so
acknowledge it. A vile part it is to enjoy ye pleasure of one man's trauail, and
bestow the thanks upon an other: yet so it falls out among the
superstitious. God works the miracle: they worship the mean. So did the
children of fornication, among the Jews of old, whose mother had played the
harlot, saying: I will go after my lovers, Ose. 2.
that give me my bread and my water, my wool and my flax, mine oil and my
drink. Nor she did know that I, says the Lord, did give her her corn and
oil, multiplied her gold and silver, which they bestowed upon Baal. Therefore
will I return, and take away my corn, in time thereof, and my wine in the
season thereof, and will recover my wool and my flax lent, and discover her
lewdness in the sight of her lovers. Whereby we have to understand, that as
God is the only worker of all miracles, tending to our health and
preservation, so does he account it an heinous fault, a spiritual fornication,
when the glory thereof, is conferred on an other. Learn you by this, that the
matter of the Cross never had the virtue, to work such things as you
report, and therefore ought not of any to be worshipped. God by his Prophet,
in plain terms, does call it whoredom, which you for your profit, in speech
of hypocrisy, do call Devotion. Wherefore beware of the plage ensuing: deryue
not ye glory fed the crucified, to ye Cross. Lactan. li. 2 cap. 2.
Viuu^ colite vt viuatis. Moriature enim necesse est, qui se suamque anima^
mortuis adiudicauit. Worship ye living God, yt you may live. For needs he must
dye, that has adjudged himself and his soul unto the dead.

To the ninth Article. What commodity every Christen man has or may have by
the sign of the Cross.
AS the ground it self, and chief buttresse of your cause, is taken out of
the second of Nice, whose impudent vanities, I have sufficiently before
declared: so are not you ashamed, sometime to allege them with as small
trial, as they had truth. But as S. Ambrose said of the council held at
Ariminu^. Illud ego concilium exhorrea. ye council I do utterly abhor: so do
I say of this, that with as good cause and with all my heart I refuse their
authority, and condemn their doings. Li. Ep. 5. Epi. 31. Fol. 113 b.
A vain allegation it was of Germanus, that the Images of holy men, are a
lively description of their stoutness, a representatio^ of holy virtue, a
dispensation of grace given the^: a vain applycation it is of yours, that even
so the Cross and Image of Christ crucified, set before our eyes, is a lively
description of his stoutnesse, in bearing the blows of the Jews, and so
forth. To speak first of other Images, and so to descend to yours, I beseech
you, what stoutnesse and virtue is described, what holiness and grace is
dispe^sed by them? When the Saints were alive, their virtues could not be
discerned with eye, they rested in ye mind their proper subject. And shall they
now be seen in their dead Images, which have neither mind nor sense to hold
them? This is as just, as Germans lips. When I see an Image gorgiously
apparelled, with spear, or sword, or book in the hand, an other with a box, or a
babe in her arms, what reason can tell me, whether Mars, or S. George: Venus or
ye Virgin ye mother of Christ, be there erected? If ye tell me, that the
superscriptio^ discernes the^, thou if it please the maker to remove ye title,
that which before was the Idol Venus, shall now become the blessed Virgin: that
which was Mercury, shall anon be Paul: and so as it pleases ye workman to
name it, it shall be reverenced and esteemed. But whereas they be called lay men's
books, impossible it is without a scholemaster to read the^. But when they be
red, what lessons have they? Such as Cherea did learn in Tere^ce, or such as
Venus Cnidia did teach in Lucian. For when they behold strange and costly
Images, wonderously adored, with coronets on their heds, rings on their
fingers, precious stones on their garments: what may they think, but yt some
stately Princes with their proud apparel and disguised train, be come in
presence: and then they fall down, and worship the body, or the garment: the
Idol, or the gold, or peradventure both. The body is stiff, for it is a
stone: the garments as stiff, for they are of gold. The shape inforceth an
honor to the Image, the furniture provoke a coveting of ye goods. So at one
time, two Idolatries be committed. If your maids do look upon Mary Magdalen,
as in the Churches she is set forth, with nice apparel, and wanton lokes, what
can they behold in her, but the prankes of an harlot? what can they learn of
her, but lusts of vanity? Doubtless, if Images must be admitted to set forth
the Saints: the Saints themselves shall not be honored, but dishonored: and
we shall espy no example of sobrenesse, of chastity, of contempt of richesse
and vanity of the world, but of excess, of wantonness, of pride and
covetousness. For if the external decking, the trimming of the puppettes, do
lively describe any thing, it is not the nature of holy Saints, but childish
affection of old doting fools, which must have such babies to play them
withal. The reason of our time for Images.
But ye play of folly, does end in earnest of gross Idolatry. And although
some affirm, that in these days, men be too wise and learned, to take any
hurt or offense by Images, they know what they are, they gad not into far
countries after them, the preachers otherwise inform the^, and therefore (as
they suppose) it is not unlawful or wicked, absolutely to have Images in
Churches, though it may (for the danger of the simpler sort) seem to be not
altogether expedient: To this I reply, that none in these days in this respect
is better instructed in the fear of God, than Ezechias was: more zelously
affected to the truth, than Josias: more endued with wisdom from above, tha^
Solomon: they knew what an Idol or Image was, they were not likely for their
own persons, to sustain any harm or damage by them: they armed other against
the danger of them: yet would not Ezechias suffer the brazen serpent, (the
sign of Christ our Savior) to stand. Josias for all his knowledge, 2. Re. 18.
2. Re. 23. 1. Re. 11.
which could not in that case be him self abused, took away all occasion of
ruin from his people, and utterly removed al Idols. Solomon for all his
wisdom, by suffering his wa^ton Paramoures, to bring their Idols into his
court and palace, was by carnal harlottes persuaded, and brought at the last
to the committing of spiritual fornication: and of a most wise and godly
Prince, became a most folish and vile Idolater. Then let Ezechias and Josias
teach us, utterly to remove all occasion of fall, as well from other as from our
selves: let Solomon also fear us, from suffering any such to stand, least by
transgression, our wisdom be folly, and understanding error. He that loves
danger, shall perish therein: Eccle. 13. 1. Cor. 10.
and let him that stands, beware he fall not. I am sure there is no Prince of
the world, more furnished with skill, than was ye Solomon: none have more
graces conferred on them: and yet he was abused by Images: by Images, that he
knew to be but stocks and stones. For horrible it is to fall into the hands of
the living God: and who so turns the glory of the incorruptible God, to the
similitude of the Image of a corruptible man: Heb. 10. Romans 1.
whosoever turns the truth of God into a lie, and worshippeth the creature
forsaking the creator: for this cause God gives them up to vile affections, to
their hearts lusts, to uncleanness. etc. Then let all Princes, all wise of
the world beware, that they procure not Gods indignation, by breaking his
precept, so often given, so straghtly enioined, Thou shall make to thy self no
likeness of any thing. Suppose they be so strengthened in faith, so assisted
by grace, that how great soever the danger be, yet they fall not in it, they
keep themselves vncorrupt from Idolatry: shall that be sufficient excuse for
them, if they leave occasion of such offense to other? Shall their learning and
wisdom be cause of folly, and deceyt to the simple? Shall they have such
regard of their own fa^sie: which is to no purpose, but only to gaze on: without
a commandment, as they themselves confess, yt the silly flock shall be
scattered thereby, and the more multitude, being simple perish, for who^ Christ
paid as dear a ransom, as for ye greatest, the wisest, the best learned of
the earth? The Scripture is commanded to be known of al men. Gather (says
Moses) the people together, Deute. 31.
men, women and children, and the stranger yt is within thy gates yt they may
hear and that they may learn, and fear the Lord your God, and keep and
observe all the words of his law. Likewise in ye new testament, the like
commandment is given by Christ, to search the Scriptures. Which words if any
man think, John. 5.
do appertain only to the Jews of the old time, or to yt Clergy now: by ye
same reason (as Augustine does well prove) he may say, ye Christians ought not
to know Christ, De verb. Domini. Ser. 45.
nor be known of Christ. Notwithstanding the Scriptures, (contrary to Gods
will,) have been for a policy forbidden to be red, least the ignorant might
fall into error by the^. And shall not the pictures, forbidden and banished out
of Gods seruise, breding a most vile affection of Idolatry, be removed rather
out of the temple, as well in respect of the precept, as peril? I have showed,
what these Images do describe: pride, avarice, wantonness, and nothing else.
If a man say, this Saint in his life time despised his life, to live with God:
continued in poverty, to be rich in Christ: rejected the pleasures, and lusts
of the flesh, to subdue the same to the good guiding spirit: his Image by and
by controls him of a lie. For he sees a most chereful and stately look, a
gorgious and rich attire, an embracing in death of ye, which in life he most
abhorred. Wherefore, as Images generally describe a contrary effect to their
first paternes, as always they work a more wicked end than in religion is to
be admitted: so the Cross it self, does not nor cannot lead as to ye
crucified: but estra^geth our hearts from god ye creator, to a vile creature.
And if the commodity of Images in the Church or Crosses, had been such (as you
would have it appear) I marvel ye Christ our scholemaster, that his Apostles
our teachers, took no order for them. Romans 15,
Paul says not Quaecu^que picta sunt, sed quaecunque scriptae sunt, ad nostram
doctrina^ scripta sunt. etc. Whatsoever things are painted, but whatsoever
things are written, are written for our instruction. Not yt by Images or
gasing stocks, 2. Tim. 3.
but through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, we may have hope. Nor he
says. All picture, but Scripture, inspired of God, is profitable to teach, to
reprove, to instruct, that the man of God may be perfect, furnished to all good
works. Then if the Scripture be a commended and commanded way, and ye same
sufficient to make us perfect in all points, I see not to what use an Image or
a picture is. Exo. 20.
God gave the law to Moses, not set forth with colors, but written in.ij.
tables. Iosue Iosu. 23.2.4
delivered ye same unto ye people, not in Imagery, but in word: not glorious
to ye eye, but gladsome to the ear, comfortable to ye heart: so yt the mean,
whereby they would the benefits of God to be kept in remembrance, was not to
paint or grave ye likeness of the^, but by faithful pen, report the noble
factes, and so print in the heart, a thankful memory. David entreating, of the
incarnation, and nativity, passion and death, resurrection and kingdom of
Christ our Savior (which are the proper effects which you will have set forth
in Imagery) says in the person of Christ, thus: Psa. 39.
In capite libri scriptu^ est deem. In ye beginning of the book, it is written
of me It is not graued in a piece of metal, or painted on a wall. The
Evangelist says: Sicut scriptu^ est in libro Sermonu^ Esaiae. Luke. 3.
As it is written in the book of Esaies Esa. 52.
sermons. He spoke of sermons, and not of signs: of a book, and not of an
Image. The Apostles also, of whom it is written, beautiful are the fete of
those, that bring tidinges of peace, and preach health, which went throwing
their seeds with tears, planting the faith of Christ with affliction, and shall
return again having their handful, Psa. 125.
with plentiful increase, with joy for gain, and success of the gospel:
sent not a Cross, or history of the passion painted in a table to cities or to
nations, but their Epistles, the certain witnesses of their minds, their
writings. Nor Christ (yt we read of) conferred on them the art of painting,
caruing, or engrauing, whereby they might convert the heathen to the faith, or
leave a remembrance with their disciples after them. Luke 24.
Sed aperuit illis dominus sensum scripturarum: but the Lord opened the sense
of Scripture to them. S. John banished into the Island Patmos, to receive the
secret and divine revelations, heard at the Lords hands: Scribe haec in
libro. Apoc. 1.
Write these in a book, and not work the^ in stone or metal. Whereby we are
given to understand, that the instruction of our faith, the only aid of a
Godly memory, must be the Scripture. The Cross, with a picture of a man upon
it, with arms stretched, body pierced, and fete nailed, may peradventure put
me in mind, of a man so executed: but who it was, for what cause it was, to
what wholesome end and effect it was, no picture in the world can tell me. If
preaching, inspired by the grace of God, working effectually in the hearts of
hearers, be not able to turn and convert the obstinate: If the lawful use of
Gods holy instrument, pearcing the hearts, and striking the conscience, can not
frame aright, and reform to piety: what shall we think of a dumb senseless
unlawful thing? If I see a fellon, a thief, a murderer hanged before mine
eyes, have I not more to consider mine own estate, than if I beheld a wodden
roode, or silver crucifix? Suppose I know that that picture represents
Christ: am I furthered any thing toward my salvation? or are the mercies of
Christ more effectual to me? Ephe. 1.
unless I know, that even God the father, has also chosen me in Christ his
son, before the foundations of the world were laid, that I should be holy
and without blame before him in love? Is there any cause to drive me to
thankfulness, or otherwise to virtuous conversation, because I see a
gallows, which my horse sees as well as I, and yet is not the holier? Can I
glorify God for sending of his son, unless I know that he did fend him:
and for me he sent him: whom he has predestinate, to be adopted through Jesus
Christ unto himself, according to ye good pleasure of his will: to the praise of
the glory of his grace, wherewith he has made us accepted in his beloved, by
whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgyuenesse of sins,
according to his rich grace: whereby he has been abundant toward us, in all
wisdom and understanding, and has opened unto us the mystery of his will,
according to his good pleasure which he had purposed in him: That in the
dyspensation of the fullness of times, he might gather together all things in
one, which are in heaven, and which are in earth, even all in Christ? If these
effects be described in a Cross, the duty of thankfulness is taught
wythall, the form of obedience, is set forth unto us. But no Cross can tell
me, that Christ came once into the world: much less that he was, before he
came: that he came to die for us: that he died to rise again: that he rose to
purchase a righteousness for us: yet these and some other articles of our
faith, we must be first instructed in: or else the sight of the Cross does no
more profit me, than (as I said) my horse. But neither we are willed by any
word of God, to fetch our knowledge from such unskillful scholmasters, nor any
thing is in them, whereof they can to our health inform us. Folio. 114. b.
You say that the Cross teaches the proud and contentious man humility, for
if any be wise in his own conceyte, and condemns other men's judgments,
and craketh to the people, that the doctrine which he teaches contrary to all
other, is sure, sound, and grounded upon the word of god, that man I say,
loking intentiuely upon this sign, may learn humility, and say with S.
Paul, God forbid that I should brag or glory in any thing but in the Cross of
our Lord Jesus Christ. In deed, sir, humility may well one way be learned of a
cross: for when it is stricken, it strikes not again: when it is reviled, it
gives no ill language: will it to stand, and it will not stir. But you that
think your self as wise as any man, and yet are abused in your own conceyt,
when ye look on your Cross, what are ye aduau^taged? Do ye learn to glory in
nothing else, but Christ crucified? In deed S. Paul in that Epistle to the
Galathians condemned the hypocrites and false teachers, which urged the Law,
Circumcision, and Cermonies, against whose heresy he brought his assertion:
that only the death of Christ was his joy and felicity: nor any thing he had
but that to rejoice in. Papists for all their crosses have no humility.
If you have learned this lesson of the Cross, I am glad thereof. For then ye
condemn your merits and satisfactions: Then will ye lay away your idle
ceremonies and wilworship. But if you retain a confidence in your works, if
you ascribe any righteousness unto them, if you think you are able to deserve
salvation, or satisfy any way for another sins, then do ye glory in somewhat
else than the Cross of Christ: then is your humility but hypocrisy. When the
Papists behold the work of their own hands, the Cross it self, fair
mustering in ye church, which might peradventure have been a logge for the
chimney, or else a chamberpot, if they had not given that shape unto it, and
garnisht it as it is, which now by their means is reverently adored, and
though to be of such singular virtue: no other thought can come into their
heads, but that they the^ selves be better than their handy work, the maker
more to be esteemed than the metal: and so for humility a pride is engendered,
that they be causes of such wonderful effects: and if God be honored, they
must be thanked. As for obstinate sinners, if they have no better helps, to
regenerate their hearts, than the sign of a Cross, to feed their eyes: they
are like to be as well converted, as Julian and the Jew (of whom ye spoke
before) who notwithstanding that they made a Cross, remained in their
Paganism accursed still. Folio. 115. b.
We read in ye scripture such power attributed to the word but to the wood
never. Psalm. 18.
Lex Domini immaculata conuertens animas, testimonium Domini fidele, sapientiam
praestans paruulis. The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul, the
testimony of ye Lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple. The statutes
of the Lord are right, and rejoice the heart, the commandment of the Lord is
pure, and gives light unto the eyes. If any such authority could be brought
for the cross, I could more easyly be brought to believe it. Now that ye bring
but your own supposall, I might refute it with a bare denial. But I will bring
Chrisostom for me. Chrisosto. in Cap. Io. 8. Hom. 54.
Animo desperato nihil peius. Qua^uis signa, quamuis miracula videat, in eade^
perstat pertinacia. which is to say. Nothing is worse than a desperate mind.
Although he see signs, although miracles be wrought, yet he stands stiffly in
the same self will frowardness. And there also he brings the example of
Pharao, whom all the wonders and plagues of Egypt could not make relent:
Wherefore if the Cross be brought unto the like, I am sure, small comfort will
arise thereof: so that not only the authority, but also the example condemns
you. De humar. verbi.
Athanasius in the place by you alleged: how the vvo^ted affections be taken
out of harlots hearts: murderers keep their vveapon no longer: fearful men
conceive a courage: barbarous nations lay away their immanitie, does not
ascribe these effects to the Cross, but wholly and solely to the faith of
Christ. Then why does he mention the sign of the cross (say you) why was
he not contented to put faith and no more? not that they should be joined
patente together: but, that the one might be testified by the other. And the
manner of that time was, they being conversant among ye infidels, by this kind
of sign to show their profession. So that as it is not enough to have a faith
secret to our selves, whereof we dare not make a confession, but that we must so
seem unto the world, as inwardely we are, that God be not only glorious in
himself, but so acknowledged of the world: therefore the sign of the Cross,
and faith, the token of profession and profession it self, be put together.
And though ye turn over all histories that ever were, ye shall never find,
that a Cross without faith, did further any man: But that faith alone, without
any Cross, is right auayleable, the Scripture in every place witnesses. Now
where ye contend, Fol. 117. a.
that a Cross is necessary, notvvithstanding that men may have Godly
instructions by reading the Scriptures: And hearing good preachers: because
every man can not read Scripture, nor understand it, when he reads it: and
every man cannot at all times so conuenie^tly hear a good preacher, as he may
see the sign of the Cross: And things seen, do move more affection, than
those that be heard or red. As your answer to this objection against your
self, contains three pretended causes: so will I in order consider of them.
First that all men, cannot read Scripture, or understand it, when they read
it: I beseech you be Images and Crosses such books, as al men can read and
understand? Images do speak doubtfully.
Did not I tell you how Stephen Gardener a learned man, made a false
construction out of such a book, taking the Image of the king, for S. George on
horseback? The countenance, the proportion, the apparel of them, is as
pleases the workman to devise: the virtue, the power, and the qualities of
them, is as pleases the lokers on to ymagine. And let them read in Images
that lust, They teach Diuelishly.
let them understand as they may: nothing doubtless is to be readde or
understood in them, but the leude lessons of gross Idolatry, penned by the
devil, tending to damnation. They be read unlawfully.
And if there were not apparently such peril in them (the contrary whereof can
not be avoided) yet were we bound, not only to suspecte, but also to refuse
such scholemasters as they, being not authorized by Gods commission, but (as I
have proved) always inhibited. If Christ (as the Gospel tells us, twice in
one place together) be the only doctor and guide of his: Math. 23. If God has
spoken in these last days by his son unto us, in whose person all wonted
ways of instruction, all revelations do cease: Hebr. 1. we must now go no
further than to his word: we must seek no teacher but his holy spirit, Ipse
nos inducet in omnem veritatem. that same will induce us into all truth. And
although I know that the gifts of God have their degrees, yet dare I say,
There can be no such ignorance as shall drive us to seek a knowledge in an
Image.
that none is utterly so void of grace, but has (for understanding) so much
conferred on him, as shall be expedient for his own behoufe, unless he be
utterly as a rotten member cut of from Christ. But if the skyll of reading, or
gift of understanding be denied unto any, shall he be driven to seek it,
where it is not? Then shall he find what he would not. If our heavenly father
refuse to teach us, a vile creature can not instruct us. If God wythdrawe his
decreed mean whereby he may win us: an extraordinary matter, a stock or a
stone cannot convert us. If God do not suffer us a preaching parson, the devil
does send us such du^b vicares. If man be not worthied to direct us in a truth:
an Image or a Cross will pervert us with a lie. Posuit thesaurum suum in vasis
fictilibus. He has put his treasure in frail vessels (says S. Paul,
speaking of the work of Gods exceeding mercy,) in sending us men of our own
nature, by whom his will may be revealed to us. But if your order and assertion
did hold, then had he put his treasure, in dumb and dead and senseless
creatures, and should stand to discretion of the Carpenter or smyth, where he
should best confer his grace. A strange case, That which all the creatures of
God can not teach a Cross can.
that where all the works of God be insufficient to teach humility, to
persuade patience, to convert from error, and comfort in despair, the vile
work of man's wicked hand, is able (as you say,) to procure and compass the
same for us. The world it self is a certain spectacle of things invisible,
for that the order and frame of it, is a glass to behold the secret working
and hydden grace of God. The heavenly creatures and spheres above, have a
greater mark of his divinity, more evident to the worlds eye, than either can
be unknown or dissembled. Which thing S. Paul declares to the Romans, Romans
1.
saying: that so much was opened unto men, as was requisite to be known of
God, in that his invisible powers, yea, till ye come to his eterne virtue and
divinity, being understood from the very beginning and creation of the world,
be daily seen amongst us. Notwithstanding, such a knowledge as this, being
grown and gathered by such circumstaunces as be common unto all alyke, is
natural as it were, and only enforces this, that no excuse, no cloak of
ignorance, can be pretended: But to alter the heart, to make a new mind, to
regenerate it to true piety, is the work of another instrument, and effect
of another cause. For the principal and chief point, whereupon depends our
health and salvation, is not only to know Gods absolute and universal
authority, (whereof both Heaven and earth is full, and all the world is
witness) but also to find out his secret counsayles, to consider his
judgments, to mark the mysteries of our salvation in Christ our Lord, which
is hidden from the world. Then if the marvelous works of God, be not
sufficient to direct our ways, considering how frail we are, and if it hap
that through them, sometime we fall into any deper consyderation of the
heavenly nature, straight ways we are pulled from the thought thereof, to
our own lewdness and ymaginations, slyding to the dotages and dreams of the
flesh: whereby it comes to pass, that if perhaps any true instincte do
sparckle in us, it is out again, before we can get any warmth of it.

What shall we think of a syllie Cross, that sorry worms, and canker, does
corrupt? that never God nor good man devised? Shall we run to so wicked and
unwieldy succor: shall we seek so blind a guide to bring us out of
darkness? God never has, no not from the beginning, dealt otherwise with his
elect, but that he would strengthen and relieve their weakness, with a
stronger remedy. For he has used to their instruction, the mystery of his
word, Illuminantis oculos, Psalm. 18.
and intellectum dantis paruulis, That lighteneth the eyes, and gives
understanding unto the meek.

Therefore the goodman, and master of the house, said in the Gospel:
Negotiemini donec veniam, Occupy til I come. Luke. 19.
When he, intending to go abroad himself, gave each of his servants his
portion to bestow. What portion was it? What was the talent? What was the
merchandise, that they should traffic with? Not with the merchants of Tyrus,
to lade their ships with precious wares: nor with the Mariners of Ahasias,
seek strange countries to get gold: But his word it was, that he charged
them wythall: that was the treasure, that being well bestowed, Joan. 4. Apoc.
22. Joan. 6. Cantic. 8. Psalm. 119. Sap. 18. Naum. 2. Math. 16. 1. Cor. 10.
Apoca. 15.
should bring infinite pleasures with it. For his word is the lively water,
whereby the heates of our lusts are quenched: the bread of life to feed our
hungry souls: the pleasant wine to cheer and make us merry: the lantern to
guide our steps: the sword that overthrows the enemies of the truth: the
fyrie shield to defend us against our adversaries: the sure rock whereupon
to build: the touch stone, to try out doctrines, and what spirits are of God:
the key to open and shut heaven gates: the sweet tuned instrument, to pass
away the tediousness of this our exile: the medicine for all dyseases: the
joy, the jewel, the only relics of Christ departed hence: which, if we mind
to know his will, as it becomes obedient children: if we do look to be
heirs with him, as all men do make a rekening of, then must we seek, observe,
and have always in reverence. For hence is the perfect knowledge of all truth
only to be had, and all other blessedness, in as ample wise, as if that
Christ were before our eyes, ready to perform and pronounce the things.
Wherefore since the Scripture is worthyed of these titles, and none of them can
justly be applied to the Cross: since the word is the ordinary and only mean,
that God now uses for instruction of his: the Cross is a scholemaster of
error and impiety: let no man plead ignorance for his excuse, which may well
be increased, but reformed never, by a beggarly book of wood or stone. As for
the other percell of your answer, that because all men can not so
conveniently at all times hear a good preacher, Folio. 117. a.
as they may see the sign of the Cross, therefore the Cross must be had
beside preaching. I may turn the argument on your own head, that the more
general the matter is, and more easily come by, being in it self unlawful,
the more seriously it ought to be reproved, the more justly condemned. For
whereas Images do but infecte the heart, are occasions of fall, and nothing
else, it is a perilous matter, the poison to be more general than the
medicine, the remedy to be harder than the offense to come by. Bonum quo
communius eo prastantius, says Aristotle, A good thing the more common it be,
the better it is. The more we may see a cross the worse.
But a mischief the more it spreads, the more it anoyeth: And of all
mischief, an Image most. For Images, Crosses, Crucifixes, are every man's
ware: A good preacher is scarcely to be found in a country. Images
continually do preach Idolatry: the preacher can not always open his mouth
against it. Images are likely to seduce a multitude, all men of nature, being
prone to Idolatry: The preacher is able to persuade but a few, few men
inclined to credit sound doctrine. Wherefore the doctrine of a good preacher,
and a gay puppet set up in ye church, being direct contrary: the less we may
hear the preacher, the more we may see the puppet: the less is our comfort
in Christ our Lord, the more do we stand in the Devils danger. As for
affection to be stirred by Imagery, Leude affections stirred by Imagery.
I grant they may be some, but not such as they ought. For impossible it is
(as in the preface is declared) an Image to come in place of Gods service, and
not allure to a wicked worship. Experience has taught us, and examples do
prove, ye princes for their pleasure erecting Images, have bred the vile
affection of Idolatry. The book of Wisdom is most evident therein. Then if
the picture of a living man, a mortal creature, be of such force to crook the
soul: what shall we think of Images of them, that are reputed saints? of the
Image of Christ our God and savior? Luc. 10. Act. 14. Gala. 3.
Whose names be written in the book of life, they care not for their faces, to
be painted on a post. They that alive abhorred any worship, will not being dead
provoke so great offense. Christ ye (as God) will be honored in truth, must not
to the world be set forth with a lie, nec qui spiritu coeperu^t carne consuma^di,
nor they yt began in the spirit, must be made perfect in the flesh. The
heathen ye believed not immortality of soul, and were altogether vainglorious
and proud, had a pleasure to have their Images set up, and their children
rejoiced in their parents folly: but this must not be taken, as president for
us Christians. For they had no other reward of well deserving: we look for an
other manner of crown of glory, 2. Tim. 4. 1. Petr. 5.
which is laid up in store for us, against a better day. They had no laws to
forbid such cou^terfets, yea the law it self, to excite men to virtue, decreed
Statuas in foro, Images in the market place. Deu. 4.5.7 1. Ioh. 5. Car. Mag.
Li. 3. ca. 15.
We have law enough from the majesty of God, to condemn Images in place of
prayer. Wherefore I may say, with the good fathers of Franckeforde: Si homines
mortales proteruia vanitatis inflati. etc. If mortal men, puffed up with
frowardness of their own vanity, proud of worldly pomp, bragging,
ambitious, because they could not be in all places, would be magnified in some
place: because they looked for no heavenly profit, would therefore have an
earthly praise: Shall this enforce us to make a picture of our God, who is in
every place, can be contained in no place, whose seat the heavens are, whose
fotestole is the earth, who is wonderful in all places, can with the eye be
discerned in no place? Where his virtue is so great, his glory so excellent,
his might so unmeasurable, he is not with colors to be portrayed, to be seen
in temples made with man's hand, to be honored or known in a beggarly picture:
but to be set forth in his worthy works, sought for in the heavens,
worshipped in heart, ye Prophet saying: Adorate dominum in atrio sancto eius.
Psalm. 28. Ioh. 4.
Worship the Lord in his holy Sanctuary. And the Evangelist. Deus spiritus est,
and qui adorat deum, in spiritu and veritate oportet adorare. God is a spirit
and they that worship God, must worship him in spirit and in truth. Thus have
I proved, that our affections to God ward, nether ought nor ca^ be styrred up,
by ye vain painters or caruers craft, howsoever men's fancies are delited with
them. Yet to consider your own histories. When Alexander the great, was fair
and finely painted, Julius Caesar beholding him was made more ambitious: and he
yt otherwise could have been contented with his own estate, was through a
picture made a plague of the world. Scipio the Aphricane, by loking on his
forefathers monuments, had more occasion of pride, than cause of praise given
him. Notwithstanding if in worldly things, for special policy, such order be
tolerable (to keep in memory the noble factes of other) if affections at home
may be stirred, with counterfetes of our absent friends: yet in Gods matters,
whose presence is at no time denied us, In Gods matters no Imagery admitted.
whose person can not be truly counterfeted, whose factes, are more lively
described in his word, than all the workmen of the world can imitate: this
point of devils rhetorique, this moving of affections, is not to be yielded to.
For the mynds of the faithful be only styrred up, by ye spirit of God, which
inwardly works in the heart, and outwardly by his word and Sacraments.
Wherefore Erasmus would not admit, yt a preacher should bring an Image to the
pulpit: he would not have such books as those. Yet then I am sure, they might
be best red, and affections (if ever) would most be moved then. His words be
these. Li. 3. Eccle.
Quidam per imagines mouent affectus, aut per ostensas sanctorum relliquias,
quorum neutrum conuenit grauitati loci in quo consistit Ecclesiastes. No
Imagery with preaching, much less without.
Neque enim legimus vnque tale quicque factum, vel a Christo vel ab Apostolis.
Some (says he) do move affectes by Images, or showing of Saints relics,
whereof neither agrees to the gravity of ye place, that a preacher stands
in. For we read not, that ever any such thing was done of Christ or his
Apostles. Then if religion will admit no president, but only of Christ and his
Apostles: If Images with tongues, to tell what they are, be not alowable: shall
tonglesse things, by man's devise be erected in every place, to serve God with
al? I told you before, what Images do teach: what affections they move is
evident to al. As Cherea when he saw painted in a table how Jupiter in form
of an in got of gold, came through ye tiles, and fell into his Ladies lap,
reioysed with himself, and said: if the thundering God played such a part: Ego
homun cio hoc non facerem? should not I poor wretch do this? So when a
gorgious and golden God, shall stand upon ye altar, will not ye covetous wish
it in his purse? will not he gather, if God delight to be made, and adorned with
this precious metal, am not I bound to make much of mine? When a man is
portrayde in the church, hanging on a gybbet, and another fool is crowching to
it, the cause not considered, and circumstaunce unknown, will not the careless
and desperate person, think with himself: what shame is it for me to hang,
since our God was so served? This is the least harm that can come of it. The
wicked adoration, the damnable Idolatry, I wittingly omit. In the next Article,
I shall entreat of it. Images not to be admitted for help of memory. Folio.
119. b.
Now for the calling unto remembrance, of ye which has been taught, or
occasioning to learn that which is unknown, ye say: that Images, if for no
other cause, yet because they quicke^ the memory, which in many is fickle,
help ignorance, which in some is lurde (I know not what ye mean by the
term, but so ye have sent it us uncorrected) stir up love which is vvaxen
cold, help hope which is almost dead, move devotion which in all men
decays, revive faith which in all men fails, they might right well be
suffered among Christen men. For proof of which points, ye bring two places:
one (as out of Augustine) an other out of Cyrill. To the place of Augustine, I
answer, according to the judgment and censure approved by the Parisiens and
set before the work that ye cite. Quod Sermo de visitacione infirmoru^, A vain
fansy fathered upon Augustine.
locutuleij cuiusda^ est, nec docti nec diserti. Quid habuerunt vel frontis vel
mentis, qui talia scripta nobis obtruserunt nomine Augustim? that the Sermon
entitled, of the visiting of the sick, is some bablers doing, that has
neither learning nor eloquence. What shamefastness or honesty was in them,
which have dashed us in the teeth with such writings, in the name of Augustyne?
To Cyrillus I say, that he had to do with Julian the Apostata: to whom it was
expedient, Foli. 120.
to excuse the order of Christians in his time: and therefore he said, the
healthful vvod does make us remember. etc. In deed in comparison of the
Gentiles Idols, Jupiter and Ganymedes, Daphne and Apollo, of which he there
discourses, the sign of the Cross was to be preferred: and to the enemy,
Cyrillus. li. 6. contra. Iu lianum.
we must not exaggerate ye fault of our friend, but cover it what we can. So
did Cyrillus. But that he was not in ye same heresy with you, see what
presidentes he brings against you. In the self same book, whereas you bring
your authority, these words he has. Honestus and bonus erat (sicut ipse
dicit) Numa, and sple^dida preditus intelligentia, etiam plurimas sacerdotum
constituit leges. Diligenter ergo inquiramus, quem hahuerit ille cultus modum.
Scripsit igitur de illo Dionisius Halicarnasseus, qui Romanoru^ historiam
diligenter composuit: quod templa quidem and delubra extruxerit, simulachrum
autem in illis erat nullu^. Nam quia Pythagorae philosophiam comme^dahat, cuius
and dogmata sequebatur, cognouerat deum omnino specie and forma tali carere,
affirmabatque illum gaudere, mentalibus and non carnalibus sacrificijs. Iccirco
and constructa te^pla fidei nominabat, qua sola deus ab hominibus, quantum
capaces sunt, videtur: and subditis praecipiebat, vt per fidem iurarent. Numa
(says Cyril) in answer unto Julian (as the enemy himself affirms) was
honest and good, and endued with notable understanding, made many laws for the
Priests. Let us inquire therefore diligently, what manner of seruise he had.
Dionise of Halicarnassus, which wrote well the history of the Romans,
reports, that he made temples and oratories, but there was no Image in the
world in them. For because he commended the wisdom of Pythagoras, whose
doctrine also he followed, he knew that God was destitute of such foorme and
shape: and affirmed that he took pleasure in sacrifices of ye mind, and not of
the flesh. Therefore the temples that he builded, he called the temples of
faith, by which only God is seen of men, so far as they are able to reach
unto his sight: and he commanded his subjects to take their oath by faith. In
which words many things may frutefully be observed: First, that where Julian
laid Numa his religion to the Christians charge, Cyrill is contented with his
authority, but he uses it to the condemnation of hethenish Idolatry: Cyrill
alovveth no Images in Churches.
Then, that he allows no Images to be in Churches, bringing a reason as out
of nature it self, whereof the Philosophers were not ignorant, that there can
be no likeness of God made, and therefore not of Christ, unless we deny him
to be God. So that if a Cross was used in his time, yet was there no picture
of Christ upon it. Last of all, that places deputed unto prayer, were only
called by the name of ye, which is the only mean, whereby we apprehende the
promises of God, and come to true knowledge of him. If there were nothing else
but Numa his judgment (whom notwithstanding in all these points Cyrillus
does allow) he were only sufficient to condemn your doctrine. No Image of
Christ to be made.
For if Christ be God: and God can have no form or shape, what shall we think
of the pictures of Christ in every roodeloft, and on every crucifix? Are they
not things utterly unlawful, and such as wherein Numa shall condemn you?
Peradventure ye set a picture of Christ, as of only man, but thereby ye run
into a damnable heresy: separating his humanity from his divinity: No Church
to be called by the name of a Saint.
and making him inferior unto his father, as is proved before. Again the
wisdom of that Roman king, condemns the foolish superstition of
Christians, in giving worse names unto their Churches, than he did to the
temples of his Idols. For he called them all the temples of faith, giving thereby
the glory unto God: whereas we do call them, saint John's Church, S. Peter's
Church, S. Mary's Church, and such other like. To join issue in the case,
whether memory be helped by Imagery: If ye speak of Gods matters, it is an
ungodly memory that is helped by them. Lib. 4. de. Imag. ca. 2.
Infoelix memoria, quae vt Christi memoretur, qui nunque a pectore iusti
hominis recedere debet, imaginariae visionis est indiga. An unhappy memory is
ye (as Charles the great affirms) which to remember Christ, who never ought
to depart out of the heart of the just man, stands in need of a sightfull
conceit. Nor otherwise can have ye presence of Christ within him, unless he
have his Image painted on the wall, or expressed in some other matter. This is
not only said, but a reason of the same is brought For (says he) such a
memory as is nourished and kept by Images, proceeds not of hearty love, but
necessity of eye sight. And see by this means how little God is beholden to
us. We remember him, as we remember the devil: for when we are not moved of
conscience and good will, A devilish memory that must be helped with a Cross.
to think upon Christ, but only as the eye, by occasion is lead, then is
there no love, but a mere necessity, which makes me remember, so often as I
see it, any thing that I hate most. So that who are these that must have their
memories quickened with a Cross? Such, as if they were blind, belyke would
not remember: and being where no Cross is, will forget Christ. And sure like
enough. For there are no worse lyuers in the world, than likers of the Cross.
Wherefore since the mind of man, ought so wholly to be desired on him, after
whose Image it was first made, that by no creature it ought to be estraunged
from the truth, which is Christ, Deme^tissimum est eam interpositis
materialibus Imaginibus, ne eius obliuione^ patiatur admoneri debere: cum
videlicet hoc infirmitatis sit vitiu^ non libertatis inditiu^. Most madness
it is, that our minds by the mean of material Images, must be put in
remembrance, least we fall to forget him: whereas this is the fault of
infirmity, no sign of liberty. The Apostle Paul says, that our
conversation must be in heaven, Philip. 3. Romans 8.
and hope reposed in heavenly things. Spes enim quae videtur, non est spes.
That hope which is seen, is no hope. God has made many creatures of his own,
whereby his power may be known of us, and they all notwtstanding in their
degree serve us: shall we now shape out a new creature and serve it? So did ye
Jews, who^ ye Prophet bitterly reproves, saying: To whom will ye like God,
Esaias. 40.
or what similitude will ye set up unto him? The workman melts an Image, or
the goldsmith beats it out in gold, or the goldsmith makes silver plates.
Does not the poor chose out a tree? and so forth. Whereby we are given to
understand, yt all Imagery (so far as concerns Gods service) is condemned,
not only for the use and adoration, but also for the having and erecting of
them. For as yet he spoke not of ye worshipping of Images, but only of
worthying them any place among them To whom will ye lyken God, (says he) as
who should say: Paint what ye will, embosse and burnishe, yet shall your
workmanship have nothing like with God. Therefore to aspire unto the knowledge
of him, we must not take counsel of our own folly: but follow the wisdom
of God herein, and betake us to his word, which is the lively Image and
perfect cou^terfet of himself. If this suffyse not, let us cast our eyes about
upon his creatures, and they will tell us of him, yea the poor and hungry, that
still be subject unto the Cross, will lead us straighter to Christ than any
Cross. If you will seek for any further aid, I may say unto you, as follows
in the Prophet. An nescitis? an non audistis? an non vobis annu^ciatum est ab
initio? an non edocti estis a fundame^tis terrae? Know ye nothing? have ye not
heard: has it not been told you from the beginning? have ye not understood by
the foundations of the earth? Mark (I beseech you) what scholemasters Esaias
does appoint us when he had used the general word (of knowing) he
inferred.ij. ways, that lead us to knowledge. First is the word which comes
by hearing. The second is ye world, which without our workmanship is daily to
be seen. If ye find any more, it is more tha^ the Prophet knew of: it is more
then the spirit of God teaches, it is more than a Christien and godly man may
use. Wherefore, seeing nothing is described by the Cross auayleable for us, no
piece of cause or effect of Christ's passion is represented in it: yea the
person of Christ (as much as in us lies) disgraced by it, and the majesty of
God dishonored: seeing by the Scriptures and authority of the Godly, such mean
of remembrance is both insufficient, and utterly unlawful, condemning our
selves of too deadly forgetfulness, and contempt of the order that God has
set us: Finally, seeing that it is such a sorry scholemaster, as speaks
doubtfully, teaches diuelishly, is seen daungerously: let the sign of the
Cross be cast out of the Church, and the Cross it self be preached symply:
least by suffering the sign of the Cross to stand, the son of God
crucified be contemned: and we fall to worshipping of a Cross material, which
in the next Article shall be proved damnable.

To the tenth Article. The adoration and worshipping of the Cross, to be
alovved by old and ancient Fathers.
ALthough in the former Articles the folly and unfaithfulness thereof is
showed: yet that the world may understand, upon how weak a ground ye stand,
how ruinously ye build: I will assay the force, and sone overthrow the
foundation of your cause. Most reason it had been, if ye would have proved an
adoration and worship of a Cross (which appertains unto God alone, which to
no creature can be applied) ye should have brought some testimony of the
Scripture, which in Gods matters, only and sufficiently does take an order. But
you saw, that Scripture is direct against you, therefore you would not
allege, that should hinder you. The Paynter that had drawn a cock ill
fauouredly, commanded his boy to keep the quick cocks away: so you that
shamefully would confirm a lie, reject most wickedly the proof of truth. But
I will briefly note (which you utterly omit) Gods plain and evident
commandment to the contrary: whereby ye may learn, that if men in terms had
ouershot them selves, yet you should have a better aim, than by following their
guess, roue so far from all godliness. If you had proceeded orderly and
according to the rule of skill: you would have showed, first what Adoration and
Worship is: and then have approved (which you never shall) the lawful
application of it unto the Cross. If ye take it as the word in Hebrew
signifies, it is to how down or prostrate your self. The Gretians come very
near unto the same, and express it by bowing of the knee, or putting off the
cap. etc. Nor I doubt, but you in this interpretation agree with me.
Notwithstanding that in no sense it can be given unto an Image, or otherwise to
a senseless and dead creature, shall appear anon. Exodus 20.
In Exodus, when God had spoken of all similitudes, and likenesses of things
in heaven or in earth, he added: Thou shall not bow down to them nor serve
them. The Greek is the same, which signifies Worship and Adoration, (...).
Also the Prophet in Gods person speaks. Is there no knowledge nor
understanding to say, Esaias. 44.
I have burnt half of it, even in the flet, and have baked bread upon the
coals thereof: I have roasted flesh, and eaten of it. And shall I make ye
residue an abomination? shall I bow to the stock of a tree? And with a great
indignation in another place he says: Esaias. 2.
They worshipped ye work of their own hands, that which their own fingers
made. A man bowed himself, and a man humbled himself, therefore spare them not.
Many other places I could heap hereon, which evidently convince all Adoration,
to other tha^ to God to be accursed. Only when you will us, after the example of
your master the devil, to fall down and worship a silver cross, or a wooden
tree, I will answer with Christ: Avoid Satan. It is written: Math. 4.
Thou shall worship ye Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Now worship
and seruise so jointly do concur together, that the one cannot be without the
other. If only we must serve god, him only we must worship. In the Epistle to
the Hebrews, Heb. 1.
S. Paul proves Christ, more excellent than the Angels: because they worship
Christ, but are not worshipped again. If Angels have not this adoration, shall
a vile stock, or a cold, cankerd, corrupt piece of metal have it? In the
Acts of the Apostles it is written, how Cornelius the Centurion, Act. 10.
fell down at Peter's feet, and worshipped him. But the Apostle took him up and
reproved him, saying: Stand up, for I my self am a man. If so great a saint as
Saint Peter was, be not to be worshipped: so foul a block as a Roode is, much
less is to be set by. In the Revelation, Apoc. 14.
an Angel from Heaven gave a charge on this wise: Fear God, and give him the
glory, for the hour of his judgment is come, and worship him. Which
worship, that it ought not to be given to another, in the same book good
president we find. For when the Evangelists fell down at the Angels feet,
Apoc. 19.
to worship him, he answered: See thou do it not, I am thy fellow servant,
and one of thy brethren, which have the testimony of Jesus: Worship God.
Likewise about the latter end, this witness ye have: Apoc. 22.
When I had heard and seen (says John) I fell down to worship before the
feet of the Angel. But he said unto me: See thou do it not, for I am thy
fellow servant, and of thy brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the
words of this book. Worship God. If the Angels of Heaven refused worship and
adoration, alleging wythall, that they were but servant, and therefore would
nor derogate from their master, ascribing to themselves that which is only due
unto God: Shall we think that an Image, a picture, or a post, forbidden to be
made, accursed to be used, may as a dumb God, or a dead Devil, lawfully be
thus honored? I will not cumber you any more with Scriptures, for that I think
you are not so far past shame, Fol. 124. a. Fol. 126. Fol. 125. ^.
but that ye acknowledge that they are against you. Let us come to the doctors.
Ye only cite Chrysostom, and so, as it pleases Friar Perionie of Paris to
make him speak. Augustine, in a work that is none of his (as here a little
before I proved. Athanasius corrupted, as in the fifth Article I showed.
Lactantius utterly against himself, as shall anon be justified. And as for
Paulinus Damascene, and the canon cited, as out of the sixth council general,
I have heretofore in sundry places answered. Here are but seven authorities
in all, if they were admitted (as they are not) to be true. But if I should
run over all the ancient fathers that ever wrote, and truly allege them (as
you do not) they would all confirm you a lier, and Idolatrer. For proof I
will bring you for seven, seauentene: (be^^^ counsels general) and among them
the selfs same authors which you trust unto, that your blind ignorance or
wilful obstinacy may the more appear. I will cite them in order, as in
auncientie they stand. Clement, not pass.80. years after Christ, in the
work that you do ascribe unto him, says: that when Peter had spoken much
against the Egyptians superstitious Idolatry, which honored an Ox and a
Goat, a Fish and a Serpent, with other sluttish and uncleanly things, Cloacas
and crepitu^ ventris, and that the hearers began to laugh thereat, he burste
out into these words: Clemens Recog. ad Iac frat. Do. Lib. 5.
Rideus vt alibr^m dedecora, quia longa^^^^ suetudine propria non videtis. Number
Egypciorum quid on stu^itiam merito ridetis, qui muta animalia, ipsi cum sint
rationabiles, colunt: Audite tamen quomodo and illi vos irrideant, aiunt enim:
Nos viuentia colimus animalia, licet moritura, vos vero, quae nunquam omnino
vixere, haec colitis and adoratis. Ye laugh at others shame, because by long
custom ye see not your own. For with good cause ye may scorn the folly of
the Egyptians, which being reasonable creatures themselves, worship dumb
beasts. But hear how they do mock you too: for they say: The worship of a
Cross worse than the Egiptians Idols.
We worship living creatures, although die they shall. But you do worship and
adore those things, which never lived yet. And think you not, that he well
describes and condemns your error, of the worship to be given to the
Cross? Is it not a dead thing, and therefore to be worshipped a great deal
more Idolatrous, than the beasts of Egypt? They of an external worship,
judged an unlawful act, and Peter does approve them in it, you will offend
as haynously as that, and yet will not be judged unlawfully to do. Again, he
plainly proves in the same place, what spirit you have, when you speak for
the cross. For his words be these: Per alios item serpens ille proferrre verba
huiusremodi solet: Nos ad honorem inuisibilis Dei imagines visibiles adoramus:
Quod certissime falsum est. A devilish excuse to say, that to the honor of
Christ they worship his Cross.
Si enim vere velitis Dei Imaginem colere, homini benefacientes veram in eo Dei
Imaginem coleretis. The devil (says he) by the mouth of other, is wont to
bring forth such words: We to the worship of the invisible God, worship the
visible Images: And this is most certaynely false. For if ye will truly worship
Gods Image, ye should by being beneficial unto man, worship the true Image of
God in him. Thus far Clement, where I beseech you mark, that he does affirm
it to proceed of suggestion of the Devil, that men for Gods honor, will
worship Images. Also that he shows, how and what Images may in deed be
worshipped: men, the true Images of God helped. Thus much Pope Clement. Now
another Clement of Alexandria, Clemens Alexandr. oratione ad gentes.
which was about.215. year after Christ, for confutation of your beastly
error, brings the assertion of Heraclitus the Ephesian. An non prodigiosi
sunt qui lapides adorant? Be they not monstrous, that worship stones? And
what your Cross is better, I see not. As it stands it corrupts. When ye
honor it, ye most dysgrace it. Sense it, and ye sindge it, or take the beauty
from it. Doubtless such Images beside the use, which is abominable, in their
creation are worse than any living creature: And therefore I may doubt with
Clement, Clement thinks the^ mad that vvorshippe a Cross.
Quomodo quae sunt insensilia, diuino sint honor affecta: and errantium vt
pote miserorum misereri amentiae. How it comes to pass that things deuoyde
of sense, have divine honor and worship given them: and worthily pity the
madness of those miserable wretches, so deceived as they are. For other
creatures, be they small, be they great, whatsoever they be, have either all
senses, or else some: or if sense be denied them, yet life is granted them,
they increase, they grow: But Images, Crosses, Crucifixes, are altogether idle,
void of good effect, utterly unprofitable. They be cast, they be molten, they
be cut, they be graued, they be embossed, they be burnished, and last of all
with nails they be fastened, that with knees they may be honored. Adorant
autem hij non Deos and Daemones, mea quidem sententia, sed terram and arte^
quod quidem est Imagines. But these folk do worship in my opinion (says old
Clement) not Gods, nor Devils, but earth, and workmanship which is the Images.
Wherefore he proves, that such have fetched their religion from proud Persians,
beastely Barbariens, superstitious sorcerers, Ignorantes Deum, haec autem egena
and Infirma vt ait Apostolus que ad vsum hominum ministeriumque facta sunt
elementa adorantes. Where as they know not God, but worship these beggarly
and weak elements, as the Apostle calls them, which are made to the use and
seruise of men. And further he proves out of Gods word. Exodus 20. that to
make a Cross, is a kind of craft. Nobis enim est aperte vetitum arte^
fallacem exercere. Non facies enim, inquit Propheta, cuiusuis rei
similitudinem. etc. For it is plainly forbidden us to practice this
deceytefull occupation: in as much as the Prophet says: Thou shalt not make
the likeness of any thing. Here you perceive what this good father thought,
that it was a monstrous matter, a mad part, worse than seruise of the
Devil, to worship stocks or stones, or any such thing as a Cross is.

Ireneus Ireneus aduersus Her. Li. 1. Ca. 24.
reproves ye heresy of the Gnostici. Qui Imagines quasdam depictas, quasdam
autem and de reliqua materia fabricatas habent, dicentes formam Christi, factam
a Pilato in illo tempore quo fuit Jesus cum hominibus. Which had certain
Images, some painted, some made of other matter, saying that the form and
picture of Christ was made by Pilate, at what time Jesus was conuersaunt with
men. Thus he that came near unto the Apostles time, reputed it an heresy, to
have, to make, to carry about with them the counterfeit of Christ. What would he
have done if they had honored it? Damned them to the Devil.

Tertullian Tertull. aduers. Mar. Lib. 2.
not long after, writing against Martion, shows that the only cause of
forbydding Images and lykenesses of things, was the Adoration and worship of
them Similitudinem vetans fieri omnium quae in coelo and in terra, and in
aquis, ostendit and causas, Idololatriae scilicet, quae substantiam cohibent.
Subijcit enim, non adorabitis ea, neque seruietis illis. God forbidding the
likeness of any thing, in Heaven, in earth, or in the water to be made, showed
also the causes, To worship the Cross Idolatry.
which do restrain the substance. And those causes are Idolatry. for he
infers after: You shall not worship the^ nor serve them. Wherefore (as he
truly says) to adore and worship the likeness of any thing (as a Cross is
some thing) is mere Idolatry, against which offense the holy Martyr Cyprian
inueighing, see how he describes it.

Cyprian ad Demetrium
Quid ante inepta simulachra and figmenta terrena, captiuum corpus incuruas?
Rectum te Deus fecit, and cum caetera animalia, prona and ad terram situ
vergente depress a sint, tibi sublimis status, et ad coelu^, atque ad Deum tuum
vultus erectus est. Illuc intuere, illuc oculos tuos erige, in supernis Deum
quaere, vt carere Inferis possis, ad alta and coelestia suspensum pectus
attolle. Quid te in lapsum mortis, cum Serpente quem colis, sternis? What do
thou bow thy captive body, before folish Images and earthly counterfets? God
has made thee upright, and whereas all other beasts of the earth are
depressed in shape, bending down to ye ground ward, thou have a lofty state, to
heaven, and to thy God thy countenance is erected. Then look up thither:
thither cast up thine eyes: seek God above. That Hell thou may lack, lift up
thy doubtful heart to high and heavenly things. What do thou throw thy
self with the Devil whom thou seruest, into the pit of death? So far. S.
Cyprian, and by him it is plain, that to bow, to kneel, to show any sign of
reverence to an earthly counterfeit, to the work of man's hand, is contrary to
nature, against the dignity of our creation, and a wicked worship. What Origens
To worship the Cross contrary to nature. Origin.
opinion was in this behalf, I have proved before, in the first Article, and
thither ye may resort to find it. Only this will I add, that when he had
rehearsed the commandment of God: Exodus 20. he put his own censure and
verdite thereunto, saying: Erat quidem legis men's ea, vt singuliis in rebus vt
veritas exigebat hij versarentur, Lib. 4 co^tra Celsum.
nec preter verum effingerent aliqua, quae prae se maris vel foeminae speciem
praeseferrent. etc. The mind of the law, quoth he, was this, that they should
in all things so behave themselves, as the truth required: nor that they
should beside the truth, counterfeit any thing representing the shape of man or
woman. Wherefore the picture of Christ upon the Cross, by Origens opinion, is
against the law. Beside this, he tells you, what Adoration, In Exodus
and what worship is. Aliud est colere, aliud adorare. Potest quis interdum
and inuitus adorare, sicut nonnulli regibus adulantes, cum eos ad huiuscemodi
studia deditos viderint, Hom. 8. cap. 20.
adorare se simulant idola, cum in cord ipsorum certum sit, quia nihil est
idolum. Colere vero est, toto hijs affectu and studio mancipari. Vtrumque ergo
resecat sermo diuinus, vt neque affectu colas, neque specie adoras. To worship
is one thing, and to adore another. For a man may sometime against his will
adore, as they that flatter Princes, when they: see them addicte to such
studyes, do feign themselves to worship Idols, whereas in their heart they are
assured, that an Idol is nothing. But to worship, is to enter into a certain
servitude and bondage with them, and be addict unto them, with all affect and
zeal. Therefore the word of God cutteth away both: that neither in heart thou
worship, nor in apparaunce adore. Thus much suffiseth for Origene, whereby it
is plain, that whatsoever our mynds are, our bodies must not bow to any Cross
or creature. Arnobius Arnobius contra Gentes. lib. 6.
discoursing against the Gentiles, who served Idols, and did Sacrifice unto
them, had the same objected him, that you do to us. We worship the Gods (said
they) by their Images. And you, By worshipping the Cross, we serve Christ.
And may I not answer to you, as he did to them? Si hoc no^ sit, coli se
Christus nesciat? nec impaertiri a vobis vllum sibi honorem ex stanabit? Per
tramites ergo quosdam and per quaedam fidei commissa, vt dicitur, vestras sumit
atque accipit cultiones, and antequam sentiat cui illud debetur obsequium,
simulachro litatis prius, and velut reliquias quasdam aliena ad illum ex
authoritate transmittitis. If you had not this Cross, should Christ be
ignorant that he were served of you? will he think that there is no honor
done him? Then does he receive your seruise and your worshippinges by certain
traynes, by other put in trust (vicars if ye will or commissaries) and before
he, to whom the obsequy is due, have any felyng of ye matter: ye do your
Sacrifice unto the Image, and send him but the scraps from another man's
boorde. Et quid fieri potest iniuriosius, contumeliosius, durius, quam deum
alterum scire, and rei alteri supplicare? opem sperare de numine, and nullius
senus ad effigiem deprecari? Nonne illud est quaeso quod in vulgaribus
sprouerbijs dicitur, fabrum cadere cum ferias fullonem? Et cum hominis cosilium
quaer as ab asellis and per culis agendarum rerum sententias postulare? And
what can be devised (faith he) more injurious, slanderous, discourteous, than to
acknowledge one God, and make thy suit to another thing? to hope for help of
God, and pour out thy prayers to a senseless Image? Is not this (as the
Proverb has) to have a quarrel to Rowlande and fight with Oliver? and where
thou sekest for advise of me^, to ask the sentence first of porkelinges and of
asses? Again. Non iste error esis non (vt proprie dicatur) amentia, supplicare
tremebundum fabricatae abs te rei? Et cumscias and certu^ sis tui esse operis,
and digitorum artem pronu^ in faciem ruere? etc. Is not this an error? Is it
not (to speak properly) a madness, in trembling wise to make thy humble shute
to a thing, that thou made thy self? and whereas thou do know and art
assured, that it is thine own workmanship, the fruit of thine own fingers,
to fall groueling upon thy face before it? I will no further deal with
Arnobius. All his.viij. books contain nothing else, but confutation of your
Image heresy, and Cross shame. Lactantius his scholar, beside many other
places to the like effect, whereof in the former treatise, I have touched
diverse, has also this:

Quae amentia est, aut ea fingere quae ipsi postmodum timeant, aut timere quae
finxerint? Lactantius de falls. Rel. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Non ipsa inquiunt timemus, sed eos ad quorum imaginem sicta, and quorum
nominibus consecrata sunt. Ne^pe ideo timetis, quod eos esse in coelo
arbitramins: neque enim si dij sunt aliter fieri potest. Cur igitur oculos in
coelum non tollitis, and aduocatis deorum nominibus in aperto sacrificia
celebratis? Cur ad parietes and ligna, and lapides potissimum, quam ille
spectatis vbi eos esse creditis?

What madness is this, either to frame those things, which they may after
fear, or fear those things, which they have framed? No forsooth (say they) we
fear not that, but them after whose Image they be made, and to whose names
they be consecrated: why then ye fear them, because ye suppose them to be in
heaven. For if they be Gods, it can not otherwise be chosen. But why do you not
lift up your eyes to heaven, and calling upon the Gods by name, do your
Sacrifices openly? why do you rather look to the walls, to the stocks and
stones, than to that place, where you believe they are?

If Lactantius thought it a wickedness in them, to turn their eyes unto the
earthly creatures beneth, where God was only to be found above, shall your
adoration of a Cross stand? shall the worship of a piece of wood, or mass of
metal, be so esteemed? Where is now Flocte genu lignumque crucis venerabile
adora? Did he condemn the Gentiles for turning of their eye to stocks and
stones: and shall be charge the Christians to bow the knee to the worshipful
Cross? It is to absurd and impious.

Athanasius Athanasius.
is so far from adoration and worshipping of the Cross, that in many places,
he is most earnest to the contrary. In his first Sermons contra Idola, he has
nothing more frequent, than that such honor to creatures is accursed.

But least you think, he spoke only against the Gentiles Idols, and that
concerns not your Images and your Cross: I will come nerer you, and go to
the nature of the word general (Adoration). He reasons with the Arrians,
denying Christ to be equal with ye father, Contra Arrianos Ser. 5
after this sort: Si adoratur ab Angelis, quia gloria sublimior est, par erat
vt omnia inferr^^^, superioribus se in adorando inclinarent. Sed id ita non
est: creatura siquidem creaturam non adorat: sed quae seruilis sunt conditionis
dominos: and quae creaturae sunt, deum adorationibus colunt. If Christ he
adored of ye Angels, because he is higher in glory than they, reason it were,
that all inferior things, should bow down themselves in adoration to their
superioures. But that is not so. For one creature adoreth not another: but such
as are of servile condition, adore their Lords and masters: and such as be
creatures, do worship their God by adorations. Afterward he infers the
examples of Peter and the Angel, which would not that this seruise should be
done unto them. Wherevpo^ he concludes: Solius numinis est adorari. It
appertains only to the Godhead to be adored. Wherefore unless ye make your
Cross a God, it can have no worship nor adoration. As for the place which out
of his questions ye allege, I say again ye lie. Fol. 125. a.
For it is not, Crucis figura^ ex duobus lignis compone^tes adoramus, as you do
cite it. But Crucis figuram ex duobus lignis, compingentes conficimus. Mark
good readers, what a true man we have to speak for the Cross. Where
Athanasius has. We frame the figure of the Cross, making it of ii. sticks:
This man has, We making a figure of the Cross of two pieces of vvood, adore
it. O blind ignorance or blinded malice. Fol. 125. a.
If the understanding of a word might have deceived one, yet the circumstaunce
of this place is such, Quest. 16. ad Antioch
that none in the world can make more against adoration of the Cross. For he
yeldeth a reason, why they make a Cross of.ij. pieces of wood: that if any
infidel lay unto their charge, that they worship wood, they may break the
form of it, Et infideli persuadire, quod non colamus lignum, Martial a
falsefier of Athanasius.
and persuade the infidel that we worship not wood. A marvelous matter, that
a fugitive of England, and a divine of Louain, should be to leude a false
fre^d. But I proceed to other. Epiphanius (as is before alleged) would not
suffer a vail to hang in the Church, that had a man's Image on it, would he
suffer a Cross think you to be worshipped? He wylled the bishop to command,
Epiphanius ad Io. Epis. Hieroso.
ne eiusmodi vela appenderentur, that such clothes, should not be hanged up,
quod contra Christianam religionem veniunt because they come against Christian
religion. And after he calls it Scrupulositatem indignam ecclesia Christi, a
scrupulositie unworthy of the Church of Christ: shall we think that he could
allow, not a cloth, but a Cross? not a veil, but a crucifix? And where he
could not suffer, the sight of the one, would he abide the seruise of the
other? Entreating of a sect of heretics called Collyridians which did offer
to the Virgin Mary, these words he has: Praetextu iustitiae semper subiens
hominum mente^ diabolus, Li. 3. Tom. 2. Here. 79.
mortalem naturam in hominu^ oculis deificans, flatuas, humanas imagines pre se
ferentes per artium varietate^ expressit. Et mortui quidem sunt qui adorantur:
ipsorum vero imagines quae nunque vixerunt adorandas introducunt, adulterante
mete ab vno and solo deo, velut commune scortum, ad multam multiplicis coitus
absurditatem irritatum, and quod temperantiam legitimi coniugij vnius viri
detriuit. The devil entering into the mind of me^, always under pretexte of
justice, aduau^cing in the eyes of men, the mortal nature, to the degree of
God, has expressed through variety of cunning, Images, representing the
counterfeites of men. And they that are worshipped, in deed be dead. And the
Images which never lived, they bring in, to be worshipped, Worship to Images
Fornication.
the mind thereby committing fornication, and estraunging it self from the
one and only God, as it were an harlot, departing fithily her body unto many,
and as one that had worn away the sober use of lawful company with one
husband. And afterward. Non dominabitur nobis antiquus error, vt relinquamus
viuentem, and adoremus ea que ab ipso facta sunt. Coluerunt enim and
adorauerunt creaturam praeter creatorem and stulti facti sunt. The old error
shall not prevail over us, to leave the living, and worship those things
which are made of him. For they have worshipped and adored the creature,
beside the Creator, and became fools. So he proceeds with proof, that
neither Helyas, nor John, nor the Virgin Mary, nor the Angels themselves, are
to be adored: ergo no Cross. S. Ambrose, Ambros. de ebitu Theod
speaking how the Cross was found, said this of Helena. Regem adorauit non
lignum: quia hic gentilis est error, and vanitas impiorum. She worshipped the
king, and not the Cross, for that were an error of Ge^tilitie and vanity of
the wicked. What playner words can you desire? ye can not say yt he spoke of
the Gentiles Idols. He spoke of the Cross, the same yt Christ hanged on: and
yt he said, was an hethenish error, and to worship, was a vanity of wicked
men. If the very Cross whereon Christ suffered, be not to be adored: will you
conclude, yt a sign thereof should so be reverenced? Hierome Hierom.
has: Notanda proprietas deos coli imaginem adorari, quod vtrumque seruis dei
non conuenit. The property of the words is to be marked, that Gods are
worshipped, and an Image adored: whereof neither agrees to the servants of
God. Read more of him. In Iere. 6. and. 10. and. Dan. 3. Ye shall plainly see,
that neither worship nor adoration, ought to be given to so vile a thing as a
Cross is. Augustine, Augustine. de vera. Rel. cap 55.
agrees with his fellows, and says: Non sit nobis relligio humanoru^ operu^
culius. Menores enim sunt ipsa artifices qui talia fabricantur, quos tamen
colere non debemus. Let not us have a religion in worshipping of man's works.
For the workmen themselves that make them, be better, whom notwithstanding we
ought not to worship. Nor Chrysostom, Chrysostom.
in any work that is his, dissenteth from the rest. Upon the.4. of John. and.
32. Hom these plain words he has. Adorare creaturae: adorari non creature
sed domini est. To adore and worship, belongs to a creature: but to be
adored, belongs to no creature, but only to the Lord. Cyrill when he would
prove the divinity of Christ, and that he is of the same substance with the
father, drew an argument from adoration of the Angels. And if that any but
only God, may be adored, then is his reason none. Cyrill Thesauri. Li. 2.
cap. 1.
The words be these. Nemo ignorant, nulli prorsus natura preterq^ dei
adorationem a scriotura contribui. No man is ignorant, that adoration in the
Scripture, is attributed to no kind of nature, save only to the nature of
God. And thus the elder fathers. Now to come down to latter years. Gregory
Pope. Epist. li. 7. Indict. 2. cap. 109.
Gregory the Pope, the first that ever maintained Images, is so much against
the adoring of them, that in every sentence where he speaks of them, he
seriously forbids it. Zelum vos ne quid manufactum adorari possit, habuisse
laudauimus. Et iterum. Ab earum adoratione populum prohibere debuit. Et tertio:
vt populus in picture adoratione minime^ peccaret. In English. We praise it
well that you had a zeal, that nothing made with hand should be adored. And
again. You ought to have forbidden the people from the adoring of them.
Thirdly, yt the people should not offend in adoration or worshipping of a
picture. If pictures generally be thus commended, so much as concerns
adoration, I leave it to your discretion to consider, what is to be said of
worship to be done to roodes or crucifixes. Nor here I will omyt a proper
workman of your own occupation, Johannes Alfonsus de castro. He in his book
aduersus haereses reports, that one Claudius by shop of Taurino, forbad all
in his jurisdiction, the adoration and worship of our Lords Cross. He was of
priuye counsel to Charles the great. A worthy Prelate for so wise a Prince.
What the opinion of Charles the great was in this behalf, Carolus. Magnus.
I refer you to his four books de Imaginibus, of purpose penned against the
insolent and doltish co^spiracy dissembling at Nice. If ye look for councils to
condemn your error, I send you back to ye third Article, and there ye shall
find sufficient to confute you. Thus have I slightly passed over, not al yt I
could recite, but as many as I thought expedient, for clear disproufe of your
ungodly purpose. Ye would have it appear, that al ye fathers were in your fond
belief, whereas ye rehearse but a very few, and the same not only corruptly
wrested, but maliciouslye in most parts falsefied. I have brought you the
simple and plain words of theirs, out of their own approved writings, such
as I trust, you will not gaynesay. Now let the good readers judge, whether
according to the false exposition of you, or fond meaning of a few, the
Cross should be worshipped and adored: or else according to the sound censure
of the more, A brief rehersall of the doctors opinion touching the adoration of
the Cross.
of the Godly, of the Scriptures themselves, be cast out of the Church, and
deputed to the use that it deserves. As for the adoration, S. Peter compared
it with the Gentiles Idolatry: condemned it as unlawful, and yet saw not the
hearts of the worshippers. Clement of Alexandria, calls it a monstrous
thing, a mad part, worse than the seruise of the devil, to worship stocks or
stones: yet we must crepe to ye Cross you say. Ireneus accompteth it heresy,
to carry about the true Image of Christ: yet you will have it catholyke to adore
and worship the false Cross. Tertullian says, that it is Idolatry to adore
the likeness of any thing: The^ is there no great holiness or safety in the
Cross. Cyprian affirms it, to be contrary to nature, against the dignity of
our creation, and a wicked worship, to fall down to a creature: and shall we then
adore the Cross? Origin will not admit any external sign of honor,
(howsoever the mind otherwise be affected) to be given to the workmanship of
man's hand: but says, that it is against the commandment: and shall we
crouch and creep to the Cross? Arnobius scorneth the esteming of the Cross:
and to the condemnation of Ethnikes, says: Cruces nec colimus nec optaemus,
vos plane qui ligneos Deos consecratis, Cruces ligneas vt Deorum vestrorum
parts forsita^ adoratis. As for Crosses, we neither worship nor wysh for: But
you which consecrate ye wooden Gods, peradventure worship the wooden Crosses,
as percels of your Gods. This spoke Arnobius in defense of the Christians,
Lib. 8.
and reproufe of the Gentiles. And shall we direct contrary to this, both wish
and worship Crosses, worse than the Gentiles, unworthy name of Christians?
Lactantius in like sort, condemns the Gentiles for tooting upon Images, and
wills them to look up to Heaven: And shall we still be poaring on so blind
a book as a Cross is? Athanasius would not that the enemy should have such
advantage of him, as to say, that he or any other Christian, worshipped the
Cross: we must have it a doctrine, that every man is bound to worship it.
Epiphanius tare the veil that had the picture of Christ upon it: he affirmed
the worshipping of the same to be fornication: We must have a post with a
mock man upon it, and afterward do honor to it. Ambrose accoumpted it an
error of Gentilitie, a vanity of perverse, to adore the Cross: And we must
hold it a good catholic doctrine, because Master Martial does teach it.
Hierome, Augustine, Chrysostom, Cyrill, Gregory, condemn (as is before
confirmed) all adoration done to any creature: and yet you think the same, by
testimonies of the fathers, due to the sign of the Cross. If you had
considered the fathers well, you would not so ill have slaundered them. You
think you have a good evasion, when you say, that we must atrribute unto it,
not any divine honor due only to God, Folio. 128. b.
but as it has been right well declared before of others, an inferior kind
of reverence. I marvel that you are so inconstant M. Martial. Even now you
would needs have Adoration and Worship to the sign of the Cross, and they be
propre unto God alone: now will ye have an inferior reverence. And what is
that? Forsooth you can not tell. But it has been declared of other. I know what
other in this behalf have babbled, making their distinction between (...) and
(...). They put.ij. horses into one stable, to eat at one rack, and reach to
one manger, yet they be not served alike, because they have a bar betwixt
them. I could speak more of the absurdity hereof, but that I must lay my
finger on my line, and treads the only steps of you, that full crookedly
have gone before me. If you voutchsaue to tell me what that inferior reverence
should be (which now by silence ye utterly suppress) ye shall then know further
of my mind. It only remains that I answer your Paradox, your strange,
your incredible proposition, Fol. 129.
that there can be no mystruste nor fear of Idolatry in Christen men
worshipping and adoring the Cross. To come to Worship and Adore again, where
the next line before ye would have but an inferior reverence, makes me
think that you be very fickle, and not settled as yet on any certain ground.
But worship a Gods name, adore and deifie (say you) for certain it is there
can be no peril of Idolatry. Ye do very wisely to put men in security, for
otherwise they would be very loath to ve^ture. Great is the leap, and the
water deep. But how shall we pass? Ye have devised a bridge as it were of a
bulrush. Your argument is this: A strange proof that no man may fear Idolatry
in a Papist.
All that be Christians are baptized. And if they be baptized, then have they
received the faith of Christ, and believe in one God father almighty, and so
forth, and have learned that commandment of his: Thou shall have no other
Gods but me. If then by baptism they have received the faith of Christ, and
believe in one God father almighty. etc. and have learned that commandment of
his, that they shall have no other Gods but him, Then believe they in no other
God but in him: then serve they no other God but him: then make they to
themselves no other God but him: But whensoever they pray, wheresoever they
knele, whatsoever gestures they use, they give all honor and praise to God,
they have their hearts and minds fixed upon him: nor we may judge the
contrary, for they are Christians: and so are we also expressly forbed to judge
of other men's consciences, or to be curious or suspicious of other men's doings.
To answer with modesty to so impudent an assertion, is hard: reasonably to
deal with so unreasonable a creature, is more than covenant: to use many
words, where a wand is deserved, is more a great deal than needs for your
reason, unless ye were purged first. For doubtless there is some mad humor
raygning, that brings forth so absurd reasoning. The effect of Martials
argument.
First ye have proved, that all Protestants be good Christians, for they be
baptized, they have received the faith. etc. Then that your self are very much
to blame, in deeming amysse of them. For in as much as they have learned ye
commandments, they also of necessity must obey the commandments.
Thirdely, that all subjects in the realm of England, all Christians beside,
are in right good ease, for they can not sin. This is your reason M.
Martial, and not mine. For thus ye say: They have learned the commandment to
have no other God but him, then believe they no other God but him, then serve
they no other God but him. By the same reason I may reply: The man that is
baptized, The absurdities thereof.
has received the faith, does know the commandment, Thou shall not steal,
Thou shall not commit adultery. Therefore there is none that is baptized,
that can be a thief or adulterer. The Jews were circumcised, they had the
law, they knew that they ought to have no other Gods but him: Therefore no
Jew that ever was Idolatrer. But notwythstanding our Christendom and faith
received, many be thieves and murderers: notwithstanding the law delivered to
the Israelites they worshipped (some of them) the brazen serpent, and the
scripture says they were Idolatrers therein. Therefore notwithstanding that
men outwardly profess one God, yet do they not worship always one God, nor
serve him on such sort as they are commanded. So that it bydeth still for all
your blind reason, that a man may fear Idolatry, in such as do pretend a
worshipping of God. And we do not offend, in affirming you Idolatrers. Folio.
129. b.
For although (as you say) one kind of Idolatry be best known unto God
alone, who searches the heart, yet has he left a way to try it, a judge to
discern it. And therefore, indefinitely and absolutely to say, that Idolatry
is a sin, lurking and lying secret in the heart, is an inconvenience.
Remember how Christ at the first entrance into his schole, gave out this
lesson: Quemeunque puduerit mei coram hominibus, Luc. 6.
pudebit and me illius coram patre meo et sanctis Angelis. Whosoever shall be
ashamed of me before men, I will also be ashamed of him before my father and
his holy Angels. A profession of Christ is requisite in a Christian. Romans 10.
So that God is not herewith contented, if a man inwardly with heart acknowledge
him: but also severely does exact, that by our outward profession, we testify
to the world, that his disciples we are. For upon none other condition but
this, he does admit us into the society and fellowship of his kingdom. Truly
does Paul say: Cord creditur ad iustitiam, ore confessio fit ad salutem. With
heart we believe to righteousness, with mouth we confess to salvation. Out of
which words it is plainly to be gathered, that there is no true faith before
God, but the same enge^dreth a confession before men. That every man according
to his calling and grace given him, do further by all means, as occasion is
given him, 1. Pet. 3.
the glory of his God. Therefore Peter's precept is general: to be ready
always, to give an answer to every man, that asks a reason of the hope that
is in us. This reason ye refuse: ye keep a byrd in the bosom, but it berayes
the nest. For impossible it is, that a good conscience in seruise of his God,
shall in appearance do one thing, and in effect another. And although ye seruise
acceptable unto god, consist in spirit and in truth, Joan. 4.
as Christ himself pronounces, yet will he not only be truly served, but also
be known, that he is so served. For which purpose, these extern actions are
right necessary, to be witnesses to the world, of our affecte within us.
Understand ye therefore, that as.ij. kinds of honor be due to God: one
spiritual, resting in the heart: another corporal, consisting in outward
gesture: So are there also.ij. kinds of Idolatry. The first, Two kinds of
Idolatry.
when a man by perverse opinion, corrupts the spiritual worshipping of God.
The second, when the honor peculiar unto god, is transferred to a creature. In
both these, ye Papists most haynously do offend. For ye think, that God which
is a spirit, is delited with your masking and externe pomp, wherein consists
al Romish religion: and so by your own text, ye be proved false worshippers.
Also by your knocking and holding up of hands before an Image, ye show your
selves whose servants you are, abasing your estate, and serving a creature.
For the proof whereof, because it more nerely concerns our question, let us
inquite what bond we be entered in with God, to serve him as we ought. So shall
we see, whether any outward and bodily fact, may well induce us, to say or think
any man an Idolatrer. The eternal God requires at our hands, that his name be
glorfied, both in our spirit and in our body, because that both be his. And if
the commandment did not extend so far, yet reason does convince no less.
For in as much as our bodies also be redeemed with the precious bloodshed of
Christ, what a shame is it, to have them subject still unto the Devils seruise?
Our souls to be Gods, our bodies to be the Devils? Whereas our bodies ought to
be the temples of the holy ghost, what absurdity is this, to defile them with
sacrilege? Whereas our bodies are foreapointed to immortality and partaking of
the glory of God, what wickedness is this to attaynt them with Idolatry?
Paul, when he does inuey against fornication, uses this argument. Whereas our
bodies are the members of Christ, 1. Cor. 6.
is it meet to make them the members of an harlot? And on like sort I may
answer you. Whereas our bodies be the members of Christ, shall we cut them of
from that body of his? shall we prophanate them with unlawful worshipping? 1.
Reg. 10. Romans 11.
God when he would express the peculiar note of his faithful servant, says
of them, that they bowed not the knee to Baall, nor with their mouth kissed
him. He might as well have said, that they were not polluted with superstition:
they did not account Baall for a God. But to intimate unto us, that the inward
affecte in this case suffiseth not, he expresses by name, the outward gesture
as altogether impious. Wherefore howsoever we flatter our selves with an hidden
opinion (so secret that our selves feel it not) yet the evident and apparaunt
work of capping and knocking, bowing and kneeling, may disprove our heart to
be well affected: and we by outward adoration, try and discern a mere
Idolatrer. When God by his Prophet would describe his magnificence, and honor
due to him: Esaias. 45.
he said, Viuo ego, mihi flectetur omne genu, and omnis lingua iurabit mihi. I
live says the Lord, Every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall swear to
me. Thus the holy ghost by bowing of the knee, by profession of ye mouth
describes true worshipping. But you M. Martial, will have neither good nor
bad worshipping to be judged by gesture. A proper shift ye have, when ye adore
an Image and creep to the Cross, saying: You know that, to be but a piece of
metal: you make not your prayers to that, but unto God alone, whom in spirit
you worship, though your face peradventure be turned to the Image. The self
same pretexte had the Corinthians. For they resorted to the feasts of Idols,
not of superstition: They were to well instructed. And Paul in their person
brings forth an excuse for them: 1. Cor. 8.
Scimus quod Idolum nihil est. We know that an Idol is nothing. We know that
one God, one Lord and savior Jesus Christ, is to be honored and served of
us. But did this satisfy S. Paul? Nay. But he affirmed rather, that their
inward persuasion and pretended excuse was nothing, in as much as their example
moved the weak to commit Idolatry. For if any man, says the Apostle, see
thee which have knowledge, sit at fable in the Idols temple, shall not the
conscience of him that is weak, be boldned to eat those things which are
sacrificed to Idols? And on like sort, you affirm, that an Image or a Cross
is nothing. But when ye give the outward reverence, when ye adore it, will not
the simple deem great virtue in it? shall not your knoweledge (whatsoever it
is) be occasion of your brothers fall, for whom Christ died? Wherefore sith
adoration is so offensive, better it were never to see Image while the world
stands, that our brother be not offended. And this is S. Paul's reason, and
not mine. As for your subtle and profound argument, drawn out of the bowels
of your professed law, whereby ye make a wo^derous demonstration, Folio. 130.
a.
that there can be no due prouf of Idolatry, in as much as Confession thereof
is nothing credible, Probation can not be made but by external signs, and
they do only enforce a presumption, and as for evidence of the fact, it can
not fall into effects of the mind, where the abomination of Idolatry lies: I
answer, that although we be very ingenious to find out excuses for our own
offenses, yet the evidence of the outward fact, makes sufficient probation of
Idolatry, and is too good a witness of mysdemeaning mind. For if the heart
conceived not, the body would not do: and if the body called the heart unto
account, I am sure that at least in the court of Chauncerie, where conscience
is examined, the heart should be first condemned of mysgouernement. When
Ezechias destroyed the brazen serpent, the Jews lacked such an advocate as
you, that might have called the King into the law, and tried the case of
injustice against him, because he was not able to make proof of any crime. For
they would not confess their Idolatry: and their kneeling to the Image, made
(as you say) but only a presumption: and no evidence could be fet from the
outward fact, because ye suppose, there is no Idolatry but secret in the
heart. But flatter your selves (as you best can) with your lurking affecte and
privy devotion: your apparent impiety, shall not only to Godwarde but to the
world condemn you. If Daniels companions had feeyed such a counselor, such a
lawyer as you: they would not have thrown themselves into such extremity,
whereas they could not have been co^uinced of Idolatry, for all their kneeling
before the Idol, if in heart they retained the honor and seruise of the living
God. But they would not have their bodies defiled with wicked worshippings,
nor of one temple make two Lords: the soul to be Gods, the body to be
Satan's. S. Paul of the outward conversation condemned the Corinthians as
Idolatrers. 1. Cor. 8. S. Peter also (as is before rehearsed) laid to his
hearers charge, that they were worse than the Egyptians, because of the
external signs: God when he sets forth the true seruise of himself, makes
often mention of the outward reverence. Therefore (as you call it) so is it in
deed a poor judgment of yours, that because God is worshipped in spirit and
in truth, therefore men falling before a piece of wood, knocking the breast,
and holding up the hands, may not in any wise be thought Idolatrers. Enrich (I
beseech you) this poor judgment of yours, with better reason, or hold your
tongue for shame. As touching your wisdom and deep discretion, Folio. 132.
wherein ye will not be so abased, to be more brutish than beasts, more simple
than byrds, more folish than davves, but that ye know a dead Image from a
live man, a still picture from a quick creature: I say that scripture shows
presidents of the contrary, in as wise men as you are. And as for your own
part experience does teach us otherwise. The iuggling of Papists, with Roodes
and Images, has sought by all means to plant an opinion of holiness and
divinity to rest in dead things. And howsoever you believe of them, yet
damnable is the seruise that you command unto them: and the more ye know the
vile condition and estate of them, the more just and terrible is your
condemnation, in exacting a worship and adoration of them. Therefore I say with
Paul. Because ye know God, and glorify him not as God, neither are thankful,
Romans 1.
but become vain in your ymaginations, and your foolish heart is full of
darkness, when ye profess your selves to be wise, ye be very fools.

And thus have I answered your Ten Articles: using more words in disprouf of
them, than the cause requires, or any man of indifferency would look for at my
hands. Only I would not be said, to concele any piece of proof, that you
bring for mayntenaunce of your error. Wherefore I have turned over leaf by
leaf, as in ye margent every where appears: perused each line and word that
had any reason in it, annexing a sufficient and the same abundant confutation
of it. Your conclusion in deed I deal not withal: for it contains more than
was in the premises: more than you be able or go about to prove. It is but an
heap of lies and slanders, which impudentlie spoken, may be best answered
with silence. Nor any news it is, the professors of the truth to de depraved
of you. Paul was blasphemed as a teacher of heresy, Act. 18. Sozomenus Li. 1.
Cap. 18.
as whose religion should be new and strange. Constantine was accused as an
innouater and peruerter of Gods order, because he furthered and followed
Christianity. The faithful Fathers wanted not their Cross, they were always
reviled with most words of reproach, and deemed of the world the vilest
persons of the earth. But as they did not contend in scolding, Theodor. Li. 3.
Cap. 5.
but stood most stiff in heresy reproving: So suffiseth me to have detected
your folly, and disproued your untruths, that the simple at least wise be not
abused by you. The cause it self stands to fast, to be battred with such
feeble assault of yours. The honesty of men, whom you would seem to touch,
is not to be empaired with the running over of a railing mouth. If ye gather
hereafter any sounder skill, and riper discretion do come unto you, ye will
correct your former follies, and thank me for the ministering occasion of
amendment. But if God has utterly resigned you to your self, and wilfulness
raygning in your witless head, breed a confidence to put still your more shame
in print: my self will contemn so leude an adversary, and give place to other
that with more fredome of speech and less derogation unto their persons, may
answer you according to your shameless deserts.

FINIS.
Quae meliora tuis placitis hoc te^pore noram,
Impartire tibi visum est: hijs vtere mecum.

A Table by order of the Articles briefly containing the effect of the whole
Book. Herein is to be noted (gentle Reader) that by the letter (a) following
the number, is signified the first side of the leaf, and by the letter (b) is
signified the second side of the same.
In the Epistle.
WHat famous Clearkes be now a days become writers. What is to be thought of
Martial. What arguments he uses. How he traitorously takes away the chief
part of the Queens style. How she for her clemency is not gracious to
Papists. How folishly he flatters her. The Queens pryuate doings no president
to all. Of every fact not to judge an affection. How public order has taken
away Roodes and Images. How Martial does lie, in saying that Crosses are not
suffered in high ways. How his three grounds of his cause, be laid only
upon lies. How for the doctrine of the Cross, we may stand to judgment of
the Fathers though scripture were not.
In the Preface.
THe Cross a forged Ensign of Christ. Fol. 1. a. Satan's sleyght to dysplace
God and his word. ibid. The Devil is the Ape of God. ibid. All Gentilitie took
president of Gods service. ib. b. Sacraments of the Hebrews cou^terfeted by
ye Heathen. ib. b. Minos followed Moses. ib. Hills and groves, in imitation of
the tabernacle. 2. a. Witches and Sorcerers in stead of Prophets and
Priests. ibid. The Poets paradise for christians Heaven. ib. Their Purgatory
for Hell. ib. Papists herein the Devils chief ministers. 2. b. For Baptism of
Infantes, Baptism of Bells. ib. More solemnity in the devils service, than in
Christ's. ib. Holy water devised in despite of Baptism. ib. Ordinance of God,
and ordinance of the devil 3. a. Sole life exacted in the Devils ministers.
ib. Adultery with Papists a light tryfle. ib. The devil deputeth saints
intercessors. 3. b. As God made man Image of himself, so the devil devised
Images of God. 4. a. Gods books burned; devils books advanced. ib.
Macedonius his answer to Theodosius me^ of war. 4. b. Images came from
Gentilitie and foolish zeal. ib. Images can not be without abuse. ib. How
prone we are to superstition. ib. How Lactantius affirms no religion to be
where an Image is. 5. b. How Images crept into the Church. 6. b. and. 8. a. To
have an Image is a wilworship, and therefore unlawful. 6. b. Proves yt nothing
in Gods seruise should be admitted beside the word. 7. a. Images teachers of
lies. ib. How Gods order is broken by Images. ib. That Images came from
Gentilitie, is proved. 7. b. That in Eusebius time. 325. year after Christ, no
Images in Churches. 8. a. Serenus bishop of Massilia, brake all Images. 8. b.
Fruits of Images. ibid. Places of scripture condemning Images. 9. a. Papists
devotion like to Michah. 9. b. Image mayntayners like to Jeroboam. ib. Erasmus
opinion of Im. 10. b. Imag. be proved not to teach otherwise tha^ wickedly. 11.
a That memory is helped by the story is answered. 12. a. That God can have no
Image made of him. 12. b. That Christ neither can nor ought have an image made
of him. 14. a. and seq. Images not only forbidden to be worshipped, but also
to be had. 15. a. Three reasons why Christ can have no Image made of him. 16.
a. The follye to have a picture of Christ. 16. b. How Images are honored
contrary to ye mind of Gregory. 17. a. A note how Martials allegations for
the cross are to be known in this treatise. 17. b. The Papists hope. ib.
Mart. lies in his preface. 18. a. Comparison between Papists and true
Christians. 19.
In the first Article.
MEn in gods matters not to be believed without the word. Folio. 21. b. and
seq. What judges ought to sit in controversies of religion. 23. a. How
Martial entreats of that which is not: applying to the sign, the virtue
propre to the thing it self. 25. b. Chrysostom his praise of the Cross,
answered. 26. a. Things well received ill continued. 26. b. The sign of the
Cross an heathenish observance. ib. Chrisost. mangled by M. 26. b Martialis a
pretended disciple answered. 27. a. Damascenus answered. 27. b. Cross sign no
weapon to fight against Satan. 28. b. Athanasius answered. 29. a. Necessary
notes to be observed in reading of the Fathers. 29. b. and 30. b. Origin
answered for his praise of the Cross. 31. a. Cassiodore answered. 33. a.
Martials fond reason for necessity of a Cross. 33. a. Lact. and Aug. answered.
33. b. Martials comparison examined. 34. and. 35. Iulians example opened whereby
he will prove the cross to drive away spirits. 35. and seq. The like example of
a Jew out of Gregory. 36. Siluester the second for all his Crosses in the very
Mass time was torn in pieces by Devils. 37. b. Martials allegations whereby he
will prove mention to be made of his Cross in Scripture, and how they are
answered. 37. 38. 39. and seq.
In the.ij. Article.
MArtial goes only about to prove a matter that he promised he would not
speak of. Folio. 41. a. It is declared, that although the Cross were
prefigured by Moses and the prophets, yet it folowes not that we must needs
have the sign thereof. 41. b. His allegations for the prefiguring of the
cross examined. 42. and seq. Moses hands lifted like a Cross. 43. and seq.
The letter Thau. 44. b. and se. Constantines apparitio^ answered. 45. b. For
good success in ye Cross time. 47. a. Iulians visions discussed. 48 Diverse
means that God has miraculously used for delivery of his. 49. and seq. How
Papists deal with Gods book. 52. a. The end of ceremonies. 52. b. What
Christ in judgment shall require of us. 53.
In the.iij. Article.
THe.iiij. reasons why every Church and Chapel should have the sign of the
Cross, answered. Folio. 54. and seq. Abdias proved fabulous. 51. a. The true
manner of dedication of Churches. 52. b. Barthelmewes dedycation. 54. a. Philips
dedication. ibid. The councels by Martial alleged, answered. 54. b. He
brings the bare name of three Councels, and nothing else. 58. a. Three
Councels which are plain against Images. The Council of Constantinople under
Leo Isauricus. 58. a. and seq. The Council of Granata called Elibertinum. 68.
a. The Council of Frankford. ibid. and seq. The beastly reasons of the second
Council of Nice confirming images, answered. 70. and seq. The wickedness of
Irene president of that sixth Council. 78. and seq. The Doctors answered that
seem to command the sign of a Cross in Churches. 79. a. Ambrose in that
case considered. 79. a. and seq. How a cross on the steple saves the Church
from burning. 80. b. Lactantius authority answered. 81. a. Eusebius thought
it strange to see an image stand in the Church. 82. a. Arnobius a great enemy
to Images. ib. Augustine answered. 82. b. What is a mystery. ibid. Augustine
does answer the same objections which the Papists make in defense of Images.
83. a. b. His places against Images. 84. b. Paulinus of Nola answered and
disproued. 84. b. Justinians laws weighed. 85. a. Valens and Theodosius
enacted that no cross should be used. 85. a. The custom of Church considered.
85. b. Siluesters lie concerning the Church of Constantinus. 86. b. Augustins
rule for custom. 87. a.
In the.iiij. Article.
A Proof that although ye sign of the cross have been used, yet does it not
follow that it is lawful now. Folio. 88. The tale of Probianus disproued. 89.
a. Cyprians authority examined. 90. Augustines authority discussed. 92. a. The
difference of Rite and Recte. 92. b. The Cannon law condemns Crossemaster
Martial. 93. a. Chrysostom answered. ib. Constantinus Church hallowing. 93.
b. Popish Church hallowing. 94. a. Dionisius dysproued not to be Areopagita.
95. b. Traditions and ceremonies added to baptism. 96. and seq. Confirmation
proved no sacrament. 97. a. Papists blasphemous doctrine touching
Confirmation. 97. and seq. The reasons against Popish confirmation. 99. and
seq. How Papists falsefie the Scripture. 100. a. The absurdity of popish
doctrine. ib. and seq. The fathers opinion touching the number of Sacraments.
101. Cyprians error. 102. b. The seaue^folde grace of Papists. 103. a. Orders
proved to be no Sacrament. 104. and seq. No due proof can be made that a
Cross with a finger was or ought to be made in the Lords Supper. 106. and
seq. Matrimony proved no sacrament. 108. a. Martials reason to make Matrimony a
sacrament. 109. a. Absurdities in Popish doctrine concerning Matrimony. 109.
b. and seq. Martial disproued for his sacrament of Penance. 111. b. Vanity
of Papists therein. 112. b. Martial confuted for his sacrament of Extreme
unction. 113. The absurdities in Popish doctrine for Extreme unction. 114.
That all councels are not to be credited. 115.
In the.v. Article.
THat Martial understands not what blessing means, which applies it to a
sign in the foreheade. Folio. 116. a. Unlawful authorities brought for
blessing. 116. b. Epiphanius authority which tare the veil. 117. and seq. What
is to be thought of traditions. 119. and seq. Tertullians traditions not to
be observed. ib. Ephrem not always sound. 120. a. Chrysostom not in all things
to be followed. ib. Hierome sometime to be reproved. ib. Augustine not always
to be admitted. ib. b. Prudentius has his infirmities. ib. The unity of
Papists and Christians. 121. a. How Martial does corrupt Tertullian. 123. a.
In Custom what to be considered. 124. a. Traditions threefolde. ib. Traditions
how they vary. 126. What lies Martial makes of Athanasius 127. a. That
Roodes, Crosses, Images are countrefets of Serapis. 128. a. The godliness and
good religion of Papists. 129. and seq.
In the.vj. Article.
AVthorities unlawful alleged by Martial, for confirming of the Cross
keeping. Folio. 131. a. No authority of men to be grounded on in Gods matters.
132. Hierome against reserving pieces of the Cross. 132. b. Chrisostomes
saying for enclosure of ye Cross in gold, answered. 133. a. Chrysostom
against such superstition. 133. b. Effects of the Cross and pieces thereof
considered. 135. and seq.
In the.vij. Article.
THat Crosses at the first were not used in Letanies. Folio. 138. Montanistes
and Arrians authors of procession. 138. b. Letanies of two sorts, and when
devised. 139. a. How Papists degenerate from all good order. ib. The Crosses
of Constantinop. what they were. 140. How Martial in one story makes.iiij.
lies. 141. a. Concerning the use of Tapers. 141. b. and seq. There must be no
Tapers on the Lords table. 142. b. How Martial proves Luther no heretic.
143. a. The affairs of August. the Monk in England. 143. b. Papists
superstitious, and why. 145. b. The true ensign of Christ. 146. b. For
Relics. ib. and seq.
In the.viij. Article.
MIracles no prouf of doctrine. Folio. 150. and seq. Wrought by ye devil. 149.
b. Three reasons why miracles make not for ye Cross. 151. a. How M. belieth
Eusebius. ib. b. How ye Papists agree not for invention of the cross. 152. a.
What lies be made of pieces of the Cross. 153. b. Of the nails yt Christ was
crucified withal. 154. and seq. The answer to ye miracles that were affirmed
to have been done by the Cross. 155. How Papistry breeds security in sin.
156. and seq. Miracles paste no proof of present use. 157. a. That as well we
may have the sign of Idols, as the sign of the Cross for any miracle. ib. b.
Whether the miracles of the Cross were true or no, they can prove no lawefull
use thereof. 158. and seq. The similitude of the cloth of estate. 161. b. For
memory helped with a Cross. 162. b.
In the.ix. Article.
VAnities alleged for commodities of the Cross. Folio. 164. a. The true
effects of Images. ibid. b. The Reason that Images should not be unlawful
though not expedient, answered. 164. 165. and seq. Gods books commanded,
forbidden for policy: man's books for policy must needs be maintained. 165.
and se. Whether Images can teach things necessary to salvation. 166. b. That
Crosses teach no humility, no virtue. 167. b. That Images speak doubtfully,
teach diuelishly, be red unlawfully. 168. b. 169. a That there can be no such
ignorance as should drive us to seek knowledge in an Image. 169. a. The titles
and commendation of Scripture. 170. a. That for want of preachers we must not
seek to Images. ib. b. What lewd affections be stirred by Imagery. 171. a.
What affections were stirred in the heathen by Images. ib. b. No ymagery with
preaching much less without. 172. a. How Images must not be admitted for help
of memory. ib. b. How Cyrill allows no Images in Churches. 173. b. A
diuelishe memory ye must be helped with a cross. 174. a
In the.x. Article,
WHat Adoration and worship is. Folio. 175. b. That adoration by the scripture
is forbidden to Images. 176. a. Authorities for adoration of ye cross falsely
aleaged. 176. b Authorities of the fathers against the Adoration of the Cross.
ib. and seq. A strange prouf that no man may fear Idolatry in worshippers of
the Cross. 183. b The absurd argument of Martial. 184. a. ij. Kinds of
Idolatry. 185. a. That bowing and kneeling to Crosses and Images, does prove
Idolatry. 185. and. 186.
The Authors alleged against both the having and Worshipping of the Cross.
Clemens Romans Epis. Folio. 4. b. and. 177. a. Ireneus. 14. b. and. 178. a.
Clemens Alexandrinus. 177. b. Josephus. 15. a. Cyprianus. 178. b. Tertullianus.
6. and. 7. 49. a. and. 178 a. Origenes. 31. and. 32. and 178. b. Arnobius. 13.
b. and. 179. a. and. 82. a. Lactantius. 5. b. and. 14. a. and. 142. a. and.
179. b. Eusebius. 7. b. Athanasius. 29. a. and. 127. a. and. 180. a.
Epiphanius. 14. b. and. 117. b. and. 181. a. Ambrosius. 86. b. and. 181. b.
Hieronimus. 97. a. and. 133. a. and. 181. b. Augustinus. 15. a. and. 52. a.
and. 83. and. 84. and. 88. a. and. 181. Chrysostomus. 46. b. 106. b. and. 133.
b. Cyrillus. 173. b. Prudentius. 53. b. Gregorius PP. In the Epistle to M.
Also. 8. b. and. 182. a. Alfonsus de Castro. 182. a. Carolus Magnus. 68. b.
Petrus Crinitus. 85. Erasmus. In the Epistle to Martial. The author of the
Turks history. 15. b.
COVNCELS.
The Counsel of Constantinople under Leo Isauricus. 58. a. The Council of
Granata. 68. a. The Council of Franckforde. 68, a. and seq.
Leaf. Side. Line. Faults. Corrected. 3 b 2 For was a Read was not a 10 b 29
strayning strayeng 17 a 18 taught naught 24 a 1 toy our to your 67 b 11 were
deified, were not deified, 68 a 22 whether whyther 86 a 9 preasseth presumes
88 a 12 vnfounde unsound 89 a 26 word wood 93 a 26 gain game 95 a 33 has?
ordained has ordained? 102 b 15 htat that Ib b 20 them them them 107 a 21
Christome Chrysostom 116 b 34 Eueria, Euoria, 129 a 28 pristinu^ pistrinum 135
a 33 follo: wed both followed both: 141 b 28 is was it was

In the Epistle to Martial, the.4. leaf, the second side and in the last
Quotation, for Ep. 109. read Cap. 109.

In the.5. leaf, the first side and line.2. for quid read quidem

Whereas two leaves together be escaped with ye number of 23. read for the
last of them.24. and for the number of the next leaf following which is.26.
read.25.

In the mergine of the.97. leaf, for Cofirmaion. read Confirmation. And in
the margin of the.110. leaf, in the second side, for martrimonye. read
Matrimony.

If ought else be escaped, I trust the gentle Reader will bear with it, and of
himself amend it.

Mortis and Crucis collatio.
QVI cupis ad Vitam renouari Morte futuram
Mortem Christi animo fac meditere tuo.
Mors ea, Vita fuit, vitamque fidelibus omnem
Praestitit in sola mortuus ille Cruce.
Non tamen ipsa licet, Cruce, Mors inflicta ministra,
Mortis erit celebri, dira ministra loco.
Mors peperit victa solidos de Morte triumphos:
Crux valet ad vitam materiata nihil.
Mors affert animis onerum folatia pressis:
Crux dare lenimen lignea nulla potest.
Stigmata Mortis habent animi defixa fideles:
Stigmata formatae sunt malefida Crucis.
Mors in honor pijs aeterno tempore stabit:
Effigiata pijs Crux abolenda venit.
Mortis vt obrepat mala non obliuio nobis
Corporeae remanet mystica Coena dapis.
Haec data firmandis quasi tessera mentibus olim,
Solaque, perpetuo quae paragatur, erit.
Non sic ille Crucem Christus praeceptor habendam
Instituit, valeat Crux, vbi coena valet:
Sin Crucis ante oculos monumentum velle videmur,
Subdita sunt Christi viuida membra Cruci.
Viuida si nequeant animos percellere nostros,
Incutiantne magis mortua Signa fidem?
Perfida visibili gens est contenta Figura,
Dum Res interea significata perit.
Sic quos debuerat verum vox viua docere,
Fusilis errorem semper Imago docet.
Quos Deus in sacrae demissus viscera mentis
Non facit Offitij sic meminisse sui,
Vana Creaturae facies subiecta proteruis
Luminibus, memores scilicet, efficiat.
Nec tamen hic scelerum finis: sceleratior inde
Cultus ab effectu deteriore venit.
Namque velut diui, Lapides and Ligna coluntur
Artificis, postquam, forma, fit art, Crucis.
Sin ea forma magis precioso obducta Metallo
Protinus Idolum Crux facit vna duplex.
Ergo Crucifixus nobis in honor locetur,
Cruxque sit a nobis materiata procul.
The same in English.
WHo do desire to Life to come by Death to be restorde,
Record always in mindeful heart the Death of Christ thy Lord.
This Death gave Life, and he that dyed, did on his Cross alone
Bring everlasting Life to those that him believe upon.
But though by mean of yt his Cross this death was brought to pass,
Yet ought not Cross in stead thereof to hold the sacred place.
A perfect triumph over Death this Death did once atchieue:
But the material Cross to Life no help at all does give.
This Death does bring a full release unto the grieved mind:
But in the framed Cross of wood no comfort is to find.
The marks of this most wholesome Death the faithful hearts do bear:
The mark of formed Cross, God wot, is but untrusty gear.
With godly men this Death for aye in honor shall abide:
Of godly men the shapen Cross is to be laid aside.
Least this good Death that brings Life should flip out of our mind,
He of his sacred body has his Supper left behind.
This as a pledge to strength our souls is poynted to endure:
And this alone ordained is to be in daily ure.
Our Master Christ commanded not the Cross be holden so:
But where this Supper is in place the Cross may be let go.
But of the Cross some monument if we desire to see,
The lively members of our Christ to Cross still subject be.
If lively ones want force enough to move our resty mind:
Alas in liuelesse Signs what force of credit shall we find?
The faithful sort content themselves with Signs yseene with eye,
Even while the Matter signified is wholly lost thereby.
So them, that should by lively Voice have learnde the truth to know,
The forged Image evermore does into error throw.
Shall they whom God that does descend into the godly breast,
Does not so make to call to mind the duty they professed:
Shall they forsooth in heart be brought to hold the same aright
By fickle form of Creature subject to erring sight?
Yet is not here the end of ylles. For hereof does ensue
From worse effect false Worship done where it was never due.
For after once a form of Cross is made by workemans art,
To Stocks and Stones as heavenly Gods then honor they imparte.
But if with precious Metal it be garnisht to the eye,
A double Idol of one Cross is honorde by and by.
Let him therefore that Dyed on Cross devoutly be adorde.
And let material Cross be far from us that fear the Lord.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, for Lucas Harrison dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the Sign of the Crane.

Anno Domini. 1565. Nouembres. 3.


