A



HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT.


DECIMARVM ET OBLATIONVM TABVLA.

A Tithing Table. OR Table of Tithes and Oblations, according to the Kings
Ecclesiastical Laws and Ordinances established in the Church of England:

Now newly reduced into a Book.

Containing as well the very letter of the Law under which these rights be
severally comprised, together with such Questions of Tything, and their
Resolutions by the Laws Canon, Civil, and approved Doctors opinions of the
same, as be ordinarily moved, and which dee often prove to controversies heerin:

As also a brief and summarie declaration of Composition, Transaction,
Custom, Prescription, Privilege; And how they prevail in Tything.

Compiled by W.C. BACH. of the Civil LAW.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purfoot. An. Dom. 1633.

ANNEXED HEREUNTO SVMMArily, such Statute Laws of the Land concerning these
rights, as have been herein authorized, and now do remain in their force
accordingly.

To the easy and plain instructions of all the Kings Subjects Ecclesiastical
or Lay, within his Majesty's dominions, interessed, whether in these rights to
demand them, or bounden to perform the same.

Eccl. 25. Hallow thy Tithes unto God with gladness:

Prou. 3. So shall thy Barnes be filled with plenteousnesse, and thy presses
flow over with sweet Wine.

THE PREFACE.
THE Canon and Civil Laws (Christian Reader) since first K. Henry of happy
memory the Eight, dismembered their bodies, 25. He. 8.19
and restored to the Diadem of the Land (over the state Ecclesiastical) the
Ancient Jurisdiction of the Crown, they have and do lie hidden, such of them
as K. Henry then continued, and K. Edward 2. Ed. 6.13.
that succeeded him, Entitled in his Reign the Kings, and afterward were
the late Queens deceased, and as they be now termed, The Kings
Ecclesiastical Laws, (the former statutes revived by Her Majesty, 1. Elizab.
^
in the first year of her Reign) they have, these Laws, and do lie hidden
in manifold, dark, and dangerous corners, in practice onley familiar in
Consistories, and their knowledge to the Countries obscure: hence are the
manifold untimely Customs and Prescriptions that we have: I inveigh not
against them, neither custom nor prescription, that be perfect now and in
their perfect being, I would not be taken, or rather mistaken so: but they be
weeds in their growing and all their ingendring time, wherein (only) they give
place to prevention: they be Laws of themselves (in their ripeness,
inviolable Glo. and DD in c. vigilanti de praescrip.
. If therefore some insight into these laws, and knowledge succeeding this
long obscurity, may work another effect in the time to come, none can say
uprightly now that he is, may be, or his posterity after him (if not benefited)
damnified thereby: happily I may be charged (in translating) to have damnified
the Laws, I have shadowed (I confess) their first and original grace, such
beauty have they and elegancy too, in the Latin tongue: but I write to
Englishmen; and such as not so much affect to hear of the beauty, as they be
desirous to understand the benefit of their Laws: for such I have framed this
Tything Table, and replenished (as my slender skill would serve) the same, with
necessary, dispersed, and scattered laws, not hurtful, considered as they be
delivered, nor prejudicial to the Royal prerogative, nor repugnant to the
Laws, Statutes, nor Customs of this Land. Tithes (by sale) be turned into
chattels Art. cler. 9. Ed. 2.1.
, and made of spiritual, temporal things: in debate (of the right of
patronage) in Tithes, and exceeding the fourth part of the value of the Church
9. Ed. 2.2. 34. Ed. 1.1. de coniunctim feosatis.
, where great wood is demanded in the name of Silva Caedua 45. Ed. 3.3.
, in Tithes and Oblations, where there is any state of Inheritance 3. Hen. 8.7.
, and where they be demanded, and be neither due nor accustomed 13. Ed. 1.
circ. agat.
, the Kings prohibition does lie in all these cases and no consultation:
otherwise, and without such temporal mixtures, prohibition has no place Fitz.
de natura brevium, Fol. 50. de consultatione.
: but the Judge Ecclesiastical has power to proceed, notwithstanding the
Kings prohibition 9. Ed. 2. circumspecte agatis. 13. Ed. 1.
. Conceiving them therefore ( Christian Reader) as they be meant, and mentioned
to be presented unto thee, viz. As they be merely spiritual Tithes and
Oblations, and without any Temporal mixture, thou shall not misconstrue the
Author, nor deceive thy self. Farewell.

LONDON the Twenty ninth of April. 1591. The Readers (ever) in the LORD, VV. C.

A brief Collection of the Letter and terms of the Law, with their several
Expositions in English; and of all such questions of Tything which be mentioned
and contained within the body of this Table, whereby every Tythable thing and
question that is moved and answered of the same, is readily found.
The First Question.
Decima De Frugibus, i. Of. Harvest fruits, sown, mowne, reaped, gathered,
bound or loose in Heap, shocke or sheafe.
1 When they be tithable, and such other praediall Tithes, whether it be
lawful to the owner to dispose any manner of way of any part of the fruits
before division be made, and the Tenth part be severed from the Nine parts?

2 If a stranger shall prescribe tithes in another parish, and there shall
happen afterward barren and wast grounds to be tilled, whether the stranger
that prescribes, or the Church where the grounds do lie, shall reap the
Tithes?

3 If one shall have right of tyth in a wood, and that wood become afterward
arable ground, whether his right continues in the Corn?

The second Question.
Decima De Siluis caeduis, i. Of woods felled; and preserved to grow again.
Decima De Lignis, i. Of wood not in use, nor apt for Timber, but for fyring.
Decima De Thenitijs agrorum, i. Of trees planted for fencing of grounds, in
fields, pastures, and hedge-rowes. Decima De Turuis, i. Of Turues growing in
fennish and moorish soiles as in the Isle of Ely.
1 Wood of 20. years growth and upward, whether it be tithable or not? And
what of lopping of timber trees?

2 When woods be felled and sold, who shall answer the tith? the buyer, or the
seller?

3 If the inheritance of a wood be sold, that is in arrerages for tyth, whom
the Parson may implead?

4 Turues, amongst what tithes they be reckoned?

The third Question.
Decima De Pasturis, i. Of pasture grounds.
1 If they be fed, how the tith shall be answered?

The Fourth Question.
Decima De Fenis, i. Of Hay.
1 Hay, of what places? and what Tyth it is?

The Fifth Question.
Decima De Lana, i. Of Wool.
1 Whether the sheep of Sons and Daughters be tithable (or not) with their
fathers flocks wherein they do go?

2 Where sheep be removed from one Parish to another, how the Tith is divided
by rate and proportion of time?

3 If strange sheep be brought to another parish and there be clipped or
shorn, how they be tithable there?

The Sixth Question.
Decima De Agnis, i. Of Lambs. Decima De Vitulis, i. Of Calves. Decima De
Porcellis, i. Of Pigges. Decima De Pullis, i. Of Colts.
1 Whether the Parson may expect his Lamb (the next year following) if the
parishioners number in any one year amounts not to ten? And what, if he
fails then?

2 When Yeawes be removed, and other such cattle and beasts from one parish to
another, how the several Churches be interessed in the Tyth of their Lambs,
and such other increase.

3 Of Lamb, calfe, Kid, colt, pigge, etc. and when is their tythable time?

The Seventh Question.
Decima De Lacte, i. Of Milk. Decima De Caseo, i. Of Cheese.
1 Milk and Cheese how? and when they be tythable?

2 If Cattle feed in one Parish and couch in another, how the profits be
tythed?

3 Where Cheese is tythable, and the number of Cattle so small that none can
be made; how the tyth shall be answered for their small proportion?

4 Where Milk of sheep is tythed in kind, how they be tithable (for their
pasture) in the VVinter when they do yield no such profit?

The Eight Question.
Decima De Fructibus arborum, i. Of Fruits of Trees.
1 Of Apples and other such fruits of trees, what of their tythable time?

The Ninth Question.
Decima De Seminibus, i. Of seeds: Hemp, Flax, Onions, Rape, and such like.
Decima De Herbis, i. Of Pot-hearbs. Decima De Curtilagijs, i. Of places
adioining to mansion houses, applied to seeds and herbs.
1 Of Seeds and Herbs what manner of tithes they be?

The Tenth Question.
Decima De Pannagijs siluarum, i. Of mast, of Beech, or Oak, or such like.
1 Of Mast, what, when it is given? and what, when it is sold?

The Eleventh Question.
Decima De Molendinis, i. Of Mils, forced by wind, water, etc. Decima De
Vivarijs, i. Of Parkes, Warrens, pooles, ponds, etc. Decima De Bestijs
guarenarum, i. Of wild beasts under custody etc. Decima De Columbarijs, i. Of
Doue-cotes, or houses. Decima De Apibus, i. Of Bees.
1 What manner of tithes they be? And how they be tithable?

The twelfth Question.
Decima De Aucupijs, i. Of Fowlings. Decima De Venationibus, i. Of Huntings.
Decima De Piscationibus, i. Of Fishings.
1 Beasts, Fishes, Fowls, how (diversely) they be tythed, (diversely) considered.

The thirteenth Question.
Decima De Cignis, i. Of Swannes. Decima De Aucis, i. Of Geese.
1 Of Swannes, Geese, Ducks, and how they be considered of.

The fourteenth Question.
Decima De Ouis, i. Of Eggs.
1 of Eggs, where Tithes be yielded, whether chickens be tythable there?

The fifteenth Question.
Decima De Artificijs, i. Of Crafts, and manual Occupations. Decima De
Negotiationibus, i. Of Trades by wares, Merchandise, etc.
1 Of personal Tithes, what time, place, and persons, be required in them, and
of whom the Church is forbidden to receive either personal Tyth, or Oblation?

The First Question.
Decima De Frugibus, i. Of Harvest fruits, sown, mowne, reaped, gathered,
bound or loose, in Heap, shocke or sheafe.
1 When they be tithable, and such other praediall Tithes, whether it be
lawful to the owner to dispose any manner of way of any part of the fruits
before division be made, and the Tenth part be severed from the Nine parts?

2 If a stranger shall prescribe tithes in another parish, and there shall
happen afterward barren and wast grounds to be tilled, whether the stranger
that prescribes, or the Church where the grounds do lie, shall reap the
Tithes?

3 If one shall have right of tyth in a wood, and that wood become afterward
arable ground, whether his right continues in the Corn?

Questions of Tithing, and their Resolutions.
The First Question.
1 PArishioners out of their Haruest-fruits; specified under the word Frugibus
(before their Tithes assigned of the same) diminish their fruits, some one way,
some another: admit to godly or profane uses: or (as their manner has been)
to the satisfying therein that laborers their wages. The question is, whether
this be lawful? It is answered, A fraud unto the Church: For this alowance (If
any such be) not otherwise ought to be made, than forth of the Nine parts: and
the reason is, Decima debet solui sine diminutione, etc. Tyth must be paid
without any diminishing c. Cum homines de decim. Glo. c. erroris damnabilis.
Constable. prou. Ang. de dec. ver. errore calculi.
.

2 The Parson of the Rectorie of A (iure praescriptionis) i. by right of
prescription, has interest in and to the prediall Tithes of the Parish Church
of B, where there be converted (into tillage) diverse barren, heath, and wast
grounds, that never before yielded any profit to the Church: The question is,
(now) of these Tithes, and which of the Churches shall have them? It is
answered, that the Parish Church of B shall have these Tithes, because they be
Decimae noualium, i. Arising of such grounds that never were manured nor
yielded before any profit at all to the Church: and the reason is, by the
foundation of every Church, the Tithes in general of that and every Parish,
are due to their own proper and peculiar Church c. Cum contingat. vbi glo. and
DD. eod.
. Now, for as much as the Church of A could never before be in Possession of
the Tithes of these wast grounds, because they never were in being l. Sine
possessione. ff. de vsucap.
, and that the Law is, that Tantum praescriptum est, quantum est possessum, and
non plus, i. So much (and no more) in prescription, than in possession l. Quod
meo.. fi. ff. de acquir. posses. cap. Auditis de praescript.
: And again, in that prescription is not extended ad futura, i. It reaches not
unto profits of tythable grounds to come Pan in vlt. notabili. in d. c. cum
contingat.
, Summae aequitatis est, etc. i. The premises considered, it stands with
great equity, in this case, that the Church of B should reap and perceive these
tiths Host. Io. And in d. c. Cum contingat.
.

3 But note, it is otherwise where one shall be in possession of the Tyth of
Corn, or of Pasture, or of Wood, or of any prediall Tithes whatsoever arising
in the grounds wherein he prescribes, howbeit afterward there be planted or
set or sown in the same any strange plant, seed, or herb, that never grew
before in these grounds. For example: Millet is sown or Saffron, where Corn
has been sown usually and ever before, and as the manner is, in some parts of
this Land to sow in their Pasture grounds the Herb that is called Glastum or
Isatis, Caesar writes of the old Brittons that they used with this Herb to
smeare their faces, to the end to seem terrible to their Enemies in War: we
call it in English Wadde or Woad. Again, Apples, or Nuts, be newly planted
where never they grew before: and so Ex nemoribus, i. Of Woods that be
converted to arable grounds: the Tithes in all these cases be payable as
before they were of the former fruits, and to whom the former fruits were
tythable before, namely, to the Parson or Church that prescribes, and the
reason is, viz. Praescriptio est realis censenda. i. Terram concernens, non
speciem fructuum perceptorum, i. Prescription is real, that is to say,
respecting not the new or never tithed fruits, but the tythable grounds that
brings them forth Ancha. in c. Cum in tuade deci. and Ant. But. in d. c. Cum
in tua^^d.
: In respect whereof, that is, of the grounds, the tithes whereof forepassed,
have been (without discontinuance or other interruption) continued and
possessed, it is thus affirmed (in these cases) of prescription, viz.
Praesciptio extenditur ad particularitatem iuris apprehensi, sub vnico iure vt
universally, i. Prescription is extended to every particularity of right
apprehended, as it were, under that particular, as general Ant. But. in c.
praeal.
otherwise it should be in potestate serentis, i. In the owners power (changing
the fruits) to prevent another right in the Tithes of his certain, known,
and tythable grounds: contrary to the rule of the law, viz. Id quod nostrum est
sine facto nostro a nobis avelli non potest, i. That which is mine cannot
(without my fact) be taken from me ff. de reg. (...).
. Look the statute De noualibus, i. Of barren, heath, and waste ground, 2. Ed.
6.13. And look the statute for prediall Tithes, and Tithable places, 2 Ed.
6.13.

The Second Question.
Decima De Siluis caeduis, i. Of woods felled, and preserved to grow again.
Decima De Lignis, i. Of wood not in use, nor apt for Timber, but for fyring.
Decima De Thenitijs agrorum, i. Of trees planted for fencing of grounds, in
fields, pastures, and hedge-rowes. Decima De Turuis, i. Of Turues growing in
fennish and moorish soiles as in the Isle of Ely.
1 Wood of 20. years growth and upwards, whether it be tithable or not? And
what of lopping of timber trees?

2 When woods be felled and sold, who shall answer the tith? the buyer, or the
seller?

3 If the inheritance of a wood be sold, that is in arrerages for tyth, whom
the Parson may implead?

4 Turns, amongst what tithes they be reckoned?

The Second Question.
1 Of Woods and wood, contained and specified under the words Silvis caeduis,
Lignis, Thenitijs agrorum, some of them exceed the growth of Twenty years, and
some of them not felled within the memory of man, peradventure not of an
hundredth or two of years: there grows a question of such Woods for the
Tithes of the same: It should seem, the parishioner herein may plead for the
one (against the Parson) the statute of Silua Caedua, that exempteth wood of
Twenty years growth and upwards, from the payment of tithes: and (for the
other) both the Statute and prescription, in that the Tithes therein were never
performed: interpreting the Statute no further than the Statute explaineth it
self: It is answered by the Canons alleged, so far forth (with
protestation) and no further, then the statute shall permit, that wood not in
use nor apt for Timber is tythable, body or bough, felled or lopped c.
Quanquam. Prouin. ang. eo. vbi. elo. in ver. excisis.
. As for prescription, it is answered, Praescriptio locum habere non potest,
vbi illi cui ius competit agere non potest, cum cesset materia de qua
experiatur, i. Prescription has no place, where the interessed (in his right)
can make no demand, the matter ceasing whereupon he should work: for example,
Of wood never cut, the Tith could never be demanded Gloss. cap. Sancta
ecclesia. prouin. ang. eo. ver. arborum. ad hoc l. arbotibus ff. de vsusr.
. But whether the loppings or boots of such trees the which the Common Laws
of the Realm account timber be tythable or not, is not yet decided by that Law.

2 It is a question, when VVoods so selled be sold, who shall answer the
Tithes, the Buyer or the Seller? It is answered, The Buyer Ext. de decim. c.
Pastoralis.
shall answer the Tyth: and the reason is, Decima sequitur fructus, and cum
onere fructuum decimae transferuntur in alterum, i. Tithe does follow the
fruits, and fruits be translated into another right together with the burden
of Tithes c. Praeal. cod.
.

3 Where the Inheritance of a wood is sold, the Tithes whereof for certain
years forepassed, by the Seller has been detayned and wrongfully subtracted
from the Church, It is a question whom the Parson may implead: It is holden, he
may implead the one or the other at his own choice Pet. de ancha. and DD. e.
cum homines eod.
, but he can recover but of one Ar. nd hoc de re iud. c. Bona fide. li. 6. Glo.
prouin. Ang. de decim. ver. asportant.
. But by the statutes of the Land, the Seller only, in this case, shall be
impleaded and sued unto treble damages, 2 Ed. 6.13. And not the buyer who took
not the Tyth away.

4 De Turvis, i. Of Turues, they be tythable, and comprehended under the word
Lignis, because they be so applied, that is, for fyring ff. Deleg. 3. l. Ligni
lignorum verb. quid mirum.
, and reckoned in the number and amongst prediall Tithes.

The Third Question.
Decima De Pasturis, i. Of pasture grounds.
1 If they be fed, how the tith shall be answered?

The Third Question.
1 Of Pasture grounds, when they be fed, it is a question how the Tyth shall
be answered? It must be considered whose the grounds be, whether the owners
of the cattle that fed them, or a strangers of another Parish. In the first
case, if the cattle be such that yield profit to the Church, the tyth is
satisfied in the fruits of the beasts Inno ext. de decim. c. commissum.
. In the other case, it must be considered of the stranger, whether he sells
or gives franckly to the owner of the cattle, the pasturage of his grounds:
the stranger if he sell it, is answerable for the Tenth Penny: the Parishioner,
if freely he receives it, is answerable for the estimation c. Preal eod.
. But note, the estimation shall not be answered, but where the grounds with
beasts be fed, Nullam Ecclesiae vtilitatem alias, etc. i. Yielding otherwise no
profit at all to the Church, of which sort be Horses, Oxen, and such other
barren Beasts. In other profitable cattle, the tyth is intended (as aforesaid)
to be answered in the fruits Iuxt. notae, per Inno. vt sup. glo. ver.
diuidenda. prou. an. co.
. But note, that generally the occupyer of the Pasture is to pay the Tyth, and
so is the Custom.

The Fourth Question.
Decima De Fenis, i. Of Hay.
1 Hay, of what places? and what Tyth it is?

The Fourth Question.
1 DE Fenis, i. Of Nay, according to the exposition of the word, the tyth is
payable, viz. Of the grass withered or green, perceived and taken in Meddow,
Pasture, great or small, or in other place, places, or angles (so within the
limits of the parish) wheresoever Prou. ang. c. quoniam propter volumus.
: Question has been moved of this Tithe to this effect, that is to say,
whether it be prediall or personal: It is answered to be prediall Ancha. cap.
peruenit. eod.
: For how be it the industry and labor of the person may seem and be alleged
more to prevail (as they term it) in the making thereof, then the nature of
the ground, yet in that it is perceived of the ground, and gathered of and from
a place certain, in some one or other known, certain, and limited Parish, it
is tythable as other prediall Tithes be Ad hoc c. pastoralis. ext eod.
, that is, to that Parish Church where the grounds do lie, without Deduction
of charges.

The Fifth Question.
Decima De Lana, i. Of Wool.
1 Whether the sheep of Sons and Daughters be tithable (or not) with their
fathers flocks wherein they do go?

2 Where sheep be removed from one Parish to another, how the Tith is divided
by rate and proportion of time?

3 If strange sheep be brought to another parish and there be clipped or
shorn, how they be tithable there?

The Fifth Question.
1 OF profits and increase of such profitable Beasts before mentioned, and
specifyed in particular under the words Lana Agnis, question is moved to this
effect, There be in one Family diverse persons having to the number of 3, 5, 6,
8, or 10 Lambs or fleeces of woll more or less, their sheep be depastured and
so be reputed part and parcel of the flocks wherein they walk, couch, and do
feed: The question is of their Tithes, whether they be tythable with the
flocks, or in their several parcels? It is answered, In their several
parcels, and the reason is, Animalia quae gregibus alienis admixta sunt,
remanent eorum propria non quorum sunt greges, sed quorum sunt animalia: i.
Beasts intermingled with other men's flocks, do remain notwithstanding proper
and peculiar unto those, not whose be the flocks, but whose be the beasts c. 1.
Cle. e.
. Howbeit in Countries where persons such as Sons, and Daughters, in their
Fathers power, government, maintenance, and finding, shall have such beasts or
cattle intended in Law, and counted in bonis profectitio and aduentitio, i.
Accruing and growing by their fathers or friends by the mother side, by gift,
procurement, or otherwise, in which beasts their fathers are interessed, in the
use and fruits, the bare property remaining to the Children, the tithes of
these beasts shall be reckoned with their Fathers Arg. ad hoc ff. per quas
personas nobis 1.
, and not in their several parcels, and the reason is, Vt ipsarum rerum quae
in fructu sunt and patri adquiruntur, pater soluat decimam, etc. i. Of things
in increase and procured to the father, so shall the father be answerable for
the tyth Glou. prou. ang. de dec. ver. decima lanae.
, the property notwithstanding reserved to him or her to whom it belongs, his
son or daughter. But for that Patria potestas, i. That legal power and
prerogative of Fathers is not in use, neither yet Profectitium nor Adventitium
peculium are known in England, the beasts of Sons and Daughters here
mentioned (in respect of their tyth) shall not be reckoned with their fathers
cattle, but as the cattle of other strangers: and what is given by the Father
to the Son or to the Daughter, is their (...), except the Father by express
words shall reterne the fruits of such cattle so given, to himself.

2 Where such cattle be removed from Parish to Parish, and question be made
what proportion of the tithes is due to each Parish, the custom of the place
must be observed: otherwise the law is, viz. Quaelibet Ecclesia pro rata
temporis portione decimas percipiet, i. Every Church shall receive it tithes by
rate and proportion of time: but the question is, of what space this rate and
proportion is meant? It is answered, of xxx. days, and so to be rated by
Thirties from Thirty to Thirty, Minori triginta dierum spatio in rata temporis
minime computando, i. Under or less then the space of xxx. days not to be
counted in rate and proportion of time Text. prouin. ang. ca. quoniam vt
audivimus. eodem.
: for example, The Parishioner has Forty Sheeps which yield him at shearing
day Fourscore Pounds of Wool: that Church is interessed intyrely in the Tyth
in whose Parish the whole year they couched and depastured: that Church in the
half, that is, in the tyth of Forty pounds where the half years they couched
and depastured: that Church in Twenty pounds where they couched three months
and depastured: and so ratably four months, five months, more or less
accordingly: and that Church in whose Parish they couched and depastured but
One Month, that is xxx. days, but in the tyth of the Twelfth part thereof,
that is, of the whole Fourscore pounds, but the Tenth of Six Pounds and a
half, and under thirty days as before is said, no allowance at all d. c. Ver.
sed si oves.
. But note, if the whole time they couch in one Parish, and depasture in
another, the Tyth shall be divided si vero. constable. preal.
.

3 If peradventure they come from a strange and unknown place to any Parish to
be clipped or shorn, there the tyth must be paid, except it may appear the
same to be satisfied to the Church whence they came and si oves constable. ead.
.

The Sixth Question.
Decima De Agnis, i. Of Lambs. Decima De Vitulis, i. Of Calves. Decima De
Porcellis, i. Of Pigges. Decima De Pullis, i. Of Colts.
1 Whether the Parson may expect his Lamb (the next year following) if the
parishioners number in any one year amounts not to ten? And what, if he
sayleth then?

2 When Yeawes be removed, and other such cattle and beasts from one parish to
another, how the several Churches be interessed in the Tyth of their Lambs,
and such other increase.

3 Of Lamb, calfe, Kid, colt, pigge, etc. and when is their tythable time?

The Sixth Question.
1 FOr Tithes in profitable beasts, the Parson may expect the fall of the Tenth
the next year following, if the number in any one year amounts not to Ten,
according to the text of the constitution Text prouin. ang. ca. quoniam propter
de decim.
, viz. Vel expecter rector vsque ad alium annum donec plenarie decimum agnum
possit recipere, si maluerit: i. Or let the Parson (if so he had rather to do)
expect another year, till he may fully receive his tenth Lamb. Now it
falls out the Parson uses his liberty, and refuses his Lamb at seven, and
his half pence at Six, and the Parishioner the year following has never a
Lamb at all: The question is, how the tyth shall be satisfied: It is answered,
(in this case) The Parson has no remedy in law, and the reason is, a principio
male eligendo fuit in culpa, ergo in hoc sibi imputetur, i. De made his choice
but ill at the first, which was his own default, and therefore he must blame
himself Arg. ad. hoc inst. quod cum eo qui in alt. pot. caeterum autem. and
glo. constable. prou. praeal. verb. possit recipere.
. Yet Lyndwood affirms in this case, That in regard of the Church, in respect
whereof tithes ought not to be lost, and in regard of the party himself, the
owner of the fruits, who without sin cannot detayne by any color the rights
from the Church, though the Parson (for his own sake) cannot relieve himself
Iure actionis, i. By right of action: yet for the Churches sake Officium
Iudicis, i. The Judge his office may be desired c. verb. constable. praeal.
.

2 Yeawes be sometimes removed from grounds to grounds, from parish to
parish, the question is, (in this case) of the right of their tithes: It is
thus answered by the text law c. Quoniam vt audivimus. constable. prouin. ang.
agni. eod.
. viz. The tyth of Lamb is payable in manner and form as be the tyths of
Calves and colts and such other like tythable increase, mentioned to be Pigge,
Kid, etc. of which the Law determines thus, viz. Habita ratione ad loca
diuersa vbi gignuntur, oriuntur, and nutriuntur, and ad moram quam traxerint in
eisdem particulariter decimentur, i. They be tythable by rate and proportion
(particularly) to the several Churches in whose parishes they were engendered,
brought forth, and nourished Ca. and prae.
: for example, The Yeaw goes five months with her Lamb, they put them
together the Male and Female the last of September, where they coupled they
remain one month: they be removed to a second parish, to a third, to fourth,
and to a fifth, where they be depastured several Months: in this case
Vnusquisque pro tempore suo: i. Every Parson for his time Glo. c. and praeal.
verb. particulariter
, that is (the several times and places considered) the several Churches in
the tithes have several rights accordingly C. and prae.
.

3 And touching the question of their tythable time, it is answered thus,
Faetus ablactatus esse debet antequam prestetur, i. They must be weaned,
weanable, or of strength to live without the damme Rebuff. eo. q. 6. nu. 30.
Inno. Host. and alij in ea. cum homines. eod.
, except custom has observed therein a time certain, the which where so it
is, there it must be continued. Look custom the 6.

The Seventh Question.
Decima De Lacte, i. Of Milk. Decima De Caseo, i. Of Cheese.
1 Milk and Cheese how? and when they be tythable?

2 If Cattle feed in one Parish and couch in another, how the profits be
tythed?

3 Where Cheese is tythable, and the number of Cattle so small that none can
be made; how the tyth shall be answered for their small proportion?

4 Where Milk of sheep is tythed in kind, how they be tithable (for their
pasture) in the VVinter when they do yield no such profit?

The Seventh Question.
1 Milk and Cheese, viz. of Kine, of Sheep, or of Goats, they be reckoned as
In pecudum fructu, i. In the increase of such cattle ff. de vsufr. l. in
pecudum. inst. de re. di. in pecudum.
, as also be Lana and faetus, i. Wool, Calfe, Kid, and Lamb, whereof mention
is made in the fifth and sixth questions before: and touching question herein to
be made, suppose of the milk when it is perceived and taken, of the ix. parts
thereof (when the tenth is deducted) there be made x. cheeses it is answered,
in this case, The cheeses are not to be tythed de reg. iur. in 6.
: for cheese is not tythable but where milk is not tythed: and so of the
other: briefly, they be tythable either of them tempore suo, i. In their
seasons c. quoniam propter prae. de decim.
, and so long, and so soon, as either Milk or Cheese shall be perceived and
taken (in their kind) by the Parishioner: there can be no custom of
intermission to the contrary. Look Custom, the 3. And what the Law of custom
may be in this case, follows here the 3.

2 Sometime these cattle be depastured in one Parish, and couch in another, in
this case it may be demanded, What the Law determines of the tyth? It is
answered in the text Law, viz. Quod inter Rectores dividatur, i. In this case
the Parsons shall divide c. Quoniam vt audivimus. praeal. decima.
.

3 Question also herein is moved further in Law c. quoniam propter. pre. quid
vero.
, where such tithes be payable in kind, and the number of cattle so small as
Lyndwood supposes in cap. and praeal. verb. modicitatem.
of some one or other Parishioners, which have but only three, two, or
peradventure but one only Cow, and those, or that to be milked but alternis
diebus, i. But eath other day, by reason whereof the Parishioner can make no
cheese at all: what is the Churches right in this case? It is answered in the
text Law c. praeal. in fin.
, viz. Consuetudini locorum duximus relinquendum, i. The custom of the place
must be observed: provided the Custom be, that Certum quid soluatur, i. That
somewhat be paid in consideration and liew ext. e. ti. c. in aliquibus.
for custom herein (as in all other cases of tything) cannot exclude
solutionem decimae, i. It cannot entirely take away the payment of the tithes
of such profits as arise, as may appear in custom the 3. Only it may limit
Solutionem decimae, i. Custom may moderate the payment of Tithes. Look
custom the 4, Hither (by a Constitution provincial of England) also be
referred Calfe, Colt, Pigge and such like, that is, when their number is so
small that they cannot be tythed: it is the Chapter Quoniam vt audiuimus, and
Paragraph Quid vero, which Constitution Lyndwood affirms upon the same
Paragraph, that it extends not to Wool and Lamb, but cites there another
express and peculiar ordinance for the same, viz. If the Parishioner shall
have six Lambs or under, he shall yield for his Tyth for every Lamb a
halfe-peny: if seven Lambs, he shall yield a Lamb for his tyth, and receive
three halfe-pence: if eight, a penny: if nine, the Parishioner (only) receives
a halfe-peny of the Parson, or the Parson may expect, according to the sixth
question before. Et ita intelligendum est de decima Lanae, i. The same
ordinance and provincial constitution is had of Wool. It is the Chapter
Quoniam propter, and Paragraph De nutrimentis, in the title of Tithes.

4 Post Festum, etc, i. after the Feast of S. Martin in winter, sheep be
eftsoons removed from parish to parish, or else they do continue in one and
the same parish from that feast till shearing any ensuing: the question is, of
their tithes? It is answered, they be tythable thus, viz. Habita ratione ad
numerum ovium Pascua estimentur, i. The pasture in this case must be
considered (for want of their milk in this season) by the head or number of
the Sheep that depastured in them c. Quoniam vt audivimus. praeal. quod si
prou. ang. e.
, and so shall the tyth be rated and yielded c. prae. c.
: by rate and proportion of time (by the month Gloss. c. praeal. verb.
estimentur.
) as Lyndwood infers, and as it is said of thirty days, and by thirties and
so from thirty to thirty, as in the first question before of Wool.

The Eight Question.
Decima De Fructibus arborum, i. Of Fruits of Trees.
1 Of Apples and other such fruits of trees, what of their tythable time?

The Eight Question.
1 FRuits of trees, viz. Apples, pears, Wardens, etc. the question is of their
tythable time: it is answeswered, Statim fructibus collectis, i. So ^oa^e and
immediately when the fruits shall be gathered c. cum homines, eod.
, and the reason is, Quia minus soluit, qui tardius so luit, i. He diminishes
his duty that delayeth the time l. si cui in fine. ff. de verb. sig.
: if therefore the Parishioner shall gather his fruits, and neither pay the
Tithes presently, nor monish the parson to receive them, but subtract them, or
that (otherwise) they be impaired or lost, tenebitur, says the Law; that is,
The Parishioner is bounden c. cum homines prae. eod. text.
: to what satisfaction look the Statute 2. Ed. 6.13. for fruits be Tythable,
and prediall e. 1. c. ad Apostolice. c. peruenit eod.
.

The Ninth Question.
Decima De Seminibus, i. Of seeds: Hemp, Flax, Onions, Rape, and such like.
Decima De Herbis, i. Of Pot-hearbs. Decima De Curtilagijs, i. Of places
adioining to mansion houses, applied to seeds and herbs.
1 Of Seeds and Herbs what manner of tithes they be?

The Nynth Question.
1 SEeds and herbs, viz. of Flax, Millet, Hemp, Leeke, Onion, Rape, Percely,
Sage, Mint, Rue, etc. comprehended under the works Seminibus, Herbis,
Curtilagijs, they be Tythable c. quoniam propter prae. prou. ang. e.
, as they be perceived and taken in Gardens, or in the fields, either of the
seed, or of the herb before the seeding time Concor. ext. eo. c. ex part
canonicorum.
, Nisi parochiani competentem fecerint redemptionem, i. Except the parishioners
sufficiently shall redeem or compound for the same c. quoniam propter prae.
: these be Minutae decimae, i. Small tiths according to the Evangelist Lu. 11.
Ho. c. ex multiplici. eo.
, vz. Ye tyth mint and Rue, etc. and therefore in them no great question to be
made.

The Tenth Question.
Decima De Pannagijs siluarum, i. Of mast, of Beech, or Oak, or such like.
1 Of Mast, what, when it is given? and what, when it is sold?

The Tenth Question.
1 BY the Chapter Sancta Ecclesia, in the provincial Constitutions of England,
and title of Tithes, the tyth of Mast and other such wood and wild fruits, be
payable, viz. Si vendantur, i. If they be sold c. Sancta ecclesia pre.
: that is, (as the gloss infers) of the tenth penny, if they be sold;
otherwise, that is, if Swine franckely and freely received and fed, without
consideration of charges to the owner, in this case, Transeunt fructus cum
onere, i. The fruits do pass with their charges glo. in d. c. verb. si ven.
dantur. vbi ad hoc ext. eo. c. pastoralis, and Inno ext. c. commissum. e.
, viz. with the burden of Tithes.

The Eleventh Question.
Decima De Molendinis, i. Of Mils, forced by wind, water, etc. Decima De
Vivarijs, i. Of Parkes, Warrens, pooles, ponds, etc. Decima De Bestijs
guarenarum, i. Of wild beasts under custody etc. Decima De Columbarijs, i. Of
Doue-cotes, or houses. Decima De Apibus, i. Of Bees.
1 What manner of tithes they be? And how they be tithable?

The Eleventh Question.
1 QUestion has been moved of the tyths of Mils, Parks, Ponds, Warrens,
Doue-houses, and Bees, to this effect, viz. Whether they be prediall, or
personal? it is answered, They be prediall, and tythable without deduction of
charges DD. in cap. pastoralis, and alijs ca. eod.
, for the reason alleged in the fourth Question before. And they be tythable
thus; that is to say, not the Tenth of the rent for milles (as they term it)
the tenth penny, nor for Bees, the Tenth Be, or Swarm, or Diue, but De
prouentibus molendinorum, i. The tenth measure of Corn for Bills c. quoniam
propter, pre. de proventibus. and ibi glo. verb. intigre.
, and so for Bees, the tenth measure of Honey, the tenth weight of wax,
briefly, De cera and melle, i. Of Honey, and ware Host. and alij. c. nuntios. c.
. And the law and reason is of these tyths, especially of Milles, as of other
prediall tithes, whereof (for example) it is said, Transit herba pasta cum
onere suo ad dominum bestiarum, i. Where grounds or pastures be demised, or
their Herbages sold, the owner of the beasts is chargeable with the tyth Ad
hec. ff. de vsufr. l. vsufructu legato. and l. item si fundi.
. Especially for the practice of England, look what is said in the Third
Question before. Hither be referred Parks, Ponds, Douehouses, etc. for Fructus
transit cum onere suo, i. Fruits be liable to their charges. Look in the Second
Question before, 2.

The Twelfth Question.
Decima De Aucupijs, i. Of Fowlings. Decima De Venationibus, i. Of Huntings.
Decima De Piscationibus, i. Of Fishings.
1 Beasts, Fishes, Fowls, how (diversely) they be tythed, (diversely) considered.

The Twelfth Question.
1 THe profits that be mentioned and contained under the words Aucupiis,
Venationibus, Piscationibus, i. Of fowlings, Huntings, fishings, question has
been moved of the tithes of the same, viz. The Parishioners of A. one of them
fowleth, another hunteth, the third fisheth, in the fields, grounds, and Rivers
of B, the question is of the tithes, of their advantages taken, and which of
the Churches be interessed in the same, vz. whether the Church of A, where the
parishioners inhabit, or the Church of B, where the profits were taken: 'It is
thus answered, vz. If the Parishioner had of the owners of the places francke
and free liberty to foul, hunt, and fish, the Church of A. that is, their own
parish Church shall be entirely interessed in them, as in personal tithes
Inno. in ea. non est, eod. and ibi Host. verb. de venatione.
: but if any consideration be required, either in money or in part of their
gain, that profit only received by the owner, is prediall and tythable to the
Church of B. that is to say, in that parish where the fields, grounds, and
Rivers do lie Inno. in and Host. cap and verb. praeal.
. De caeteris vero, i. Of the residue, that is to say, of the clear gain of
these Beasts, fishes, and fowls, all charges and expenses, in, about,
belonging, and concerning these profits taken, deducted DD. praeal. in ca.
pastoralis, eod.
, the Parishioners that took them be chargeable withal to their parish Church
of A DD. in d. c. Non est. ibi idem not per DD. prae. in decimis avium and
ferarum gloss. in pre. c. quoniam propter de piscationibus prouin. ang. eod.
verb. debito modo.
, mentioned before: and the reason is, the fowls, Beasts, and Fishes be taken
artificio, ministerio, and opere hominis, i. By the art only, labor, and
industry of man, from whence proceeds personal tithes c. ad apostolicae. eod.
, payable only where the parishioners inhabit. c. quaesti. 16. q. 1.
. But if the consideration mentioned here, required and taken by the owners,
comes not by art, or industry, but Ex humo, i. By way only, and means of the
ground Inno. Host. in c. non est praeal. eod. verb. de venatione.
, from whence do arise all prediall Tithes c. 1. c. ad apostolice. c. peruenit.
prae. eod.
: payable only in the place and parishes within whose bounds and limits they
are cap fin. de parochijs.
. Thus they be diverse, these tithes, diversely respected, that is to say,
prediall or personal; note the difference. Note also, that where such tithes
be demanded, it is where such art, industry, and travel is answered and
rewarded, not with pleasure Rebuff. eo. q. 8. nu. 17.
, but with profit Ancha. in praeal. c. non est. eo. col. 2.
. Question has further been moved of these profits and advantages aforesaid,
to this effect: viz. The parishioners mentioned of N, had frank and free leave
and liberty to hunt, fish, and foul within the fields, grounds, meadows,
rivers, and running streams of B mentioned before: they took, preserved, and
reserved alive their beasts, fowls, and fishes, and so they conuaide them to
certain their own proper and private grounds, within the bounds, compass, and
limits of another parish, than either of N where they dwell, or of B where they
took them: they include them (there) these beasts, fowls, and fishes, and
compass them within Parks, Warrens, ponds, pooles, Houses, such as be
mentioned and comprehended under the words Vivarijs, Columbarijs, in the
Eleventh question before. Thus they feed and nourish them, and they breed, and
increase in their kinds: If they be brought forth and so be taken in and from a
certain and known place, they be prediall and tythable as prediall tithes: if
from incertaine places, they be personal, and so they be tythable, viz. as
personal Tithes Gloss. in c. sancta Ecclesia prae. 1. ver cignorum
. It is affirmed of them, as of beasts, fowls, fishes DD. ext c. tit. c. non
est.
, in the question last before. Hither by the chapter Sancta Ecclesia, in the
Prouincials of England, be referred Geese and Ducks.

The Fourteenth Question.
Decima De Ouis, i. Of Eggs.
1 Of Eggs, where Tithes be yielded, whether chickens be tythable there?

The Fourteenth Question.
1 DE Ovis, i. Of Eggs, it has been moved whether they be tythable in such
places where tyths be yielded of Chickens? By the written law it may be
answered, as of milk and Cheese in the Seventh Question before, the 1. Howbeit
Custom in this case prevails, as experience shows in some parts of this
Land Gloss. in d. c. sancta ecclesia. cap. quoniam vt audivimus ver. pulli.
.

The Fifteenth Question.
Decima De Artificijs, i. Of Crafts, and manual Occupations. Decima De
Negotiationibus, i. Of Trades by wares, Merchandise, etc.
1 Of personal Tithes, what time, place, and persons, be required in them, and
of whom the Church is forbidden to receive either personal Tyth, or Oblation?

The Fifteenth Question.
1 TRades, Crafts, and Manual Occupations, they be personal, and of the
profits do arise mere personal tithes: touching therefore first their Tythable
place, it is answered in the Twelfe question before. Of their Tythable time, it
is answered in fine anni, i. They be payable at the end of the year Gloss. in
c. reuertimini. verb. annus
, and as our custom is, at Easter. Of persons that be chargable with these
personal Tithes, it is answered of such persons, which of Custom have, or of
right ought to have paid their personal Tithes 2. Ed. 6.13.
. Look the Summaries of the Statutes ensuing. There are of these personal
Tithes (in diverse cases) Opinionum conflictus, i. Diversities of opinions
Rebuff. q. 13. nu. 44. and ibi. cit. But. in. c. parochianos. in fin. eod.
: but herein they agree, viz. Hae Decimae personales, magis in difficultate,
and subtilitate, quam vtilitate consistunt, i. They are, these personal
Tithes, more intricate then profitable Host. in ca. pastoralis in fin. eod. and
10. de tur. cre. in c. reuertimini proeal. nu. 12. ver. ad septimum. 16. q. 1.
: only this (to conclude) must be noted, that is to say, all persons
(consideration had as before is said) be bounden to offer their personal Tithes
to the Church, but the Church is forbidden (of all persons) to receive them
Host. in. ca. ex transmissa. eod. arg. ca. Oblationes. 90. did. Deuteronomy. 23.
: for example, The Harlot, the Robber, the Usurer, etc. they be not exempted,
but the Law rejects them, their personal Tithes, and Oblations: Non inferus
mercedem meretricis, etc. i. Thou shall not bring the hire of an Whore, nor the
price of a Dog into the House of the LORD. And for the other, Quaestus fit ex
peccato, i. Their gain arises of sin: the Church is therefore forbidden to
receive of them, Ne ipsorum videatur approbare turpitudinem, i. Least the
Church should seem to approve c. miror. 17. q. 4.
their Iniquities c. si tantum 6. q. 2. hec Rebuff. q. 5. nu. 18. and 19.
.

Here do end the Questions of Tything, moved (in times past) and answered:
and which be new urged (ordinarily) and decided at this day.

Of Composition, Transaction, Custom, Prescription, Privilege: and how they
prevail in Tything.
Of Composition.
COmposition (by the Canon laws) holds or fails diversely respected: and it
is first to be considered of as it has been made and had inter Clericos, i.
Betwixt Clerks themselves; and then it has tended either Transferendis
decimis, i. To the translating of Tithes from one Church to another: Vt quae
vni Ecclesiae decimae debentur, alia recipiat, i. That one Church receive Tyths
which be due to another. And the Composition herein holds c. 2. d. trans. c.
dilecti. eo.
, and the reason is, Non refert quae Ecclesia decimas habeat, modo Ecclesiae
persoluantur, i. It forces not of Tithes (so the Church enioieth them) what
Church receives them c. 3. eod.
. Howbeit, the nature and kind of the Tithes thus translated, must be
considered, namely, whether they be personal or prediall Tithes; if they be
personal, the Composition that translated them holds not, and the reason is,
Ne occasio tribuatur avagandi and diuina extra parochiam audiendi, i. Least
occasion should be given to the people of wandering, and hearing of Divine
Service from their own Parish Churches c. 2. sup. ti. 1. Rebuff. in q. 13. nu.
17. de decim.
.

2 If they be prediall, the Composition holds, Inita cum authoritate
Episcopi, i. The authority and approbation of the Bishop of the Diocese
thereunto had; which composition shall bind both the Clerk and his successors
c. 2. etc. veniens, de trans
: otherwise without the Bishops confirmation, it shall not only bind the
Clerks that yielded therewith, and not touch his successors at all c. veniens.
8. praeal.
.

3 Or the Composition has tended Remittendis decimis, i. To the remitting of
Tithes, Vt tota decima clerico remittatur, namely, That to a Clerk Tyths
should be entirely remitted, this composition holds not Rebuff. q. 13. nu.
27. de decim.
, and the reason is, Decima omnino tolli non potest, i. Tyth may not wholly be
taken away q. nu. prae. Rebuff.
.

4 Secondly, composition must be considered, as it has been said inter Laicos,
and Rectorem, i. Betwixt Laymen and Clerks, which composition also must be
respected thus, namely, whether it be De praeteritis decimis, i. Of Tithes
forepassed, or de futuris decimis, i. Of Tithes to come. In the first case,
this composition also holds, yea though it be Gratuita, i. without
consideration or allowance at all c. super. de reb. eccle. non alien.
: In the second case if the composition be, Vt aliquas decimas non soluant, i.
That tithes be not paid at all, Non est admittenda, i. Not to be admitted
Rebuff. q. 13 praeal.
. If the composition be, Vt integra decima non soluatur, i. That tyth be not
wholly paid, but in part, it holds: howbeit not otherwise but confirmed by
authority supreme: for the Bishops confirmation herein suffices not, for none
could exempt from tything, nor diminish the quantity of the same, but the
Supreme power Text. in ca. venerabilis de confess. and ibi Pan.
, as it follows in Privilege.

Of Transaction.
1 TRansaction and Composition do differ in this, the one is Gratuita
conuentio, i. A voluntary, frank and free agreement of things not contended
for, which is said to be composition: the other, De re dubia and lite incerta
(aliquo dato vel retento) pactio, i. A forced covenant or agreement (for
somewhat given or received) of things litigious, incertayne, and doubtful in
controversy r. ff. de trans. C. e. c. super eo.
.

2 It must be considered of Transaction, as before it has been said of
Composition betwixt Laymen and Clerks. Look Composition 4. Transaction (if it
be of Tithes forepassed) holds; yea though the consideration had, be of
things mere temporal: and the reason is Fructus decimarum sunt temporales, i.
The profit and fruits of tyths be reputed temporal c. vestra. de loca.
. Transaction, if it be of tithes to come, must be respected according to the
time and term it is made sin, namely, whether it be made in tempus modicum, i.
For a short and limited time, or in perpetuum, i. (without limitation) for
ever. In the first case it holds with the Bishops approbation and authority
Arg. c. 2. and 3. sup. de hijs quae f^^nt a capit.
in the other case it holds also if the right and interest of the Church be
doubtful, as where the Parishioner pleads against the Church, Exemption or
Privilege. But where the right of the Church is Liquidum, i. Where the Churches
right is clear, Transaction holds not, otherwise than by consent and
authority supreme Not. ca. a nobis, eod. Pan. c. statnimus de trans.
. Transaction is often taken for Composition, and one for another c. veniens. e.
.

Of Custom.
1 Custom by the Canon Laws holds or fails, diversely respected: if it be
De transferendis decimis predialibus, i. Of translating of tyths prediall (as
before has been spoken in Composition) it holds c. cum sint homines. etc. ad
apostolice. eod.
.

2 If of personal tithes, as also before has been said in composition, it
holds not c. praeal.
.

3 Custom De non soluendis decimis, i. Of not yielding of Tithes at all,
holds not, and the reason is: Iuri naturae and divino contraria est, i. Such
a custom is contrary both to the Law of Nature, and the Law of GOD DD. in c.
fi. de consuetud.
.

4 Custom De minori quantitate solvenda, i. Of yielding less than the Tenth
in quantity, holds in Personalibus, i. In personal tiths only after the
opinions of some c. in aliquibus. and ibi inno pan and alij. eod.
, but of others in prediall also Rebuff. q. 13. nu. 4.6.
; and practice also shows the same.

5 Custom De loco, i. Of place where Tithes ought to be left, holds Host. in
sum fin. eod.
.

6 Custom De tempore, i. Of the time of Tithes to be yielded, holds DD. in
c. ad apostolice praeal.
.

7 Custom De modo, i. Of the manner and form of yielding of Tithes, holds
Rebuff. q. 13. praeal. nu. 40.50.52.
.

TYTH WHAT IT IS, AND OF how many sorts.
TYth of the Latin Decima, is a Tenth part or portion of increase, commanded
unto Moses by whom it was delivered (at the appointment of GOD) to be paid to
the Sons of Leui, for their Ministry wherein they served in the Tabernacle
Nu. c. 18.
: in Law defined thus; viz. Omnium bororum licite quaesitorum quota pars Deo,
diuina constitutione debita, i. Of all lawful increase and gain a certain
part (by constitution divine) due, and appertayning to God Card. confi^ 26. pro
evidentia c. tua c. fin. eod.
. And they be either prediall, as that which does arise and grow by reason and
virtue of the grounds, viz. Fruits, and increase of Beasts, Fishes, Fowls c.
pervenit. praeal. eo. c. non est. 22. c.
, etc. Or they be personal, as that which arises by reason and virtue of
lawful and honest commodity, so recovered and procured by art, science, or
manual Occupation of some person c. ad apostolice. prae.
. It is also to be noted, that tiths, some of them comprehended under these
titles, Prediall and Personal, be called by the name of mixed tithes; of which
sort be such as do rise and grow partly by the grounds ca. commissum praeal.
, and partly by the care, keeping, labor and industry of some person c.
apostolice. c. pastoralis. eod.
; as of Cattle subject to the Fox, Woolfe, and such devouring beasts, supposed
to be partly of the grounds where they be bred and fed l. cum quidam ff. de
fun. instruct.
, even as a tree is supposed to be also partly of that place where the roots do
grow, by the which it is nourished l. si plures. in fin. ff. arb. furt. caes.
: so they be maintained by the grounds, but defended by the shepherds. Look
more of mixed tithes in the Twelfe Question. Some of by the name of Greater
Tithes, In Latin Maiores sieve grossae Decimae (as we term them) Great
tithes: such be of Corn and Pulse c. ex multiplici de dec.
. Some of them be termed Minores or Minutae decimae (in our common speech)
Small tithes, such be seeds, Herbs, Eggs Glo. and DD. in c. cum ex (...) etc.
ex multiplici. praeal. eod.
, etc. mentioned in the ninth and foureteenth questions, 1.

(*)

Of Prescription.
PRescription is not much differing from Custom, as before is specified of
Transaction and Composition: but the one oftentimes is taken for the other Dom.
ca. 2. col. vlt. de preb. in 6. barb. consil. 35. sapienter. col. 6. in 2. vol.
. Howbeit herein they differ, Consuetudo proprie dicitur quando ius acquiritur
in communi and publico, i. It is properly said to be Custom where a right to
many is procured in common and public. Praescriptio vero quando priuato, i.
Prescription when privately to one Pan. in ca. cum ecclesia. col. 8. nu. 45. de
cause. pos.
.

Of Privilege.
PRIVILEGE or Exemption is derived from authority Supreme, by the which ex
iusta causa, i. upon cause and good consideration, sometimes the persons
themselves, as the order called Cistercienses, and other Religious persons were
priuileged and exempted from Tithes c. a nobis de decim.
; sometimes the places, as grounds belonging to Religious persons c. ex part
eod.
. For example, Monasteries, Priories, Nunries, Colleges, etc. or other
Ecclesiastical houses, etc. or any Manors, Mesuages, Parsonages appropriat,
etc. or other Hereditaments which belonged unto the said monasteries, priories,
etc. which were discharged of and for the payment of Tithes, being in the hands
of Abbots, Priors, or other Ecclesiastical governors. Concerning these
possessions in Religious persons, there has been five several times observed
Rebuff. q. 14. nu. 37.38.39.40.42.
: but leaving those times I refer the Readers only to the statute viz. These
Monasteries, etc. and every person and persons, their Heirs and Assigns,
having etc. shall be according to their estates and titles discharged of
payment of tyths, in as ample manner as any of the said Abbots, etc. at the
days of their dissolution. 31. H. 8.13.

*

Summaries of the Statutes of Tything.
EVery of the Kings Subjects shall truly and justly without fraud or guile
divide, set out, yield and pay all manner of their Praediall Tithes, in their
proper kind, as they rise and happen in such manner and form as has been of
right yielded and paid within xl. years before the making of this Act (being 4.
Novem. An. 1548) or of right or custom ought to have been paid. And no person
shall take or carry away any such or like Tithes, etc. before he has justly
set forth for the Tyth thereof the tenth part of the same, or otherwise agreed
for the same tithes with the Parson, etc. under the pain of forfeiture of
treble value of the tithes so taken or carried away. 2. Ed. 6.13.

At all times whenever the said praediall tyths shall be due at the tything
time of the same, it shall be lawful to every party to whom any of them ought
to be paid, or his Deputy or servant to see their said tyth to be truly set
forth, and severed from the nine parts, Double value of the tenth, beside costs.
and the same quietly to take and carry away, 2. Ed. 6.13.

If any person carry away his Corn or Hay, or his other praediall tyths,
before tyth thereof be set forth, or willingly withdraw his tyths of the same,
or of such other things whereof praedial tiths ought to be paid, or do stop or
let the Parson, Vicar, etc. or other their Deputies, to view, take and carry
away their tithes, by reason whereof their said tyth or tenth is lost or hurt:
then upon due proof thereof, etc. the party so carrying away, etc. shall pay
the double value of the tenth, etc. besides the costs, charges, and expenses of
the suit in the same, etc. to be recovered before the Ecclesiastical Judge,
according to the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws. 2. Ed. 6.13.

Every person which shall have any beasts or other Cattle tythable, wast
ground not certainly known of what parish.
going or feeding in any wast or common ground, whereof the parish is not
certainly known, shall pay his tithes for the increase of the said Cattle, to
the Parson, Vicar, etc. of the parish, Hamlet, Town, or other place where the
owner of the said Cattle dwells. 2. Ed. 6.13.

All such barren heath and wast ground, wast ground improued that never paid
Tith.
etc. which before this time has been barren and paid no tithes, by reason of
such barrennes, and shall be improued and converted into arable ground or
Meadow, shall after the end of 7. years next after such improuement, pay tyth for
the Corn and Hay growing upon the same. But if such barren, etc. has before,
etc. been charged with the payment of any tithes, and the same be after
improved and converted into arable ground or meadow, then the owner thereof shall,
during 7. years next following, from and after the same improuement, pay such
kind of Tyth as was paid for the same before the same improuement. 2. Ed. 6.13.

Great Wood of the age of 20. years or of greater age sold to Merchants to
their own profit, Silva caedua.
or in aid of the King in his Wars, is not Tythable nor comprehended under
this word Silua Caedua. 45. Ed. 3.3.

Every person exercising Merchandise, bargayning and selling, etc. or other art
or faculty, Personal Tithes.
being such kind of persons and in such places as heretofore within these Forty
years have accustomably used to pay such personal Tithes, or of right ought
to pay (other than such as be common day-labourers) shall yearly, etc. pay for
his personal Tyths, the Tenth part of his clear gaynes, his charges and
expenses, etc. deducted. But in all such places where handicrafts men have used
to pay their tyths, etc. the same custom of payment of tyths shall be observed
and continued. 2. Ed. 6.13.

Every person which ought to pay offerings, Offerings:
shall (yearly) truly pay them to the Parson, Vicar, etc. at such four offering
days, etc. as have been accustomed for the payment of the same, and in default
thereof to pay for the said offerings at Easter then next following. 2. Ed. 6.13.

No tyths of marriage goods shall be required of any person within Wales, or the
Marches thereof. Wales.
Neither shall any person be compelled to pay Tyth for the lands or
hereditaments, which by the laws and statutes of this Realm, or by any
Privilege, or Prescription, are not chargeable with the payment thereof: or
that be discharged by Composition real. 2. Ed. 6.13.

If any person after sentence difinitiue given against him, Obstinacy.
obstinately refuse to pay his tithes, or shall otherwise contemn and disobey
the process and decrees of the Ecclesiastical Courts, Contempt.
etc. then upon information given, etc. the same party shall be committed to
ward, etc. 27. H. 8.20. Look the statute in all.

If any of the parties do appeal, Appeals.
etc. then the Judge forthwith shall adiudge to the other party the reasonable
costs of his suit therein before expended, and take surety of the other party,
etc. to what effect, see the statute in all. 32. H. 8.7.

If any party, Prohibition.
etc. do sue for any prohibition, etc. under the copy of the Libell shall be
written the suggestion, wherefore the party so demands the the said
Prohibition: and in case the said suggestion by two honest and sufficient
witnesses at the lest, be not proved true in the court where the said
prohibition shall be so granted, within 6. months next following, etc. Then the
party that is hindered of his suit in the Ecclesiastical court by such
prohibition, Consultation.
etc. shall have a consultation granted, etc. and shall also recover double
costs and damages. 2. Ed. 6.13. And the Judges before whom the cause was first
brought in question, shall proceed notwithstanding the Kings Prohibition. 24.
Ed. 1.

These be Summarily (Christian Reader) the spiritual and statute Laws of the
Land for Tything: such as be exercised now under the happy government of our
King, the life both of them and us: this is the work, take it in good part:
the Title but begun, may better be satisfied hereafter.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purfoot. An. Dom. 1633.


