AN EXHORTATION OF THE PARTICULAR Kirks of Christ in Scotland TO their Sister
Kirk in Edinburgh.

Printed Anno 1624.

TO THEIR DEAREST AND WORTHIEST Sister the Kirck of Christ at Edinburgh, Grace
to you and peace from God our father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.
WE may all of us discern by our unprepared minds The cross seems stra^^
where th^^ is want o^ preparation
for suffering such evils as are daily incident to all men, as they are men,
how we are disposed to take up the cross of Christ, and to beat that other
sort of afflictions, that are proper to Christians, as they are professors of
the Gospel: for albeit that all vices do cry in our ears, that we be woeful
creatures, subjected through sin to many miseries; albeit the lamentable
example of others set the same lesson many a time before our eyes, and albeit
we do often feel the sparkles of the fire upon our own bodies, and may know
the warning pieces before the Lords great ordnance, yet when tribulation
comes within our doors, we think it almost as strange, and intertaine it as
impatiently, as if it had never knocked, nor given a warning before: the love
of the world, and the secure fruition of present prosperity naturally so
filling the heart, that it leaves no room for the expectation of adversity.
We may find upon greater reason the like untoward disposition of heart, when
we are called to suffer for the profession of the gospel: for we have been
taught from the beginning, that all that will live godly in Jesus Christ must
suffer persecution, that the godly shall weep, and lament, but the world
shall rejoice; often has it been beaten in our ears, that we would ere long
be put to our trial; We might also by the light of the fires of affliction in
other Kirks beside us, have discovered our own dangers, and prepared our
selves against them; and which is more, and draws nearer, in the trial
begun, and continued at home amongst our selves, we might have beholden the
common case, and condition of us all; yet no sooner are we assayed a new again
with the smallest threatenings, but we are put to such perplexity, as if either
we of all Christians were excepted from affliction, and to us only Christ
should be a Savior without a cross, or else that for fear of the loss of some
worldly dignity, or temporal commodity, we should so much as enter in
deliberation whether to change any part of our holy, and comfortable
profession.

Ye are set upon the stage at this time (right reverend, and dearest sister)
to act What care required of the kirk of Ed^^burgh in t^^ present tri^^
your part, we are the beholders, al our eyes round about are fixed upon you,
you are made a spectacle after a special manner to the world, to angels, to
men; your care must be so to carry your selves, that y^^ draw not on by your
sinning against God, a greater judgment, then man can remove again; that you
commit not that which may be a blot to your profession, and either a bleeding
wound to your consciences, while ye live, or the beginning of an endless
defection. Make not the faces of so many, as behold you, and are ready to
suffer with you to be ashamed, because of you: Beware to do that, which will
make your friends, and the followers of Christ to mourn, and your enemies the
favorers of Antichrist to rejoice.

We cannot deny (most worthy Sister) The duty ^ther kirks owe to (...) kirk
of Edinburgh.
but both our pastors, and professors have been watered many times with that
large river of Eden, that gladded your city, and have received both light, and
heat from your golden Candlesticks. You may therefore without offense of any,
e^xpect at our hands some thankful reflexe and Christian reciprocation at this
time.

We must first of al earnestly beseech you, by the peace of your souls, and by
the price ^emorse of ^onscience ^^ovveth (...) defection ^^d tur^itude will
^^llow upon ^dmitting of ^^ange.
of your redemption, that ye chang nothing in the worship of God upon any
sudden fear, or perturbation of mind, with a secret doubting, and
contradiction from your own consciences: for when the cloud of passion is
past over, and the light breaks out again, the accusations of conscience
shall be more insufferable, nor the importunity of tentation is now; the
fears of the judgment of God shall be greater, then now be the fears of the
wrath of the world. And when ye have changed the comfortable worship of God
with husks, and empty ceremonies that nourish not, either ye shall with
remorse return to eat bread, in the old manner in your fathers house, or else
ye shall dolefully go on from evil to worse, your consciences, which ye have
greeved, perpetually tormenting you, and the one fide whom ye have hardened,
crying out upon your old hypocrisy, and the other side whom ye have
deserted, upon your new apostasy. That, which your conscience would not
suffer you to do, for any pretended church authority, for all the arguments,
and reasons that have been multiplied, and for the doctrine and example of your
own pastors, if ye shall now through fear of any worldly loss suddenly
admit, what shall al these, who have been your witnesses from the beginning of
this controversy judge, but that ye are a multitude of wilful worldlings;
that ye have in your prosperity counterfeited the voice, and carried the
opinion of good Christians, as the parrat can learn to imitate the voice of
man; but now when ye are beaten with the parrat, ye return to your own
voice, and manifestly declare of what kind you are.

Secondly, when you hear that suggested The vv^^^^lings (...) the Chr^anscom^
togethe^
unto you, which is the scope of the worldlings text, Ioh. 11. 48. If we let
him alone the Romans shall come, and take away both our place, and our nation;
if ye adhere to the reformation, and retain Christ, as you have learned him;
both Session, and counsel will be removed, and your town will turn to
nothing. Remember that which was once taught you upon that place, by your own
holy, and heavenly preacher M. Rollock in his powerful manner. That the
wisdom of the world looks to the present estate, and condition of things;
if with it Christ, and the purity of religion may subsist, then will they
embrace Christ, and religion, otherwise they bid them farewell. But the
wisdom of God (says he) lays Christ, and the purity of Christian religion
for a ground, and sin closes her eyes to all events whatsoever for Christ,
and religion should not be servants to policy, but policy, and this whole
world should serve Christ, and religion. The Jews preferring their estate to
Christ, and fearing ruin, if Christ should live, they kill him to save their
nation, but the same was the cause, that in the justice of God the Romans came,
and destroyed their nation. The Lord has more ways then your town has ports,
to bring in his wrath, and for magnifying his own wisdom, and snaring of men
in their wisdom, many times judgment enters by the port, that policy
has locked fastest. They wanted not in those days their own pretexts, none
of them was so shameless, as to set himself against God, as God, they had
their own cunning to color the matter, and pulled forth their eyes least they
should see, that God, against whom they fought, as men deal now with Christ,
and the purity of religion. The more knowledge, and the less conscience we
find in any age, we may look for the fouler errors, and the fairer covers.
Oppose also to that the Christians text Matthew. 16. 26. and with elevation of
heart think seriously, what has a man profited, if he should gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul? or what can a man give in exchange for his
soul? 1. the immortal soul of man may be losed. 2. the gaining of the world
is the ordinary cause of the loss of the soul. 3. it is extreme folly to
loose the soul for gaining of the world: for first it is an unprofitable
gain, what has a man profited? and next it is an unreparable loss, what can
a man give in exchange for his soul, so that the loss of one soul, is the
eternal loss of that which is more worth then the whole world. 4. he makes
themselves judges, and demands them for their farther conviction. But in this
lies the deceit, that while men to their own conviction acknowledge it to be
madness to loose their souls for the world, they observe not, or will not
suffer themselves to observe the secret, but sure conjunction betwixt the
sinful courses they betake them selves to for gaining the world, and betwixt
the loss of their souls. Purge your affections of this particular fear, and
quit your selves of such things, as woe your flesh, and court your carnal
senses: Covetousnes is the root of all evil, ease savoureth not the things
that be of God, but those that be of men, and whosoever shall be ashamed of
Christ and his words in this adulterous, and sinful generation, of him also
shall the Son of man be ashamed when he comes in the glory of his father
with his holy angels.

Thirdly, when ye have happily removed the world, and all worldly tentations
God blesses not a worship not directed by his word.
from betwixt your eye and the cause in hand; for your resolution ye need not
to search after curiosities of learning, nor wander after uncertainties of
opinions; but limitting and directing your sight, 1 Look first upward to the
glorious majesty of God, who is present at his own worship, and neither
accepts, nor blesses a worship, that is not directed by his own word: think
as in his sight, whether ye may look for a more sensible testification of his
comfortable presence in your souls at the celebration of the Lords supper,
when ye draw nearest to Christ's institution, or when Christ's gesture of sitting
is abolished as common, and profane, and the Antichrists gesture of kneeling is
enforced as more humble and holy; the table of the Lord either taken away or
turned into a cupboord, our eating and drinking into a minsed and pinched
tasting, our conjunct communicating into a confused disputation, our
sacramental breaking in the time of the action into a formal carving before the
action, our kindly, and christian distribution into a steward like
dispensation, the enunciatiue words of the institution, into an idle petition
and repetition, and our spiritual exhortations according to Christ's example
into a comfortless deadnes, and silence. Such Churches, as never saw better,
may have some comfort in this, but for you who have seen the glory of the
first temple in this land, and who call to mind with what heavenly meditation,
lively affection, large consolation, and with what spiritual resolution ye
were wont to be filled; It is a wonder, when ye see this new ministration
with your eyes, that your hearts melt not within you, that your flesh cries
not out for the living God, that ye weep not with a louder voice then the
voice of their joy, who shoute now having gotten the ark of the Lord upon a
cart, that ye prefer not the poorest parish in the land with the liberty of
Christ's institution, to your own tabernacles and courts, that of late were so
amiable, that your souls longed, and fainted for them.

2 Look back, and see how the house of God was builded, and the headstone put
Building, and demolishing of the house of God compared together.
upon it by Gods own hand to the admiration of the christian world about us;
what unity of ministers, authority of assemblies, order of ministry, purity
of external, power of internal worship, what zeal, and indignation against
all impiety, and iniquity. And again by what methods, and machinations have
succeeded, for unity, division, for authority anarchie, for order hierarchy,
for purity of worship antichristian ceremonies, for power of godliness
superstition and profanitie, and for zeal, and indignation, nothing but
lukewarmnes, and toleration. In all these considerations, as this national
kirk was eminent above other nations, so were ye above us all, as far as in
civil dignity. And shall we live to see the day, when for the confused fear
of an uncertain loss, our Jerusalem shall become Romish, our Philadelphia
become Laodicea, our fountain be turned into a puddle, our glory become our
shame, our Najoth, our beauty turn to be our blemish, our lothing, our
deformity.

Look back also to the course of his blessings upon our reformation, and the
perpetual The blessings upon the reformation, and judgments upon defection
compared together.
course of his judgments upon our defection. We know the power of the Lords
particular providence in all the works under the sun, and should have learned
against the atheism of the times to have referred notable judgments to their
own procuring causes. The darkness, lightning, thunder, hail and rain at the
ratificatio^ of these rites that now molest us; the inundations, the hunger,
and cold, the sicknesses and death, since can not yet be worn out of our
senses, and shall be kept in memory by the generations after us.

Look again back, and compare the many reverend assemblies, which we have kept
The former assemblies compared with Perth assembly.
with that one new meeting at Perth, and try the spirits. The place of the 95
Psalm. is impertinent, neither can it be a commandment, for at sometimes it is
not lawful to kneel before him, and no man will say, that we are commanded so
often, as we worship, to kneel. The second, and third reasons in the act, beside
other absurdities, do charge the Lord Jesus Christ with his disciples, and all the kirks that have used Christ's gesture after him with an unreverent behavior
in a holy action. And whether the memory of by past, or the multiplicatio^ of
present superstition, (which is the fourth pretense in the act) might not have
given a better narratiue for the contrary conclusion, the times have given
verdict.

3 Look inwards into your own heart, that you may find the testimony of a
good A good conscience makes choice of the sure^^ way.
conscience, one sure note whereof, is this, that in cases co^troverted a good
conscience takes ever the surest, and safest side. Perjurie is a heinous sin,
and odious to the world. Idolatry is against the first commandments of the
first table, and is no less abominable in the sight of the alseeing jealous
God then is adultery to a jealous husband, when it is committed before his
eyes. Now it is known to us all, that in our confessions and covenants we have
abjured al Antichrist his rites, and ceremonies added to the ministration of
the true sacraments without the word of God (of the which sort, this kneeling
was esteemed to be one, and cannot escape this censure more then other popish
rites) and it is as certain, that all the fetches, and fingers that have been
busied about this knot have not loosed it. Kneeling also before the elements is
proved to be Idolatry, not only in that sense, that a glance of the eye, or a
gesture, and a rash word of anger, are adultery, and murder by Christ's own
interpretation, but also being taken, as it is commanded in the act; both
because it is kneeling with direction before a creature, and that it is done in
reverence of the sacrament. The greatest clerks among our opposites can give
no other answers, nor differences betwixt this kneeling, and the worship of
images, but that the one is somewhat inhaesive in objecto, or adhaesive per
objectum, but the other is abstractive ab obiecto, and that the sacrament is
obiectum a quo significative, which dark distinctions, and subtle evasions
can be conceived but of a few, neither can these few find in them any
satisfaction. But upon the other side Christ's gesture of sitting at the
communion is free of the fear of both these rocks. And therefore while the
superstitious conscience will be pleased with the appearance of humility, and
the servile conscience will follow example and authority, and the blind
conscience swalloweth down bunchbacked camels, and gnats, counting all under
indifferency, and the bold conscience will venture with sacrificing Saul
stoutelie, and the presumptuous conscience will take leave for worldly
respects, and say, in this the Lord be merciful unto me; In the mean time the
good conscience laboring to keep integrity, will take the safest, and surest
course for her constant tranquillity, that she neither be guilty of perjurie
nor Idolatry.

4 Look forward, and ye shall see the A little change opens the door to
traditions, and the substance of popery.
wide door of traditions cast open, whereby the whole multitude, and
theatrical pomp not only of English, but popish rites, woodbind to the
gospel may as well enter, when authority bids them, as these called
innocent ceremonies. And when we have received the shadow, what can we look
for less then for the substance, for which some are secretly as busy, as
others openly are for ceremonies. The divil has put the warpe of defection
long since upon his beam amongst us, he will not let it out of his loome, but
will still employ one malignant wit after another to make it out. And the Lord
in his justice may plague preceding defections with following apostasy,
whatsoever be the intention of the present urgers.

Look forward, what shall be the case of the posterity, and of your own
children, A care is to be had of the posterity.
whether they shall have cause to curse their predecessors, that resisted not
the beginnings of evil, and who were more careful of their civil then of their
spiritual liberties. Their hearts shall mourn, and the tear many a time shall
fall into their eye, when they shall behold so fair a building, so dearly
conquessed, so firmlie grounded, so compactly builded, so well lighted, so
wholesome to dwell in, so meet for God, and his Angels to delight in, so
fruitful a paradise as this kirk was, wherein they should have succeeded, to
be pitifully ruined by their fathers, possessed by their enemies, and made a
den of unclean spirits.

Look yet forward a little. ye know we have no pattent for our peace, but the
evils (...)he evil day, the day of (...)eath and of ^^dgment ^pproaching should
bri^le us.
of the times tell us of evil times: death it self is not far from every one
of us, and Christ at last shall come to judgment to punish them, who obey not
the Gospel, with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and
the glory of his power, and to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired
in all them that believe. In these three greatest terrors, what joy of heart
shall it be unto you? that God by his singular care, not for your merits above
others, that fall, but to make you examples of his grace, has kept you in so
dangerous days from the strea^ of defection; that he has made you to shine as
the stars in heaven, when others like the sand of the sea shore have been
covered with the inundations of the time. So many of you, as have seen better
times have not now long to live, your eye is upon the mark, ye are almost at
the end of your race, and the crown is ready for you, and shall ye turn
your back upon God, leave that course, whereby ye have all your assurance, and
comfort of salvation, and return now to the garlic, and onyons of Egypt, when
ye are so near to the promised Canaan. Better ye be fined by others, then
that ye file your selves, and the darkness of Blackness is far more
tolerable, then the blacknes of darkness. Cum innocens de poena metuit, de
innocentia gloriatur Hierony. Omnis nobis vilis est poena, ubi pura comes est
conscientia. Tiburt.

5 Look also about you. for if ye look to Malefactors, it is better, if the
will of God be so, that ye suffer for well doing, then for Malefactors, mockers,
sufferers, papists, weak brethren call us to watch and suffer.
evil doing, for his quarrel, the^ for your own sins, never refuse to taste
of the brimm of that cup, the dregs whereof, and third draught might have been
your portion. If ye look to Mockers, resolve with Job. 17. 6. to be made a by
word of the people, and as it were a tabret. for either thou must be a mocker
with Ismael, or sustain mockings, and derisions with Isaac. If ye look to
them who suffer in other places, their trials are fiery, and they have
suffered to the blood, yours are but earthen, or airie, and ye have not yet
suffered with joy the spoiling of your goods. If ye look to papists; and
adversaries, harden them not; and most of al, when ye look upon weak
professors, give them no offense, neither do that which is scandalous, or may
be unto them a stumbling block. Neither your inward intention, nor the outward
commandment of the magistrate will remove the moral, perpetual, and universal
reason, that is given by the Apostle without any exception, Destroy not him,
for whom Christ died. Neither your good meaning, nor civil authority, will
make it cease to be scandal, nor cease to be sin, nor cease to be your sin.
And thus except ye blind your eyes wilfully, and put away a good conscience,
look whether ye will, whether upward, or back, or inward, or forward, or about
you, all call you to be ready upon the watch word to suffer, al promise you
joy, and comfort in your sufferings. Let the brambles of the wood that can do
noe better rule over the trees of the forest; continue ye still like the olive,
the fig tree, the vine; loose not your fatnes, your sweetness, your cheerefulnes
for the fattest, the sweetest, and most pleasant preferments.

Think it not sufficient, that ye have before this time given testification of
your Constancy to the end is required in a witness of the truth.
zeal to your ancient liberty, and of your misliking of the present course of
conformity. If you shall be weary now, or make defection; all your former
testification will be a direct accusation against your selves. Pilate protested
thrice that he found no fault in Christ, and labored to set him free; but
least he be reputed a small friend to Caesar, at last he delivered him to be
crucified. Darius labored all the day til the setting of the sun to deliver
Daniel, but overcome with importunity, he condemns him at last to the lions
den; which made him to pass that night without meat, sleep, or music. Your
reasons, and motives that ye stood upon before, do yet stand without change in
the power of your consciences, and therefore draw not upon your selves after
so long a day, a restles night of doole, and desolation.

Object not his Majesty's wrath, nor your Pastors delations, nor the examples
of other His majesty's wisdom will rule his anger.
Kirks. Think not that his gracious majesty has quite forgotten what he was
once himself, or that he will not pity his own woonted case in your persons
now, as Augustine did the Manichans, greater Heretics, then we are imagined to
be. Illi in vos saeuiant, qui nullo tali errore decepti sunt, quali vos
deceptos vident, ego autem saeuire in vos omnino non possum, quos sicut meipsum
illo tempore, ita nunc debeo sustinere, and tanta patientia vobiscum agere,
quanta mecum egerunt proximi mei. His Majesty will not refuse at your hands
the offer that Jerusalem made to Alexander. They could not suffer his image to
be erected in their temple, but they were ready to please him in every thing
wherein God was not displeased, as to begin the accounts of their times from
his entry to the town, and to give him the name of all their first borne
sons. If you shall offer, what is Caesar's, and what is yours, he can not
offend that ye keep Christ's royal prerogative to himself. He was not a
defender, but a persecuter of the faith (whom for respect to our Dread
Sovereign we will not name). who inserted the images of the false gods into his
own picture, that no man could adore the Emperor, and not adore them, and if
any refused they were punished, as guilty of laesae majestatis. We look
never to see your civil obedience, and the practice of Idolatrous ceremonies so
straightly joined, neither in his majesty's opinion, nor in his injunctions to
his good people.

Neither can your Ministers forget themselves so far, as to set themselves to
be instruments to draw the wrath of a King upon their own flock. If they were
justly offended, they would rather send up their The duty (...) the Ministe^
of Edinburgh.
complaints to heaven, then their miscontentments to court, and would rather
inform you by scripture, then enforce you by authority, they would choose
rather to draw your minds to them selves, then your moneys to others.
Pastores facti estis, non percussores, Nova atque inaudita est istae
praedicatio, quae verberibus exigit fidem. Aliud est quod agitur typho
superbiae, aliud zelo disciplinae. Plus erga corrigendos agat benevolentia,
quam severitas, plus cohortatio, qua^ comminatio, plus charitas, quam potestas.
Sed hi, qui quae suae sunt quaerunt, non quae Jesus Cnristi facile ab hac lege
discernuntur. The exam^^^ of other kirks not be objecte^


Other Kirks abroad which have not been favored with your measure of
reformation have been exercised with their own trials, but never had the happy
occasion to give you example of suffering. The Lord has been more liberal to
us, and requires of us that we give example, and encouragement to them to
aspire to our perfection. We all suffer in the same cause of Christ, some for
his person, some for his priesthood, and some for his princely office. If we
look to the enemies, and not to the equity of the cause, there is great
inequality of sufferings, yet the promise of blessedness is pronounced upon
them, who suffer in the last times by Christians, no less then to them, who in
the primitive times were persecuted by the heathen. Were the question now of
the profession of the name of Christ, many say they would be martyrs, who now
are persecuters: but the question would be, whether conscience, or credit were
their cause. In matters of this sort, that we are about, especially where the
discredit, and scoffing of the world waits on, conscience may be the more
sensibly discerned; and the less the cause be, providing it be Christ's cause,
the more acceptable to God, and the more comfortable to thy self is thy
suffering. If by no means, when all are assaied with God and the King, and
your pastors, you can decline the cross; but if the will of God be that ye
suffer; then deny, and lay aside your selves, take on the erosse, and follow
Christ, applying joyfully to your souls all the co^forts that the word
furnishes in afliction, whether the Lords rich promises, or the sweet fruits
of the cross, or the weakness of the enemies, or the greatness of the reward,
or the example of the prophets, apostles, confessors, and martyrs, or which is
most, conformity with Christ, whose we are, and in whom we continue.

Your loving Sisters looking upon you, praying for you, willing to suffer with
you, and most unwilling to be witnesses against you: The particular kirks of
Christ in Scotland.


