TO HIS HONORABLE FRIEND Sr. HENRY SKIPWITH Knight, and Baronet,

The Author hereof sends this his work as a Testimony and Memorial of the
LOVE and HONOR which he bears to his WORTHINESS.

A JUSTIFICATION OF THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND. Demonstrating it to be a true Church
of GOD, affording all sufficient means to SALVATION. OR, A Countercharme
against the Romish enchantments, that labor to bewitch the people, with
opinion of necessity to be subject to the Pope of ROME.

Wherein is briefly showed the Pith and Marrow of the principal books written
by both sides, touching this matter: with Marginall reference to the Chapters
and Sections, where the points are handled more at large to the great ease and
satisfaction of the READER.

By ANTHONY CADE, Bachelour of DIVINITY.

GALAT. 3.1. O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you should not
obey the truth?

LONDON, Printed for GEORGE LATHVM, dwelling at the Bishops head in Paul's
Churchyard, Anno 1630.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, JOHN, LORD Bishop of LINCOLN, my very
good Lord and Patron.
RIght Reverend Father: I humbly crave your Patience, to take notice of the
Causes, and Manner of my writing; and your Patronage to countenance it. The
occasions of my writing. 1 Particular.
I ever accounted it a great blessing of God, and it is still the joy of my
heart to record, that in my stronger years I was thought worthy to be employed
in the trayning up of some Nobles, and many other young Gentlemen of the best
sort (whose names here to insert might happily be censured ambition in me) in
the Learned Tongues, Mathemacicall Arts, Music, and other both Divine and
Humane Learning; and that Many of them have since risen to great places and
dignities in our Church and Common wealth. And it was afterward my great
grief, to hear, that any of them, or of their Parents (by me much honored)
should be seduced or drawn to embrace the present Religion of the Papacy, and
to separate from our so excellently-reformed Church. The falling away of
persons of so Noble birth and place, and after such education, likely also to
be means by their examples and reputation, to draw others to the like
defection, made a deep impression of sorrow in my soul, and wrought a desire
to seek their recovery. 1 More general.
I saw also a general inclination of many sorts of people to return again to
the Old Religion (as they called it) upon a strong persuasion, that the
Protestants Religion was new, and but of yesterday: although we daily cry down
all novelties in Religion, and profess to embrace nothing which is not of the
ancient faith, Jude verse 3.
once (or first) delivered to the Saints. These considerations excited and
urged me, by that bond of love and duty, wherewith I feel my self bound, both
to my late dearly beloved young Nobles and Gentlemen in particular, and to our
whole Church and State in general, The purposes and ends of my writing.
to address my self to writing, to recollect and perfect that, which I had
long professed, observed and taught: both to put those former in mind of such
grounds of sound Religion, which in their youth (both by pulicke Sabboth-dayes
Sermons, and by private Schoole-Catechizings on Frydayes, and by other
Conferences) they had learned of me; and to confirm those grounds with
Invincible Reasons and Allegations: And also to improve my Talents (such as
they are) to the best service of the whole Church, our Gracious Sovereign, the
State in general, and every particular soul, for their eternal and temporal
happiness; by instructing the Ignorant, confirming the right believers and
good Subjects, reducing the errant, staying the weak and wavering, or
confounding the obstinate: and thereby (so much as in me lies) working a happy
peace, love, unity, and unanimity amongst all. To which purpose, An objection
answered.
though many have written most learnedly and excellently already: yet I thought
good to follow S. Augustines advise, Augustine. libro 1 De Trinitate cap. 3.
V^ile es^ plures a pluribus fieri (libros) diverso stylo, non diuersa fide,
etiam de quaestionibus ^^sdem, vt ad plurimos re^ ipsa perueniat, ad alios sic,
ad alios autem sic.
who wishes, where heresies are busy, that all men which have any faculty of
writing, should write; though they write not only of the same things, but the
same reasons in other words, either that heretics may see multitudes against
them; or that of many books written, some at lest may come to their hands, as
it happily fell out in the time of the Arrians.

And for the manner of my writing, The manner of my writing.
I endeavored to fit it the best way to the Persons to whom I intended it; and
to these times. I saw, that books of all sorts are infinitely multiplied in
the world: and that neither men of great place, nor many others, have time
afforded from their necessary affairs to read many books, or any large
discourse. I thought it therefore (though the most painful, yet) the most
profitable course, diligently to collect, and faithfully to relate, with all
possible breuity and perspicuity, the substance of that which former learned
Authors, Fathers, and Histories have delivered: what the Romish Doctors have
probably objected, and Protestants (especially English) have substantially
answered, (so much as concerns my purpose and the points which I handle) that
the Reader might have in one view and volume, the Pith and Substance of the
best books written on both sides, touching these matters, as an Epitome of
them all. And withal pointing to the books, chapters and sections, By
marginall notes for the most part.
or pages of them all, as an Index, referring the unsatisfied where he may read
of every point more at large. I find (to omit all others) the late most learned
Lipsius in humane knowledge, Iusti. Lipsij Politica. See his Prefaces.
has taken this course, without any disgrace to himself, but rather with the
great commendation of his diligence and learning: writing to the Emperor,
Kings and Princes (which have no leisure to read great books) brief
Aphorisms methodically delivered by him, but evermore in the most learned
Authors own words, and quoting their books. Vt quae optima sunt, aut per me
cognoscatis, aut mecum recognoscatis, says he to those great Estates, That
either by me ye may know these excellent things, or with me call them again
to mind. And herein (says he) Vere dicere possum, omnia esse nostra, and
nihil. All things (in the book) are mine, and nothing. Because the matter was
the Authors (who^ he cites) the whole invention and order was his own. And
Bellarmine in divine Controversies, is esteemed to have done the greatest
service to the Church of Rome, by collecting the substance of the learned large
writers of Controversies into one body, co^futing (as he could) what was
against, and confirming what was for that Church. I have followed these great
wits, though longo interuallo, a great Way behind them, in the manner, not in
the matter of their writing. I know it unfit for me (yea, unfit for a
Christian, and I hate it in my heart) to bean Author or Inuenter of new
opinions of Religon. We must learn of S. Jude, Jude v. 3.
only earnestly to contend for the faith which was once (that is first)
delivered to the Saints. Therefore the Materials of my building I create not,
but fetch them from the Garden of Eden, (the holy Scriptures) and the large
Forests and rich Quarries of others: but the choice of all the Timber and
Stone, the squaring, joining, form and frame of the work is mine; which I
have set together without any impairing of the strength or beauty (I hope) of
any piece. Such grave and holy Authors words (as undeniable witnesses) add
weight and authority to my discourse, more then from my self it could have,
and it will be a great ease to the Readers (as Judges) to have the whole
pleadings abridged, and laid in one (...) (or short view) before them; with the
witnesses names annexed to every Article, whom they may more fully examine upon
every occasion. This I have aimed at, how near I have come unto the mark, I
must leave to others to Judge. The first part of this work I now publish,
which concerns the general exceptions against our Reformed Church (which I
hope I fully clear and satisfy in this small. Volumne.) The second part,
which handles the particular doctrines controuerted, I am compelled to put off
to another time. Those my labors, I am bold (or rather indeed I am bound) to
dedicate unto your Honor.

1 As to my most bountiful Patron, furnishing me with increase of means, both
to live in better sort without want (and thereby without contempt) and
especially to furnish me with many vsefulll books of all kinds and sides: in
perusing, examining, and extracting the quintessence whereof, is my daily
labor, and my greatest worldly contentment. The honor and fruits whereof, are
due debts unto your bounty.

2 As to our Reverend Bishop, and general Father of the Clergy in this your
Diocese of Lincoln: appointed according to the order of christ's Apostles
delivered in Scripture, As app^^reth by the subscri^tions of the second Epistle
to Timothy, in the Original Greek, (...). To Timotheus, ordained the first
Bishop of the Church of the Ephesians. And the like to Titus, ordained the
first Bishop of the Cretians And by the Text, Tit. 1.5. and cap. 2. and cap.
3.1, 2, 8, 9, 10, etc.
To govern part of Gods Church; not only for the Ordination. Tit. 1.5. 1 timothy
4.14. and 5.21, 2^. and 2 timothy 2.2.
Ordination of Ministers ((...)) in every Congregation, but also for
Jurisdiction 1 Timothy 1.3. and 4.11. and 5. per tot. and 6.3, 4, 5, 20. and 2 timothy 2.14. tit. 1.10, 11, 13. and 3.10. etc.
Jurisdiction or power or ouerfight, that they teach found doctrine, and live
without scandal.

3 As to a most eminent and excellent builder of Gods Spiritual house, by your
divine wisdom, learning, preaching, and writing.

4 And yet further, To the most Noble and famous builder of Gods external and
visible houses: by your The beautiful Chapel at Lincoln College in Oxford:
a magnificent Library at S. John's College in Cambridge (the mother and
^^rse-place of of his learning) another at Westminster, (his Dignity) built and
furnished by his cost, (as also another at Lincoln, his Bishopric) with store
of excellent books. Founding also ^ew Fellows and other Students with yearly
maintenance for ever in Cambridge, with many other works of Piety, and
abundant charity, Oxford, Westminster, Lincoln, Leicester, and other places.
material buildings, enriching, beautifying, and amplifying Churches and
Colleges, with Chapels, Libraries, Fellowships and Schollerships in both the
Universities, and else where, and furnishing them with the most excellent and
necessary books that can be gotten. Which (With other your most pious and
Noble works) draw the hearts and tongues of all men which I can hear mention
your name) to glorify God for you, and you for glorifying God and our Church
and Nation, with such worthy Monuments of your Piety, Cost and Labors. In
regard of all these, I could not hold, my heart would break, if I did not in
some sort vent the fullness thereof, and honor your Bounty, your Fatherhood,
your spiritual Graces, and your material magnificall Beneficence, by the best
means I can, with this dedication of my poor labors. And (let me add that
which all men will easily conceive) 5 To receive honor from you, by
prescribing your much honored name before my labors And finally, as in these
many respects I am bold and bound So 6 I do most willingly and humbly offer my
labors to your Fatherhood, to be viewed, Judged, approved, or censured by your
grave Wisdom, Learning, Piety, and Authority. For the continuance and
increase whereof, and of all your temporal and eternal happiness, I shall
daily pray: as becomes,

Your Lordships much bounden, ANTHONY CADE.

To the Reader.
Dear Christian Reader whatsoever, or of what Religion soever thou art, if
there be any of these three things truly rooted in thy heart, either the care
of Gods Glory, or the salvation of thy soul, or the love of thy Country, with
the peace, strength, happiness, and flourishing estate thereof (as I hope all
these three are conjoined in thee) by them, all of them, or any of them, I
humbly and heartily entreat thee, to read, not with prejudice, but with an
honest and good heart, with indifferency, patience, aduisednesse, and with
continual waighing; considering, and examining, the things which I have with
great labor and diligence gathered, and here set before thee. Rom 9.1. etc.
I do protest before God (as Saint Paul did for the Hebrews) that I have
great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart, for my dear brethren,
English people, that are seduced and withdrawn from the sincerity of the
Gospel: and my hearts desire and prayer to God is (and my endeavors both by
example of life, and holy doctrine, Romans 10.1. etc.
continually tend that way) that they might be saved (eternally, and in this
world live comfortably and happily.) For I bear them record (the greatest
number of them) that they have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge.
And it may be, many of their seducers are themselves first seduced by the
cunning of their greatest Rabbines, who yet (the most of them) know full well,
(and very often confess in their writings, as I shall manifestly show in
handling the chief points controuerted betwixt us) that Protestants hold the
truth, and themselves have swarned from pure Antiquity.

In tender commiseration therefore, and yerning bowels of compassion unto the
seduced, I have undertaken this great labor, with neglect of my self, my
health, and state, to do good to their souls, and good to my Country, by
uniting them (so far as in me lies) firmly to be the true Church of Christ,
and the body of this State. And I have carried my self with that sincerity and
singleness of heart, that I may safely protest again with S. Paul, I speak
the truth in Christ, I lie not, Romans 9.1. etc.
my conscience bearing me witness in the holy Ghost I renounce the hidden
things of dishonesty, not walking (nor writing) in craftiness, 2 Cor. 4.2.
and. 2.17. and 1.12.
nor handling the word of God (or divine things) decitfully: but by
manifestation of the truth, commending my self to every man's conscience in the
sight (and fear) of God.

I am no Innouator, inventer, or favorer of new things in Religion. I search
for the old, and out of all kind of Authors deduct allegations, authorities,
consequences and reasons against the new. I cut off extrauagant, needless, and
endless questions, private opinions both of these and former ages: and
comprehend the necessary points of Religion agreed upon by the Scriptures,
Fathers, and modern divines within their own true limits: I set down the
most substantial points agreed upon betwixt the Romans and us: and show
withal their unnecessary additions and corruptions. I search how corruptions
came into the Church (as they will do into all societies of Men in continuance
of time) I show how they were discovered, opposed, and reformation wished and
sought for in all former ages: and by what power, policies, and cunning they
prevailed after Satan was loosed. I find and show the outcries of
historians, and other learned men, Emperors, Princes, Clergy, and people, yea
of their own writers against them, all before Luthers time. And all this
while, I show the continuance of all necessary saving doctrine in many other
famous Churches beside the Church of Rome: yea and within that Church also a
sufficient visible number of many hundred thousands far and wide spread in
Countries and Nations, and continewing till Luthers time, which refused the
government, errors, and corruptions of the Papacy, and taught the same
substance of doctrine which Protestants now teach. Yea, the better part of the
Church of Rome it self (excepting only the Papacy, and the faction that
maintained it) held with great liberty the same most necessary points of Faith
which we do, until by the Council of Trent (which was not a free end
general Council, but guided wholly by the Papal faction) that liberty was
taken away, and the errors of the Papacy were imposed generally upon all, under
pain of Anathema, or deprivation of salvation.

Upon due search of these and many other things (which here I deliver unto
thee) in the Scriptures, Fathers, Histories, and all kind of Authors of either
Religion, I have by the grace of God attained to that perfect knowledge and
assurance of the Verity Antiquity, and Sufficiency of the Protestants doctrine
to good life in this world, and eternal salvation in the world to come, that
any mortal man can desire to have: and am as willing (if God have so decreed
i^ expedient, and the times desire it) to suffer for it, as the holy Martyrs
were for this same Religion in the Primitive Church; not writing any thing in
substance which I will not willingly seal with my blood. This is it (dear
Christian Reader) which I present unto thy view in this work, being a Sum or
Abridgement of many great volumnes written on both sides, upon these points,
and thus briefly delivered for thy greater case in reading and perfecter
judging of Truth and Error, Sincerity and Corruption, Antiquity and Nouelty.

To answer all the Romish books (lately come abroad in great numbers)
punctually following their own method, had been an endless labor both to
Writers and Readers: and therefore (for my part) I thought better to gather
their principal motives and reasons out of the chiefest of their books, and
separating them into several Chapters, to give them their full answer in their
proper places; so answering many books in one. Among the store of all other
Allegations, I have most willingly and commonly referred the Reader to the late
Writers of our own Nation; and that especially for these Reasons:

First, for the excellency of our Authors, surpassing others, both in
multiplicity of reading, profundity of Judgment, and sincerity of affection,
in delivering the truth. As we find in our learned Bishops, Jewel, Abbots,
Bilson, Morton, Usher, Downham, Hall, White, Andrew, etc. And our Doctors,
Fulke, Raynolds, Whitakers, Field, Favor, White, Prideaux, etc. And other
Divines, Master Fox, Perkins, Hooker, and many other: whose worthy labors, I
do heartily commend to the diligent reading of our English men. The Romish
affected, very well know, that those English which have fled from us, and
written on their side, have in show of wit and learning gone beyond, not only
all former, but all other of this Age: So that Bellarmine takes most out of
them in the points whereof they have written: as Sanders, Allen, Stapleton,
etc. And therefore let no man contemn their own Countreymens wits and
learning: but acknowledge their worth, and make high account of their learned
labors.

Secondly, to show that I bring no new thing of my self, but what is fully
confirmed by our most approved writers: and that I also thankfully remember and
honor them, Per quos profecerim.

Thirdly, to show the unity of the Writers of our Church from the beginning of
the Reformation to this time, contrary to the Romish slanders, which charge us
with continual varying from our selves.

Fourthly, to show to our English men especially, where they may read in our
learned English Writers more fully, of the points which I deliver briefly; for
their better instruction and satisfaction.

Fifthly, because my self am aged, and not fit, by reason of the increasing
weakness of my body and memory, hereafter (if any flourishing busy wits list
to oppose) to manage this cause, without much disparagement to it, and to my
self: I thought good to allege many worthy Divines now living, that they
might take upon them the defense of their own writings by me alleged, or
impose it upon others more able in body then my self.

Further, I confess, that it much troubled me, that I could not make my book
shorter, without either making it too obscure, and vn-intelligible: or else
cutting off much matter fit to give the fuller satisfaction. For by this length
of it, (I doubt) it will become tedious to many, to read it through, and carry
away the matter in their memory. But I have helped this Inconvenience as much
as I could, (1) by distinguishing the whole matter into Chapters, every Chapter
being (as it were) a several Treatise by it self, which may be read alone;
without reference to the rest, And (2) by dividing the Chapters (if they be
long) into Sections, (and sometimes also the Sections into Subsections) and
Paragraphes (marked thus) setting down the sums of the Chapters and
Sect^ons, in the beginning, and before them: for the quicker finding or
refinding of the matters therein contained; and the easier view and carrying
away of the whole form of the discourse.

The Style in Treatises of this nature is not required to be Rhetorical to
please the ear, or as Sweet-meates to delight the Taste; but Scholasticall,
Logical, or Theological, that is, intelligible and significant to inform the
understanding, and convict the conscience. Which if it perform, It is all that
I affect, or thou may in reason expect in such a work. And now I leave it
to thy diligent reading and serious consideration, wishing thee often to
commend both the Writer and Readers to God in thy prayers;

Thine for Christ Jesus, ANTHONY CADE.

A Table of the chief heads and matters, according to the several Chapters,
Sections, and Pages.
The first Book. The first Chapter. The first ordinary, and great objection,
of the Romish Churches Antiquity, and our English Churches Nouelty: Paragraph.
1 Alleged, odiously against the Protestants, and gloriously for the Romans.
Page. 1 Paragraph. 2 Sincerely answered, as vain: for that the Protestants
firmly retain the true ancient saving faith. Page. 2 Paragraph. 3 And only
weed out the errors and corruptions crept into the Church as superseminated
tares in Gods field. Page. 3 Paragraph. 4 As Hezekias and other good Princes
did, very religiously in their times. Page. 4 Paragraph. 5 So that the English
Church differs no otherwise from the Romish, then as a field well weeded and
governed, from a field still ouergrowen with weeds: or as Naaman cleansed, from
the same Naaman formerly leprous. Page. 4 Paragraph. 6 And the Protestants are
not separated from the good sound things found in the Roman Church: but from
the Papacy, which is not to be accounted the Church, but a domineering faction,
or disease in the Church. Page. 5 Paragraph. 7 The ancient Martyrs suffered not
for the Doctrines of this Papacy, but for the Doctrines which the Protestants
bold. Page. 6 ( Hereunto the Reader may add, that which is written chap. 3..
8. page 27. that This newness of Religion is retorted upon the Romish Church,
which now holds many points new, never held by any Church in former times, some
of them not in 600 years, some not in 1000, some not in 12 hundred years and
more after Christ.)
CHAP. 2. Of errors creeping into the Church. Paragraph. 1 Any particular
Church may in time receive errors and corruptions. Page. 9 Paragraph. 2 As did
those of the Old Testament. Page. 10 Paragraph. 3 And of the New Testament.
Page. 11 Paragraph. 4 For which we find many reasons in the Scriptures. Page.
12 Paragraph. 5 The Roman Church is not excepted. Page. 14 Paragraph. 6 Yea,
the Roman Church is warned in Scripture to take heed lest is be cut off for its
corruptions. Page. 14 Paragraph. 7 And it has been corrupted, De facto. Page.
15 Paragraph. 8 Yea, Rome is confessed (by the very Romish Doctors) to be meant
by the damnable mystical Babylon. Page. 16 Paragraph. 9 And that Rome must be
the sent of Antichrist: and that toward the end of the world. Page. 17
Paragraph. 10 And Rome is that City that must be tainted with foul impieties,
as well foregoing, as following Antichrist. All which their own Romish Doctors
confirm. Page. 19
CHAP. 3 Of the time when corruptions came into the Romish Church. Paragraph. 1
A designation of the time when corruptions began in the Roman Church required.
Page. 20 Paragraph. 2 Often required heretofore, and often answered. Page. 20,
21 Paragraph. 3 Many corruptions crept in secretly and insensibly: as in humane
societies, diseases in the body, tares and weeds in the fields. Page. 21
Paragraph. 4 The Romanists acknowledge many changes, whereof they cannot show
the beginnings. Page. 23, 24 Paragraph. 5 Such things are best discerned, by
their difference from the first pure doctrine. Page. 25, 26 Paragraph. 6 The
Romans cannot find the beginnings of our Doctrines on this side the Scriptures.
Page. 26 Paragraph. 7 We can, and do, show the beginnings of many of theirs.
Page. 27 Paragraph. 8 No Church in the world held the now- Romish Doctrines,
but only that Church it self in those latter times. Page. 27
CHAP. 4. Of Corruptions in the Church of Rome, long before Luthers time,
seen, written against, and Reformation wished for them. Page. 30 Paragraph. 1
An historical narration, of the first age of the Church golden. Page. 31
Paragraph. 2 But afterward peeped up some seeds of corruption, misliked of
many in the East, South and West Churches. Page. 32 Paragraph. 3 A foul
matter, of three popes alleging a Counterfeit Canon of the Council of Nice,
for their jurisdiction, which the whole Church of Africa withstood. Page. 34
Paragraph. 4 Gregory the great wrote sharply against the Titles which now the
popes use. Page. 35 Paragraph. 5 Bishops of the East Church, and of France,
Germany, and Britany, opposed the pope about Jmages. Councels against Councels.
Page. 36 Paragraph. 6 Many thought Antichrist was then borne. Constantines
donation, and the decretall Epistles then first seen. Page. 37 Paragraph. 7 A
deluge of wickedness in the ninth and tenth Ages, as Bellarmine, Baronius,
Genebrard, etc. record. Page. 38 Paragraph. 8 After a thousand years, greater
innudations of evils. The wicked pope Silvester 2 and Benedict 9. a child of
about 10 years old. Then Cardinals arose. Page. 40 Paragraph. 9 The Sultan
subdueth many countries in the East; the Clergy are most wicked in the West.
Letters from Hell to the Clergy. Anti-popes, and Anti-Caesars. Rebellion made
Piety. Hildebrands Dictates, foundations of a new earthly-Church-Kingdome.
Page. 42 Paragraph. 10 The testimony of Friar Onuphrius, that Hildebrand (that
is Gregory 7.) was the first raiser of the popes princedome, about eleven
hundred years after Christ. Many historians speak of his diuellishnesse.
Page. 45 Paragraph. 11 Campians historians rejected by his own fellows. Page.
47 Paragraph. 12 Grave Divines against Romish corruptions, Bernard,
Sarisburiensis, Grosthead, Occam, Cesenas, Clemangis, Gerson, Cameracensis,
Valla, etc. Page. 49 Paragraph. 13 These and many others, wrote not only
against Corruptions of manners, but of doctrine also. Schoolmens philosophical
divinity, corrupted pure doctrine. Doctrine framed to maintain wealth and
greatness. Page. 53 Paragraph. 14 Particular doctrines, wherein learned men
differed from the popes faction. Page. 55 Paragraph. 15 Oxford alone afforded
many learned men opposing Romish corruptions. Page. 58 Paragraph. 16
Reformation was sought for, and promised by some popes, as very needful; but
could not finally be attained. The Scriptures disgraced: Traditions uphold
Romish doctrine. Page. 65
CHAP. 5. A note of the chief points of Christian doctrine, wherein the
Protestants and Romanists fully agree, showing also the Romish additions,
whereunto the Protestants cannot agree, as being not ancient, not true, or not
needful, but very corrupt. Page. 70 Paragraph. 1 Of one God in substance, and
three persons: 2 Canonical Scriptures. Page. 70, 71 Paragraph. 3 Of the
original Hebrew, and Greek authenticke. 4 Of the word written, being the sure
ground of faith 5 Of Traditions. 6 The three Creedes. Page. 74, 76 Paragraph. 7
Of Gods worship in Spirit and Truth. Page. 77 Paragraph. 8 Of prayer in a
known tongue, 9 And to God alone. 77 10 Of Christ our Mediator. 11 Of Saints
praying for us. 12 Of honor due to Saints departed. Page. 78 Paragraph. 13 Of
Justification by Christ's merits. Page. 79 Paragraph. 14 Of man's inherent
righteousness and sanctification. Page. 79 Paragraph. 15 Of contrition,
confession, satisfaction, and vivification, etc. Page. 79 Paragraph. 16 Of such
good works as God has prescribed. Page. 81 Paragraph. 17 Of freewill. Page.
81 Paragraph. 18 That works done by grace, please God, and are rewarded of
him. Page. 82 Paragraph. 19 Of two Sacraments, seals and conduits of
justifying grace. Page. 82 Paragraph. 20 That to the well prepared Receivers,
God gives as well the justifying and sanctifying grace, as the outward
elements. Page. 82 Paragraph. 21 That the worthy Communicant really partaketh
Christ's Body and Blood. Page. 82 Paragraph. 22 Of heaven for the blessed, hell
for the damned. Page. 83 Paragraph. 23 Of Christ's satisfaction for our sins.
Page. 83 Paragraph. 24 That we ought to pray for all the members of Christ's
militant Church upon earth. Page. 83 Paragraph. 2 The Protestants doctrine in
general justified by two Cardinals, Contarene and Campeggio, and our Liturgy
by Pope Pius 4. Page. 83 Paragraph. 3 But the Popes reach further at an earthy
Church kingdom proved. Page. 85 Paragraph. 4 And they challenge a supremacy
over all Christians and Churches in the world. Page. 89 Paragraph. 5 More
specially over the Clergy, exempting them from being subjects to Princes,
either for bodily punishments or goods. Page. 90 Paragraph. 6 Yea, a supremacy
over all Christian Princes and their states, to depose, dispose, and transpose
them: and to absolve subjects from their Allegiance, to rebel, etc. hence
comes treasons, etc. Page. 92 Paragraph. 7 To dissolve bonds, oaths and
leagues. Page. 95 Paragraph. 8 To give dispensations, to contract matrimony in
degrees by Gods laws forbidden and to dissolve lawful matrim. Page. 96
Paragraph. 9 And other dispensations and exemptions from laws. Page. 99
CHAP. 6. Paragraph. Of policies to maintain the Popes Princedome and wealth.
Page. 102 Paragraph. 1 Depriving men of the light of the Scriptures. Page. 102
Paragraph. 2 And of ordinary orderly preachings, in stead whereof the Pope set
up ambulatory preachers (Monks and Friars) to preach what was good for his
state, without control of Church-Ministers, Officers, or Bishops. Page. 103
Paragraph. 3 Schoolemens too-much subtilty and philosophy filled men's heads,
darkened and corrupted wholesome Theology. Page. 109 Paragraph. 4 Jesuits and
their original (after Luthers time) noted, their Seminaries, emissions,
faculties, insinuations, and most politic employments. Page. 110 Paragraph. 5
Cardinals (a most powerful and politic invention.) Page. 114 Paragraph. 6
Provision for men and women of all sorts, high and low, by Monasteries, to
sustain and satisfy all humors. Page. 118 Paragraph. 7 Auricular confession,
discovering many secrets, and finding humors fit for all employments, etc.
Page. 120 Paragraph. 8 Her policies to get wealth. Page. 121 Paragraph. 9
Purgatory a rich thing. Page. 122 Paragraph. 10 So are indulgences or pardons.
Page. 122 Paragraph. 11 And Iubiles. Page. 123 Paragraph. 12 Corruptions of
Doctrine, touching merits and Justification, etc. Page. 125 Paragraph. 13
Things hallowed by the pope. Page. 126 Paragraph. 14 Extraordinary exactions,
most grievous to Nations, most rich to the pope. Page. 126

The second Book. Chap. 1. THe first Chapter is a discourse of the visibility
of the Church, and fully answers that common question of the Romists, where
was the Protestants Church before Luthers time? This Chapter is large, and for
better satisfaction and perspicuity, is divided into four sections. The first
section shows how visible the true Church ought to be. Page. 136 The second,
shows, that the Protestants Church has evermore been so visible as the true
Church ought to be. For it was the same in all necessary doctrine, first with
the Primitive Church, and afterward also with the Greek and Eastern
Churches. 149 The third section shows, the Waldenses were of the same
Religion which the Protestants maintain; and delivers a sufficient
historical discourse of the Waldenses. 155 The fourth section shows, that
our Church and the Church of Rome was all one in substance till Luthers time.
For even till then the Church of Rome continued to be the true Church of God,
excepting the Popacy, and the maintainers thereof, which was rather a sore or a
faction in the Church, then any true or sound part thereof. 195 Chap. 1. These
principal Sections are also subdivided into Subsections, and those into
smaller Paragraphes, noted thus.. Sect. 1. subsect. 1. So the first Section
(which shows, How visible the true Church ought to be) has two Subsections.
The first Subsection. Paragraph. 1 Shows an objected description of the
excellency of the Church, and a necessity of the perpetual succession and
visibility thereof. Page. 136 Paragraph. 2 That for a thousand years and more,
our Church was all one with the Roman, notwithstanding some growing
corru^tions. Page. 138 Paragraph. 3 After that coruptions grew intolerable in
the Roman Church, yet many m^sliked them, and held the truth. Page. 138
Paragraph. 4 The whole Catholic Church can never be visible to men at once,
but parts of it may and must. Page. 139 Paragraph. 5 The promises of purity and
eternal life do not belong to all the Called, but to the Few chosen; whose
true faith to men is invisible, though their persons and profession be visible.
Page. 140 Paragraph. 6 And so much Bellarmine and many other Romanists yield.
Page. 141
Subsect. 2 The second subsection. 143 Paragraph. 1 Some promises of God
concern the outward spreading of the Church, and some the inward Graces. Page.
143 Paragraph. 2 The outward spreading, and glorious visibility, is not at all
times alike. Page. 144 Paragraph. 3 So Saint Ambrose, and Saint Austen teach,
by comparing the Church to the Moon. Page. 145 Paragraph. 4 Many Fathers and
Romish Doctors say, that in the time of Antichrist, the Church will be obscure,
and hardly visible. Page. 145 Paragraph. 5 Which (say Valentinianus, and many
Fathers) was fulfilled in the Arrians time. Page. 146 Paragraph. 6 The Jesuit
Valentinianus grants as much invis^bility of the Church, as the Protestants
desire. Page. 147 Paragraph. 7 Observations out of his grant. Page. 148
Chap. 1. Sect. 2. subsect. 1 The second section (showing, that the Protestant
Church has evermore been so visible, as the Church of Christ ought to be) has
two subsections.

Paragraph. The first subsection (concerning the first times.) Page. 149
Paragraph. 1 Shows that the Protestants labor sincerely to teach the same
doctrine which the Scriptures and the Fathers taught. Page. 149 Paragraph. 2 As
appears by Irenaeus, Tertullian, and the Creeds. Page. 150 Paragraph. 3 But
the Romists cannot allege the Fathers for their new doctrines; much less the
Scriptures. Page. 151 Paragraph. Subsect. 2. The second subsection (concerning
the latter times.) Page. 152 Paragraph. 1 Propounding (1) the Eastern and
Greek Churches: (2) Waldenses, etc. and (3) the Roman Church it self,
misliking and groaning under the tyranny of the Papacy, and desiring
reformation. Page. 152 Paragraph. 2 The Greek Church condemned by the Romish,
as heretical. Page. 153 Paragraph. 3 Is cleared by Scotus, Lombard, Aquinas,
and others. Page. 153
Chap. 1. Sect 3. The third section (showing that the Waldenses were of the
Protestant Religion) has four subsections. The first of their doctrine page
155. The second, of their great numbers, and visibility, page 166. The third of
their large spreading into all Countries, page 177, the fourth of their
continuance until Luthers time and after. page 181.

Subsect. 1. The first Subsection. Paragraph. 1 Of the Waldenses. Page. 155
Paragraph. 2 Their diverse names, but all of one Religion. Page. 155 Paragraph.
3 To wit, of the Protestant Religion, as say Aeneas Syluius, Du Brauius,
Poplinerius, Cocleus, Gretserus, Eckius, etc. Page. 156 Paragraph. 4 Many bad
opini^ns, badly and falsely imputed to them. Page. 158 Paragraph. 5 Nine
Articles different from the Protestants, ascribed unto them by Parsons the
Jesuit, but cleared by authenticke Authors. Page. 160
The second subsection. Paragraph. 1 Of the great number of the Waldenses.
Page. 166 Paragraph. 2 Their disputations with the Romish Doctors. Page. 168
Paragraph. 3 Mighty wars against them, as against the Popes most potent
enemies. The popes every way labored to subdue them, by continual cursings,
wars, and Inquisitions by Friars new sprung up, about 12 hundred years after
Christ: threescore thousand put to the sword at once. Page. 169 Paragraph. 4
Carcasson, a great and strong City, taken by composition, and made the head
City of the war: and the famous Simon Montfort made General. Page. 171
Paragraph. 5 6 and 7 New Armies against the Waldenses gathered out of all
Christendom, by the popes Croysadoes, pardoning sins, and giving salvation
to all that would fight against them (as before 3. page 170.) Tolous taken. The
King of Aragon (in aid of the Waldenses) intercepted by ambush, and slain.
Page. 172 Paragraph. 8 Tolous recovered by the Waldenses. Simon slain. The
King of France continues the Wars, sends his own son (crossed) with a
great Army: and diverse other Armies after: but to little purpose. For the
Waldenses (otherwise called the Albigenses) prospered, and recovered Carcasson
(fourteen years after the loss of of it) and spread exceedingly in many
Countries. Page. 174 Paragraph. 9 The Earl of Tolous submits to the Pope: but
finding himself deceived betwixt the pope and his Legate, he fortifies
Auignon. The King of France besieged it, swear never to depart, till he had
taken it, but finally (after great losses) died mad. The Legate unable by
force, gets it by fraud and perjury. Page. 175 Paragraph. 10 Tolous overthrows
the French Armies. The Pope and French King offers him peace. The great wars
cease. Councels are held to root out the Albigenses. Page. 176 Paragraph. 11
Ignorance (not only of Scriptures, but) of Histories makes men love the Pope.
Page. 177
Subsect. 3. The third subsection. Paragraph. Shows how the Waldenses were
spread into all Countries: namely, (for example) Spain, England, Scotland,
Jtaly, Germany, Bohemia, Saxony, Pomerania, Polonia, Liv^nia, Lituania,
Digonicia, Bulgaria, Croatia, Dalmatia, Constantinople, Sclauonia, Sarmatia,
Philadelphia. In all parts of France: In Italy also they had Churches, in
Lombardy, Millan, Romagnia, Vicence, Florence, val Spoletine, etc. Page. 177
Subsect. 4. The fourth subsection. Paragraph. 1 The Waldenses continued above
400 years, until Luthers time and after. Page. 181 Paragraph. 2 Jn England by
means of Wicliffe. Page. 182 Paragraph. 3 Wicliffes Doctrine, and many
followers. Oxford Divines. Page. 182 Paragraph. 4 5 6 and 7. The story of John
Hus, Ierom of Prage, and Bohemian affairs. Page. 189 Paragraph. 8 and 9 The
continuance of the Waldenses after Luthers time. Luther wrote a Preface to one
of their books commending it. Letters passed betwixt them and Oecolampadius,
Bucer, Calvine, etc. Page. 192
Chap. 1. Sect. 4. The fourth Section. Paragraph. 1 Showing, that the Church of
Rome, (excepting the Papacy, and the maintainers thereof) continued to be the
true Church of God, and the same with ours, until Luthers time: proved by many
Protestant Divines, Luther, Calvin, Beza, Morney, Melanchthon Bucer, Master
Deering, Master Richard Hooker, Bishop Usher, Bishop Carlton, Bishop White,
Doctor Field, etc. Page. 195 Paragraph. 2 Their reasons. Paragraph. 3 But now
the state of that Church is much altered, since the new light in Luthers time,
fully discovering and publishing the corruptions thereof, and since their
obstinate defending their corruptions, and imposing them as Defide. Page. 200
Paragraph. 4 Especially since the great alteration and addition of faith made
by the Council of Trent. Page. 202

CHAP. 2. Paragraph. Answering the vain alleging of some words and customs:
and the corrupt alleging of the Fathers words against the Protestants. Page.
205 Paragraph. 1 Objection. Non^ (alleged in the former Chapter) agreed with
the Protestants in all things: Ergo, are not of their Church or Religion. Page.
206 Paragraph. 2 Answered. It is no consequent. For so also, every one of them
differed from the present Romish Religion, and yet the Romish account them
theirs. Protestants have justly abstained from some words and phrazes of some
Fathers. Page. 206 Paragraph. 3 And also have left off some ceremonies and
customs. Page. 209 Paragraph. 4 As the Church of Rome has left many (here
mentioned) known to be ancient, and thought to be Apostolical. Page. 210
Paragraph. 5 Which confutes the vanity of W.G. his book; and shows his own
alleged authors by his own argument, to be none of his Church and Religion.
Page. 214 Paragraph. 6 By the same argument, many Fathers (for example,
Athanasius, Ierom, Gelasius, Gregory, Chrysostom, Augustine) are plentifully
proved to be against the present Church and Religion of Rome. Page. 216
Paragraph. 7 Four several ways (at the least) the Romish make show of the
Fathers to be for them: very deceitfully. The first, by alleging counterfeit
books, falsely bearing the Fathers names. Many examples hereof. Page. 223
Paragraph. 8 The second, by corrupting the books which the Fathers wrote,
putting words in, or out, and altering the text (and so printing them new)
making them speak now contrary to their meaning. Examples hereof. Page. 228
Paragraph. 9 The third by blinding or perverting the sense of the Fathers
sentences, by glozes and interpretations. Instances. Page. 232 Paragraph. 10
The fourth by citing the Fathers to prove that which is not in question.
Examples thereof. Page. 234
CHAP. 3. Paragraph. Of the differences of Fathers and Protestants, and of
their contentions. Page. 236 Paragraph. 1 Many Fathers are confessed (by all
sides) to have held some erroneous opinions, which none are bound to receive:
and yet in the substance of Religion, were good Catholic Christians, and our
Predecessors. Page. 236 Paragraph. 2 Many differences also are noted among
Romish Doctors, which yet hinder them not from being all accounted Catholics.
Page. 243 Paragraph. 3 The differences among Protestants are nothing so great
or many, as those before noted of the Fathers, and of the Romish; the especial
one, about the manner how Christ is present in the blessed Sacrament, is much
less then it seems. Page. 248 Paragraph. 4 The popes unwillingness to
reform manifest abuses by the way of general Councels, was the cause of all
differences in Reformed Churches: when each several state was compelled to
reform a part, without sufficient general consultations with other Nations.
Page. 250 Paragraph. 5 The Protestants contentions for Gods cause, (as they
take it) are nothing so hot or troublesome, is the contentions of many ancient
holy Fathers, have been about smaller matters. View the examples. Page. 253
CHAP. 4. Paragraph. Of the rule to judge the soundness and purity of all
Christians, and Churches by. Page. 261 This Chapter has four sections Page.
261
Paragraph. The first section: of the rule used in the Primitive Church. Page.
261 Paragraph. The second; of the Rule enlarged and approved in this Age. Page.
268 Paragraph. The third; of objections arising from the former discourses, and
their answers. Page. 280 Paragraph. The fourth; of the necessity of preaching
still to them that hold this rule. Page. 288 The first section. Paragraph. 1
The rule in general. Page. 261 Paragraph. 2 Opened by distinctions of the
foundation of Religion. Page. 262 Paragraph. 3 A necessity of a short rule
drawn out of the Scriptures. Page. 262 Paragraph. 4 This rule is described by
S. Paul. Page. 263 Paragraph. 5 The practice of it by the Apostles, who
delivered the most necessary fundamental points to the Jews, and then
baptized them. Page. 265 Paragraph. 6 The like practice used by the following
Primitive Church to their Catechumeni before Baptism. Page. 266
The second section. Paragraph. 1 The rule enlarged, and approved in this Age.
Page. 268 Paragraph. 2 By Azorius out of the Schoole-Diuines, in 14 Articles.
Page. 269 Paragraph. 3 Some observations and censures of those 14 Articles.
Page. 272 Paragraph. 4 The rule set down by Bellarmine, more briefly. Page.
273 Paragraph. 5 By Doctor Field far more sufficiently in 6 Articles, with
his judgment of the deductions therefrom, evident or obscure. Page. 274
Paragraph. 6 Bishop Vshers distinction of superstructions upon the foundation.
Page. 277 Paragraph. 7 Consequents of this doctrine. Page. 278
The third section. Paragraph. 1 Objection. If holding the foundation will
serve, then we may easily obtain salvation in the Church of Rome. Page. 280
Paragraph. 2 Answer. The Church of Rome holds many things, which by consequent
destroys the foundation, by (the most moderate) Master Hookers judgment.
Page. 281 Paragraph. 3 Objection. This crosses what was said before: That many
before Luthers time, might be saved in the Roman Church. Answ. No, for they
lived in those errors of ignorance, not obstinacy, and not knowing any
dangerous consequence of them. Page. 282 Paragraph. 4 Such men by particular
repentance of sins known, and general repentance of unknown, might by Gods
mercy be saved. Page. 284 Paragraph. 5 Observations hereof. Page. 285
Paragraph. 6 Other learned Protestants join in opinion with Master Hooker.
Page. 286
The fourth section. Paragraph. 1 There is a necessity, or great profit of
preaching, even to them that are well grounded in all necessary principles.
Page. 288 Paragraph. 2 As Israel needed all helps after the giving of the Law:
and all were too little. Page. 289 Paragraph. 3 The profits of preaching in
general. Page. 290 Paragraph. 4 Some particulars, for continual spiritual
food, cordial medicine and comfort, memory, armor, etc. Page. 290 Paragraph.
5 The continual need thereof was found in all Churches, planted even by the
Apostles, and in their times. Page. 292

CHAP. 4. Paragraph. Of the succession of the Protestants Bishops and
Ministers, from the Apostles. Page. 296 Paragraph. Section 1. The necessity
thereof, urged, without which there can be no Church. Page. 296 Paragraph. 2
This succession is clamourously denied to Protestants. Page. 299 Paragraph. 3
But manifestly proved, and the slanders confuted. Page. 300 Paragraph. 4
Particularly in Cranmer, our first Archbishop. Page. 302 Paragraph. 5 In other
Bishops of King Henry 8 his time. Page. 304 Paragraph. 6 And of King Edward 6.
and of Queen Mary's time. Page. 306 Paragraph. 7 And of Queen Elizabeth's
time. Page. 306 Paragraph. 8 The false reports whereof do alienate many from
the Reformed Religion. Page. 309 Paragraph. 9 A proof of the sufficient
ordination of Ministers in foreign Reformed Churches. Page. 310 Paragraph. 10
Which is further confirmed by the doctrine and practice of the Romish. Page. 312
CHAP. 6. Paragraph. Of the Popes supremacy, challenged over the whole Church.
page 1 Paragraph. 1 The necessity thereof urged, as the maine pillar of
Religion. Page. 1 Paragraph. 2 The matter and method of the Answer propounded.
Page. 4 Paragraph. 3 The ancient Church yielded to Rome (as the greatest and
most honorable City of the world, and seat of the Empire) to have the dignity
of one of the five Patriarcks. Page. 5 Paragraph. 4 And among the Patriarchs,
sometime the first or chiefest place. Page. 6 Paragraph. 5 Which dignity the
ambition and covetousness of following popes have much impaired. Page. 8
Paragraph. 6 And have challenged that dignity (which was anciently yielded unto
their predecessors for their sanctity, and for politic reasons) and much more
also, by authority of Bellarmine gathering the pith of all learned writers, can
find no strengh in them by any Scriptures to maine the Papacy: as in their
chiefest places, Matthew. 16.18. Page. 11 Paragraph. 7 And John 21.15 etc. Page.
16 Paragraph. 8 Observe the Romish strange extractions out of the words, Feed
my Sheep. Page. 18 Paragraph. 9 And other learned-foolish allegations of other
Scriptures. Page. 20 Paragraph. 10 The Scripture against the supremacy of
Peter. Page. 23 Paragraph. 11 And the fathers are urged for it vainly, beyond
their meaning. Page. 24 Paragraph. 12 The Fathers are manifestly against it.
Page. 29 Paragraph. 13 Saint- Peter's prerogatives were personal, and descended
Page. 32 Paragraph. 14 The conclusion: collecting the parts of this Chapter
briefly, and Justifying the Protestants. Page. 35
CHAP. 7. Of the Popes infallible Judgment in guiding the Church by true
Doctrine. Paragraph. 1 It cannot be proved by Scriptures, or Fathers, or by
the Analogy to the chief Priests of the Old Testament. Page. 40 Paragraph. 2
Neither is such infallibility now necessary in any man. Page. 44 Paragraph. 3
But if in any man, most improbably in the Popes, whereof some have been
children, and many most wicked men, and monsters of men. Page. 45 Paragraph. 4
And many Popes have erred (De facto) in judgment. Page. 50 Paragraph. 5 Which
all the Romists distinctions, and euasions cannot avoid. Page. 51 Paragraph. 6
The manifold and manifest judgment of Antiquity overthrows this supposed
infallibility. Page. 56 Paragraph. For I. The ancients ever accounted the Popes
fallible. Page. 56 Paragraph. II. They never in their writings mentioned their
infallibility. Page. 56 Paragraph. III. But rejected often both their
Jurisdiction and Judgment. Page. 57 Paragraph. IIII. If infallible judgment in
the pope had been established and believed, the Fathers studies and
commentaries upon the Scriptures had been needless. Page. 58 Paragraph. V. And
Councels had been called to no purpose. Page. 58
CHAP. 8. Of the good which the Popes supremacy might do to the Church and
States by uniting Christian Princes among themselves, and against the Turk.
Paragraph. 1 This is urged. Page. 60 Paragraph. 2 But answered, that policies
agreeable to Gods word, and the Primitive Church only are sufficient, and
blessed by God. Page. 61 Paragraph. 3 But this policy (binding men to unity
under some one head) might be set up by any sect, to maintain any errors or
wickedness. Page. 62 Paragraph. 4 And experience has proved it very
unprofitable, and intolerable, to all Churches and states (saving to the Popes
own state, wealth, and greatness.) Page. 63 Paragraph. 5 As is showed by the
miserable troubles in Christendom, wrought by Hildebrand; who first set up the
Popes Princedome (as Onuphrius says) about eleven hundred years after Christ.
Page. 64 Paragraph. 6 And by the voyages against the Turk, which finally
proved profitable to the Pope, not to Christian Princes. Page. 68 Paragraph. 7
As appears by the Stories of Pope Gregory 9. and the Emperor Frederick 2.
Page. 69 Paragraph. 8 And many other most wicked Popes, Page. 74 Paragraph. 9
The Emperor Phocas erred much in government, in making the Pope so great, so
far from him. For Popes shortly after proved Masters of mis-rule, ejecting
the Emperors out of Italy. Page. 76 Paragraph. 10 Their turbulent proceeding
to dethrone Princes. Page. 78 Paragraph. 11 Their troubles wrought in England,
in King Henry the first his time, by Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury: In King
Henry the 2 his time, by Becker: In King John's time, by Pope Innocent. Page.
80 Paragraph. 12 In these later times, of Queen Elizabeth by the Bull of Pope
Pius Quintus, deposing her: and by erecting at Rome and Rhemes, Seminaries,
that is Schools to breed Traitors, and draw her subjects to disobedience,
treasons, and rebellions. Page. 89 Paragraph. A brief enumeration of some
treasons in Queen Elizabeth's time. The Rebellion in the North. Page 91 And
other petty conspiracies Page 92 Sanders. Page 93 Of Ormonds brethren. Page 92
Of Stukely. Page 93 Someruile. Page 94 Motives to the Ladies of Honor. Page 94
Mendoza. Page 94 Doctor Parry. Page 95 Savage. Page 96 Aubespineus. Page 96 The
Spanish Armado. Page 97 Squire. Page 99 In the time of King James, Watson Clark
and others. Page 102 Throgmorton. Page 94 Creighton the Jesuit. Page 95 Percy.
Page 96 Ballard. Page 96 Stanly and York. Page 97 Lopez. Page 99 Tyrone. Page
100 The Powder Treason. Page 102
Paragraph. 13 Some observations out of these. A good Christian abhors these
Treasons, and therefore cannot like of that doctrine that teaches them. Page.
106 Paragraph. 14 Therefore every good man is forced (by reason) to renounce to
be an absolute Papist: and therefore cannot think the doctrines grounded only
upon the Popes authority without Scripture to be necessary: and consequently
must acknowledge that it is not necessary to be a Roman-Catholicke. Page. 108
Paragraph. The conclusion, with a brief Recapitulation of the whole precedent
conference. Page. 110



Friendly Reader, before thou read these books, amend with thy pen, these
grosser faults which (most of them) pervert the sense.
PAge 1. In the first line of the Text, for notice read motive. p. 18. l. 29.
r. under the persecuting Emp. p. 33. 4. then they gave to other holy Bishops.
p. 45. 26. Of all the Bishops. ib lin. 27. first that (trusting p. 76. ma^g. l.
^. x. Boniface 8. lived anno 1300 p. 81. 6. and reciting. ib. lin 8
p^lgrimages. p. 85. 11. is insufficient to set up. p. 86. 14. there be not more
care. p 89. 17. but were built. p. 98. 1. for the Pope meant. p. 104. 14. and
make of Christ's mil^tant Church a Church tr^umphant upon earth. p. 109. lin.
vlt. married. p. 112. 25. has worn a girdle. p 1^6. 26. to the last times. p.
152. 28. we propose p. 208. 17. per sacramentum memoriae celebratur p. 244. 34.
for Stoiks read Scot^sts. p. 246. 31. for^t is no indignity p. 264. 30. root,
author. p. 126. 9. must be diminished. p. 138. ^. latent invisible Church. p.
139. 25. it is not visible. p. 274. 34. full of ^ighte. 304 marg. ad lin. 22.
ordinator hareticus vere.

In the second Alphabet. CC. p. 33. lin. ^4. put cut not. p. 46. marg. lin. 26.
Baronius anno 963. n. 17. p. 54. marg. l 25. Anno a Christ's nat^. 1033, a
Christ's pass^ 1000.

Other faults there are scarce venial which deserve correction.
Page 7. lin. 27. read wars and dissentions. p. 13. 13. Simon Magnus among
them. p. 14. 9. for says, read truth. p. 20. 8. from the first pure d. p. 31.
8. Church kingdom ib. lin. 14. Cameracensis, ib. l. vlt. large authors. p. 37.
2^. Infallibitily. p. 38. 13. decretal. ib. l. 18. infamis. ib. l. 19. choked.
ib. l. 25. says, this. p. 40. 17. the ancient vitility. p. 42. 14. Calosyria
ib. l. 23. schism 1. ib. l. 30. in marg. Greg. 7 and libro. p. 43. 12.
Releherspergensis. p. ^6. l. 12. and 18. Trithemius. ib. l. 30.
Schafnaburgensis. p. 48 9. says your Bish. linea antepenult. Valentianus. p.
50. 18. into his mouth. p. 51. l. vlt. foul and manifest. p. 52. lin. ante^en.
Patricius. p. 51. 14. Divinity. p. 55. marg. See these alleged in my third
book. p. 57. 14. this c^^cumgestation. p. 60 8. Gualter Mapes. p. 61. 24. John
Ba^^^thor^. p. 63. 15. Sod^^^^ dominatur p. 64 2. Lorell p 80. 26. an^
beautifying all. p 87. 16. abjuration p. 90 for [Chap. 5.] put [ 5.] p. 91. 2.
robbers. ib. l. ^^. acknowledged. p 93 4. to the P^pe. To give p. 96. put ^ut
marg. Annal. Elizabethae. Camden Apparat. page 2. and place it page 97. against
Pope Iul^us the 2. etc. p. 99. 1. searching. p. 101. 19. frustrated. p. 115.
27. put out [this dignity is not new, (sait^ Bellarmine, b.) for it 500 years
old: ^ut surely that is new that came not in till after twice 500 years, and
more] and place those words after the note -- aft^r the words Sect. 3. p. 128.
29 furnished. p. 140. marg. Ecclesie prom^tte^. p. 143. and often elsewhere is
printed Valentinianus for Valentianus. p. 147. 25. ha h God vttterly forsaken.
p. 153. 35 read 370 years after Christ p. 155. 21. Eckius. p. 161. 21. other
vices. p. 196. 8. yet we do not think p. 210. 2. and often the foremost
devouring p 211. 32. Athanasius p. 220. 34 whereon. p. 2^6. 11. suppositions p.
234. 12. a whole book p. 243. 25. members all of p. 2 17. 11. being voided. ib
lin. 16. not the Churches opinion p 209. marg. ad. li. 18 read 2 Cor. 5.^. and
6. 3. Ephesians. 4. 12. col. 4. 17. ^ tim. 1. 12. 2 timothy 4. 5. p. 103. 35.
pontificatus nostri decimo. p. 308 25. in the more p 311. marg. ^ Armachanus
lib. 11. in q. Armeniorum c. p. 7.

Numbers of pages are sometimes misprinted; and Sections, which may be amended
by this general I able.

In the second Alaphabet. page 65. add to the marginall notes, Avenein. A^nal.
^^ior. lib. 5 See Tortura Torti page 264. p 71. lin. penul wasted it with fire.

Other smaller s^^pt in letters or points, I note not; they will trouble the
Reader less in ^^ading, then amending. The most are amended.

The Preface, or Jntroduction, containing 1 a brief description of the parties
conferring in this Dialogue. 2 The purpose and profit of the conference
touched: 3 The manner of it intended, in all humility and meekness of spirit:
4 the matter, solidity of Arguments and allegations out of the best Authors of
both sides.
Roman-Catholicke. 1 ALthough in mine own judgment, I am sufficiently
resolved of the verity and sanctity of the Roman-Catholicke-Religion; and am
loath to be either unsettled or disquieted again by any further conference:
yet to give satisfaction to my tried honest and good friends, Such should be
the qualities of a good Minister as may win the love of the Aduersarie^.
who urge me once again to confer with a grave learned Minister hereby; I am
content to go to the man. And the rather, because (besides his learning) I
know him to be very honest, just, loving, and of a meek spirit; And here he
comes. Save ye Sir.


Protestant Minister. Master Candidus, I have much longed to meet you. The Lord
now give a blessing to our meeting. I have heard, with no small grief of
heart, by some of your good friends, that you are fallen into mislike of our
Church of England, and into liking of the present Religion of Rome. Now in
tender care of your salvation, I desire to confer with you thereabout, to try
if by Gods gracious blessing I may be a means to resolve and settle you in the
truth.


Romans Sir, I would have you to think, that I have a great care of my
salvation, and in simplicity of my heart, and tenderness of conscience, and
not for any other by respect, I have sought the true way to salvation, and
doubt not but I have found it. And therein I am so well settled, that you may
spare your labor.


Prot. I doubt not, but in the simplicity of your heart, and desire of the
truth, you have labored in this weighty matter. For I have observed you
always to be of an honest disposition, sober, temperate, advised and of
discreet conversation: for which fair carriage of life you have gained the
surname of Candidus. Good natures misled are much to be pitied.
And I have also found you zealous of Gods honor. So far as your knowledge
did lead you. The more it grieueth me, that so honest a nature should be abused
and misled Paul himself was blameless in life, devout and zealous in his
Religion, when it was erroneous (as you are now) and thought his courses
marvelous godly, and much tending to Gods glory. He was instructed by
Gamaliel, Act. 2.3. Phil. 3.6.
a learned Doctor, according to the perfect manner of the Law of the Fathers
(as was then thought) and was zealous toward God, and touching the
righteousness of the Law, blameless: and of very zeal persecuted the true
Church of God: and thought he was bound in conscience to do many things
contrary to the name of Jesus. A and s 26.9.
So that men may think, they are in the holy way of truth, and may be devout
and zealous therein, and yet be far wrong. As we hold those of the Romish
Religion to be at this day, who persecute the Reformed Churches of Christ which
profess to hold the doctrine of the holy Scripture entire, without admitting
any other grounds of Religion. Remember what our blessed Savior foretold, John
16.2.
John 16.2. Venit hora, vt omnis qui interficit vos, arbitretur obsequium se
praestare Deo. The time comes that whosoever kills you, will think he does
God service. This was fulfilled in part, quickly. As in Acts 13.50. The Jews
stirred up devout and honourable-women, Acts 13.50.
and the chief men of the City, and raised persecution against Paul and
Barnabas and expelled them out of their coasts. So that people that are devout
and zealous in their Religion yet may be in the wrong: and had need well to
examine their grounds.


Rom These examples may as well be applied to the Protestants, as to the
Catholics.


Prot. You apply them to the Protestants: we to your new Catholics. Let the
impartial world Judge, who are the persecutors, and who are the persecuted.
But hereby you may see, mortal men must not be too hastily resolved, but first
thoroughly examine the truth of their grounds, whereupon they build their Faith.
Lest they run amiss, as Saul did, though taught by Gamaliel; and as the devout
honorable-women, and chief men of the City did, being stirred up by the Jews.


Romans But when a man is well resolved upon good grounds: why should he
disquiet himself, and call his Faith into question again?


Prot. The question is whether his grounds be good or no. Saint Paul before his
conversion, and these honourable-women thought as well of their grounds, as you
do of yours: and yet were deceived in them. But beside this, there is another
reason, why you should thoroughly know the strength of your grounds, to wit for
the winning, satisfying, and confirming of others. To which end S. Peter says
(1 Pet. 3.15.) Be always ready to give satisfaction to every one that asks
you a reason of the hope that is in you with meeknes and fear. So then both
for your own fuller resolution in the truth, and for the satisfaction of me or
any other, I pray you let us seriously confer of these weighty matters.


Romans With all my heart. So it be done in that manner Peter there prescribes:
with meekness, fear, and a good conscience. For rough, rude, biting, and
railing speeches, argue rather a blinded heart, or a proud, scornful, and
unmortified man, then one endued with Gods grace, love and patience, such as is
fit to win others with all long suffering and doctrine. 2 Timothy 2.24.25. and
4.2. 1 Timothy 5.1.2. and 3.3.


Prot. Sir we pray with understanding in our English Letany, from all
blindness of heart, from pride, vainglory, and hypocrisy, from envy, hatred,
and malice, and all uncharitableness: good Lord deliver us.


Romans It is a good prayer. I would it were well liked and practiced of you all.


Prot. You shall find me not only patient, but exceeding pitiful, and full
of commiseration to you, and to all other well-minded men that are seduced,
that be Errones only, and not Turbones (as Lipsius distinguishes them) not
wilful but ready to yield to sound reason, Iustus Lipsius. Politic.
and to the truth when it manifestly appears: such as be vere Candidi, as I
hope you be. But against those wicked seducers, that wilfully persist to
blindfould themselves and you by Pious frauds (as they call them) and keep
you on their side for by-respects, contrary to the truth laid open to their
eyes; you must give me leave to use just indignation, As we see the Prophets,
our Savior and his Apostles did.


Romans Whomsoever you shall prove to be such I will join with you in your lust
indignation, and abhor them. I account no fraud pious: nor lawful to do
evil that good may come of. But by forgery and deceit to mis-lead simple
souls from the truth in Religion, I account most detestable.


Prot. If it please you then to allege your best and most solid reasons
whereby you are moved to forsake our Church and embrace the now Roman Religion:
I will be willing to answer you,


Romans I will do it not of mine own head, but out of the best and learnedest
Authors of our side.


Prot. And I will endeavor to answer out of the learnedest and most judicious
Authors of the Protestants, and most especially out of our latest, pithiest,
and substantiallest English writers, referring you to the books themselves,
with notes of their Chapters, Sections, and Pages for your more through
satisfaction and settling of your Judgment: with like allegations also of your
own best Authors, when they do (as they do often) yield us the truth.


A JUSTIFICATION OF THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND. Demonstrating it to be a true Church
of GOD, affording all sufficient means to SALVATION.
CHAP. 1. The alleged, 1 antiquity of the Romish Church, and newness of the
Protestants Church; 2 is showed to be vain for that the Protestants retain the
ancient saving faith, and 3 only weed out the super-seminated Tares: 4 as
Hezekias and other good Princes did in their times. So that 5 these two
Churches differ only as fields well weeded, and ouergrowne with weeds. And 6
Protestants are not separated from the good things found in the Roman Church,
but from the Papacy which is a domineering faction in the Church: 7 For the
Doctrines whereof, the ancient Martyrs suffered not, but for the Doctrines
which Protestants hold.
. 1.
Roman Catholic. IT is a sufficient notice to mislike and forsake the
Protestants Church, because it is new, never seen nor heard of in the world,
in any Age or Country, before Luthers time: for we know the true Church of
Christ is ancient, Bellar. de notis Eccl^s l. b. 4. c. 5. G^eg. de Valent^a
Analysis fidei l. 6. c. 12. Costerus Enchirid. cap. 2.. convertat Campian.
rat^o 4, 5, 6, 7. Doct Hill. reas. 1. And all Roman Writers triumph in this
Argument. See B. White ag. Fisher p. 115. Call. inst. l. 4. c. 2.. 2.
continued from our Saviors own time: and such is the Church of Rome, founded
upon the chief Apostles. S. Peter and S. Paul, manifestly traced throughout
all Ages, with an honorable and certain succession of Bishops, the successors
of S. Peter: All Tyrants, Traitors, Pagans, Heretics in vain wrestling,
raging, and barking against it: confirmed by all worthy Counsels, the general
grave Senates of Gods highest Officers and Ministers upon earth: enriched with
the Sermons and writings of all the sage, learned, and holy Doctors and
Fathers: made famous by all those millions of Saints with their holiness,
Martyrs with their sufferings, Confessors with their constancy: the building of
Churches, Monasteries, Colleges, Universities; and by all excellent means
made conspicuous and honorable to the whole world. Is it likely? is it
possible? that this Church, so anc^ent, so honorable, so holy, and glorious,
should all this while be false, heretical, and now to be forsaken and
rejected? and a new particular Church lately molded and erected by Luther,
Melancton, Calvin, Beza, and a few other obscure vpstarts, should be the only
true Church to be embraced? or that the most gracious God would hide his saving
truth from the world, fifteen hundred years, to the destruction and damnation
of so many millions of souls: and now at last reveal it to a few in a corner?
No Sir, give me leave herein to take the name of Antiquus, to live and dye in
the old Religion, and to refuse your new.

. 2.
Protestant. This is indeed the general enchantment, whereby those that
compass Sea and Land to make Romish Proselytes, do bewitch the unwary: and
were it true, it were able to draw all the world to become Roman Catholics.
But I pray you mark my counter-charme, showing the untruth and weakness of
your assertion.

We of the Church of England do profess and protest, that we are of that All
our learned Bishops, Doc^ors, and Preachers, beat upon this point. B. Jewel.
Arch. Abbot. B. Abbot B. Bilson. B. Andrews. B. Carlton. B. Barlow. B. Morton.
B. Usher. B. Downan. B. White. B. Hall. D. ^ulk. D. Whitacres. D. Field. D.
White B. Bot. D. utclis. D. Favor. Mr. Perkins. and in^umerable others.
true ancient Church of Christ, which you describe: ^ee F^eld. Church. lib. 3.
cap. 6. etc.
that we hold entirely and soundly, all that saving Doctrine which the blessed
Son of God, brought into the world, and his Apostles taught, and wrote in the
holy Scriptures, and which the ancient holy Fathers of the Primitive Church,
held with great unity and universality for many ages.

. 3.
This is shew^d, chap. 5. sect. ^. and Book 2. chap. 2.. 6. and chap. 4. sect.
2.
And we reject nothing, but the corruptions, errors, and abuses, that have
crept into the Church in later times, and from small beginnings have grown at
last to be great and intolerable: those only we have refused: and have
reformed our particular Churches in diverse Kingdoms and Nations, as near as
we could, to the fashion of the first true, pure, and vncorrupt Churches:
retaining all the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, which we found to be
Catholic, or agreeable to the faith of the whole Church in all times and
places. See D. White against Fisher. page 68.
But Doctrines not Catholic, being neither Primitive, belonging to the
ancient Church, nor generally received by the whole Church, either at this day,
nor in any other age, nor grounded upon the Scriptures, we have no reason to
receive, as points necessary to salvation. And the points tending to
superstit^on corruption, or deprauation of Gods honor, Christ's merits, our
own salvation, the disturbance of the peace, or safety of Kingdoms, States,
or Commonwealthes, we worthily abrogate, as intolerable and unchristian. And
in these respects, as you assume the title of Antiquus so do I of
Antiquissimus. And let you know, that See D. Mortons Appeal. lib. 4. cap. 16.
sect. 4.. 10.
our Church is no new Church, devised by Luther, and other learned men, and
received by Princes, affecting mutations: neither ever was it their purpose to
do any such thing, but faithfully and religiously to purge out new
corruptions, and to continue and maintain the substance and whole essence of
the old Church of God, and all the sound Catholic Doctrines thereof, coming
along through so many ages from the first planting of the Church to their times.

. 4.
Read 2 Kings 1^.4 5.6. and chap. 22. and 23.
No otherwise then the most religious Kings, Hezekiah, and Josiah, and other
godly Rulers did in their dominions, (being moved by their learned Priests, and
by their knowledge of Gods Law) who removed the high places, and brake the
Images, and cut down the Groves: spoiled the vessels made for Baal and for the
Groves, and for the host of heaven: and put down the Idolatrous Priests, and
the brazen Serpent also (though at first it was made by Gods own appointment,
erected to good purpose, and was a figure of Christ) because it was now grown
to be an instrument, and occasion of Idolatry: but they preserved still the old
Religion and service of God entire and whole, and that much more pure then they
found it.

This when they did, can any man have the forehead to say, They erected a new
Church, when they only purged and retained the old? or shall we be reviled and
blamed for imitating Hezekias, Josias, and Iehoshaphat, and in that, for which
they were much praised and honored in the Scriptures?

. 5.
Observe then here, first the vanity and deceit of your Romish teachers, that
(against their own knowledge) bewitch the simple people with this conceit,
that our Church (forsooth) is a new Church, begun in Luthers time, little above
an hundred years agone, and was never seen nor heard of in the world before.
Whereas indeed there is no other difference betwixt the Roman Church and ours,
then betwixt a corrupt Church (still maintaining her own corruptions for
worldly respects) and a Church well reformed according to the Scriptures, and
the purest Primitive Churches: or betwixt the corrupt Idolatrous Church before
Hezekiahs time, 2 King. 18.
and the same Church reformed in and after his time.

I may compare the whole Church of CHRIST in all her ages to Naaman the Syrian,
2 King. 5.
who was honorable for bringing safety to his Nation. He was first pure and
sound, and did many honorable acts, and thereby represented the Primitive
Church, pure and clean, without spot or disease appearing: howbeit there might
be some secret seeds of diseases unperceived, which in continuance of time
grew into a visible leprosy. In his middle time he became leprous, diseased
and deformed, fowly infected in himself, and infecting others, and thereby
represented the later Church of Rome. Afterward by the Prophets direction, he
was washed and cleansed from his leprosy, and his flesh restored to become
pure and perfect, like the flesh of a young child, and thereby represented our
Reformed Churches. And as Naaman in all these three estates, was the same
person, and not a new, diverse, or several man (for Elisha made not a new man
but cleansed the old of diseases, and restored him to his first soundness) so
our Church is not a new Church, but the old Church reformed from errors and
corruptions, and restored to her ancient purity and soundness. Let the Church
of Rome still glory in her leprosy and brag of the antiquity of some of her
diseases: we thank God for our Churches clensing, and the new restoring of it
to the Primitive purity.

. 6.
Secondly, observe, that we have not departed from the sound parts of the
Church of Rome it self, (for the leprosy thereof was not universal, nor spread
over all: there were many even in the corruptest ages of that Church, which
taught the same saving doctrine that we do, See Chap. following.
and misliked and wrote against the errors and abuses that we refuse) but our
departure or separation, is only from the Papacy or Court of Rome, (which much
oppressed the best members of the Church of Rome, and instead of Christ's
heavenly Kingdom, set up and maintained an earthly, ouertopping and abusing
all other Christian Kingdoms) or our departure is, from that domineering
faction in the Church, which (like an ill disease, and botch in the body)
intolerably oppressed the Church, by imposing upon it errors in doctrine, and
tyranny in government. But to the sound members of that Church, both of ancient
and modern times, we are still conjoined and united, and herein, their and our
Church continued always sufficiently visible.

. 7.
Thirdly, observe (as a consequent of the former) that our Church is so far
from being new, that it is most ancient: the very same Church that our Savior
Christ and his blessed Apostles first founded. We succeed them both in
succession of persons, as well as the Church men of Rome, and in succession of
doctrine much better: So that we justly challenge our Savior Christ and his
Apostles to be ours: all the learned holy Fathers to be ours: the ancient
Councels, the blessed Saints, Martyrs and Confessors to be ours. For they
taught, professed, lived and dyed in, and for those points of saving Religion,
which we soundly hold, and for none other. The Martyrs dyed for the profession
of their faith and service to the true God, for believing in Jesus Christ
crucified (whom their persecutors scornefully called, the crucified God) and
for their hope to be saved by his merits and passion: for their trust,
comfort, and constancy in the Holy Ghost, and worshipping the holy, blessed,
glorious, and individual Trinity: and for cleaving truly and constantly to the
holy Scriptures and the doctrines grounded thereupon only, as the true rule of
their faith: and (on the other side) for refusing to sacrifice, offer incense,
or do worship to Idols and Heathen gods. They suffered not death for standing
in defense of Image Worship, or for holding the doctrine of Purgatory so like
to the Heathen Poets, Homer and Virgil: or for praying for the dead or to the
dead: or for accusing the holy Scriptures of insufficiency and ambiguity, and
forbidding Christian people to read them under great penalties, for fear of
Heresy. For, such points would have pleased their Heathen persecutors well
enough.

Neither suffered they for crossing Christ's institution, in denying the
Communion cup to Gods people: or for worshipping a God made of a piece of
bread; or for maintaining the Popes gainful Indulgences, and Pardons, or for
defense of their exorcised Holy Water, or other ceremonies: which would have
been matter of scorn and laughter, rather then of persecution from the Heathen.

Neither dyed they for defending the Popes now-claimed Supremacy over all the
Clergy, people, and Princes of the Christian world, direct, or indirect: which
in those times, and many ages after, was never thought of nor claimed: and upon
the first claim thereof, was most odious and hateful to the best Christians,
and threw the world on heaps by grievous wars and dissolutions: nor for
other points which the Church of Rome now maintains different from us, and
which we refuse. And therefore the great flourish which you make of the
antiquity of your Church, (including all the points, which at this day you do
with all policy and violence maintain) utterly fails you, and indeed makes
against you. For they are not the ancient doctrines of the Church, but later or
newer inventions and corruptions, so that in respect of them your Religion is
new and not ours; you are the Innouators, and not we.

B. Usher De Eccles. successione page 66.
The very same nouelty which you impute to the Protestants, Wiclife long ago
imputed to your Friars: crying out as in an agony, Good Lord, what moved Christ
(being most omnipotent, most wise, most loving) to hide this faith of the
Friars for a thousand years, and never taught his Apostles, and so many Saints
the true faith, See hereafter chap. 6. sect. 2.. 4.5, 6.
but taught it these Hypocrites now first, which never came into the Church,
until the impure spirit of Satan was loosed.

Antiquus. Sir, I would it were so for my countries sake, that we might enjoy
such a happily reformed Church as you speak of, with true comfort to our
consciences, and hearty obedience to our Princes Laws, and all love and
happiness of the Kingdom and of our States. But all you have yet said are but
words, you must give me leave to suspend my belief thereof, until you make
good proof of what you affirm.

Antiquissimus. The Poet said well, Non est beatus, esse qui se non putat. No
man is happy, be he never so well, if he think himself not so. English men
may be happy, Bona si sua norint, If they will but know their own happiesse.
In deed, what both you and I have said yet, are but general words. We must
first say, and afterward prove. You have set down your assertion, I mine.
Mine I am ready substantially to prove, even out of your own Authors, and
Books which you cannot disallow which (I am well assured, having read your
strongest Books) you can never do for yours.

CHAP. 2. Of corruptions in the Church. Shows, 1 that particular Churches may
err: as did 2 those of the Old Testament: and 3 of the New: for which 4 we
find many reasons in the Scriptures. 5 The Roman Church is not excepted: but 6
warned thereof: and 7 it has been corrupted, de facto. Yea 8 Rome is the
mystical Babylon: and 9 the seat of Antichrist: and 10 taynted with foul
impieties, as well foregoing as following Antichrist.
Antiquus. BY your Imputation of errors and abuses, to the most Illustrious
Church of Rome, Romans 1.
(so much glorified by S. Paul's writing unto it, so much honored by the
ancient Fathers, so renowned in all after ages,) you seem to hold that all the
Churches in the world may err and be corrupt.

Antiquissimus. We do not hold that the whole Church of God may err at any
time in points fundamental, which constitute the essence of the Church, and
are absolutely necessary to salvation. For then the Church should cease to be
in the world.

Antiquus. Good.

Antiquissimus. See D. Field. Church. lib. 4. cap. 4, 5.
But particular Churches may both err and fall away (as some of the Churches
have done, which flourished in the Apostles times, and to which they wrote
Epistles: the Hebrew Church, the Corinthian, Ephesian, etc.)

Antiquus. You speak contrarieties, and absurdities, for the whole Church
consists of particulars: and if all particulars may err and fall away; then
the whole may.

Antiquissimus. It is no more contrariety, or absurdity, then to say all
particular men may be diseased and dye away; but whole mankind cannot dye away
till the end of the world, although whole mankind consists of particulars For
they may be diseased and dye by succession, See Bellar. De Pont. Romans lib. 4.
cap 4. initio.
not all at once others by succession coming in their rooms: and so of
Churches; No man says, all particular Churches may fundamentally err and
fail at once, (for then indeed, the whole Church should cease to be in the
world) but every one in their several times may fail, when others may hold
the truth. Romans 11.17. and
As some branches of the Olive tree may be cut off, while others grow, and
while others be grafted in: and those that are grafted in, may (for want of
goodness) be cut off also in their times, and the first or others grafted in.
Ioh. 15.
But the good husband of the Church will not suffer the whole Olive or Vine to
be without fruitful branches, by cutting off all at once, but when he pruneth
off some, will cherish and dress the rest. Romans 11.25.
Thus the blindness of the Jews for a time, procured the fullness of the
Gentiles: Verse 22.
who may peece-meale be cut off, Verse 23.
if they continue not in goodness: and the Jews may be grafted in again.

Antiquus. Similitudes may well illustrate, but cannot convince the judgment:
you must bring demonstrations if you will have me yield.

Exodus 32. Number. 16. Iud. 2.11, 19. and. 3, 7. and 4.1. and 6.1. and 8.33. and
10.6. etc. 1 Kings 11. and 12.28. and. 15.13. and 18.21. Genesis 35.2. Exodus
32.20. Joshua 24.15. 1 Samuel 7.4. 2 Kings 18.4. and 22.8. and 23. 2 Chro. 17.6.
. 2.
Antiquissimus. I will by Gods grace do it briefly.

First, that gross errors and abuses may creep into Gods true Church, is
manifest, De facto, in the Church of the Old Testament. The Books of Moses,
Judges, Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles, are full of the peoples falling to
Idolatry, and corrupting the Law of God. And there are many worthy reformations
of those corruptions described, wrought by Jacob, Moses, Joshua, Samuel
Hezekiah, Iosia, Iehosaphat, and others.

And as these corruptions were frequent, so sometimes very general. While
Jeroboams people practiced Idolatry in Israel, (1 King. 12.28. etc.) Rehoboams
people in the other Kingdom forsook the Law of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 12.1. So
that all the face of GODS Church (which was then only in those two Kingdoms)
became mightily depraved and Idolatrous Aholah and Aholibah, that is, Samaria
and Jerusalem, (Ezech. 23.1, 4.) did both falsify their faith to God, and
played the harlots with strange gods, yet the whole Church failed not: For as in
Eliahs time, (when he thought himself alone, 1 Kings 19.10.) God had 7000
true servants in secret, (though their names be not recorded) ibid. verse. 18.
So doubtless it was in other most depraved times.

. 3.
Antiquus. Though this were so, See Field. Church. lib. 3. cap. 10. and lib. 4.
cap. 4.
yet the Churches of the New Testament, had Prophesies of greater purity, Psalm.
45.13. and by our Saviors power and care, may be kept without spot or
wrinckle, Ephesians. 5.26, 27.

Antiquissimus. Such things are spoken of the best parts of the Church upon
earth (washed by Christ's blood, and made beautiful by his righteousness, and
by their own practice of holiness) but those are merely discernable by Gods
eye. But those places of Scripture, specially respect that part of the Church
which is triumphant in Heaven, and there presented by our Savior. Ephesians. 5.27.

But the general face of visible Churches upon earth have bin ordinarily
stained with spots and blemishes; the Church of Corinth, with sects and
schisms, and other deprauations, yea, with doubting, or denying that great
Article of faith (the life of Christianity) the Resurrection of the dead.

Galatia erred in the great point of Justification, against which error, Saint
Paul opposed his Epistle written to them.

In the Church of Pergamus, some held the doctrine of Balaam, and of the
Nicolaitans, teaching to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to commit
fornication, Reu. 2.14.

The like was in the Church of Thyatira, Revel. 2.20, etc.

And if there were no possibility or likelihood of errors and heresies in the
Churches of the New Testament: What needed those warnings and admonitions?
Keep your selves from Idols, 1 John 5.21. Beware of false prophets in sheep
clothing, Mat. 7.15. (...). Charge men that they teach no other doctrine, 1 Timothy 1.3. Stop the mouths of the gainsayers that subvert whole houses, Tit.
1.11.

And to what end were Visitations, Counsels, and all Offices and Government in
the Church, but for maintaining of true doctrine, preventing and rooting out of
errors and abuses?

. 4.
Matthew. 18.7. 1 Cor. 11.19.
Remember, that our Savior said, There must be offenses in the world: and Saint
Paul, There must be heresies. Yea, it is necessary that there be; both for the
good of the faithful, the good of the faith, and the punishment of the
faithless. To which ends God suffers these two causes to concur and work,
to wit, the Devils malice, and Man's corruption; because God can work good out
of their evil.

The Devils malice and policy, never cease still to pursue the seed of the
Woman, and to bite the heel, seeking both by persecutions and heresies, to
supplant Gods Church, to plant and increase his own Kingdom. He attempted our
head, Matthew. 4.3. and so will do his members, Luke 22.31. 2 Cor. 12.7. Ephesians.
6.11, 12. 1 Pet. 5.8. 2 Cor. 11.14.

Man's corruption and blindness is also easy to be drawn by others, and
easily drawn by his own affections out of the right way; as Micah (Judges 17.)
to worship God by a silver Image, thinking (blindly) that every work with a
good intention, would please God, and draw blessings from him.

Solomon by love to his wives was drawn to Idolatry. Our Eues are weak to be
seduced, 1 Kings 11.4.
strong to seduce us.

Jeroboam by ambitious policy, 1 Kings 12.26. Acts 19.24.28
set up Idolatry to keep his people at home.

Demetrius and the Ephesians, for covetousness, magnified the Idol of Diana,
and cried down the Gospel, Acts 19.

Simon Magus through pride bewitched the people, Acts 8.9.10.
that he might seem some great man, Simon Magus among them.

These and such other affections and actions God permits to oppose, corrupt, or
blind the truth. First, for the good o^ the faithful, that their diligence in
searching, their wisdom in discerning, their constancy in holding the truth,
their love to win the adversaries, their patience to endure opposition,
disgrace, persecution, yea, Death and Martyrdom for the truth, and their many
other virtues, may shine to Gods glory, others example, and their own crown,
Reu. 3.11

Secondly, for the good of the faith, Vt fides habendo tentationem, haberet
etiam probationem, says Tertullian, that our faith being sifted, winnowed,
tried, examined, may be more approved, and appear more solid, sound, pure,
like the gold that is purified in the fire.

Thirdly, for the punishment of the fa^thles; Romans 1.21.22.23. etc. 2 These.
2.11.
for it is just with God, that such as hold the truth in unrighteousness,
should be punished with loss of the truth, and left to their own errors and
damnable corruptions, even to the efficacy of delusion, to believe lies.

. 5.
Antiquus. Be it so, that all other Churches may err; yet the Roman Church,
which the chief Apostles, Saint Peter and Saint Paul planted, and where Saint
Peter (the Universal Pastor of the whole Church) lived and dyed, leaving his
successors to govern the whole Church to the end of the world: has this
double privilege (above all other Churches) both to continue to the end, and
to be free from error.

Antiquissimus. A pretty imagination, but void of faith; For if the Church of
Rome be not as subject to errors and deprauations, yea, and to Apostasy, as
other Churches: what needed that Admonition of Saint Paul to the Romans (Romans
11.20) Be not highminded, but fear. For if God spared not the natural
branches (the Hebrews) Take heed lest he also spare not thee. This was a
Caveat for Gentiles, and consequently to the Romans (which were Gentiles among
them.) The Romans are not excepted or privileged: Nay, they are principally
intended; for to them that Epistle was written, ( cap. 1. verse. 7. To all that
be at Rome, Beloved of God, called to be Saints.) To them Saint Paul says, Be
not high-minded, (affecting superiority over all Gods Church, as if Rome were
the root, and all other the branches) but fear (yea fear both error and
apostasy. For you may fall from goodness, and be cut off) for verse 10. thou
bear not the root, but the root thee (be content to be a branch of the Olive
tree, as other Churches are: they depend not on thee, no more then thou on
them, but all of you alike upon the root. Thou art not the Mother, be content
to be a Daughter, a Sister to the rest: Suppose, one of the eldest sisters
living, yet the elder may be sick, and near to death, when the younger are
more sound and perfect.) Mark the 22 verse; Behold the goodness and severity
of God; on them which fell, severity; but toward thee, goodness; i^ thou
continue in his goodness, otherwise thou also shall be also cut off. Note, if
there were no possibility of the Roman Churches falling from the goodness,
which then it had, this admonition directed to them, were idle; but upon
supposition of such falling (as other Churches have done) he denounces
absolutely a cutting off.

Antiquus. Such suppositions do enforce good Caueats and warnings to make that
Church watchful: as by Gods grace it has been, so that no such errors and
heresies have come into it.

. 6.
Antiquissimus. Yes, even in S. Paul's time, Abuses began in the Roman Church,
as well as in the Corinthian, Galatian. and others. Whereof S. Paul gives
another Caveat, chap. 16. verse 17, 18. I beseech you Brethren, (says he)
Mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which
ye have learned, and avoid them. For they which are such, serve not our Lord
Jesus Christ, but their own belly: and by good words and fair speeches,
deceive the hearts of the simple. And verse 19 though he praise them, yet he
adds, But J would have you wise unto that which is good, and simple or
harmless concerning evil; and he prays God to establish them, verse 25.

Antiquus. All this yet proves not, that ever any such errors prevailed in
the Church of Rome, to the defacing or corrupting the soundness thereof.

. 7.
Antiquissimus. But the Ancient Fathers, and the Histories of the Church do
prove it: Hieronymus contra Luciferianos Basil. epist. 69.
As namely in the Arrian heresy, whereby the Church of Rome (together with the
rest of the world) was maruellously, both defaced, and corrupted, and that both
in the members, and in the head. Whereof S. Jerome wrote, that the whole world
groned, and wondered that it was become Arrian: And S. Basil, that men
abandoned the houses of Prayer (which then were made schools of Impiety) and
were feign to pray to the Lord in Deserts. And S. Hilary admonished in many
words, that the Church at that time, was not to be sought (Jn tectis and
exteriori pompa, sed potius in carceribus and speluncis,) in Houses or Temples,
and outward pomp but rather in Prisons and Caves. Bellar De Pont. Romans lib. 4.
c^p. 9. initio. Bellarm. in that Book reckons 40. Popes, accused of errors
and heresies: whom he labors to excuse, but confesses most of them guilty in
one degree or other.
And when Liberius, Bishop of Rome, himself was drawn to subscribe to the
Arrian heresy, yielded to the condemnation of Athanasius, and communicated
with Valens and Vrsarius, whom he knew to be Heretics: As Bellarmine
confesses.

Antiquus. This was a heavy time, and a heavy thing it is to hear it; yet in
good time the Church of Rome recovered.

. 8.
Antiquissimus. But the Scripture mentions another defection of Rome, which
will never be recovered. For your Roman Doctors cannot avoid it, but Babylon in
the 17 and 18 of the Revelation, signifies Rome, chap. 17.9. The seven heads
are seven mountains on which the woman sits: and verse 18. The woman which
thou saw, is the great City which reigns over the Kings of the earth.
These two properties of the City, situate upon seven hills, and also reigning
over the Kings of the earth, do manifestly describe the City of Rome and none
other, as it was in S. John's time, when the Revelation was given Your own
Jesuit Ribera, Doctor of Divinity, and Professor in the University of
Salmantica, in his Commentaries upon the Apocalypse, chap. 14. verse 8 Number. 25.
and sequentib. shows plainly, that Babylon can signify nothing else but the
City of Rome: he cites many testimonies of the Fathers for it. He cites also
Sixtus Senensis, and Bellarmine to be of the same opinion, and many other late
Writers: and concludes with these words [Vt alios hujus aetatis scriptores
omittam: hoc dicam, Ambrosius, qui prius negaverat, tandem, in cap. 17.
veritate conuictus Babylonem Romam significare confessus est. Huic convenient
aptissime omnia, quae de Babylone dicuntur in hoc libro (Apocalypscos)] and
this he shows at large in many particulars.

The like has Viegas, another Jesuit, Viega in Apoc. 17. com. 1. sect. 4.
page 772. Rhemist. annot. on Apoc. 17.9. scoff at us. so Bellar. de Romans Pont.
lib. 3. cap. 2. and Parsons 3. conuersions part. 2. cap. 5. v. Bishop.
Reformed. Cath.
Doctor also of Divinity, and Reader in two Universities of Portugal,
Conimbrica and Ebora.

And your Rhemish (though they scoff at the Protestants, for interpreting
Babylon to be Rome, in Revel. 17.5. yet presently after, they are forced
themselves to) confess that Babylon signifies the City of Rome: but they shift
all from the Pope, to the persecuting Emperors, and apply the prophetical
discourse to the times of S. John the Writer, principally, as a type of the
place (wheresoever it be) where Antichrist shall sit toward the end of the
world. But Ribera and Viegas, prove plainly, that S. John's description agrees
to Rome, toward the end of the world, when Rome shall be the feat of
Antichrist, and shall be finally, fully, and irrecouerably destroyed, according
to the plain words of Revel. 18. verse 2, 8, 21, etc. Ribera (page 454.)
says, [ Roma, nisi pristinam illam impietatem (of Idolatry and persecutions
under the Emperors) novis sceleribus, and immanibus peccatis aequatura esset,
maneret vsque ad finem seculi extremum. Etenim non propter priora tantum
peccata came conflagraturam esse magno incendio, vt ante diximus, sed etiam
propter illa, quae extremis illis temporibus commissura est, ex huius
Apocalypsis verbis adeo perspicue cognoscimus, vt ne stultissimus-quidem negare
possit.] Rome (says Ribera) should doubtless continue to the end of the
world, if it did not match the old Impiety (of the Emperors) with new
impieties and grievous sins. For we plainly learn, that it shall be
destroyed with that great consuming fire, not for the former sins only (as we
said before) but for those sins which it shall commit in the last times: yea,
we learn it so plainly out of the words of this Revelation, that surely the
veriest fool cannot deny it.

. 9.
Antiquus. Indeed these learned Roman Doctors are plain and powerful, in
proving this Mystical Babylon, described in the Revelation, can signify no
place but Rome, and that it must be the seat of Antichrist toward the later
end of the world. But the same Doctors say also, that Antichrist and the Pope
are two diverse things; yea, contrary one to the other: as also, that the
Church of Rome and City of Rome are diverse things: and further, that
Antichrist is not yet come, neither shall he come until three years and a
half before the last day: Revel. 11.3. and 12.6, 14. and 13.5.
as they gather out of the prophecy of Daniel, and the Revelation, by the 1260
days, which make 42 months, and a time, times, and half a time.

Hieronym. in Daniel. 9.
Antiquissimus. S. Ierom understood those prophesies of the destruction of
Jerusalem, to which they maruellously agree: and, to the reign of Antichrist,
it is very unlikely they should agree. See B. Downam de Antichristo. part. 2.
ad Demonstrat. 13. 5. etc. and K. James his Praemonition. page 60. and seqq.
But your men have reason to keep off this deadly blow from themselves and
their head. Note their shifts; first, they would by no means suffer Babylon to
signify Rome: but the text is so punctual and plain, pointing out a City, a
City built on seven hills, a City that bare rule over the Kings of the earth;
that at last they grant, it can be no other but Rome. But (see a second shift)
not Christian Rome, but Heathen Rome, unto the persecuting Emperors, long
since gone. Now when they are driven from this also, because the Text descrbes
Rome as it must be nere the end of the world; (note their third shift.) It must
be Rome only, three years and an half before the last day.

. 10.
Well, howsoever, yet you see it granted by you own men, Rome must be the seat
of Antichrist. Who, if he be not come already, (from which Controversy, I
will now spare you) yet you cannot imagine but there must be preparations for
his coming and entertainment. I will not say with your own S. Gregory; Greg.
lib. 4. epist. 38.
Rex superbiae prope est, and (quod dici nefas est) Sacerdotum ei est
praeparatus exercitus: The King of pride is at hand, and an army of Priests is
prepared for him. Be it what it will, there must be corruption both of life and
doctrine, to make way for his entertainment, as your Ribera said before, there
must be new impieties and grievous sins of Rome, matching the old of the
Emperors, that must fore-runne the plagues of Antichrist, and Romes
destruction. Take heed they have not far proceeded already. I have
demonstrated unto you already; first, that any particular Church may in time
gather corruption, err, yea and fall away: Secondly, that the Church of Rome
is not excepted, nor privileged from that calamity: but contrarily, thirdly,
that many threatenings, warnings and prophesies thereof are found in the
Scriptures: and fourthly, further, that Rome must be the seat of Antichrist;
and fifthly, that toward the end of the world (which cannot be far off;) and
lastly, that there must be many corruptions and impieties that shall deserve
and make preparation for his coming. All which ought to abate your high
conceit of the present Church of Rome; and work in you a more reverend esteem
of our Church, which has reformed the abuses which we found in the Church of
Rome.

CHAP. 3. Of the time when corruptions came into the Roman Church. 1 A
designation of the time when the corruptions first came into the Church,
required. 2 often, and often aswered. 3 many crept in secretly and insensibly:
4 as themselves acknowledge, 5 best known by their difference from their first
pure doctrine. 6. The Romans cannot find the beginnings of our doctrines on
this side the Scriptures: 7 We can, and do, many of theirs. 8 No Church in the
world held the now Romish doctrines, but only the Romish Church it self in
these later times.
. 1.
Antiquus. SInce you impute so many errors and abuses to the Church of Rome,
which you pretend to have reformed: Tell me when those corruptions came into
that Church, which (you confess) was once, and a long time the true, sincere,
and famous Church of God. For no such foul matters, so gross and intolerable
can enter into such a famous Church, without being noted in Histories, Bellar.
de notis ecclesiae lib. 4. cap. 5.
and opposed by godly learned men. Show me therefore when these corruptions
came in and changed the Roman faith, in what Age, under what Pope, by what men
and means, and with what rel^ctation, or opposition of the godly learned. For
if no such time can be showed, I shall never believe there were any such thing.

. 2.
Antiquissimus. This is another point of your ench ntment indeed. Your Masters
politikely, stand upon generals to discredit our reformation, which in
particulars they cannot disprove. Among which generals, this is (as it seems)
their great Goliath, brought into the field so often, to terrify all our troops
at once. To omit your foreign Jesuits, Bellar. De Euchar. lib. 3. cap. 8
Bellarmine, Costerus epist. ad. Apolog.
Costerus, Greg. de Valent. lib. 6. cap. 12.
Gregorius de Valentia, etc. your English are enough. The Author of, The brief
discourse of Faith, (which is answered by D. John White, and Mr. Anthony
Wootton) brings it in, in his 50 Section, as Camp. ratione 7.
Campian (their great Champion) had done before him: which being foiled by our
men in their answers, yet is brought in again by A. D. his Reply, in his 57
Chapter, and foiled again by D. White: Defense page 519, etc. Lately brought
in again by a Jesuit in Ireland, in his Challenge, and overthrown by D.
Usher, B. of Mead, in the beginning of his Answer. D. Kellison Suruay lib. 2.
c. p. 163. 1.
And still is brought in again and again, without measure or end, as if it
had never been answered before. And most lately by M. Fisher the Jesuit, at
least four several times in his little book written to our late Gracious
King James, of famous memory: which B. Francis White, has fully answered in
every of the places D. White. page 116. and 131 and 143. and 255, etc.
. Out of all whose answers and Doctor Favors Book, entitled, Antiquity
triumphing over Nouelty D. Favor. page cap. 17.
; and many others; I will give you some short satisfaction, wishing you at your
leisure to read the Authors themselves at large.

. 3.
Your argument presupposes that errors and abuses, came into the Church full,
strong, and at once: See also D. Field. Church. lib. 3. cap. and B. Morton
Appeal. lib. 4. cap. 16.
So that their very entrance must needs be apparent, visible, obseruable, and
therefore strongly opposed by learned and good men, and described in Histories:
whereas indeed the most of them crept in secretly, and insensibly, and were not
observed of a long time. Saint Paul calls the great desertion and Apostasy,
The Mystery of Iniquity 2 These. 2.7.
: Which the ordinary gloss thereupon, says, is Iniquitas, Sed mystica, id
est, pietatis nomine palliata; an iniquity indeed, but mystical, that is,
cloaked under the name of piety. A mystery works not openly, but secretly:
not at once, but by little and little, and then gets greatest advantage,
when it is least observed and suspected.

It is first a Mystery, and creeps in secretly, before it be a History,
observed and described.

In Commonwealths it is ordinary for things of obscure and insensible
beginnings, to work sensible and notorious changes in the end, so that the
wisest shall not so easily find out the first entrance, as the simplest may
see and feel the gross and dangerous events in the end. As Plutarch observes
in the life of Caesar: and in the life of Coriolanus, he tells how the
corruption of the people by bribes and banqueting, entered into the old Roman
Commonwealth. This Pestilence (says he) crept in by little and little, and
did secretly win ground, still continuing a long time in Rome, before it was
openly discovered, For no man can tell who was the first that bought men's
voices with money, nor that corrupted the sentence of the Judges: but he
knows that this took away all authority (and destroyed the Commonwealth.)
So it is also with diseases in man's body: they come not to the height and
extremity at first, and at once: but ill humors and matter of diseases, breed
secretly, and insensibly, and afterward by degrees, become more full and
strong, and seldom are well discerned, till they manifestly impair the health
and actions of the body. Now when a disease is grown apparently dangerous and
deadly, shall neither the Physician nor the grieved Patient believe that there
is any disease at all, because they know certainly there was once health, and
they cannot set down the time when the humors began first to corrupt, nor by
what accesses and increasings it proceeded to that desperate danger? 2 Kings 5.
So Naaman, because he was once clean and could not tell the very time,
means, and degrees of the coming of his leprosy, might be proved to be
clean still, and needed neither the Prophet nor the washing.

Our Savior shows, Matthew. 13.
that in the field where good feed was sown, the enemy secretly sowed tares:
but they were not discerned to be tares, till they were grown up to some
height; and peradventure favored, watered, and defended by the Husbandmen, and
thought to be good Corn for a time, till they showed themselves more fully.
Shall we be so idle to say, they were not tares, because we know good wheat was
sown there, but when any tares were sown we know not? The Master of the field
acknowledges the^ by their present view to be tares, and says that the enemy
had sown them secretly: but your argument would persuade the contrary. You
Protestants grant (say your Doctors) that the seed first sown in this field
(in the Church of Rome) was good, and there sown by the Master himself: now,
if these which you call tares, be no good Grain, but weeds sprung up from
some other seed, tell us the man's name that sowed it, and the time when it was
sown. If you be not able to show this, surely your eyes deceive you; either
they are not tares (as you call them) or they are not of any enemies, but of
your own Masters sowing.

. 4.
Antiquus. Your similitudes are apt and perswasiue, but no similitude is
demonstratiue. Can ye show me some examples of things in this kind, confessed
to be changed, the beginnings of whose examples, were not perceived, or
observed, or opposed?

Antiquissimus. I can, and will; and you may read them more at large, in D
Vshers answer to the Jesuit in Jreland.

Your own Catholics confess that the Primitive Church, See also D. Field.
Church lib. 3. cap. 14. who reckneth many more.
for many years delivered the holy Eucharist to the people in both kinds,
according to Christ's Ordinance, and the Apostles practice: that custom is now
quite changed, and the cup disused and forbidden to the people.

This change they grant, but when, and how it began, and under what Pope, they
know not. Valent. de l^git. vsu. Euchar. cap. 10 See more in B. Morton. Appeal.
lib. 4. cap. 6.
Gregory of Valentia (your great learned Jesuit) says: It began first in some
particular Churches, and in time grew to be a general custom in the Latin
Church, not much before the Counsel of Constance, in which, at last (to wit,
about two hundred years agone) this custom was made a Law. But of the time
when it first began to get footing in some Churches, he says, Minime constat;
It is not known.

Fisher Rossensis. assert. lutheran. confut. art. 18.
B. of Rochester, and Cardinal Caietan, Caietan. opusc. tomo 1. tract. 15 de
indulgent. cap. 1.
grant, that of Indulgences no certainty can be had, what their original was,
or by whom they were first brought in. But of the great increase and bringing
infinite wealth out of all Nations to the Pope, and the abusing of simple
souls thereby, we have knowledge more then enough.

Fisher adds (ibid.) that of Purgatory, in the ancient Fathers there is no
mention at all, or very rare: that the Latins did not all at once, but by
little and little receive it: that the Grecians believe it not to this day: and
that Purgatory being so long unknown, it is not to be marvelled that in the
first times of the Church there was no use of Indulgences, for they had their
beginning after that men had a while been scared with the torments of Purgatory.

Harding, Hard. answer to the first article of Jewels challenge fol. 26. v.
Antwerp. ^dit. anno 1565.
fetches from no other ground, then lack of devotion on the peoples part.
Tell us in what Popes days the people fell from, their devotion and then we
may hap tell you in what Popes days your private Mass began.

You see then (1) what little reason your men have to require of us the precise
time of the beginning of such changes, seeing themselves grant, that in many
things themselves cannot do it. (2) That some of them may come in pedetentim
(as B. Fisher says of Purgatory) by little and little, and by very slow steps,
not so cast to be discerned, as you would make simmple men believe: (3) Thar
it is an idle imagination to think that all such changes must be made by some
Bishop, or any one certain Author: whereas it is confessed, that some may come
in by the silent consent of many, and grow after into a general custom, the
beginning whereof is past man's memory: (as the abstaining from the Cup) and
some may arise of the ^ndiscreet devotion of the multitude (as those of
Purgatory and Indulgences) and some from the want of devotion in the people (as
the private Masses) and some also must be attributed to the very change of
time it self: as public prayers in an unknown tongue in Italy, France, and
Spain: for there a long time the Latin was commonly understood of all: but
when afterward their speeches degenerated into those vulgar tongues that are
now used there, then the language, not of the service, but of the people, was
altered. So that (says Erasmus Eras. in declarationib. ad censuras Parisiens.
tit. 12. sect. 41.
) the vulgar tongue was not taken from the people; but the people departed from
it. Now then, show you under what Pope their language degenerated, and we will
show you when public prayers there began, in tongue not understood.

. 5.
I may well then conclude, (with that learned D. Usher,) that if we can show
the present Doctrines of Rome, (refused by us) disagree from the Primit ue, it
is enough to show there has been a change and degeneration, though we cannot
point out the time, when every point began to be changed Tertullian Tertul.
praeser. aduersus Haeret. cap. 32
says sufficiently; The very doctrine it self being compared with the
Apostolic, by the diversity and contrariety thereof, will pronounce that it
had for Author, neither any Apostle, nor any Apostolical man. Jf Mat. 19.8.
from the beginning it was not so, and now it is so there is a change. 1 Cor.
11.28
All drink of that Cup, now all must not: all then prayed in known tongues
with understanding, and all public service done to edification, 1 Cor. 14.
See B. White against Fisher page 128.
this is altered, though when the alteration began, we neither know, nor need
take pains to search.

. 6.
The Romanists say, Our Doctrine is new: can they show it to be later then the
Apostles times? we hold the Hebrew Canon of the Old Testament, that is, so
many books Canonical, as the Hebrews, and with them the Fathers accounted
Canonical, and no more: If this be an error, let them show who began it, and
when: as we can show when and by what means many Apocryphal writings were
added to the Canon. We hold the Hebrew of the old, the Greek of the New
Testament to be most Authentical, and all translations to be corrected by
them. Who began this heresy, and when? they prefer the vulgar Latin before
them, contrary to equity and antiquity. We commend the holy Scriptures to all
Gods people, of all Nations, in all languages: we hold that God forbids the
worshipping of Images: That a man is justified by faith without the works of
the Law; and yet that good works are necessary fruits of faith, without which,
faith is dead: we administer the whole Communion in both kinds, to all Gods
people: let them show the time when these heresies or abuses began: or else
either cease to call us heretics for them, or grant that heresies may creep
in, they know not when nor how.

. 7.
All this, notwithstanding, D. Favor. Antiquity, triumphing over nouelty. cap.
17 page 433.
we are able to show by approved Histories, the age and time, when many of the
fowlest corruptions became notorious in the Church and how they were opposed.
Doctor Favor shows some; as the Supremacy of the Pope; Transubstantiation;
The Worshipping of Angels, (an old heresy, a new piety,) The substance and
parts of the Mass; The Divine worship of the Virgin Mary, above a creature;
The worship of the Cross; Single life of the Clergy; Abstinence from certain
meats, and on certain days; Seven Sacraments; Images and their worship;
Indulgences or Pardons Communicating without the Cup; Auricular Confession, and
diverse other things. Bishop Usher answering the Jrish Jesuits Challenge,
shows the same very fully in many points. So do most of our other learned
Authors; and most plentifully in a continued historical Narration, that
learned French Noble man, Philip Morney, Morney. Mysterium Iniquitat. Praefat.
Lord of Plessis, in his Mysterium Iniquitatis. But of particular points. I
shall speak more fitly in their proper place, if you desire it.

. 8.
And now for a conclusion of this point, and for full answer to your challenge
of antiquity; I demand where was there any Church in the world, for 600.
years after Christ, which worshipped Images as the Roman Church does now?
where was any Church for a thousand years, that called the little hone their
Lord, thought it to be God, and adored it as God? or for 12 hundred years,
that kept their God in a box, and carried it about in procession to be
worshipped, and appointed peculiar office or service unto it? and without
receiving it, offered it up before the people, as a propitiatory sacrifice for
the quick and the dead? or that bereaved the people of the Cup in the holy
Communion, and made it heresy to teach otherwise? or that received
Transubstantiation for an Article of faith? or that accused the Scriptures of
Insufficiency and ambiguity, and held the reading thereof dangerous to the
faithful, forbidding it by public decree, under great punishment. Where was
there any Church for 600 years, that believed the Pope of Rome to be the
universal Bishop, and that all power of Orders and Jurisdiction for all
Churches in the world is to be derived and received from him? where for a
thousand years any Church acknowledged the Pope to be an earthly Prince, or
above all Christian Princes, girt with both swords? and had power to unbind
subjects from their oaths of Allegiance to their Princes, to depose Princes,
and place others in their rooms? or in 12 hundred years, that held the Pope
to be above the universal Church, and above the general Councels, and that
he only had authority to call Councels, to ratify, of nullify whatsoever
pleased him in them? or that he could dispose of the state of souls, by the
manner or measure of his Indulgences or Pardons, shutting Purgatory, and
opening Heaven to those he liked, or would pay for it: making Saints whom he
pleased, to be prayed unto and worshipped, and whom he pleased, sending down
to Hell or Purgatory? Council. Trident. Sess.
or that he could dispense with the Laws of God, binding where God had loosed,
or loosing where God had bound, as in Matrimonial causes and degrees, in
diners kinds of oaths and such like.

Or where was any face of a Church until within these few years so glorious
with a Princely Senate of Cardinals, equals, if not superiors to Kings, making
an earthly Kingdom of the Church, with the transcendent greatness of the
triple crowned Pope? Friars began, Anno 1220. Jesuits 1530.
those swarms of late Friars, and later Jesuits, and Seminary Priests? which
some make to be the Locusts, ( Revel. 9, 3,) darkning the Sun and the air.
Luther in conference with Vergerius the Popes Nuncio among other things, told
him plainly; None could call his Doctrine new, Hist. council. Trent. lib. 1.
page 76.
but he that believed that Christ, the Apostles, and the holy Fathers lived as
now the Pope, Cardinals, and Bishops do.

To conclude: In these and such like things, the Church of Rome has no
antiquity neither succeeds the Apostles and the Primitive Church, otherwise
then darkness suceeeds the light, sickness succeeds health, and as Antichrist
must succeed Christ in the Temple of God, and may sit in Christ's (or S. Peter's)
seat, as God, or above God.

Antiquus. It is easier to show disl^ke then disproofe of these things. But
when you say, The most of the corruptions (as you call them) crept in secretly
and insensibly, you seem to grant that some of them came in openly and were
observed.

Antiquissimus. Yea, and strongly opposed too, as our learned Authors do
plentifully show: and I shall (by Gods blessing) show afterward, when we come
to the particulars; but for the present, let this general answer satisfy your
general doubt.

Antiquus. Satisfy me in another general question also. If there were such
corruptions in the Roman Church as you pretend: how chance they were suffered
to continue and grow, and never spoken or written against nor reformation
sought for till Luthers time? but that glorious Church enjoyed perpetual
unity, peace, and quietness, till he disturbed it? yea, and all Historians,
Fathers, Councels, learned men, and Princes ceased nor continually to praise
and glorify the unity sanctity, and excellency of that Church, as Mr. Campian
alleges in most of his reasons.

Antiquissimus. See B. White against Fisher, page 107, 108, 109.
You are very much deceived (with your vainly boasting Champion) there was in
every Age much speaking and writing against the abuses of that Church; both by
the whole Eastern or Greek Church, which long agone forsook the unity of the
Roman Church, being neither able to reform the corruptions thereof, nor to
endure them: and by many Fathers of the Western Church that did oppose them:
and Historians that detected and detested them: and many thousands in these
Western parts, that would not live under the obedience of the Pope and his
Clergy, nor admit their Doctrines: Besides, many other learned men also living
in the Community of the Church of Rome, which yet wrote against many abuses
thereof, wishing and desiring reformation.

Antiquus. If this be so, I have been wonderfully abused, being made believe
the just contrary.

Antiquissimus. Then I perceive it is necessary to handle this point thoroughly:
both to satisfy you with sufficiency, and to cloy them with superfluity, who
told you that nothing could be brought against them.

CHAP. 4. Corruptions in the Church of Rome, seen, written against, and
reformation wished for them. An historical Narration, 1 of the first age of
the Church golden: but 2 afterward peeped up some seeds of corruption,
misliked of many in the East, South, and West Churches. 3 A foul matter of
three Popes alleging a counterfeit Canon of Nice for their Jurisdiction, which
the whole Church of Africa withstood. 4 Gregory the Great wrote sharply
against the Titles which now the Popes use. 5 B.B. of the East, France,
Germany, and Britany, opposed the Pope about Images; Councels against Councels.
6 Many thought Antichrist now borne. Constantines Donation, and the decretall
Epistles now first seen. 7 A deluge of wickedness in the ninth and tenth
Ages, as Bellarmine, Baronius, Genebrard, etc. record. 8 After a thousand
years, greater inundations of evils. Siluester 2. Benedict 9. a child of ten
years old, then Cardinals arose. 9 The Sultan subdueth many Christian
Countries in the East: the Clergy most wicked in the West. Letters from Hell to
them. Anti-Popes and Anti-Caesars, Rebellion made piety. Hildibrands Dictates,
foundations of a new earthly Church, Kingdom. 10 The Testimony of Onuphrius,
that Gregory 7 was the first raiser of the Popes Princedome. Many Historians
speak of his diuellishnesse. 11 Campians Historians rejected by his own
fellows. 12 Grave Divines against Romish corruptions: Bernard, Sarisburiensis,
Grosthead, Occam, Cesenas, Clemangis, Gerson, Caremacensis, Valla, etc 13 These
and many others, wrote against the corruptions of Doctrine. Schoolemens
philosophical Divinity. Doctrine framed to maintain wealth and greatness. 14
Particular Doctrines wherein learned men differed from the Popes faction. 15
Oxford alone afforded many learned men opposing Romish corruptions. 16
Reformation was sought for, and promised by the Pope; but could not be obtained.
. 1.
TO show how corruptions crept into the Church of Rome, were seen and written
against, as they were discovered from time to time: I must become altogether
historical, and not Write mine own words, but other men's, and as the times be
many, and matters various, so will my Narration be long, although I will
endeavor all possible breuity, that may not hinder perspicuity. And first I
will g^ue you (as it were) a Table, of what our lea^ned and laborious Bishop
Usher has written (compendiously also) out of many brave Authors, to this
point: but in this Table I will insert other brief memorials remarkable out
of other Authors.

Perer in Apoc. c. 6. disp. 6. See B. Usher de ecclesiarum successione and
statu. cap. 1. v. Casabon Proleg. Heg^sippus apud Eusebius. lib. 3. hist. cap. 32.
vel, in alijs editionibus cap. 29. and Niceph. lib. 3. cap. 16. Lactant. lib.
5. institutionum cap. 2. Eusebius. hist. lib. 8. cap. 1. Hieronym. in vita Malchi.
Cyril Hierosol. cateches. 15. Man tuan in vita Blasij. lib. 2.
The first hundred years of the Church was a golden Age (says your Pererius)
but when the Apostles, and they that heard them were gone, errors and abuses
began to take root, through Heretics, Philosophers, and Divines given over to
too much daintiness and ambition, and degenerating by the corruptions which
peace and plenty bred amongst them: as Hegesippus relates: and as Lactantius,
Eusebius, S. Jerome, Cyrill, and your Mantuan complain. So that Gregorius
Magnus (about 600 years after Christ) compared the Church to a decayed and
putrefying ship; and A gebardus, Bishop of Lions, after him, says, If the ship
of the Church waxed rotten then, alas, alas, what does it now?

. 2.
It is recorded, that even some good Bishops of Rome, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 23.
Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 21.
holy men and Martyrs, living in the second hundred years after our Savior,
out of a desire to advance their Sea, went somewhat too far to impose
ceremonies upon other Churches: as Anicetus, for the celebration of Easter, who
yet was quickly quieted by the good counsel of Polycarp, who made a journey to
Rome to that end, and was greatly honored by Anicetus.

Eusebius. ibid. B. Morton Appeal. lib. 4. c. 7.
Not long after, Victor grew somewhat too violent about the same matter, and
excommunicated the Eastern Churches for their difference from the Western in
the celebration of Easter, but he was sharply reproved by Polycrates, See B.
Carlton Jurisdiction. cap. 4.. 19, 20, 21. etc.
Bishop of Ephesus, and the other Bishops of the East, and also by Jrenaeus,
Bishop of Lions in France, and the other Bishops there; whereby it may appear
that the B. of Rome began even then to usurp or challenge a Jurisdiction which
neither the Bishops of the East or West did acknowledge. They all honored the
Bishops of Rome, as Bishops of the chief City, the seat of the Empire, and for
their holiness and virtue; and gave them great and honorable Titles; but yet
not greater then we gave to holy Bishops. Saint Basil writes to S. Ambrose,
saying, Basil. epist. 55.
that he holds the stern of that great and famous Ship, the Church of God, and
that God had placed him in the primary and chief seat of the Apostles. Inter
epistola Cypriani. See more in B. Ca^lton. ibid.. 22. Cyprian. lib. 1. epist.
3. page 12. and page 22. in alijs editionibus epist. 55. See Cyprians epistles.
Bellar. de Pont. Romans lib. 4. cap. 7.
S. Ierom writing to S. Augustine in some Epistles, styles him Papa, (a Title
now appropriate to the Bishop of Rome) and and the Bishop of Rome, often
entitles Cyprian Papa, in Epistles sent to him.

This holy Martyr Cyprian, wrote sharply to Cornelius Bishop of Rome, against
his unjust intermedling with delinquents of Africa, which being censured, or
excommunicated by their own Bishops, fled to Rome to procure favor and
protection. Cyprian says, That a part of the Flock is appointed to each
Pastor, which each in several must rule and guide, etc. Yea, Cyprian, and with
him the whole Nation of Africa, refused and resisted the Popes Judgment and
government for this point. And Cyprian proceeded to write very contumeliously
of him (as Bellarmine grants) calling the Pope superbum imperitum, caecae ac
prauae mentis; Proud, misiudging, of a blind and corrupt mind. And not only
the holy Martyr Cyprian, with his African Bishops, but Saint Basil the Great,
Basil. epist. 10. Baronius anno 372. 32. Usher. ib. cap. 1. page 23.
found great fault with these beginnings of corruptions, getting foot-hold in
the Latin Church. He called it (...). Occidentale supercilium, The Western
pride: and says elsewhere, Odi fastum illius ecclesiae. I hate the pride and
presumption of that Church. D Field. church. lib. 5. page 240. cap 39. Gerson.
part. 4. sermon. de pace and vnitate Graecorum consid. 6.


And indeed this beginning of corruptions grew so great in the end, that it
occasioned the lamentable separation of the Eastern or Greek Church, from the
communion with the Latin Church: The other 4 Patriarks, dividing themselves
from the B. of Rome, and at their parting using these or the like words: See B.
Carlton. Iurisd. cap. 5.
Thy greatness we know thy covetousness we cannot satisfy, thy encroaching
we can no longer abide: live to thy self.

. 3.
Council. Carthag. 6 cap. 3. See this whole story fully discust, and all shifts
answered in B. Mortons Appeal. l b. 4 cap. 8. per totum.
For these seeds grew from time to time, In the time of Pope Zozimus, (who sat
at Rome 417.) began a foul matter; he received Plaintifes out of Africa. and
alleged for his warrant, a Canon of the Council of Nice. But the Bishops of
Africa. gathered together in a Council at Carthage, could not find that Canon
in their copies ot the N^cene Council, nor ever heard of it before, though
some of them were of the best learned Divines then living in the world: so that
they were much troubled and offended at it, and took notice of the
Roman-growing ambition. They write therefore to Zozimus, denying for the
present, both the Canon and the Popes request, until they had searched
further. And their letter was delivered to Boniface, Council. African. Cap. ^01.
successor to Zozimus (who dyed in the interim) and is extant in the Tomes of
the Councels. Mean season, the Fathers of the Council of Carthage procured
two authentic copies of the Nicene Canons, one from Cyrillus, Bishop of
Auxandria, the other from Atticus, Bishop of Constantinople: wherein no such
thing was found as Zozimus had alleged. So that when Boniface urged this
matter again, they sent their Decree, That the true Canons of the Nicene
Councels should be observed, but this Canon they rejected, as forged, and
supposititions. But Boniface was also dead before their Letters came to Rome,
and Celestinus his successor received them. This Celestine urged the Canon
again, sending Commissioners into Afric to maintain the cause; But the
African Bishops would not yield, Council. African. cap. 105.
but wrote their absolute denial (after much debating) both of the Canon as
forged and of the Popes request as unfit and unusual; admonishing him, Ne
fumosum typhum saeculi in ecclesiam Christi induceret, etc. That he and his
successors would not bring into the Church the smoaky pride of the world, etc.
And they made a Decree that no appeals should be made to Rome, or to any other
place from Afric.

The like Decree had been made in S. Cyprians time, Council. Afric. cap. 92.
Cyprian. ep. 55.
by all the Bishops of Africa, that where any fault was committed, there the
cause should be heard to prevent appeals to other places, or claims of other
Bishops. And this Canon of the African Council, Council Mileuitan cap. 22.
was also repeated and confirmed in the Mileuitan Council, where S. Augustine
was present. For the sixth Carthagenian, the seventh Carthagenian, the African,
and Milevitan Councels were held all about this time by the same men. And in
all this business S. Augustine had an especial hand. So that here we have S.
Cyprian, S. Augustine, and all the Bishops and Church of Africa, misliking,
resisting, and making Decrees or Canons against the corruptions and usurpations
growing in the Church of Rome. Yea, Hardings answer to Jewels challenge. page
290.
and if we may believe Mr. Harding and his Authors; These Saints, Martyrs, and
Bishops withstood, stood out, and lived and dyed out of the Communion of the
Church of Rome, an hundred years together, rather then they would admit the
corruptions and usurpations of that Church; although these corruptions were
then but in the beginning, and far from the height which now they are come
unto.

. 4.
And indeed, before they came to that height, their own Bishop, Gregory the
first, cried out of that ambition in the Bishop of Constantinople, which the
Bishops of Rome shortly after assumed. For John, Bishop of Constantinople, with
new pride and presumption strove to be called, The chief universal Bishop, or
Occumeniall Patriarch, which Gregory Greg. Regist. lib. 4. ep. 32. novum nomen,
sceleflum, nomen singularitatis.
condemned as a new and wicked name, a name of singularity, which none of the
Bishops of Rom^ had ever assumed; and whosoever had it, Epist. 34.
was the forerunner of Antichrist, ep. 38, 39. and 34.
the Universal plague of the Church, and corrupter of the faith, with many
other like terms. Lib. 7. ep. 30. and 69. etc.
The same Gregory complained grievously of those times: and Lib. 8. ep. 36.
prophesied, that they that came after should see worse times, in comparison
whereof they would think the former times happy. And in one place he said,
Lib. 4. ep. 38.
All things that are foretold shall come to pass: The King of pride is at
hand, and (which is most grievous) an host of Priests is prepared for him.

This prophecy of Gregory living 600 years after Christ, was in short time
after fulfilled in his successors. Paulus Diaconus in Phoca. Hic (Phocas)
rogante Papa Bonifacio, statuit sedem Romanae ecclesiae, vt esset caput omnium
ecclesiarum.
For Boniface the third obtained of Phocas the Emperor, that the seat of the
Roman Church should be head of all Churches; and the Bishop thereof called
Baronius anno 106. n. 2. Solum Romanum Pontificem esse dicendum universal, non
autem Episcopum Constantinopolitanum. See also B^bliothecarius in Boniface 3.
Platina in Boniface 3 and Sabellicus 8.6. against all whom Bellarmine strives
in vain. In Apologia pro Torto. See B. Andrews. Ad M. Torti librum Responsio
page 329. and seq. and Ad Cardinalis Bellarmini Apologium Responsio page 277.
and seq. and B. Morton Appeal. lib. 4. cap. 11.
Universal Bishop, and not the Bishop of Constantinople: which title in
aftertimes gave a good color to the Bishops of Rome, for their
claimed-dominion over all Christian Churches.

Usher. c. 1.. 18.
So that within the first six hundred years, doubtless the seeds of much evil
were sown, and Antichrist conceived, though not yet borne; for in all those
six hundred years, no man could truly be called Papist, either for holding
this usurpation, or any other of those 27 Articles which Bishop Jewel learnedly
defends against Mr. Harding.

. 5.
Usher. ib cap. 2. 4 etc.
In the succeding times The Bishops of France, Germany, and Britany, opposed the
Bishop of Rome in the matter of Images, as the African Bishops before had done
in the matter of Apeales. For in anno 754; A Synod of 338 Bishops at
Constantinople, had abrogated all Images, saving that one Image of Bread and
Wine, which our Savior ordained in the B. Sacrament, to represent his Body and
Blood.

But the Pope, in the year 587, As our English Histories report.
by another Synod (called the second Council of Nice) established the
worshipping of Images. Which Council, and Image Worship, our English Church
execrated, and our Alcuinus wrote a Book against it, which he carried in the
name of our Bishops and Princes to the K. of France. The same second Council
of Nice was condemned also by the Bishops of Germany and France, in a Council
held at Frankfort upon Mean, in the year 794. As also by Charles the Great,
and Lodouicus Pius his son. And in this Lodouicus his time was another Synod
held at Paris, anno 821. which condemned the same second of Nice, with the
Image worship, and argued the Pope of error therein.

Now to say, these Councels that were against the Popes Judgment, were
condemned by the Pope, is to no purpose: for thus it appears still, that the
Princes and Bishops of Brittany, France and Germany, rejected at once, both the
worship of Images, and the determinations of a corrupt Council, and also the
Popes infallibity of Judgment, and his authority over them; as the Eastern,
and the Southern African Bishops had done before.

Baronius further adds, Baronius anno 794. nu. 36.39. and seq.
that many learned and famous men living then in the world, and in the Ages
following, greatly grudged at, and sharply wrote against that second Council
of Nice, and the Image Worship by it and by the Popes, confirmed: many of whose
names he recites and cites their words.

. 6.
In these times many Authors write, that the worlds opinion was, that
Antichrist was borne: yet that he was yet but an Infant, not able to subdue the
Nations until a thousand years after Christ's planting the Church; for till
that time Satan was not let loose, Revel, 20.7, Esaias 1.21. Revel. 17.2 and
18.23.
8. The faithful City began to be an Harlot, and great Babylon prostituted it
self; but could not yet inebriate the Inhabitants of the Earth with her Cups
of Fornication, till that time came. But these preparations must go before: as
did also the publishing to the world of Constantines Donation, long since, made
(as it was pretented) but now first known to the world; for the Popes larger
temporal Dominion; and also the coming abroad of the Decretable Epistles of
ancient Popes, long since also said to be written, but never before known to
the world, for the Popes greater spiritual Dominion: both which are condemned
as mere counterfeits by many learned men, yea, by many of their own side.

. 7.
Sigonius l 6. de regno Italiae. Werner. ^ascil temp. aetat. 6. circa annum 894
et ^74 Bellar. de Romans Pont. l 4. c 12. verbis vlt. nullu^ saeculum indoctius
aut infaelicius Baronius tomo 10. anno 900.. 1. Saeculum sui asperitate ac boni
sterilitate ferreu^, malique exundant^^ deformitate plumbeum, ^^que nopia
scriptorum, obscurum. Abominatio desolationis in Templo -- mirum quod non
secuta mox fuerit desolatio templi.
But the succeeding Ages exceeded in all kind of wickedness, both by the
iniquity of Princes, and madness of people as Sigonius, Wernerus, and all
others record. So openly wicked; that Baronius and Bellarmine can neither hide
nor deny it. Bellarmine says, No Age was more unlearned, nor more if unlucky.
Baronius says, They Were Iron Ages, for barrenness of goodness, Leaden Ages
for abundance of evil, Ages of darkness for scarcity of Writers, which he
tells in the beginning of the story, lest a weak man seeing (in the story) the
abomination of desolation sitting in the Temple, should be offended, and not
rather wonder, that there followed not immediately the desolation of the Temple.

And Baronius, anno 912.. 8. laments thus. O what a face was then of the Roman
Church! how filthy! when the most rich, and withal the most sordid Whores
domineered at Rome! by whose pleasure Bishops Seas were changed, Bishops
placed: and (which is horrible to be heard or spoken) their Sweet-hearts (false
Bishops) were intruded into Peter's seat; which are for no other ends recorded
in the Catalogue of Roman Bishops, but only to fill up the times. And a little
after. Then plainly (as appears) Christ was in a deep sleep in the ship,
when by these strong winds blowing, the ship was near covered with waves. He
slept (I say) when seeming not to see these things, he suffered them, and arose
not to avenge them. And (which seemed yet worse) there wanted Disciples with
their cries to awake him, all sleeping. What Priests do you think were then
chosen by these Monsters, what Deacons, Cardinals? seeing nothing is more
natural then for like to beget their like? This and much more Baronius to the
like effect. Gerber. epist. 40. at the end of that Age. Vsh. ib.. 33. Platina
in Benedicto, 4 Sabell. in Ennead. 9. l. 1. and l. 2. Genebrard. chronolg. l 4,
in Decimi saeculi initio. Wernerus fasciculo temporum ae^^t. 6. circa annum
944. Vsh. ibid.. 34.
Gerbertus in few words spoke much of those times Romanorum mores Mundus
perhorrescit The Romans manners the world thoroughly abhors.

Platina and Sabellicus have the like complaints of the state of the Church,
and Popes so vntollerably degenerate.

And Genebrand says, that in about 150 years, there were about fifty Popes,
which wholly swarued from the virtue of their Predecessors (a virtute maiorum
prorsus deficerunt Apotactici Apostaticiue potius, quam Apostolici) rather
masters of mis-rule, or Apostataes, then Apostolic. Wernerus a Carthusian
Monk, says of this age. Sanctitatem Papam dimisisse, and ad Jmporatores
accessisse. That holiness forsook the Pope and came to the Emperors.

Of the profane life of the Clergy; King Edgare made a wise religious speech to
the English Bishops, which Alred Abbot of Rhieuall published in writing. Abrod
Rhieval. in Genealogi^ Dauidis Regis Scotiae, MS.
I must say (says he) that which good men lament, and wicked laugh at: they
melt away in gluttony and drunkenness, in chambering and wantonness; that now
the houses of Clerks are accounted the Brothels of Whores, and Synods of
Iesters; their Dicing, their Singing and dancing, their sitting up till
midnight with clamor and horror. Thus, thus ye waste the Patrimony or Kings,
the alms of Princes, and which is more, the price of his most precious blood.
Did our Fathers exhaust their treasures to this end? Usher. ibid. 33 Polydor.
lib 6. Hist. Angl. A^l. fric. sermon. ad sacerdotes MS. colleg. Benedict.
Cantabrig. Joan. Stella Sacerdos in vita B^nedicti 4 Papae 122. inquit.
Acciderat illi aetati, quod omnis virtus, tam in capite qua^ in membris, ex
hominum iganvia consumpta fuerit.
I have Constantines, you have Peter's sword in our hands. Let us join hands,
and swords, that the leprous may be cast out of our Tents, and the Lords
Sanctuary may be purged. Do it carefully, that we may not repent of what we
have done, and what we have given, finding that it is consumed, not in the
service of God, but in the luxury of wicked man, with unbridled liberty.

The covetous rauin and tyranny both of Monks and Priests, most scandalous,
beyond all lay men, at those times is described and lamented, by Polydore
Vergil, Aelfricus, Joannes Stella, and others.

. 8.
Vsh. ibid. cap. 3.. 1. etc.
After the great secular year of Christ (1000 after his Incarnation) the
Christian faith much decayed from the ancient unity: and inundation of all
wickedness ouerflowed the world, by the descriptions and lamentations of
Wernerus, Glaber Rodulphus, Lupus Episcopus, Guilelmus Archiepiscopus Tyrensis,
etc. and wonderful prodigies and terrors appeared from above, and below were
plagues, famines, earthquakes, etc. (spoken of by Sigonius, Hector Boethius.
Hepidamus, Rupertus, Wernerus, Glaber, Sabellicus, Sigebert, Nangiacus,
Vincentius, Bellevacensus, Antonius Florenticus, Archiepiscopus, Joannes
Nanclerus) as proclaymers of Antichrists coming; for many believed that
Antichrist was then borne, (as Baronius records, 1001.. 1. and 4.. 5.
) by the testimony of Abbo Floriacensis, of the time presently after the
thousandth year of Christ; which opinion had continued from the times of
Hippolitus, Cyrill, and Chrysostom.

In the thousandth year after Christ's birth, Vsh. ib. cap. 4. Benno in vi^^
Hil^hbrandi and Platina in vita ^jus.
Siluester the second was Bishop of Rome, and sat 4 years he was before named
Gerbertus. He entered by the Devils aid, (says the Cardinal Benno) and by the
devils deceit was quickly destroyed. And anno 1033. (which was the thousandth
after Christ's death,) Benedict the ninth, a child of ten or twelve years old
was made Pope, by money, not by merit, and sat 12 years. He was also cunning
in Magic and devilish in Arts, and wrought much mischief to the Church and
Common wealth, (says Benuo) he was homo ignavus and nullius pretij (says
Platina and Stella) Probrosus and infamius (says Volateran) Nefarius (says
Baronius:) and he was chosen by the Devils in the woods (says Benno) In his
time Cardinals began to be in some estimation: Baron. anno 1061.. 9.16.
And in Nicolas the seconds time, anno 1059. they had the first voices in
choosing Popes. Now they do all, they are created by these words, August.
triumph. de potestat. eccles. quaest. 8. art. 4. Ballar. Apolog. cont^a Iacobum
Regem cap. 4. page 34, 35. adedit. Romae. 1610.
Estote fratres nostri, and principes mundi The Pope creates them, and they
create the Pope. Bellarmine says. This dignity is not new, since it has been
500 years. But surely that is new, which came into the Church after Satan's
loosing. In which respect Wiclife says, Cardinals were the invention of the
Devil. For (in stead of lots directe^ by the Lord in the election of Matthias,
Acts 1.) Now whomsoever the Cardinals choose, be he fit or unfit, Wic^f. art.
40. in council. Constan. sess. 8. and in speculo milit. eccle. cap. 10. Camera^.
Cardinal. lib. de Refor^ Eccle.
he is straight Beatissimus Pater, and Immediatus Christi vicarius. Wicliffe
was indeed condemned in the Council of Constance, yet many in that Council
held with his opinion says Cameracensis: that such choice of the Pope by
Cardinals was unprofitable and hurtful to the Church, and was used without
reasonable cause, burdensome to the Church and fit to be abolished. Howsoever
they are dignified with most glorious and transcendent titles, Clemang de
corrupto Eccle. statu.
. 26. whose office was at first (says Clemangis) to carry out the dead and
bury them.

. 9.
When a thousand years was expired after the destruction of Jerusalem, still
greater miscries fell upon Christendom. Romanus Diogenes. Emperor of the
East, was assailed by War, and taken Prisoner by the Sultan of the Persians
and Assyrians, trodden upon in despite of the Christian religion and returning
home, had his eyes put out by his own Nobles and rejected. The Sultan subdueth
many Countries, great Antiochia; Celosyra, both the Calicias, Isaurio,
Pamphilia, Lycia, Pisidia, Lycaonia, Cappadocia, Galatia, both the Pontuses,
Bythinia, Matt. Paris hist. anno Dom. 1072.
and part of the lesser Asia, etc. And in the West, the negligence and
wickedness of the Clergy, was so outrageous, that some published letters as
sent from Hell by Satan and all his infernal powers, giving thanks to the
Ecclesiastical orders that they failed in nothing to do him pleasure, but sent
or suffered so many souls to descend to Hell, as never any Ages had done
before. Anton. in Chro. tit. 16. cap. 1. 21. Segebert. chron. an. 1088
The Shismes of Anti-Popes and Anti-Cesars, increased this evil: the Crowns
and the Crosiers dissenting, one excommunicating another, and one contemning
another censure, and treading down both authority and equity under their feet.
And then began that Nouity (not to call it heresy) that to evil Princes
subjection was not due; and though men had sworn fidelity to them, Onuphr.
Vita Greg. 7, ex libro 4. de var^a creation^ Romans Pontif.
yet they ought them no fidelity: and that whosoever rose against the King was
not perjured, but he that obeyed the King, was to be accounted excommunicate
This says Sigebert, was a Nouity, if not heresy. But Onuphrius says, that
hence did arise perniciosissima seditio and haeresis omnium pestilentissima.
And Auentinus says. Then false prophets, false apostles, Aventin. Annal.
Bo^er. l. 5.
false priests came out and deceived the people with counterfeit Religion, and
seeking to establish their own power and dominion quenched Christian charity
and simplicity, and then all good, open, just, ingenuous, and plain people
thought the kingdom of Antichrist began, for they saw that was come to pass,
which Christ so many years before had foretold. Thus writes Aventine, of the
times of Gregory the seventh, formerly called Hildebrand.

Waltramus, Bishop of Naumburg, and Lambertus Schasuaburgensis, and Gerhohus Be
cherspergensis say, Now was Satan let loose out of prison. Sir John Haywoo^ of
Supremacy, page 68. Ma^hiavel. dispat. de rep. l. 1. c. 12. and Hosp^n. de
Orig. Monach. l. 6. c. 66.
For Piety and Religion now did not only decline by degrees, but ran headlong
to a ruinous downfall, and there was no where less piety, then in those that
dwelt nearest to Rome, as Machiavel observed.

This Hildebrand, called afterward Gregory the seventh, lived in this tenth
Age, beginning his Papacy, Anno 1076.

The Canons or Dictates of this Hillebrand, Onuphr. in vita Gregorij 7 col.
248. B. Usher. ib. cap. 5.. 17. Greg. 7. Kegest. lib. 2 post. epist. 55. tom.
3. Con^^ edit. Binij, part. 2. page 1196.
(which he devised or executed beyond all his Predecessors, says Onuphrius)
were many and strange: whereof these are the chiefest.

1 That the Bishop of Rome only is by right called universal.

2 That he may ordain Clerks in every Church where he will.

3 That the greater causes of every Church ought to be referred to that Sea.

4 That he alone can depose Bishops, or reconcile them.

5 That his Legate is above all other Bishops, though he be of inferior degree,
and that he may give the sentence of deposition against them.

6 That he alone may for the necessity of times, make new laws.

7 That he alone may use the Imperial Ensigns.

8 That his feet alone all Princes must kiss.

9 That he may absolve subjects from their fidelity to wicked Princes.

10 That he alone may depose Princes and Emperors.

11 That his sentence way not be retracted by any man; and he alone may retract
all men's.

12 That he ought not to be judged of any man.

13 That he is not to be accounted Catholic, that concordeth not with the
Roman Church.

14 That the Church of Rome did never err, neither ever can err.

15 That the Bishop of Rome, if he be Canonically ordained, is by the merits of
S. Peter undoubtedly made holy.

16 That no Council without his command ought to be called general. Onuphr.
ib. col. 250. Sir John H^y ^ard Supremacy, page 57 Aven^^n. Annal. Boiorum lib.
7. ^ribuit hanc sententiam Eberhardo Salisburiensi Episcopo: Hildebrandus
primus specie religionis Antichristi imperij fundamenta jecit. Hoc bellum
nesandum primus auspicatus est, quod per successor^ hucusque continuatur. And A
entine h^^^elfe in the fi^t book, writes thus.


17 That no Chapter or Book in the Bible shall be accounted Canonical without
his authority.

18 That no man dare to condemn him that appealeth to the Apostolic Sea, etc.

Upon these foundations (says Onuphirius) he laid his steps and stayres, and
made his way to effect all that in his mind he had conceived.

This man was the first that enterprized to be elected and consecrated Pope
without consent of the Emperor: and set forth a Decree to excommunicate all
that affirmed the consent or knowledge of the Emperor to be necessary to the
election of Popes. He (says Auentine) was the first, that under color of
Religion built up the Popes Empire (primus Jmperrium pontificium condidit)
which his successors for 400 and 50 years together, maugre the world maugre
the Emperors (invito mudo, invitis Imperatoribus) have so drawn out, that
they have brought into servitude high and low, put them under their yoke, and
terrified all with their thunder. -- that the Roman Emperor is now nothing but
only a name without a body, without glory.

. 10.
Onuphrius speaks enough also (though he was a great favorer and amplifier of
the Popes dignity. Onuph^n vita Gregor. 7. col. 271, 272.
) Thus he writes. Him alone (that is Hildebrand) may all the Latin Churches,
but especially the Roman, thank for freedom from the Emperors hand, and for
the large endowment or wealth, riches, and (profanaditione) worldly
jurisdiction; and for being preferred and set over Kings, Emperors, and all
Christian Princes: and shortly to speak in a word, by him it attained to that
great and high estate whereby the Church of Rome is become the Mistress of all
Christians: whereas before, as a poor handmaid, (tanguam vilis ancilla) it was
held under, not only by the Emperors, but by every Prince that was aided by
the Emperor: from him (Hildebrand) flowed the right (jus) of that great, and
almost infinite power of the Roman Bishop, so fearful and venerable in all
Ages. For although before, the Roman Bishops were honored as the heads of
Christian Religion, Christ's Vicars, and Peter's successors: yet their authority
stretched no further then to the propounding or maintaining of poin^s of faith:
but their persons were subject to the Emperous; all was done by the Emperors
appointment; by them the Popes were created; of them the Popes of Rome durst
not judge, or determine any thing. All the Bishops of Rome, Gregory the seventh
was the first (trusting to the Arms of the Normans, and the wealth of Maud the
Countess, a powerful woman in Italy: and inflamed by the German Princes
discords, wasting themselves by ciu^ll wars:) beyond the custom of his
Ancestors, contemning the authority and power of the Emperor, when he had
obtained the Popedom, dared not only to excommunicate, but further to deprive
of his Kingdom and Empire, the Emperor himself, by whom if he was not
elected, yet he was confirmed in his Popedom: Res ante easecula inaudita; A
thing never heard of before that Age. For, the Fables which are reported of
Arcadius, Anastasius, and Leo Iconomachus (nihil moror) I recke not of.
Whereupon Otto Frisingensis, a Writer of those times, Lego and relego.
says thus; I read over and over the Acts of the Roman Kings and Bishops, but
I never find any of them before this Henry, excommunicated by the Bishop of
Rome, or deprived of his Kingdom, B. Usher. grauiss. quaest. cap. 5.. 8, 9,
etc.
etc. Thus writes Onuphrius. The like with Otto, writes Gotfridus Viterbiensis,
Joannes Trithenius: and others alleged (with these) by our Bishop Usher.

Of Hildebrand, not only Cardinal Benno (who lived in his time and wrote his
life) but many others do write very prodigiousand devilish things: as Paulus
Bernriedensis, Ioannes Trithenus, Ioh. Aventinus, Marianus Scotus, Otto
Frisingensis, Conradus Liechtenavius, Abbas Vrspergensis, Carolus Sigonius, and
Onuphrius, that he was a Magician, a Necromancer, and by help of the Devil
got the Popedom, and that he was so judged by thirty Bishops gathered together
out of Italy, Frace, and Germany, in Synodo Brixinae Noricae, anno 1080.
Although the late Jesuit and Cardinal Baronius would excuse him. He
propagated the doctrine of Devils, forbidding marriage to the Clergy, and
commanding abstinence from meats, (I Tim. 4.1, 3.) about which many troubles
and evils arose in the Church; In the Histories of anno. 1074.
as Sigebertus Gemblacensis, and Lambertus Schasuaburgensis (beside many other)
report at large, and with much detestation.

See the story of this Hildibrand hereafter.
This Hildebrand laid the foundation of Papisme, or the Popes greatness, and
was exceedingly opposed by the Bishops of Germany and France, and the greatest
number of Jtalians condemning his wicked doctrine and courses: as did also the
common people, calling the Pope Antichrist, that trod under foot, all Laws,
Usher ib.. 18.2^. etc. Avent. lib. 5. Annal. aedit. ^ngolst. anno ^^54. page
573. 574.
humane and divine: and under the title of Christ, d d the business of
Antichrist, absoluing men, not from sin, but from the Laws of God; filling
the world with wars, seditions, rauishments, periuries, murders, fire, and
robberies, corrupting Histories to cover and maintain his ambition; yea
adulterating the holy Scriptures with false interpretations to serve his lusts.
This inexpiable wickedness, this mischief, never before heard of in the
world, ought to be cut off by the Emperors sword; the Wolf raging in the
Sheeps skin ought to be taken out of the world, etc. This and much more (as
Aventine reports,) Plerique tum priuatim, public clamitant.

At that time therefore the greatest part of the world, Princes, Bishops, and
people cried out for reformation of intolerable corruptions crept into the
Church.

. 11.
Antiquus. You and your Authors reckon up obscure Historians; but the most
approved writers of Church-Histories, are wholly for us, such as our Martyr
Campian reckons up in his seventh Reason, Eusebius, Damasus, Hieronymus,
Ruffinus, Orosius, Socrates, Sozomenus, Theodoretus, Cassiodorus, Gregorius,
Turonensis, Vsuordus Regino, Marianus, Sigeberius, Zonaras, Cedrenus.
Nicephorus; These are wholly in the praise of our Church.

Antiquissimus. I answer you manifoldly; First, I have cited many of these
speaking against the manifold corruptions of your Church in their own times.
Secondly, the more ancient of these which Campian reckons, could not speak
against the corruptions which were not brought into the Church, until after
their times. Thirdly the latest of these might well be parties with you, as
maintained by you, to like the things usual in their times, and yet many of
them could not hold, but gravely reproved the novel corruptions of their
times. See B. Mortons Apologia Cathol. part. 2. l. 2, c. 9.
And lastly, I say Campian wrote untruly and unsoundly, making a glorious
flourish, that all these Historians were wholly for your praises, when as yet
your own Writers do ordinarily reject them, as writing against you. As for
example.

Eusebius, in rejecting and refelling of whose History Gelasius, has used
great wisdom, says our Bishop Canus Canus loc. theol. lib. 11. cap. 6. page
659.
.

And your Cardinal Bellarmine says. To Irenaeus, Tertullian, Eusebius and
Luther, I answer, Omnes manifesti haeretici sunt. They are all manifest
Heretics B^l^a^ de Christo l. 1. cap 9. page 104.
.

Hieronymus, He is not the rule of the Church (a bold and a bald scoff) in
judging of the Canonical Scriptures, says your Canus Canus loc. com. lib. 2.
p. 7^.. secundum quoque.
.

Ruffinus, He knew not the traditions of the Fathers, says Canus Canus ibid..
nam ad primum.
.

Damasus, Sophrnoius, Simeon Metaphrastes (when they cross the now Romish
tenets) they little move me, says Bellarmine Bellar. de Romans pontif. lib. 2
cap. 5.. neque multum me movet.
.

Marianus Scotus, secum ipse and cum veritate pugnat. says Bellarmine Bellar.
ibid.. quocirca sasciculum temporum and passionale merito contemnimus.
: he plainly crosses himself and the truth; and therefore we justly contemn
his Fasciculus temporum, and his Passionale.

Sigebert he was a follower or favorer of Henry the fourth, and therefore
took things wrong, says Bellarmine Bellar. ib. lib. 4. cap. 13.. Respondeo
Sigebertum.
.

Sigebert, and Marianus Scotus, we know well enough, they are corrupt Authors
says Bellarmine Bellar. ib. lib. 3. cap. 24. quod autem.
.

Socrates, He was a Nouatian Heretic, his testimony in dogmaticall points is
of no moment, says Bellarmine Bellar. de cultu Sanctorum lib. 3. cap. 10. add
vltimo.
.

Sozomenus, multa mentitur, he lies in many things, says your Jesuit
Valentinianus Valent. de caelibatu cap. 6. primo quia Sozomenus.
: also, Socrates, and Sozomenus are not worthy of credit (In the story of
Paphnutius) Valent ib. Valent. ib.
.

And Sozomens History is Reprobata a Gregorio, quia multa mentitur, says
Bellarmine Bellar. lib. 1. de clericis. cap. 20. at quod council.
.

Thus the Historians of greatest note which your Campian alleges, are by
Campians Fellows and Masters, rejected, refelled or refuted, condemned for
Heretics, scoffed at, not regarded, counted liars, mistaken and erroneous,
corrupted, Heretics, unworthy of credit, etc.

Antiquus. Indeed I cannot but wonder at it, that they should be thus in
general applauded, and in particulars rejected?

Antiquissimus. And so the world both in general and particular deluded. For,
observe here by the way.

First, If these Histories be true, which have recorded many grievous
corruptions crept into your Church, with the worlds wonder and detestation of
them: how have you been deluded and persuaded of the unity, sincerity and glory
of that Church, never spoken against by any, before Luthers time? but that all
Writers and Histories spoke in high commendation thereof? which you see, they
do not.

Secondly, If the Histories be false or doubtful: how can you appeal to them
for a true description of the succession, propagation, doctrine, traditions, or
customs of the Church, to show the sincerity and truth thereof? which you more
urge, and more lean upon then upon the Scriptures.

. 12.
Antiquus. Well then to let these histories pass, See these things more at
large in B. usher. ib. cap. 7.. 5.
show me some learned Judicious Divines, that have written against the errors
and corruptions, by you ascribed to the Church of Rome.

Antiquissimus. Take good Saint Bernard for one (who lived about the year,
1130. Bernard in Cantio. ser^^. 33.
) woe be unto this generation (says he) for the leaven of the Pharisees, which
is hypocrisy: if yet that may be called hypocrisy, which for the abundance
cannot, and for the Impudence desires not, to be hid. -- Omnes amici, and omnes
inimici, omnes necessarij, and omnes adversarij: omnes domestici, and nulli
pacifici: omnes proximi, and omnes quae sua sunt, quaerunt Ministri Christi
sunt, and seruiunt Antichristo. All friends, and yet all are enemies: all
necessaries, and yet all adversaries: all of an household, yet none peaceable:
all neighbors, yet every one seeks his own: the Ministers of Christ, but
they serve Antichrist. And afterward. Superest vt de medio fiat daemonium
meridianum, etc. It remains, that the Meridian Devil (the bold devil that
walks at noone, or at midday in the open light) come to deceive the residue
that still are in Christ, persisting in their simplicity. For he has supped up
the rivers of wise men, and torrents of powerful men: Job 40.23.
and has hope that Jordan will run in his mouth that is, The humble and simple
that are in the Church. For he is Antechrist, which counterfetteth himself to
be not only the day, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4, 8.
but the midday: and extols himself above all that is worshipped as God: whom
the Lord Jesus will slay with the breath of his mouth, and destroy in the
appearing of his coming.

Bern. in Psalm. 90. vel. 91. ser. 6.
This conclusion also he repeats, writing upon the Psalm Qui habitat. Superest,
vt reueletur homo peccati, etc. It remains, that the Man of sin be
revealed, the son of perdition, Daemonium non modo diurnum, sed and
meridianum: quod non solum transfiguratur in Angelum lucis, sed extollitur
super omne quod dictur Deus, aut quod colitur. etc.

Bern. sermon. 1. in convers. Pauli.
And elsewhere Saint Bernard makes his complaint to God: O God, thy near
friends come near to stand against thee. The whole Vniue^sity of Christian
people from the least to the greatest, seem to have conspired against thee.
From the sole of the feet to the crown of the head, there is no soundness.
Iniquity is gone out from the elder Judges thy Vicars, Of Bernard, see more in
D. ^^eld Appendix to the fifth book of the Church, part. 1. page 88, 89.
which seem to rule thy people: and now we cannot say, such people, such
Priest; for the people are not so as the Priest. Alas, alas, O Lord God, those
are the first and chief in persecution, who seem to love and bear the first
and chief place in thy Church, etc.

Johannes Sarisburiensis told Hadrian the fourth, Joh Sarisbur. in Policratic.
lib. 6. cap. 24.
plainly, what the world thought of him and his Prelates: that the Roman Church
showed her self not a mother, but a step mother to all other Churches. For in
it sit the Scribes and Pharisees, laying importable burdens upon men's shoulders,
which themselves will not touch with one finger. -- They hurt very often, and
herein they follow the Devils, which then are thought to do good, when they
cease to do harm, except a very few, who perform the name and office of
Pastors. Sed and ipse Romanus Pontifex, omnibus grauis and fere intolerabilis
est: that is, even the Bishop of Rome himself is grievous to all, and almost
intolerable. Aliacus de Reformatione Ecclesiae. Caesarius Heisterbach. hist.
lib. 2. cap. 29.
These times were evil, the succeeding much worse. Of which Petrus de Aliaco,
Cardinal of Cambray, said, It was a proverb in his time. Ad hunc statum venit
Romana ecclesia, vt non esset digna regi nisi per reprobos. The Church of Rome
was come to that state, that it was not worthy to be governed, but only by
Reprobates.

Robert Grosthead, Matthew. Paris. in Henric. 3. See this History abridged in D.
Field church. appendix part. 1. page 97. and B. Carlton. Iurisd. cap. 8.. 111.
a very learned and holy Bishop of Lincoln, living anno 1140. wrote sharply
to the Pope (for the evils he did specially in England) that he was opposite to
Christ, a murderer of souls, and an Heretic in these his courses, etc. Upon
receipt of which letters the Pope was exceedingly moved, threatening to cast
down this Bishop into the pit of all confusion, but was p^c^fied by the more
moderate Cardinals, telling him of this Bishops holiness, learning,
reputation: and since there must be a departure from their Church, the meddling
with such an excellent man might occasion it; the things which he proved being
full and manifest.

Archb. Abbo^. contra Hill, reason 1.. 28.
William Ockam an Englishman, a great Schooleman, living anno 1320. for his
large reproof of the Papacy in many points in his books, he was
excommunicated by the pope, and dyed willingly under that sentence. Catalog
testium. verit. lib 18. D. Field. ch l. 3. c. 11.
He cried out of perverting Scriptures, Fathers, and Canons of the Church with
shameless and Harlots foreheads; and that many that should be pillars of the
Church did cast themselves headlong into the pit of Heresies

See B. Carlton. Jurisdiction, cap. 1.. 11.
Michael Cesenas, lived anno 1320. he was general of the Order of the
Minorites, he wrote against three constitutions of Pope John 22. and was by
John deprived and disabled from taking any other dignity: but Cesena appealed
from the Pope (as from the head of faction in the Church) to the Roman
Catholic, and Apostolic Church, and was favored therein by Ockam, and many
famous learned men, and by the two Universities of Oxford and Paris.

Nicholas Clemangis, Archidiaconus Baiocensis, living anno 1417. in his book
De corupto Ecclesiae statu, writes very sharply against the Popes ambition and
covetousness, preying upon all Churches, and bringing them into miserable
slavery: and against the stately Cardinals, and other vices of the Clergy.

Gerson lib. de council o vnius obedientiae, and in many other books.
John Gerson, Chancellor of Paris, anno 1429. writes the like, wishing that all
things should be reformed and brought back to their ancient state, in or near
the Apostles times.

Of Gersons doctrine, see D. Field Appendix, to the fifth book of the Church,
part. 2. p. 73. and seq. Petrus de Aliaco Cardinalis Cameracensis, living about
the same time, wrote to the Council of Constance, a book wherein he reprooueth
many notable abuses of the Romanists, and gives advice how to redress them.

Arch. Abbot ibid.. 13.
Laurentius Valla, a Patricias of Rome, and Canon of Saint John's of Lateran,
living about the same time. wrote against the forged Donation of Constantine,
and many abuses of the Pope: and was by the Pope driven into exile.

I might here speak of Leonardus Aretinus, Antonius Cornelius Lynnichanus, and
diverse other writers reproving the same things.

. 13.
Antiquus. Let them alone; for these whom you have alleged, speak not of any
false doctrines of the Church of Rome, but only against the wicked lives of
the Professors.

Antiquissimus. Yes, against both: and especially, because they labored by
false doctrine to justify their doings, and therefore they write not only
against the Pope, but against the Papacy, the very office that challenged a
right to do such things as the Pope and his Clergy did.

The two Cardinals Cameracensis and Cusanus, Camer. in his book to the
Council of Constance. Cusanus Concord. Cathol. lib. 2.
wholly condemned the Papacy (as we do) denying the Popes universality of
Jurisdiction, uncontrollable power, infallible judgment, and right to meddle
with Princes states; making him nothing but the first Bishop in order and
honor, amongst the Bishops of the Christian Church.

And this claimed power of the Pope, dissolving the whole frame of
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and form of government settled by Christ, was
thought no less hurtful then the bringing in of heresy and false doctrine,
by all that wrote against it: and therefore they impute unto it, Heresim
pestilentissimam, and all such things as belong only to Antichrist and his
followers.

And indeed the desire of worldly wealth and honor drew on many corruptions of
doctrine. For when the ouer-politicke Popes found but few learned i^dicious men
able to maintain the truth, and few potent courageous Princes able to
maintain their right against them: then they fell to make their own
greatness, wealth, and honor the very rule to square out the Canons of Faith
and Government, and then set Clerks on work to devise arguments to maintain
them The Church at that time abounding with rewards to quicken their wits, and
spur on their diligence. From this root proceeded (doubtless) the forged
Donation of Constantine, and the Decrees and decretall Epistles of ancient
Bishops, then newly brought to the knowledge of the world, and never before
seen, and in these more learned Ages rejected by their own Doctors: and from
this root, sprung a new generation of Schoolmen, moulding a new Doctrine mixed
of Philosophy and divnity, to amuse and amaze the world, and keep it in
blindness: and much corruption of Scriptures, which now must have no other
sense then their Philosophy, and the Rules of their Government will give it.
This desire of wealth and greatness, brought in Image Worship, which the holy
Scriptures so plainly and plentifully condemn. For when it might easily have
been abolished, See the Histories of those times.
as but then creeping in: and that Leo Jsaurus Emperor, seeing the Sarazens
take offense at Christians, to abhor and massacre them for their Images in
Churches, which offense Leo took away and burned the Images: Pope Gregory the
second, that ought to have Joined therein; opposed him, and took the hint to
make the Emperor odious to all Italy, as an enemy to Religion, to the Saints
and to their Memories. And while the Emperor was weakened by the Sarazens in
the East, the Pope made this an occasion to make the West to revolt from him:
and quickly deprived him of Italy: to the great injury of the Emperor scandal
to the world, and hurt to Christendom. And then Image worship must be defended
that had been the means of so much wealth to the Pope, with opposing Council
to Council, Princes and learned men one against another, to the great trouble
of Christendom. The worshipping of Images therefore did the Pope good service:
and so it does still; for it draws multitudes of devout people to Rome, and
other places, with their offerings and other spendings to enrich them.

. 14.
But to leave these things, and come to particular doctrines held then by many,
otherwise then they be now by the Romans.

The Fathers held those books for Canonical Scriptures which we now do, D.
Field of the Church lib. 4. cap. 23. and Appendix. part. 1. page 100. See all
their allegations in D. Field. lib. 4. cap. 23.
and separated those from the Canon which we do separate. Namely, Melito
Bishop of Sardis, Origin, Athanasius, Hilarious, Nazianzen Cyril of Jerusalem,
Epiphanius, Ruffinus, Hierom, Gregory, and Damascene. So did also many other
learned men, living in the corrupt state of the Church under the Papacy: as,
Hugo de Sancto victore, Richardo de Sancto victore, Petrus Cluviacensis,
Lyranus, Dionysius Carthusianus, Hugo Cardinalis, Thomas Aquinas, Richardus
Armachanus, Picus Mirandula, Ockam, Caietan, and Dredo. In this point they were
all Protestants, and desired the reformation that we have made.

That man after the Fall, Field Appendix ad lib. 5. part. 1. page 101.
until he be restored by grace can do nothing spiritually good, or that is
not sin: nor can any way dispose himself to a true conversion unto God,
without preventing grace, was the doctrine of S Augustine, Prosper; and more
lately of Thomas Bradwardin: Gregorius Ariminensis, Cardinal Contaren, and
Bonaventure, cited by Cassander Consult. art. 8.

Justification by Christ's imputed righteousness (not by our inherent) was
taught by S. Bernard. Epist. 190. Bernard. Ge^son lib. 4. de consulatione
theologiae. See these alleged in my second Book, in the chapter of
Justification.
Assignata est homini Iustitia aliena, quia caruit sua. To man is assigned the
righteousness of another, because he had none of his own. And sermon 61 Jn
cantica. And Gerson, and Cardinal Contarenus, and the Divines of Colen in
their Enchiridion, and Antididagma, and Albertus Pighius.

That man cannot merit any thing properly at Gods hand, See D. Field. Church.
appendix ad lib. 4. cap. 11.
Scotus, Ariminensis, Waldensis are plain. So Pope A^rian on the 4 of the
Sentences cited by Cassander, Consult. art. 6. and Clicthoveus cited there
also. And Bernard. sermon. 1. in festo omnium sanctorum, and often elsewhere, he
says our good works are via regni, non causa regnandi, the way to heaven, but
not the cause meriting heaven.

See these Authors words cited at large in Bishop Vshers book. D. Field
Church. appendix part. 1. page 103. etc.
And Cardinal Contarenus, epist. ad Cardinalem Farnesium. To which add out of
Bishop Vshers answer to the Jrish Jesuit. page 500. and seq. A great number
more of ancient Fathers and later writers.

That Christ's merits are to be apprehended by a lively faith, which faith is a
motion of the spirit, when men truly repenting of their former life, are
raised and lifted up to God, and do truly apprehend the mercies of God
promised in Christ, and do indeed feel in themselves an assurance that they
have received remission of their sins, and reconciliation by Gods goodn^sse,
and by the merit of Christ, and do cry Abba Father.

Cited by Cassander. consult. a^^, 4.
This is expressly delivered in the book exhibited by Charles the fifth Emperor,
to the Divines of both sides: and the Divines agreed unto it.

And in the Enchiridion (cited by Cassander, ibid.) well approved by all the
learned Divines of Jtaly and France: and by Cardinal Contarenus in his Tract
of Justification: and by the Divines of Colen in their Antididagma, De duplici
fiducia, and by Saint Bernard, sermon. 1. de Annuntiatione dominica.

The Communion in both kinds is delivered to the people in all Churches of the
world unto this day, saving in the Roman Church: and in the Roman Church it so
continued, for more then a thousand years, in the solemn, ordinary, and
public dispensation of that Sacrament: Cassander consult art. 22.
As Cassander shows, and Beatus Rhenanus. And it has been called for, with
great earnestness, by many Nations and Churches, Rhenanus upon Tertullian de
corona militis.
both before and in the Council of Trent: and is still stiffely denied by the
Pope and his Prelates.

Against private Communions (called private Masses) where none of the people
present receive, but the priests only: Cassander writes, and Micrologus,
Cassander praefat. ord. Romani Microl. de officio Missae cap. 19. Clicth^veus
on the Canon of the Mass, cited by Cassander. ibidem.
and Clicthoveus, among many others.

Circumgestation (says Cassander) is contrary to the manner of the Ancients,
Cassander consult. art. 22. Field. quo supra.
for they admitted none to the fight of the Sacrament, but the partakers, and
therefore the rest were bidden depart. Crautzius praises Cusanus, who being
the popes Legate in Germany, took away his Circumgestation unless it were
within the Octaues of Corpus Christi day: The Sacrament being instituted for
use, and not for ostentation.

Touching the honor of Saints, Gerson and Contarenus, Gerson de Directione
cordis. consider 16. and sequent. Contarenus in confut. artic. Lutheri.
and many others reprehend sundry superstitious observations, and wish they
were wisely abolished.

Whether the Saints in heaven do particularly know our estate, and hear our
cries and groans, not only Saint Augustine, August. de cura pro mortuis.
Glossa in Esaias 63 Hugo Erudit. Theolog. de sacram. fidei lib. 2. part. 16. cap.
11.
and the Author of the Interlineall gloss; But Hugo de Sancto victore tells us
it is altogether uncertain, and cannot be known. So that though in generality
they pray for us (or rather for all the Church on earth,) yet we may not safely
and with faith pray to them.

That in the primitive Church, public prayers were celebrated in the vulgar
tongue; Lyra confesses, Lyra in 1. Cor. 14 Caietan in respons. ad Articulos
Parisiense^,
and Caietan professes that he thinks it would be more for edification, if
they were so now. And he confirms his opinion out of Saint Paul.

Saint Bernard wrote diverse things concerning the now- Romish Doctrine,
touching special faith, imperfection and impurity of inherent righteousness,
merits power of freewill, the conception of the blessed Virgin, and the keeping
of the feast of her conception. See D. Field. Appendix to the fifth book of the
Church. part. 1. page 89. Bernard. sermon. 5. de verb. Esaiae.
All our righteousness (says he) is as the polluted rags of a menstruous
woman. Sermon. 1. de Annunciat.
We must believe particularly that all our sins are remitted us. Tract. de
gratia and lib. arb. in fine.
Our works are via regni, not causa regnandi, they are the way that leads to
the kingdom, but no cause why we reign. Epist. 175. ad Canonicos. Lugd.
The blessed Virgin was conceived in sin; and the feast of her conception ought
not to be kept.

So that what errors and abuses we have amended in our reformed Churches;
those the learned men of former Ages, have espied, and have written against
them: and we have made no other Reformation then they heartily desired.

For conclusion of this point; see what a number of famous men, writing and
preaching against the corruptions of Rome, One University afforded: and thereby
guess what the world did.

. 15.
Gabriel Powel de Antichristo. Edit. Land. 1605. reckons these Oxford men
amongst many others in his Preface.

1 King Alfred, Founder of Oxford University: would not have his people
ignorant of Scriptures, or bard the reading thereof. Anno 880 Capgrav.
cataloge. Sanct Angliae. Polydor. Virg. hist. Ang. lib. 5. Baleus.

2 Joannes Patricius Erigena, a Brittan, first Reader in Oxford, ordained by
the King; wrote a book of the Eucharist, agreeable to Bertrams, and condemned
after by the Pope, in Vercellensi Synodo. And he Martyred for it, anno 884.
Philip. in Chron. lib. 4. sub Henr. 4, Baleus cent. 2. cap 24.

3 Some Divines at Oxford were burnt in the face and banished, for saying the
Church of Rome was the Whore of Babylon, Monkery a stinking carrion: their
vows, toys, and nurses of Sodom, Purgatories, Masses dedications of Temples,
worship of Saints, etc. inventions of the Devil, anno 960. Matthew. Paris. lib.
4. Guido Perpin. de haeresib. Baleus cent. 2.

4 Arnulph or Arnold, an English preacher, a Monk of Oxford, for preaching
bitterly against Prelates and Priests wicked lives and corruptions, cruelly
butchered, anno 1126. (but says Platina, greatly commended by the Roman
Nobility for a true servant of Christ) Bale cent. 2. cap. 70.

5 Joannes Sarisburiensis, anglus Oxoniensis theologus, Episcopus Carnotensis,
beloved of the Popes Engenius 3. and Hadrian. 4. wrote against the abuses of
Clergy and Bishops, in Objurgatorie Cleri, and in Polycratico, he says, The
Scribes and Pharisees sit in the Roman Church, laying importable burdens on men's
shoulders. The Pope is grievous to all, and almost intolerable. [Ita
debacchantur ejus legati ac si ad ecclesiam flagellandam egressus sit Satan a
fac^e domini.] and he that dissents from their doctrine is judged an Heretic
or a Schismaticke, etc. 1140. Sarisburien. Polycr. lib. 5. cap. 16. and lib. 6.
cap. 24.

6 Gualo, Professor of Mathematics in Oxford, much praised of Sarish. in
Polycrat. wrote inuectiues against Priests, of the Monkish profession, their
luxuries, pompes, and impostures, anno 1170. Bale cent. 3. cap. 15.

7 Gilbert Foliot, Doctor of Divinity in Oxford, Bishop first of Hereford, and
after of London, persuaded King Henry 2 (after the example of Jehoshaphat and
other Kings) to keep the Clergy in subjection: and often resisted and blamed
Tho. Becket to his face, 1170. Bale ib. cap. 7.

8 Syluester Gyrald, Archdeacon Meneuensis beloved of Hen. 2 and John King of
England, wrote a book of the Monks (Cistertians) naughtiness, etc. 1200.
^eland catalogo virorum illustrium. Bale cent 3 cap. 59.

9 Alexander, a Divine of Oxford, sent by King John, to defend his authority
against the Pope, which he did by reasons and Scriptures: and wrote against the
Popes power, and temporal Dominion. He was banished by Langton, Bishop of
Canterbury; and dyed in exile, he lived, anno 1207. when King John banished 64.
Monks of Canterbury for contumary breaking his commandment. Bale cent 3 cap.
57.

10 Gualter Maxes, Archdeacon of Oxford, a famous man, having been at Rome, and
seen the ambition of the Pope, he set it out while he lived with most vehement
satyricall criminations. He wrote a book called, The Revelation of the Romish
Goliath: and diverse others of the enormity of the Clergy: lamentation over
Bishops, and against the Pope, the Roman Court, the evils of Monks, etc. he
flourished, anno 1210. Siluester Gyrald, in spec. eccles. lib. 3. c. 1. and 14
Bale cent. 3 cap. 61.

11 Robertus Capito, Robert Grosthead, Doctor of Divinity in Oxford, Bishop of
Lincoln; wrote against Prelates idleness: and thundered against the Romish
Court: he modestly, but yet publicly reproved the covetousness, pride, and
manifold tyranny of Pope Innocent 4. He was excommunicated to the pit of hell,
and cited to come to their bloody Court, but he appealed from the Popes tyranny
to the eternal tribunal of Jesus Christ, and shortly after dyed, anno 1253.
The Priests that taught men's commandments and not Gods, he called Antichrists,
Satan's priests, thieves, murderers of souls, spirits of darkness: and their
exemptions by the Pope, he said were the nets of the Devil: Matthew. Paris calls
him Magnus Ecclesiae Doctor; skillful in the Hebrew, Greek and Latin: Triuetus
calls him A man of excellent wisdom, most pure life, and incomparable pattern
of all virtues, 1253. Bale. cent. 4. cap. 18.

12 Sevaldus, Sebald, Archbishop of York, wrastled constantly against the
tyranny of the Romish Court. He thought the Pope was permitted of God for the
great hurt of many. He wrote to the Pope in great grief, to abstain from his
accustomed tyranny, and to follow the humility of his holy Predecessors: and
after Peter's examples to feed, not to clip, flea, bowel, devour, and consume
Christ's sheep: but the Pope contemned his admonition: he dyed 1258. Matthew.
Paris in Hen. 3. anno 1258. Bale. cent. 4. cap. 23.

13 William Stengham Doctor, wrote for the sufficiency of the New Testament,
only for salvation against the Evangelium eternum. He flourished anno 1260.
Bale cent. 4 c. 17.

14 Roger Bacon, Fellow of Merton College in Oxford, a great Philosopher and
Divine (without Necromancy, says Bale) spoke so much against the Antichristian
errors of his time, that Pope Nicholas the 4. condemned his doctrine, and
imprisoned him. Antonius in Chron. he flourished, an. 1270. Bale. cent. 4. cap.
55.

15 Ioannes Dominicus Scotus, an English man, of Merton College; a great
Schoolman, and called Doctor subtilis: he taught against the abuse of the
Keys: and that Transubstantiation could not be proved, neither by Scriptures,
or true Reasons, as Bellarmine confesses, he flourished, 1290. Scotus 4 cent.
did 18.

16 John Baronthorp, Doctor and public Reader of Divinity in Oxford, called
Doctor resolutus. He taught that the Pope was to be under the Emperor, and
Kings. He reviled the deceits and impostures of Antichrist, flourished, 1320.
as appears in his book, De Christi dominio: Jac. Papiens. l. de H. 8.
diuortio Bale c. 5.

17 Nicolaus Lyranus, an English man, of the Jews lineage, a Divine of Oxford,
amongst other things, he wrote a Book, De visione Dei, against the Pope, anno
1326. Iean. Wolphius, tomo 1. lect. memorab. in anno 1326.

18 William Ockam Fellow of Merton College in Oxford, called Doctor
singularis; and after Doctor invincibilis, wrote against Pope Ioh. 23 and
against Pope Clement, charging him with heresy, and calling him Antichrist,
hater of Christian poverty, and enemy to the Commonwealth he taught that the
Pope had no power in Civil dominion, flourished 1330. Occam. oper. 90. dierum
cap 93. Wolphius lect. memorab. tom. 1.

19 Thomas Bradwardine, of Merton College, Archbishop of Canterbury, wrote for
Gods grace against free will, three books: flourished, 1340. Catal. test. ver.
tom. 2.

20 Nicolaus Orum, Doctor in Oxford, preached at Rome before pope Vrba^ 5. and
the Cardinals, painting out and condemning the Papacy, and foretelling
destruction to hang over the Pope and Clergies head. He wrote the Epistle from
Lucifer to the Clergy, thanking them for sending so many souls to hell He
placed his daughters to them as to their proper husbands. Pride, Avarice,
Fraud, Luxury, and specially, Simony: See the whole Epistle in Powel de
Antichristo, in calce libri. he flourished 1351. Catalogus test. ver. tom. 2.

21 Richard Role, de Hampole, Doctor in Oxford, inveighed against the
unchastity, avarice, and filthiness of priests, and their Idolatry, anno 1340.
Wolphius tom. 1 lect. memorab.

22 Giles Hay, a Divine in Oxford, wrote a sharp book, Contra Flagellatores,
which is to be seen in Baliol College in Oxford, about the same time. Bale
append. ad cent. scrip. Britan.

23 Richardus Radulphi, Richard Fitz-ralph, an Irish man, Chancellor of
Oxford, Archbishop of Armagh, (Archiepiscopus Armachanus Hibernia Prima^) wrote
against begging Friars, and dedicated his book to pope Innocent 4. and in his
public Lectures displayed their follies, frauds, luxuries, wantonness, pride,
pomps and other fryerly virtues: and held it unchristian to be a wilful
beggar, condemned, Deuteronomy. 15. Wiclif. and Walden, say he was set on by the
Bishops and prelates of England: flourished 1355. Wiclif. in Trialogo. Walden
in fascicul. zizanorum Wiclif.

24 Richard Killington, Doctor in Oxford, Deane of Saint Paul's in London,
defended the said Richards Doctrine: and wrote many learned books against the
Monks and Friars. 1360. Bale cent. 4. cap 96.

25 John Wiclife, Doctor in Oxford, wrote great Volumes against Romish
corruptions. 1360. of Wiclife, read more, Book 2. chap. 1. sect. 3. subsect.
4. 2. etc.

26 Robert Langland, a Divine of Oxford, wrote against Papists corruptions in
English, especially the vision of Pierce Plowman, which is extant about Anno
1369.

27 Sir John Mandevil, Doctor of physic in Oxford, Knight after his travels,
said in our times, it was more true then in ancient, Virtus cessat, ecclesia
calcatur, clerus errat, damon regnat, Sodoma dominatur, 1370. Bale cent. 6.
cap. 46.

28 William Wickam, Bishop of Winchester, building two Colleges one at Oxford,
one at Winchester, so hated Sects and Monks, that he ordained by statute under
pain of expulsion present, none of the Fellows should enter the Religion of a
Monk. And though he did many good works, yet he professed he trusted to
Jesus Christ's merits alone for salvation, 1379. Out of the statutes of Wickams
College in Oxford. rubric. 38. and his life written by Tho. Martin. lib. 3.
cap. 2.

29 Philip Repington of Merton College, afterward Bishop of Lincoln, boldly
declaimed against the lives and vopure doctrine of the Romish Clergy, the Roman
Pharaoh, men's traditions, Friars beggings, Masses, Pilgrimages, Auricular
confession, and other things; at Oxford the Vice Chancellor, Robert Rigges, and
the Proctors joining with him, anno 1382. Bale cent. 6. cap. 90.

30 Geffrey Chawter Knight, Student in Oxford, Chawcer in his Plowmans Tale and
passim.
wrote many things very wittily, reproving, and scoffing at the idleness
foolery, and knavery of the Monks and other Clergy, at their ignorance,
counterfe^t Relics, pilgrimages, and Ceremonies: yea the pope himself he
sticked not to call an idle Laurel, a Marshall of Hell, a proud, envious,
covetous Lucifer, and Antichrist, he flourished, anno 1402.

31 Alexander Carpenter, an Oxford man of Baliol College, wrote a book
entitled, Destructorium vitiorum: wherein he reproved the careless and
godless lives of Prelates and priests, calling them Traitors to Christ
deceivers, thieves, liars, raueners, oppressors, lovers of pleasures, fleshly
hypocrites, cursed tyrants, and execrable Antichrists 1429. Ex destructorio
vitiorum part 6. cap. 30. and alibi saepius.

32 John Felton, Fellow of Magdalen College in Oxford, taught the Gospel
purely, and much against the popes pride and tyranny. 1440. Leland in Catalogo
virorum illustrium. Bale cent. 8. cap. 3.

33 Reginold Pain or Peacocke, of Oriel College in Oxford, made B. first of
Asaph, then of Cicester, taught at Paul's Cross, many things against the
Church-abuses of the time: and that the use of the Sacraments (such as was then
used) was worse then the use of the law of Nature: that Bishops sinned in
buying their admission of the pope of Rome, that no man was bound to believe,
or to be subject to the Church of Romes determination, that the begging of
Friars was idle and impious, that it was not necessary to salvation to believe
that Christ's body was materially in the Sacrament. And many other things
against the unsoundness of the Papacy: Yea, madness contra Papatus insaniam.
At last he was condemned of heresy by the slaves of the popish Bishops, 1457.
Bale cent. 8. cap. 19. ex Thomae Gascoigni Dictionario Theologico.

34 John Capgraue, Doctor of Diunity in Oxford, complained much of the impious
tyranny of the prelates, and priests hirelings, exposing their sheep to the
Wolves, seeking their wool and milk, but not their souls, etc. 1460. Bale
cent. 8. cap. 1.

35 Henry Parker, Fellow of All-Soules College in Oxford, preached at Paul's
Cross, against the pride, bravery, and ambition of Prelates, so flat contrary
to Christ's poverty and humility. And at the peoples entreaty, he wrote and
published his Doctrine to the great shame of the Prelates. For which, he
endured long imprisonment and want, 1470. Leland in Catalogo virorum
illustrium. Bale cent. 8 cap. 29.

These few (for a taste) I give you, excerpted out of a great number, which
that one famous University of Oxford afforded. Whereof you may read more
plentifully in Master Powels Preface alleged. To search and allege the
Records of that other famous University of Cambridge, and the rest of England,
would not be fruitless, but (I hope) to you needless.

Antiquus. This is full enough, so many learned men, Preachers, Doctors,
Bishops, and Worthies of all sorts, out of one University, with the danger of
their state, honor, liberty, and life, setting themselves publicly against
the corruptions crept into the Church, must needs argue the corruptions to be
great, public, and necessary to be reformed; and I am fully satisfied that it
was so. But happily this Reformation might have been performed, without such a
breach, rent, schism, and scandal, as you Protestants have made by your
departing from that ancient famous Church of Rome.

. 16.
Antiquissimus. Oh sir, you must know that this Reformation was sought for,
even at the Popes hands, with great humility and earnestness, both by Luther
himself at the first, and also by many other learned men, This appears by
(...) Commencaries. History of ^he Council of ^r^^. Onuph^^^. S^rius.
Thua^^us, and oath r Histories of those times.
States, and Pr^nces; yea, by the Emperor himself with much instance. And
Pope A^rian the sixth was well inclined thereunto, confessing ingenuously, that
the Church was mightily overrun with corrup ions. For reformation whereof,
diverse conferences were appointed in Germany, (as not only our Sleidan, but
your Surius and Thun^nus report.) And Pope Clement the seventh, promised
Reformation to the Emperor Ch^rles the fifth: and three Cardinals ( Caie^^^,
Pole, and Contarene,) were deputed to give advice for this Reformation After
many delays, again, Anno 1537. History of the Council of ^rent.
Pope Paul the third, appointed four Cardinals and five other Prelates to
consider the demands of the Protestants, and to collect the abuses of the
Church and Court of Rome, and to devise Remedies to correct them. And of these
abuses they gathered great numbers (which are set down at large in the twelfth
book of Sle^d^ns Commentaries.) But all this came to nothing. For when upon
due examination, the Cardinals found many things too nearely, touching the
quick, the Reformation thereof would vncurably wound the Sea of Rome,
overthrow and undo the greatness of their wealth and worldly estate, and when
they consulted deeply thereof with the Pope; See D. W^ite against ^^^er. page
10^, 1^7.
there followed a conclusion, and a plot quite contrary. In regard of the
principal things, That nothing should be reformed, but all should be
justified, since a thorow-reformation would spoil them, and a
halfe-reformation would not content the Protestants; and yet would give the
world occasion to think. They might err in many things if they reformed some.
Now therefore the proceeding must be changed. At first many of their Divines
opposing Luther, labored to prove all their Doctrines, Ceremonies and
Government by the Scriptures: now they find it cannot be. Therefore the
Scriptures must be cried down, disgraced disabled, as ambiguous, and
insufficient to teach and guide the Church. And the Church (to wit, their own
only Church of Rome) must be exalted above the Scriptures. That Church must
give authority to the Scriptures, yea, and sense also, so that no sense of the
Scripture shall be received, but that which that Church allows. For that
Church only cannot err: See B. And^ewe^ a^ Ap^lo^^am resp^^^^ page 259
and therefore they that admit the Scriptures to be the only Judges and Rules
of Doctrine and Discipline, are bad Divines, little better then Heretics, and
Enemies to the Church.

From hence came those base speeches from their Doctors, Eckius. Hosius contra
(...) lib. 3. p^g. 148. (...) s^^g^^^us.
That the Scripture has no authority but from the Church: Hosius, No more
force then Aesops Fables, without authority from the Church: Pighius, the
Scripture is of it self but a Nose of Wax, which may be writhen every way.

Costerus compares it to a sheath, Costeranchir, d^ sa^^a script. cap. 1..
huius script. pa 44. B llar. de verbo D^i l^b. 4. c^p. 9. in ^alce. Council.
Trid. sess. 4. Pighius controv, 3. page 92 and Hi^^arch. epist nunc. Mulhus.
disp. 2. de fide pa. 21. See D. White against Vish^r. page 92.
admitting any Dagger, Wooden or Leaden.

The Jesuit Salmeron says, Tradition is the sure rule of Faith, by which the
Scriptures are to be tried. And Bellarmine says the best way to try which be
true traditions, which be false, is the authority of the Church of Rome. So
that now (to speak in their Dialect, or meaning.) The Church of Rome is the
Queen, and the Scripture her slave. That Church has now two servants, of
equal authority, Scripture and Tradition: and therefore that Churches Council
of Trent says, Scripturas -- and Traditiones, Ecclesiae -- pari pietatis
aspect^ ac reuerentiae suscipit, and veneratur. We receive the Scriptures and
Traditions of the Church, with equal affection and reverence.

Nay, no great matter what the Scripture says, for their Tradition must
interpret it. If the Scripture say, Drink ye all of this (Matthew. 26 27) their
Tradition says, not all, but the Clergy only: and not all the Clergy, but he
that ministers it only. So what their Priests teach, must be rece^ued and
obeyed, whether out of Scripture or Tra^ition. Tolet. casuum conscientiae l b
4. cap. 3. p ^53.
Cardinal Tolet says, The people may merit ar Gods hand in believing an
Heresy, if their Teachers propound it, for their obedience is meritorious. And
Stapleton, They must not regard quid, but quis, not what is the matter, but who
is the man that delivers it. If a Priest therefore teach it, (be it true, be it
false) take it as Gods Oracle.

2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
What can Antichrist do more, when he sits in the Temple of God, as God? exalts
himself above God? but disgrace Gods Word, set up his own? make Gods Word
speak what he list? both it and the sense of it shall receive authority from
him? His Laws, his Judgment, his Agents shall be received without
examination. And the holy Word of God, which should be the rule of all true
faith and good actions, shall lose his place of leading, and follow the Popes
fancy?

By these grounds, means, and shifts, all the seeking for reformation at the
Popes and Romish Prelates hands was utterly avoided. And the Roman Church, (as
now it stands) is the multitude of such only as magnify, admire, and adore,
the plenitude of Papal power and infallibility of judgment: and are so far
from Reformation of errors, and corruptions formerly cried against, and by
many of themselves confessed; that they decree them now to be good, impose them
now as De fide points of faith, and doctrines of the Church: yea, and persecute
with curses, fire and sword, the discouerers, reprouers, and reformers thereof.

So that there was no possibility left to good and godly Princes and States,
and to true-hearted godly learned men, but either against their knowledge and
conscience to live slaves to the unsupportable tyranny and corruptions of the
Pope, or else to reform these abuses every one in their own Countries: and if
the whole field of the Church could not be purged and dressed, yet every one to
weed out of their own Lan^s and Furlongs, the Tares and filth that choked the
good Corn.

Thus I have showed you, that errors and corruptions had crept into the once
pure and famous Church of Rome: and that they were noted and cried out upon by
many Historians, Learned men Bishops Doctors Princes and People: and
Reformation sought for, many Ages before it could he performed: And that
neither Luther, nor any other learned men, nor Princes ever intended to erect a
new Church: but by reforming of the Abuses crept in, to reduce the Church to
her ancient purity. Whereupon the Protestant Churches are truly called, The
Reformed Churches.

Antiquus. Well sir, show me now the true difference betwixt your new reformed
Churches, and the Church of Rome, as now it is. How far they agree, and
wherein they differ, in some principal points.

Antiquissimus. I will, and the rather because some railing Rabsaches of your
side, impudently say and print, that [ The Protestants have no Faith, no Hope,
A namelesse Author (be like ashamed to set to his name) beginning his book
with these words, The Protestants have no Faith, etc.
no Charity, no Repentance, no Justification no Church, no Altar, no
Sacrifice, no Priest, no Religion, no Christ,] I hope to make it apparent, that
we hold all the points of Faith, necessary and sufficient to good life on
earth, and salvation in heaven: and that you confess we hold them truly;
because you hold the same: and we only refuse your later, needless, and
unsound additions there unto.

CHAP. 5. The principal points of Doctrine, wherein the Romish and the Reformed
Churches agree, and wherein they differ. Protestants refuse the popes earthly
Kingdom, and maintain Christ's heavenly. 1 A note of the chief-points of
Christian Doctrine, wherein the Protestants and Romanists fully agree, showing
also the Romish additions thereunto. 2 The Protestants doctrine in general,
justified by Cardinal Contarene, Cardinal Campeggio, and our Liturgy by Pope
Pius 4. 3 But the Popes reach further, at an earthly Church-kingdome: and
fourthly challenge a supremacy over all Christians and Churches in the world. 5
More specially over the Clergy, exempting them from being subjects to Princes.
6 Yea, over all Christian princes and their states: to depose, dispose, and
transpose them: and to absolve subjects from their allegiance, to rebel, etc.
7 To dissolve Oaths, Bonds, and Leagues. 8 To give dispensations to contract
or dissolve Matrimony. 9 And other dispensations and exemptions from Laws.
. 1.
Antiquissimus.

1 We believe Articles of the year 1562 art. 1.
one true God, invisible, incorporeall, immortal, infinite in wisdom, power,
and goodness; maker, preserver, and governor of all things: and that in the
unity of this Godhead, there be 3 persons of one substance, coequall in
wisdom, goodness, power, eternity; the Father the Son, and the Holy Ghost:
You believe the same: But your exalting and adoring the Blessed Virgin (whom we
honor and reverence so far as we may any the most excellent creature) in
such sort as you entitle her a Goddess L^si^s oft^n ^al^er D am, a (...) si^,
in his (...) and (...) where the (...) and ^tice.
, Queen of Heaven So Hortul. a^i ae 117. b such wa the h^resie o^ the C^ll^
d^^^s. Vpip ^an, ^er. 79.
and of the world ^o Hort anime 154 b
; and make the like prayers to her as you do to God You call her son Lo^d;
her, Lady: him Savior, her saluatrix: him Mediator, her Mediatresse: him King,
her Qu^en^: him God, her Goddess: As appears in many of your prayers as sa^^^
R^g^^^, ^^ter misericordiae, vita, dulcedo, salve. And consolatio desolator^m,
via e^^antium, s^^as o^^^m in te sperantium. In Offi^io B. Mariae Reformato,
and iussu Fij 5. edito. And in the Ladies Psalter (wherein the words of honor
and prayers are turned from God to her, in places innumerable:) Psalm. 50.
mis^rere mei domina, -- munda^e ab ^^^ibus iniquitatibus men's, ess^nde gratiam
tuam super me. Psalm. 89. Domina resugium fa^ta es no^^s in cunc^^
n^cessitatibus nostris, Psalm. 2. protegat nos dextra tua, matter dei.
, even with authority and command over her Son As their own Cassander
confesses ( consult, art. 21.) they make Christ reigning in heaven, yet
subject to his Mot^er. Monstra te esse Matrem. In B^evi^r. Romans and officio B.
Mariae reformat. And Matris i^^e impe^a Redemptori. Missal. Parisiens. D^reus
to Whitaker, fol. 352. says, This is not against Religion.
, and as a partaker of the government of his Kingdom They assign Justice to
Christ, and Mercy to the Virgin: As Gabri^^l B^e^ (in exposit. Cano^. Missae
lect. 80.) says Confu^imus primo ad b atissimam Virgin^m caelorum reginam, cui
Rex Regum, Pater caelestis, dimidium ^egni sui dedit, and post Pater cael^stis,
cum h^beat institiam and misericordiam, tanq^am potio^a regni sui bona;
iustiti^ sib^ retenta, misericordiam Matri Virgini concessit. The like is
written by many other of their learned men, (viri celebr^s, says Cassander,
consult. art. 21.) The great learn^d ^esuite Gregorius de Valentia often sets
Christ after his mother thus, Glori^ deo, and B Virg^n^ Mari^ Do^inae nostiae,
Item Jesus Christo. At the end of his Treatises, De satisfact De Jdo olat. De
diff^r. no^ae legis. De Indulgentijs, and others.
: which wants not much of making a Quaternity of the most glorious individual
and inco^municable Trinity See more of this in P. Ma^lius Defense of our late
learned King James his book against the answer of Coss^tean art. 7. p. 165.
and s^q. And in B. Andrews his answer to Bellarmine, about the same K. James
his book, ad c 8. p 174. etc. And in B. Downam, De Antichristo. lib. 3. cap.
8. 2, 3, 4. and lib. 5. cap 2.. 2, 3, 4, 5. And in Bishop Morto^. Apolog. Cath.
tomo. 1. cap 68. page 202. and Protestants appeal l^b. 2. cap. 12. sect. 10
and relation of Religion in the West page 3 Rainolds and ^art. cap. 8. divis.
2. page 474, 475. And it is abundantly noted in most of our Protestants Books.
; This is a corrupt doctrine and practice crept into the Church we may not
admit.

2 We believe the Canonical Scriptures (reckoned up in the sixth Article of the
year 1562.) to be the undoubted Word of God written by inspiration of the Holy
Ghost, guiding the minds and pens of the holy Writers, absolutely free from
all error. You confess the same Council. Trident. sess. 4.
.

But you add the Apocryphal books, and make them also Canonical Ibid. Si
quis libros -- ^aruch Eccl^siastici, Sapientiae, Iu^i^h, Tobiae, Duoru^
Maccab^orum, Danielis integros libros cum omnibus suis pa^^b^s, pro^t in
vulgata editione habentur, prosacris and Canon c^ non su^cepent, Anathema sit.
, contrary to An^iquity For, to the Jews were committed the Oracles of God
(Canonical Scriptures) to be kept, Romans 3.2. but they n^uer acknowledged the
Apocryphal books, so says Josephus lib. 1. contra Appion. See Eusebius hist.
lib. 8. cap. 10. And Bellarmine h^mselfe grants it. lib. 3. ^e eccle. milit
cap. ^0. init^o. B. Andrews answering Bellarmines Apology (concerning King
James his Monitory Preface) cap. 7. page 15. gives us ten very ancient Fathers,
reckoning the C^non of Scripture as we do: 1 Melito Sardensis in Eusebius. 4.26.
2 Origenes 3. 25. 7 in Ios^a. 3 Athanasi^s in Synops. 4 Hilarious pro^og in
Psalm. 5 Epiphanius haere^. 8. 6 Cyrill^s Cat^ch, 7 Nazianzen de ver. and ge.
scrip. lib. 8 Amphilochius ad Saleucum. 9 Hieronymus in prolog. Gal^^to. 10
R^ffi^us in expos. Symboli. D. Field reckons more l^b. 4. cap. 23 see more cap
4. sect. 14.

The Laodicean Council excludes the Apocrypha, the Carthaginian Council
receives them; and both these were confirmed in the sixth general Council; how
hangs this togeth^r? thus: The Lodicean spoke of the Canon of faith, the
Carthagenian of the Canon of good manners: to both which the sixth Council
subscribed in that sense, and we to it.

See thi^ Whole Controversy thoroughly handled by B. Morton, Apologiae
Catholicae part. 2. lib. 1. sex primis captibus. Also in his Protestants
Appeal, lib. 4. cap. 18. and by D. Whit^^^es Disp. de sacra scripura quaest.
1. And by D. Field of the Church Book. 4. chapt. 23, 24.


.

3 We believe the orignall Hebrew of the Old Testament, and the Gre^^e of the
New to be authentical and of undoubted authority, your side has heretofore
held the contrary, deprauing the Hebrew and Greek now extant, as intolerably
corrupted by Jews and Heretics: yet now your best ^hu^ Bellarmine de ver^o
dei lib. 2. cap. 2. in sine Si^tus Senens^s Bibl^oth. lib. 3. pa^. 153. and
lib. 8. page 630 Ribera com^n Hoscam. cap. 9. na. 20. Acosta 2. lib. de Christo
Reuelat. cap. 16. And of the Greek of the new Sixtus Se^ens. Bibl. lib. 7 page
58. See D. Field. Church. lib. 4 cap. 28. 29. and B. Morton. App^al. lib. 4.
cap. 18. Sect. 3.
learned men come home to us, and hold them pure from such corruptions,
affirming, that though some slips of Printers or Writers may be found in
letters or words, yet they hurt not the sense, nor derogate from their
authority. Thus you justify us.

But This your Agorias (a choice man, to deliver the Roman Catholic Tenets)
shows Institutionum lib. 8. cap. 3. 3. and. 4. where the Greek or Hebrew now
extant (says he) differs from the sense of the vulgar Latin, that Latin
Edition shall be to us the Canoninall Scripture, Post habito c^ntrario sensu
Hebr^aicae vel Graec^^ lectionis. And whereas many of their own side (since
the Council of Trent) have found diverse faults and errors in the Latin (as
Vega, Sixt^s Senensis, Canus, Tayva, L^ndanus, etc.) Yet Azorius excuses the
matter, saying, They are not errors against faith and good manners: but only
in some places (clarius, si^nificantius, proprius. and latin^us, reddi
potuerint: non tamen verius, aut simpliciter certius) things might more
clearly, significantly, properly, and in better Latin have been delivered,
but not more t^^ely, or simply, more certainly. Thus says Azorius, but our
Bishop Morton shows them many great intolerable corruptions concerning Faith
and Manners, and in matters in Controversy, Apol Cathol. part. 2. lib. 1. cap.
11, 12, 13. and in his Prot. Appeal. lib 4. cap. 18. 3. As also many other
Protestant Writers do. But were in true that Azorius says, his reason might
authorize a translation to be profitable and comfortable to the people to read
(in any tongue which they understand) but cannot make a Translation more
authentical then the original, or not liable to be examined and corrected by
the Original. That were to prefer men's conceit before Gods most absolute
truth, and is no better then impiety.

See Rainolds and Heart confer. chap. 6. divis. 2. page 244. etc. D. Whitakers.
D. Field. Church. Book 4. chap 25, 26. specially 27.


whereas you make your vulgar Latin authentical also, and of greater authority
then the Greek and Hebrew, where they differ from it: we must neeeds forsake
you.

4 We make the written word of God, Artic. 6. 1562.
the ground of our faith: and hold nothing necessary to be believed to
salvation, but what is there either delivered in express words, or thence
deducted by necessary consequence. Your own learned men conf^sse this course
to be good Bellar. de Iustif. lib. 3 cap. 8.. Prima ratio: non potest aliquid
certum esse certitudine fi^ei, nisi aut immediate continetur in verbo dei, aut
ex verbo dei per euidentem consequentiam deducatur. Fides enim non est, nisi
verbi dei authoritate ^itatur. Ne^ue de hoc principio vel Catholici, vel
Haeretici ibitant. Faber Stapa^ensis, In his Preface to the Evangelists (which
Preface now the Roman Doctors appoint to be left out in the new Prints, by
their Indices Expurgatorij) says thus: The Scripture suffices and is the
only rule of eternal life, whatsoever agrees not to it, is not so necessary
as superfluous. The Primitive Church knew no other rule but the Gospel, no
other scope but Christ, no other worship then was due to the Indiuidu^ll
Trinity. I would to God the form of believing were fetched from the Primitive
Church. Thus says Sta^pulensis.
. By which rule (justified by our Adversaries) we conclude that the holy Church
of God need not receive or believe any of those things following: to wit
Purgatory, Invocation of Saints departed, worshipping of Images, Auricular
confession, the Popes pardons, Transubstantiation the Mass to be truly and
properly a propitiatory sacrifice, to be offered both for the quick and the
dead: the Sacrament without Communicants, and Communion under one kind
(without the Cup) to be sufficient for Lay people: reservation of the Sacrament
and elevation thereof, to be worshipped: and circumgestation in Procession, for
pomp and adoration: Matrimony, and extreme Unction, to be properly Sacraments
of the New Testament, and to confer grace: single life necessary to be
imposed upon the Clergy: All which and more your Jesuit Azorius reckons for
Traditions unwritten Azorius Institutionum lib 8. cap. 4.. 3. and seq.
. Also that the Church of Rome is head of all ^hurches, and that all Christians
must fetch their Faith, their Orders, and jurisdiction from it: that the Bishop
thereof cannot err in matters of faith, or interpreting the Scriptures. See
more of this point, Rainold and Heart confer chap. 5. division 1. page 184 etc.
And chap. 8. divis. 1. page 462. etc.
The Scriptures teach no such thing: and therefore we need not believe it.

5 We (being constant to the former rule, for the sufficiency of the
Scriptures, in matters of faith and good life) further admit of some kind of
Trad tions: to wit, first Doctrinall traditions agreeing with the Scriptures,
or thence truly deducted Many Fathers call the whole Word of God (which by some
holy men guided by Gods Spirit was let down in writing: and by them also and
others delivered to the people by lively voice) A tradition which the Church
must preseru^: and also the form of wholesome words, ( Creeds, Catechismes
etc.) thence deducted. 2 Timothy 1.13. Romans 6 17. See Rain. and Heart. c. 8. d. 1.
p 466, 467. So the baptism of Infants, if not commanded in plain words, yet
plainly deducted from Scripture, Genesis 17.12, 13. Col. 2.11, 1^, Act. 2.38, 39.
Luke 18.16. Mar. 10.16. Mat. 19.14. and 18, 14. 1 Cor. 7.14. Mat. 28.19. The
doctrine of the Trinity, the equality of three Divine persons in one substance,
and the distinction by incommunicable proprieties. Genesis 1.1, 26. Mat. 3.16.
Job. 1.32. Mat. 17 5 and 28.29 2. Cor. 13.13. 1 I^b. 5.7. Psalm. 2.7. Heb. ^.3,
5. and 7.3. Col. 1.15. The proceeding of the holy G^ost from the Father and the
Son, as from one beginning, and one spiration, from all eternity, Ioh. 14.26.
and 15.26. and 16.13, 14. Romans 8.9.
. Secondly, rituall traditions, for order and decency, left to the disposition
of the Church, being not of Divine, but of positive and humane right 1 Cor.
14.40. and 11.2. Acts 15 ^0.
So they be not childish or trifling: nor accounted parts of Gods worship: nor
with opinion of merit: nor burdensome for their m^ltitude Of the multitude S.
Augustine complained in his time. Epist. 119. ad ^anuar. c. 19. See D. Ram. and
Heart c. 8. div. 4. p. 599. and seq.
.

The first of these no man allows and commends more then we: and the second
kind we retain and use with reverence, such as are profitable and comely in
our times and countries without condemning other Churches differing from ours
in such matters: as we find Saint Ambrose and Saint Augustine did. Aug. Epist.
188.

But a third kind of Traditions obtruded for Articles of Religion, grounds of
Faith, and part of Gods worship, neither contained expressly in Gods word, nor
thence deducted by any sound inference: and yet received (by the Council of
Trent, Sess 4.) with the same authority and reverence that the holy Scriptures
are received: those we gainesay, as things derogating to the verity,
sufficiency, and perfection of the Scriptures. And herein your Romish Writers
deal fraudulenly against us, and deceive the world; for they allege the
Fathers speaking of the first kind of Traditions, as if they spoke of all:
whereas indeed they write very strongly and sharply against this third kind,
which we refuse. Bishop Usher in his book against the Jrish Jesuit, page 36.
and seq. alleges a whole Jury of ancient Fathers, testifying the sufficiency
of the Scriptures, for matters of Faith: Tertullian, Origin, Hippolitus the
Martyr, Athanasius, Ambrose, Hilary, Basil, Gregory Nissen, Jerome, Augustine,
Cyril, Theodoret. So that the Traditions which they urge, we allow, and those
that we deny they write sharply against.

The Fathers (say your Rom sh) are not of the Protestants Church, because they
urge Traditions: but we say more truly; The Fathers are not of the Romish
Church, because they teach, the Scripture is sufficient, and needs no
Traditions to supply their defect, as the Romish teach.

When Bellarmine and your other Doctors are pressed with the authority of the
Fathers, they are compelled to yeel^ unto us the sufficiency of the Scriptures,
(as I alleged, artic. 4.) but (observe their inconstancy) lest they should
overthrow thereby the manifold doctrines held by their Church, that have no
ground in the Scriptures; they are feign to maintain also unwritten Traditions
to be the grounds of those Doctrines.

See more of this point in Mr. Perkins Reformed Catholic, the 7 point. B.
Morton. Apol. Cathol. part. 2. lib. 1. cap. 32. and seq. And Protestants
Appeal. lib. 2. cap. 25. D. Field, of the Church Book. B. Usher in his answer
to the Irish Jesuit. Rainolds and Heart confer. chap. 5. division 1. page 190.

6 We receive and believe also, the three Creeds, The Apostles, the Nicene, and
that of Athanasius These are in our Books of public prayer, and book of
Articles of anno 1562 art. 8 and subscribed unto by all Ministers.
: and the four general Councels of the Primitive Church: as good forms of
true Christian Doctrine, deductions and explications of Scripture Acknowleeged
by King James, in his Praemoniti^n to all Christian Monar^s, p. 35. and by our
Acts of Parliament.
. You receive the same also: but you add a thirteenth article, decreed to be
an article of Faith, thirteen hundred years after Christ, by a thirteenth
Apostle, Pope Boniface the eight Boniface 8. lived an. 13^^. his Decree runs
thus: Subesse Romano Pont^fici omni humanae creaturae declaramus, dicimus,
desinimus and pronunciamus omnino esse de necessitate salutis. Thus Boniface 8
in extrauag. de majoritate and obedientia. cap. vnam santa^.
. That it is necessary to salvation to be subject to the Bishop of Rome, which
is neither in the Scriptures, ancient Creeds, nor ancient Fathers, nor can be
thence deducted.

And you have further also, dately added 12 new Articles by the authority of
Pope Pius 4. ( anno 1564) raised out of the Council of Trent, and added to the
Nicene Creed, to be received with oath, as the true Catholic Faith, to be
believed by as many as shall be saved In ^ulla juramenti de prosess. fidei.
These 12 new Articles you may see also in the Epistle Dedicatory to B. Jewels
works in every Church. In Onuphrius (added to Platina) in vita Pij 4.
.

7 We believe that the true God is to be worshipped in Spirit and Truth, and
according as himself has prescribed: and you yield that therein we do well:
but you add, that he may be analogically and relatiuely worshipped by Images,
and by other Doctrines devised by Men, which are not commanded, but sharply
reproved by the Scriptures, Exodus 20.4, 5. Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16. Mat. 15.9. Mar. 7 3,
4.7. Col. 2.18, 22, 23. God grant we may serve him as himself has prescribed,
and then we shall be sure to be happy enough. See D. Hall, Roma
irreconciliabilis sect. 21.

8 We believe we ought to pray with feruency and sincerity of heart, with a
purpose to forsake all sin, and to serve God truly, and with faith and hope
to be heard: you believe so also; but you add, we may pray in an unknown
tongue, without understanding sense, or feeling what we say, with many
repetitions, and by number (upon Beads) without weight: and that such prayers
are sat^sfactory for sin, and meritorious of grace. You do not say (I hope) we
ough to pray in a tongue unknown: but we may do it. So you condemn not our
custom, (lest you condemn Saint Paul also, 1 Cor, 14.15. etc.) but only
excuse your own.

9 We believe, we ought to pray unto God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost: you yield it to be good; but you add (not that we are commanded, but)
that we may also pray unto Angels and Saints deceased. But surely the worship
and invocation of Angels is forbidden by the Council of Laodicaea: much more
of Saints. For they that urged the worship of Angels, alleged, that for our
better access unto God, we we must use the intercession of Angels (as Gods
Courtiers and Attendants) and this is your reason for your prayers unto Saints.
The Council therefore that forbids the one, implies the prohibition of the
other. See more of this in Bishop Mortons Protestants Appeal. lib. 2. cap. 12.
section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc, and compendiously, s^ct. 13.

10 We believe that our Lord jesus Christ is our Mediator, both of Redemption
and int^rcession. You grant this to be true; but you add unto him Angels and
Saints, upon whose intercession and merits, you also in part rely. See B.
Morton, ib. lib. 2. cap. 12. specially, sect. 10, 11, 12, 13.

Perk. ^esor. Cath. points. 15.
11 We believe that the glorified Saints bear most loving ^ffection to the
Saints living on earth, and pray in general for the Church Militant. You
believe so to; but you add that they hear men's prayers made unto them, pray
for particular men, and know their wants (which hearing and knowledge, we say,
is proper to God alone.) But your greatest Clerks cannot determine how the
Saints know our hearts and prayers: whether by hearing or seeing, or presence
every where, or by Gods relating or reue^ling men's prayers and needs unto them.
All which ways some of your Doctors hold as probable, or possible: and others
deny and and confute them as untrue. Of this, see Bishop Morton. Appeal lib. 2.
cap. 12. sect. 5. and lib. 5. cap. 2 sect. 2.

Perkins reformed Catholic point. 14.
12 We honor Gods Saints deceased, as the Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and
other holy s^ruants of God: both by reverend memorials of them praises to God
for them, and for his ben^fits to the Church by them, and by imitation of their
virtues Their true Relics (virtues, books, good work^s, and e^amples) we
respect with reverence. And their bodily Relics we despise not, but
reverently keep them, if we may without offense. This you like well, but
whereas you further worship the Saints, the^r Images, or Relics, with
kneeling, Invocation, dedication of Churches, and Festival days and
Pilgrimages to their Shrines or Relics, you step too far into superstition
and Idolatry. See B. Mortons Appeal. lib. 5 cap. 2. sect. 3 4, 5. and cap. 3.
sect. Doctor Hall. Roma irreconciliabilis section 20. and 21.

13 We believe that man is justified by the merits and passion of our Savior
Jesus Christ: Antic. 11. 1562.
you believe so too; but you a^de, that he must be further justified by his
own merits or satisfactions.

Of Justification, and of Merits, see a large discourse afterward.

14 We believe also, that as Christ's most perfect righteousness is most
nec^ssary to be imputed unto us for our Iust^fication: so our own inherent
righteousness, wrought in us by Gods Spirit, for sanctification of life, is
necessary to salvation: and that he is no good Christian that shows not his
true conversion by the fruits of a good life. You cannot mislike this. And yet
you charge us that we open a gate to all licentiousness of life because we
teach that we are not justified by our own good works (which are far short
of perfection) but by Christ's righteousness imputed unto us, which alone is
most perfect and able to satisfy Gods Justice and his Law We urge good works
as much as you, as absolute necessary effects of Justifying grace, but not
causes thereof: saying with S. Bernard, They are Via regni, non causa regnandi,
The way whereby we must walk to felicity, (or else we shall never come to it)
but not the meritorious cause of felicity.

15 Yea, we urge good works more then you do. We teach, that in true
conversion, a man must be wounded in his conscience by the sense of h^s sins,
his contrition must be compungent and v^hement, brusing, breaking renting the
heart, and feeling the throws (as a woman laboring of Child) before the new
creature be brought forth, or Christ truly formed in him. It is not done
without bitterness of the soul, without study, care, indignation r^u^nge (2
Cor. 7 11.) But as some Infants are b^^ne with l^sse pain to the Mother, and
some with more: so may the new man be regenerated in some with more, in some
with less anxiety of travel. But surely grace is not infused into the heart
of any sinner except there be at least so great affliction of spirit for sin
foregoing that he cannot but feel it; otherwise, he might make a conf^ssion
without contrition. Thus we urge sinners to a true feeling and sorrow for their
sin. And for scandalous faults, we urge open sinners to open acknowledgement,
satisfaction of the Church, and to ^ndure the censures thereof: and all men to
practice the actions of holy devotion, the better to humble and dispose
themselves to be more capable of reconciliation with God: and to promise and
vow amendment of life, and set down with themselves the best fitting courses
for it. See D. Francis White Orthodoxe Faith. p. 16.
We teach, though they must be justified by Christ's merits only, applied and
made theirs by faith: yet that faith must be justified to be true, sound, and
lively, by the fruits thereof. For whenever God forgiueth sin, he gives
grace also to resist and mortify sin. See Hookers Discourse of
Justification,. 21.
At the first instant, when we are converted and justified, we receive the
spirit of Adoption, we are made members of Christ, and our bodies temples of
the Holy Ghost: even then we receive habitual righteousness, wherewith our
souls are inwardly endued: and if we live, that habitual, will bring forth
actual righteousness upon all occasions, mortifying sin, and beatifying all
the parts and actions of our life. All these are given together in the root, we
receive them all at once, 1 Cor. 6.11. Gal. 6.15. col. 3.10. ephesians. 4.4.23. 2
Cor. 4.16. psalm. 51.10, hebr. 9.14. 1 pet. 2.9. See P^rkins Refor. Cath point.
21 The manifold uses of good works.
they are inseparable, and will show their comforts inwardly in our hearts, and
their fruits outwardly in our lives; which if a man do not find in himself,
he can have no hope of salvation, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. 1 John 3.8. and 1.6. Ezekiel. 18
13, 21, 22. Therefore we urge mortification of sin, denying our lusts and
affections, and a holy resolution to serve God in all soundness pureness,
integrity, and sincerity of heart, and a true care to keep all Gods
Commandments, not in act only, but in heart too, without swaruing at all
under any color, dispensation, interpretation or whatsoever. We think, your
extenuating of some sins, calling them venial, and extolling men's
satisfactions more then themselves need, that they may be applied by
indulgences to them that need, and the slight pennances imposed by your
Priests, and reciting a few prayers that have pardons annexed to them, or
pilgrims to some Saints Images or Relics (be they true or false) and many
other your humane devices, are the very stranglers of true penance,
mortification of sin, and care of good life.

16 We exhort unto, and urge such good works as God has prescribed,
commanded, and promised rewards unto; both of holiness toward God, subjection
to our Magistrates, justice to men, sobriety and cleanness in our selves, and
works of mercy to them that need, etc. You do not, you cannot mislike this:
but whereas you add other works out of your own brains, which God never
commanded, (nay, which cross Gods Commandments, A man may forsake parents to
become a Christian, Mat. 10.37. ergo to become a Monk. So Bellarmine r^asoneth
lib. 2 de monachis cap. 36. contrary to the Council of Gangren cap. 16.
that children may forsake their duty to Parents for vows of devised Religion;
subjects may rebel against their Princes, yea depose and murder them at the
Popes appointment, and do many such things:) those we cannot but detest and
abhor.

17 We believe that howsoever man has power in natural, moral, civil,
Artic. 10. 1562. M Perkins Reformed Cath. point. 1. and Augus^in. confess. art.
18. B^llar. teaches the same, De ^ra and lib. a^^. lib. 4 cap. 4 and seq. and
lib. 5. cap. 14. and seq. and lib. 6. cap. 1. etc.
and also outward Ecclesiastical actions, to do them, or not to do them,
except God restrain him: yet he has no freewill, power, or ability to convert
himself truly to godliness, to believe, or to perform, or will any mere
spiritual, inward, or holy actions, pleasing God, until God first by his
grace, move his heart to will, and give him ability to perform them, Phil.
2.13.

Your best learned men believe and teach so also.

But you have many other idle questions, needless, yet hurtful to the Church,
which your Cassander wishes were abolished. Cassander consult: in articulo 18.

Of this point of Freewill, see a fuller discourse afterward, lib. 3. Of
Freewill.

Hebr. 13.6. psalm. 19.11. pro 11.18. hebr. 6.10. mat. 10.41, 42. Bellarmine
confesses this to be our doctrine, lib. 5. de iustif. cap. 1. So Bellarmine de
Iustif. lib. 5. cap. 17. Iam. vero. and Rhemists upon 2 timothy 4.8. and upon
hebr. 6.10.
18 We believe that the good works of a justified person, are acceptable to the
Lord, please him are rewarded of him, and procure many excellent blessings from
him.

This you believe also, but whereas you add, that that they do properly and
condignly merit eternal life, as an equal recompense and reward: you teach
contrary to the Scriptures, and to the ancient Fathers, and to many of your
own men.

Of this point also see hereafter, lib. 3. Of Merit.

19 We believe that our Lord has instituted two Sacraments in his Church, as
seals of his Covenant with his people, and Conduits of Justifying grace; to
wit, Baptism, and his holy Supper. You believe the same but you add five
other, Matrimony, Penance, Ordination, We find two mentioned by the Fathers as
properly called Sacraments Aug. epist. 118. and lib. 3 de doctrina Christiana.
cap. 8. Ambros. lib. de Sacra^entis. Justin. Martyr. Apolog. 2. Tertul lib. 4.
contra Marc. cap. 34. Cyril. Cateches. See Kemnit. examen. part 2. desacram.
But of things called Sacraments improperly they speak of more then seven. But
this is a nouelty, not known, or not observed in the Church of more then a
thousand years: and not imposed in the Church of Rome to be necessarily
believed but very lately. See more of this in B. Mortons appeal, lib. 2. cap.
26. sect. 4, 5.
Confirmation, and Extreme Unction. Of which also we acknowledge the
Institution and use, only we deny them the name and the nature of Sacraments.

Artic. 25. 1562. and art. 27, 28. Perk. resorm. Cath. point. 19.
20 We believe that God has so annexed grace unto the Sacraments, that all well
prepared receivers do participate the Justifying and sanctify ng grace, as
well as the outward Elements. You believe so too; but you add, that Sacraments
have this grace, Ex opere operato.

A tic. 29. 1562.
^1 We believe that in our Lor^s supper, the worthy Communicant really partaketh
Christ's Body and Blood. You believe the same, we only differ in the manner
how; we say spiritually with his soul: you say, with his mouth and stomach,
the substance of the Bread and Wine, being (you say) transubstantiated into the
body and blood of Christ. So that you also believe that impious Men and
Atheists, yea, Cats, Dogs, and Mice, eating the bread, do eat the very body of
Christ. Our manner is enough for salvation, and agreeable to antiquity: yours
is a nouelty, and crosses the analogy of faith.

Of this point see a large discourse hereafter, lib. 3. cap. Of the Eucharist.

22 We believe there are two places prepared for souls departed out of this
life, Heaven for the blessed, Perkins Reformed Catholic. point. 17. of
Purgatory.
Hell for the damned. You believe so likewise, but you add other places more,
Purgatory, Limbus patrum, and Limbus pucrorum. Of this point see more
hereafter, lib. 3. cap. Of Purgatory, etc.

23 We believe that Jesus Christ has satisfied for our sins, and redeemed
us. You believe so also; but you add, Christ has satisfied only for the
eternal punishment, and for sins before Baptism, but that we must satisfy
for our following sins, August sermon. 13. De verbis dom. Christus suscipiendo
poenam, and non suscipiendo culpam and culpam deleuit and poenam. See B Mortons
Appeal lib. 1. cap 2 sect. 23. 47. and lib. 2. cap. 15. sect. 8, 9, 10.
and also for the temporal punishment due to all our sins, either upon earth
or in Purgatory. This we account an error against the foundation, making
Christ but half a Savior: and against reason, for he that forgiues the fault,
forgiues the punishment also, in S. Augustines opinion.

24 We believe that we ought to pray for all the members of Christ's militant
Church upon earth: you believe so too; but you add, we ought also to pray for
the souls suffering in Purgatory, which was a thing long time unknown to the
Church of God.

. 2.
These are the principal points of Religion, and the foundation of our church;
and by your approbatio^ of the^, you grant them all to be true good ancient and
Catholic, which may appear also by that which follows.

Se h^story of the Council of Trent. lib. 1. page 95.
At a Diet in R^tisbon, (anno 1541.) where was present, Jasper, Cardinal
Contareni, the Popes Nuncio, Granuel delivered a book of 22 Articles to be
considered of, by the Divines of both sides (whereof the chief were chosen by
the Emperor to dispute, namely Eckius, Flugius, and Gropperus, Romists,
Melancthon, Bucer, and P^storia, Protestants) and upon their debating, some
things were approved, and some amended by common consent. They dissented only
in five things, and in seventeen they all finally agreed.

Ibib. page 54.55.
Also when the Augustane confession (of the Protestant Princes and Divines) was
read at Augspurge (anno 1530) the Popes Legate, Cardinal Campeggio, said
plainly to the Emperor, that the difference (of that doctrine from the Roman)
for the most part seemed verbal; and that it imported not much whether one
spoke after one manner, or after another; and that for the present there was no
cause to make any strict examination of the doctrine: only means should be
used that the Protestant should go no further on.

See Annals Elizah ^ngl page 63. and Relation of Religionin the West parts page
x. 2. 159.
And Pope Pius the fourth ( anno 1560.) offered to Queen Elizabeth, to allow
our whole Book of Common Prayer if she would receive it as from him, and by
his authority. And so he might well do, for the book was with great judgment
purposely so framed out of the grounds of Religion, wherein both sides agree,
that their very Catholics might resort unto it, without scruple or scandal,
if Faction more then reason did not sway.

The truth is, were it not for other causes, the Controversies of points of
Religion might well be compounded betwixt us. For the learned of them know that
our doctrine is sufficient to make us true Christi-, ans, both for faith and
good life: to make us live holily, righteously, and soberly by Gods grace; to
become good subjects to our Princes; good neighbors amongst men; good,
diligent, and dutiful members of the Commonwealth; painful, peaceable, and
blessed people, and blessings to the Country where we live: and to conduct us
through all necessary, gracious ways and means ordained by God to eternal
blessedness. There is no defect in our doctrine to these ends: to promote
Christ's Kingdom both of grace and glory,

. 3.
Only they know (and we confess) our Doctrine is insufficient to set up an
earthly Church-kingdome (instead of Christ's heavenly Kingdom) such as the Pope
desires, ouer-topping all other Christian Princes and Potentates, and
maintained with all worldly wealth, pomp, and glory. Were it the purity of
Religion which he desired, (described and received in the best Primitive times
of the Church) our Religion would abundantly satisfy him: but this high
transcendent supremacy of the Pope, far beyond those Primitive times, and the
wealth of the world to maintain him and his in their greatness, Acts 19.28,
25.
is the great Diana of the Romans which they strive for. And these doctrinall
controversies are but subordinate means, subtly kept on foot to make the
adversaries of his supremacy more odious. For by that craft their wealth is
maintained. D. Francis White Orthodox faith. Epist. dedic. Ramolds and Heart
confer. cap. 7. dinis. 6, and 7. page 367 and seq.
Our Doctor Reinolds observes well, and proves largely, that this in these
latter Ages has been the Pope: maine aim and practice. And men of skill and
judgment (who knew the popes thoroughly and faithfully set forth their lives)
have opened this secret and mystery of State, (as it has been managed, since
it grew to majesty) that they mind the propping up of their own Kingdom,
while they pretend the worship of Christ: and that in the popes language, the
Church does signify (not the company of the faithful servants of God, but)
the Papacy: that is, the dominion, and princehood of the pope in things both
temporal and spiritual.

K. James his Remonstrance to Peron. page 246.
And our late learned and judicious King James says, The name of the Church
serves in this our corrupt Age, as a cloak to cover a thousand new inventions:
and no longer signifies the Assembly of the faithful, or such as believe in
Jesus Christ according to his Word, but a certain glorious ostentation and
temporal Monarchy, whereof the pope (forsooth) is the supreme head. Ibid.
page 259.
And, S. Peter's net is now changed into a casting net or a flew, to fish for
all the wealth of most flourishing kingdoms.

1 To this end, consider whether there be more care and policy to maintain the
popes greatness and revenues then to make good Christians. For where good
Christians are already (such as the Primitive Christians were) thither the
popes Emissaries come to make them the popes subjects, and stick not at
Treasons, Rebellions, invasions, if they have hope so to effect it.

Relation of Religion in the West, page 156, 159.
2 Consider, whether all other (though never so profane or wicked, Jews, Stews,
Turks, Infidels, Heretics, or Atheists) open enemies of Christian Religion,
be not suffered more quietly to live in Italy, Rome, and under the popes nose,
then Protestants, whose only great crime is, They are against the popes
usurpations and corruptions

Molius defense page 464.
3 Consider, if all sins against God and his Word, be not more slightly
punished, then offenses against the Popes greatness? In cases of Murder,
Treason, Incest, Blasphemy, etc. ordinary Bishops may bind and loose: but the
cases of hindering men from going to Rome for pardons, of intrusion into any
benefice or office Ecclesiasticail, of purloyning any Church goods, or
offending the Sea-Apostolicke, etc. those are reserved to the pope only. And
the penitentiary tax for falsifying the letters Apostolical, is more then
three times so much as the tax for Incest with a man's Mother.

4 Consider, Bellar. de Iustif. lib. 2. cap. 1. in fine.
if they wink not at our doctrine in their own men, as Pighius, the Divines
of Colen, Durandus, and hundreds of others, as long as they profess subjection
to the pope: in such Catholics our opinions are not heresy: but in us the
same opinions are persecuted with fire and sword.

5 Consider, Histor. council. Trent. lib. 3. page 293.
how kindly they offer to tolerate things otherwise very odious unto them, if
men will profess subjection to the pope; as ( anno 1548.) Paul the third, sent
the Bishops of Verona and Ferentino his Nuncij, into Germany, (then almost lost
from him) with faculties to grant unto all persons (Kings, Princes,
Ecclesiastical and Regular) that would return to his obedience; absolution
from all censures, dispensations for irregularities, or objuration, penance,
oaths, perjuries: and to restore them to honor, fame, and dignity: and to
license them to partake the Cup in the Communion, to eat flesh in Lent, and
Fasting days, with many other immunities, so far as might be done in time
and place without scandal, etc. So Pius the fourth, Annals Eliz. Engl. page
63. Latin. page 49.
( anno 1560.) offered to Queen Elizabeth, to allow our whole book of Common
Prayer, if she would receive it as from him and by his authority.

6 Consider, whether this was not the maine cause of the popes quarrel and
thunder against the German Emperors, and our English Kings, John, and Henry
the 8. who held all the doctrinall points of the Romish Religion; and only
impaired the popes highness, greatness or revenues. In Henry 8 time, Hist.
conc. Trid. lib. 1. page 70.
the Court of Rome maintained, that it could not be said, There was no change
of Religion in England, the first and principal article being changed, which
is the supremacy of the pope: and that seditions would arise, as well for this
only, as for all the rest, which the event showed to be true. For though the
King continued the Religion of the pope so fully by commands and punishments,
that pope Paul 3 commended him highly to the Emperor, Ibid, page 89, 90. ibid.
page 87.
as an illustrious example to be imitated in that course: yet for abrogating
the popes supremacy and revenues in England, he thundered a Bull against him,
denouncing him deprived of his k^ngdome, and his adherents of whatsoever they
possessed, and commanding his subjects to deny him obedience, and strangers to
have any commerce with that kingdom: and all to take arms against, and to
persecute both himself and his followers, granting them their estates and
goods for their prey, and their persons for their slaves.

It is not therefore the points of true ancient Catholic Christian Doctrine
that you so much contend for, to make good gracious Christians, inheritors of
heavenly felicity: but it is your wealth and greatness, or the setting up and
maintaining of your Visible Monarchy of the Church (as you Doctor Sanders calls
it) whereof Christ and his Apostles spoke never a word, and whereof the
Primitive Church never dreamed. This, if our Religion would allow, Pius 4.
Hist. conc. Trid. lib. 8. page 745.
you would allow of our Religion. The rather-politicke-then-pious pope said
once: since he could not regaine the Protestants, it was necessary to keep
those in obedience which he had, Bellar. de eccles. militant. lib. 3. c. 2..
nostra autem sententia. See Triplici nodo page 41, 42. Printed 1609.
to make the division strong, and the parties irreconciliable. Conformable
whereunto, now their Doctrine is, that such as submit not to the popes
supremacy, do renounce Christianity. For the Church, (says Bellarmine) is the
company of them that live in subjection to the pope, professing the same faith
with him, though they have no inward virtues but be indeed Atheists,
Hypocrites, or Heretics. And in his Epistle to Blackwell, the Archpriest in
England, (anno 1607.) he calls the popes supremacy one of the principal heads
of the Faith, and foundation of the Catholic Religion: and says, They that
disturb or diminish that primacy, seek to cut off the very head of the Faith,
and to dissolve the state of the whole body, and of all the members.

. 4.
This primacy is practiced in the popes challenged government over the Church
of the whole world. For Turrecremata lib. 2. c. 27. Aug. Triumph. q. 19. art. 1.
as Matrimony is contracted betwixt a prelate and his particular Church (by his
election and consecration) so betwixt the pope and the Universal Church. Thus
if the pope be the general bridegroom (sponsus) and Rome the general bride
(sponsa) then they two are the common parents of all Christians, so that none
is to be accounted a Christian that has not the pope for his father, and that
Church for his mother. Capist. fol. 31. ^.
So says Capistranus, fol. 56 a.

A manifest error, for 1 none of the Churches of the New Testament (Corinth,
Galatia, Ephesus, Philippi, Colossus, Thessaly, Smirna, Pergamus, Thyatira,
Sardis, Philadelphia, Laodicea, etc.) nor 2 other Primitive Churches following
for many hundred years, were any way dependant upon Rome or her Bishop: but
were built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets (in general) Jesus
Christ himself being the chief corner stone: and by that means, Ephesians. 2.20.
were no more strangers and forrainers: but fellow-Citizens with the Saints,
and of the household of God, Ephesians. 2.19, 20. They did not acknowledge Rome
their mother, but their sister: not the root, but a particular branch of the
Church: such a one as equally with the rest, did partake of the root and
fatness of the Olive tree, Romans 11.17. Romans 11.18, 20, 21, 22.
And to the Roman Church was written directly this prophetical Caveat, Boast
not against the branches: but if thou boast, thou bear not the root, but the
root thee. Be not high minded, but fear: for if God spared not the natural
branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee: if thou continue not in his
goodness, thou shall also be cut off.

This shows (1) that Rome is but a branch, not the root of the universal
Church: (2) that it may be cut off, and yet other Churches stand and flourish,
being united to the common root: and therefore are independent upon the Church
of Rome. Baronius an. 45. n. 18. Bellar. de Romans pont. lib. 2. c. 2. and lib.
3. cap. 13.
And it is plain that the mystical Babylon ('mother of Abominations, drunken
with the blood of the Saints and Martyrs, Revel. 17.5, 6,) is the very City of
Rome, built upon seven mountains ( verse 9.) and reigning over the Kings of
the earth, Ribera in Apoc. 14. n. 27. and seq. Viegas in Apoc. 27. comment. 1.
sec. 3. Suarez lib. 5. c. 7. n. 11. Of this point, see the glorious Panegyric
Oration of Innotencius 3. calling himself the Spouse of the Church, and
magnifying the largeness, dignity, wealth and dowry of his Bride: apud
Vsserium De ecclesiarum successione and statu. cap. 9. initio page 255. See
also B. Carlton. Consens contr. 2. de ecclesia cap. 1. page 156. and D. Field
of the Church. lib. 5. cap. 41. page 267. where he answers Bellarmines arg.
libri. 2. de Romans pont. cap. 31. Ex nominibus quae Romano Pontifici tribui
solent.
( verse 18.) so plain, that that the Jesuits cannot, do not deny it, our
Rhemists say it was Rome under Nero, etc. but later Jesuits, Ribera, and
Viegas, and Suarez confess it must needs be Rome, toward the end of the
world, wherein Antichrist shall sit, make havoc of the Church, and be finally
destroyed.

CHAP. 5.. 5.
II. As the Pope challenges a superiority over all Christians so much more
particularly over all the Clergy; who must all derive their, both Orders and
Jurisdiction from him, as from the universal Pastor of the Church, in whom all
power of Orders and Jurisdiction originally resideth: So that Bishops pay to
the Pope great sums of money for their ceremonies at their entrance, and
Priests also their first fruits and yearly tenths, with other payments to
fill the Popes Cofers, by exhausting Christian Kingdoms: and all Bishops and
Priests become the popes subjects, exempted from the Jurisdiction, Laws and
penalties of the Princes in whose Countries they live, both their persons,
goods, and lands: which is a double injury to Christian Princes and
Commonwealths. First, that the Princes and State have no dominion over the
persons or bodies of the Clergy, or over Monks, Friars, Nuns, or other
Regulars or Votaries; they cannot be punished by the Kings laws, be they
adulterers murderers, robers, traitors, or tainted with other villainies, except
the popes officers will degrade them and make the^ seculars. Which was the
Controuercy betwixt King Henry the second, Read this whole story in our
Chronicles, especially in Speeds.
and Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, who would not yield the King any
authority to punish Clergy malefactors, as being none of his subjects.
Secondly, that the Princes and State have no aid, subsidies, or revenues out
of the goods or lands of Churchmen or Abbeys: whereas the goods or lands of
such men may arise to a quarter or a third part of the whole Realm: yea, and
they continually increase from Age to Age, by gifts, bequests, and purchases,
and are never alienated; to the great impairing of public revenues and
public force. For which the Venetians and other Commonwealths have been
compelled to make Laws of restraint, lest they should in time be swallowed up
by the Clergy.

This is against Divinity, equity, and antiquity; Christ was not exempted from
the Magistrates power: he acknowledge Pilat to have power to crucify him, John
19.10, 11
and power to release him; even lawful power given him from above. He paid
tribute to Caesar for himself and his. Saint Paul acknowledged Caesaer to be
his lawful judge; And taught all men (both for conscience sake, Mat. 17. end.
Act. 25.10. Romans 13.1. etc. 1 Pet. 2.13. Bernard. epist. ad Episcopum
Senonensem. Omnis anima, tum vestra, quis vos excipit? qui tentat excipere,
tentat decipere.
and in equity for the good we receive from the Magigstrates) to be subject to
the civil Magistrates that bear the sword. Saint Peter does the like. Saint
Bernard writing to a Bishop, tells him he is not exempted from temporal
subjection to Princes; he that excepts him deceiues him.

Father Paul of Venice in his Considerations upon the censure of Pope Paul 5.
page 39. shows how the Exemptions of the Clergy, came in peece-meale by the
privileges of Princes, and not jure diuino.

Anno domini 315. Constantine the great, exempted their persons from public
and Court services. And Constant and Constance his sons added their exemption
from illiberall or sordid actions, and from Impositions.

308 Valens and Gracianus. 400 Arcadius and Honorius. 420 Honorius and
Theodosius 2. etc. put the trial of the Clergy to the Bishop, if both parties
were willing; otherwise to the secular Magistrate: which was confirmed by
Gracian also, anno 460. and by Leo.

560 Justinian put the Clergy in civil causes to the Bishop, and in criminal
to the secular Judge.

630 Heraclius exempted the Clergy both in civil and criminal causes, from
the secular Magistrate; yet ever reserving entire the Princes immediate
Deputies and substitutes.

But the popes in following Ages challenged these privileges as due to them by
divine right, and abused these Emperors bountifulness, to their great
disturbance and dishonor. And in these last Ages wherein priests and Jesuits
are so busy with State matters, to the great disquiet and danger of Princes,
making Religion a Mask to cover and closely convey treasons and rebellions:
these exemptions and privileges are not tolerable.

. 6.
III. The Popes authority stays not here, in the general Fatherhood of the
Church, or dominion over the Clergy, exempting from the secular powers. These
are but stairs to an higher ascent. In the first and best times of the Church,
the gaining of souls to God, was the principal end, and wealth a poor
inferior means to maintain them (selling their lands to relieve the poor
Christians, Acts 2.45 and 4.34, etc.) Now (it seems) greatness and wealth are
the chief ends and a show of Religion is a means to get them. Christ's
kingdom was not of this world, ( John 18.36.) The Popes is: Doctor Sanders
calls it, Sanderi libri de visibili monarchia.
The visible Monarchy of the Church, a Monarchy ouertopping all other, yea
practicing to depose, dispose transpose all other Christian Potentates, as
shall seem good to the Pope to give Henry's Empire to Rodulph, sending to him
a Diadem with this Inscription, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus Diadema Rodulpho:
authorizing him (like Zimri) to kill his Master, and reign in his stead. To
give England from King John to Philip of France: our Henry the eigth, his
Kingdom to whosoever could take it by force: Queen Elizabeth's to the King of
Spain: to omit many others.

Pope Celestinus crowned Henry 6 and his Empress, See Tortura Torti page 264.
and 262. Baronius approved not Alexander 3. act. annot 177. for he thought the
story not true: But Celestin^s fact he commends and defends. B. And^ews in
Tortura Torti. page 263.
with both his feet; and cast off his with one. An Emperors Crown is but the
popes football. Gregory 7, made Henry 4. attend barefooted four days in
Winter before his gates. Alexander 3, trod upon Frederick Barbarosaes neck,
reciting the verse of the Psalm, 91.13. Thou shall tread upon the Lion and
Adder, The young Lion and the Dragon shall thou trample under thy f et. These
things the world cried shame upon, and Bellarmine blusheth at some of them, and
labors to weaken the credit of the Reporters: but our Bishop Andrews
reckons above 20 Authors of diverse Nations reporting them.

Christ would not divide Inheritances amongst brethren, as a thing that
belonged not unto him, Luke 12.14. The Pope (Christ's pretended Vicar) will. He
will give all the East Indies to the Portug^ll and all the West to the
Spaniard: and other Kingdoms at his pleasure: with as ample right as he
challenged, that tempted Christ, Luke 4 6.

As this is an unsupportable mischief, so the means to effect it is as evil
or wo^se. When people must be so strangely and strongly deluded, and inebriated
with false opinions, as to drink down poison instead of wholesome doctrine, to
break Gods absolute, manif^st, and holy laws at the popes commandment: that
if the pope take offense excommunicate the King, say he does and can absolve
them from their oath of allegiance, and all obedience to their King the Lords
anointed, and bid them take arms against him, and root him out: they ought
rather to obey the pope then God. Holy David, having Saul at advantage (a
wicked King, forsaken of God, and one that furiously sought David's death) yet
would not touch him himself, nor suffer him to be hurt by any other, because
he was still the Lords anointed, 1 Samuel 24.4 5, 6, 7. and 26.11, 12. Saint
Paul and Saint Peter taught Christians subjection even to heathen Emperors,
persecutors of the Church (for such they were at that time) Romans 13.1. etc. 1
Pet. 213. The pope is far from David's, Paul's, Peter's spirit. Our Saint Peter
of Jerusalem commanded, Be subject to the King as supreme, for so is the will
of God, 1 Pet. 2.13, 15. but your Peter of Rome commands the contrary: Be not
subject to the King as supreme, for this is the will of Christ's Vicar. Yea
(says our Saint Peter, ib, (verse 19, 20, 21.) Be subject to your Masters,
though they be evil and froward, and for conscience sake to God suffer
wrongfully, as Christ did, for that is acceptable to God: but your Peter of
Rome says, R^bell against Princes whom J judge evil and froward, and for
conscience sake (do against all conscience, religion and common honesty) work
treasons, insurrections, massakers, for that is acceptable to God. What new,
incredible, abominable doctrine is this, that rebellions, treasons, and
massacres of Princes and people, differing from the pope in some points of
Religion, are meritorious acts, and highly pleasing to God? That dethroning
Princes, adiudging their Kingdoms to strangers, filling the world with
periuries, rebellions, wars treasons, invasions, dashing kingdoms against
kingdoms, bringing in a Chaos of confusions, and the face of hell into the
Christian world: that all these are works of piety and religion? and poor
bewitched people must so believe, and so practice? Tantum Rell^gio potuit
suadere malorum! ^ucretius.
If this be religion, men had need write Apologies (books of excuse and
defense) for Religion: which has been and should be the greatest blessing of
the world, the power fullest means and strongest bond of love, peace, comfort,
and happiness: lest it now be held the most turbulent suspicious, seditious
engine to undermine and overthrow, all love, peace, comfort, happiness, and
become the greatest plague of the world. Of these things here briefly; of this
point I shall speak more fully in fitter place.

. 7.
IIII. A fourth great policy, whereby the Pope gayneth to himself sure friends
and great means, is his assumed power to dissolve or dispense with oaths,
bonds promises, or leagues. An insufferable sin, but very profitable to him.
For when Princes or great men are driven in their estates to hard conditions or
extremities, or desirous for their profit to take some great advantage by
breaking their oaths: they have no other means to save their honor and
credit with the world, then to allege the warranty of the popes holy
authority: which authority they are tied, afterward, most firmly to
maintain. Thus the politic pope, and they whom he favors, thrive in
honor, wealth and strength, by blinding the world with this unjust usurped
practice, to the inestimable prejudice of the wronged party, and of all other
whom the pope affects not, whose waightiest actions, resolutions, leagues and
contracts, are made nothing worth; or only are in force till the pope list to
dissolve them. See B. Andrews Ad Tortum Responsio. page 55.
He can bind and lose at h s p^easure: as our Saint Peter by the Ke^es of
heaven could bind and unbind sins: so your Peter of Rome, (b^ the Keys of
Hell, it seems) can bind and unbind, laws and oaths, be they never so
good, holy, and divine: yea laws and oaths as easily as sins against laws
and oaths. And thus the most solemn oaths for leagues and laws taken upon
men, sub Deo ^^ste sub Deo vindice, ordained to be the sovereign instruments
of justice and security amongst men, See examp^es of these hereafter, cap.
and the strongest bonds of conscience: are now made delusions of good men,
instruments of deceit and mischief intolerable; snares to entrappe the
well-meaning, to maintain the deceitful wrong-doer, and to uphold the popes
own greatness, with most sh^mefull blemishes of Christian Religion. Laws,
oaths, vows, are soluble and salable at Rome: men are no more to be trusted
with them, then without them; they that are on the popes side need not stick
at sin, breach of vows, or per^uries: he can d slolue all, and cut asunder
all the bonds and sins of humane peace, security and society, laws, oaths,
vows, leagues and tyalls whatsoever.

. 8.
Hist. conc. Trent. lib. 1. page 10. and lib. 8. page 791.
V. No less sinful, and no less profitable to the pope are Matrimonial
dispensations and sentences of divorce, as well granted as denied. When great
Princes are sheltered with the name of the Vicar of Christ, to contract some
incestuous marriage, or dissolve one, to contract with another to unite some
Territory to their own, or to drown the titles of other pretenders, or make
some other strait alliance: those Princes are now to defend that authority
without which their actions would be condemned: yea, also their children and
posterity must be fast friends unto the pope, l^st they endanger their own
legitimation, their state and dignity. Annals Elizab. Camden. Appara^^. page 2.
For uniting of Territories, Charles the 8, King of France made great use of
the popes dispensing power. He had taken the daughter of Maximilian (King of
Romans) for his future wife; but afterward for desire of the Duchy of Britany,
he solicited to marry Anne the heir of Britanie, though she was betrothed,
yea, and already married to Maximilian by his Proxy, or Proctor Wolfgangus,
Poleme of Austrich openly in the Church. A double injury to Maximilian, to have
her taken from him whom he accounted his wife, and to have his daughter sent
home again, who had been many years Queen of France. But this could the Pope
do. Philip Cominius reports it, lib. 7. cap 3. adding, whether these things
agree with the laws of holy Church, or no, let others judge. Some Doctors of
Divinity said, yea, and many nay. But the issues of these Ladies were very
unfortunate, and many calamities proceeded from these marriages, as he there
reports. Yet the pope dispensed with all this, partly to bind the French unto
him, and partly to bridle the Emperor, whom he would not have grow too great,
by addition of Britany to his State. Besides, he needed not much care for this
present Emperor Maximilian, a poor prince, full of affairs, and of small
credit. Yea Maximilian himself afterward affected the popedom, as
Guicciardine reports. But come we to the affairs of our own Nation.

Pope Julius the 2. gave a dispensation, that King Henry the 8. of England,
might marry Katherine, the wife of his brother Arthur, deceased. A marriage
plainly condemned by the Scriptures, Leu. 18.16. and 20.21. and Mat. 24.2, 4.
and by many learned Universities. Afterward pope Clement the 7. Hist. council.
Trid. lib. 1. page 68.
at Henry's suit sent Cardinal Campeggio into England, framing a Brief to
dissolve the Kings said marriage with Katherine (to be published when some few
proofs were passed, which he was sure would easily be made) and to give
liberty to the King to marry another: This, anno 1524. but anno 1529. The pope
thinking it better to join with the Emperor (who was son to Katherines
sister) sent another Nuncio to Campeggio, with order to burn the Brief, and
to proceed slowly in the cause. For the popement to apply himself to his best
advantages, but the King espying their iugling, finally banished the popes
authority out of England.

Annals ibid praepar. page A. 3. Latin Apparat. p. xij.
But Queen, Mary, the daughter of H^nry, by the said marriage of Katherine,
persuaded her self that all the right that she had to the Kingdom of England,
was vpholden by no other means then by the power of the pope, whose
dispensation made that marriage lawful, and gave sentence of her side, after
her father had declared her illegitimate, and therefore she was bound to cleave
strongly to the Pope.

Also Charles the 5, Emperor, procured a marriage betwixt Philip his son of
Spain, and Mary, Queen of England, by a dispensation of pope Julius the 3.
because they were allied in the third degree: and that Charles himself had
contracted to marry her, being then under age for time to come.

Ibid. page 5. sed ^atin. page 4.
After her death, King Philip desirous to keep England, treated seriously of a
marriage with Queen Elizabeth (his late wives sister) with promise to obtain a
special dispensation from the pope. Which, the King of France (fearing it
would be granted by the pope) labored secretly to hinder, but the hindrance of
the marriage was from Queen Elizabeth her self.

Relation of Religion in the West. page 34. and 27. See the whole Tract. page
25. and seq.
By such dispensations from the pope, marriages in the house of Austria have
been so near, that they remain still as brethren, all of one family, and as
arms of the selfsame body. Keeping their dominions united still together
without distraction. Philip the second of Spain, might call the Archduke
Albert, both brother, cozen, nephew, and son; being uncle to himself,
cozen-german to his father, husband to his sister, and father to his wife.

Such marriages (made lawful only by the pope, dispensing with the Law of
God) must needs bind both the parties and issue thereof to be firm to the
Papacy, and to maintain that authority, by which themselves stand maintained
and honored. So searched and penetrant is that Sea of Rome to strengthen it
self more by unlawful marriages of other men, then ever Prince yet could do,
by the most lawful marriage of his own. And thus the Pope, by some one act,
ties unto himself the favor of many friends, and many generations. Yet may
this be thought fit only for blinded or ill-minded Princes; The well-sighted
or well-minded, need no such cloak, nor will make use of any such, for any
otherwise unjustifiable courses. But if they through their own ignorance, or
their Ancestors unjust proiects, have been inuolued in such nets as their
conscience now mislikes: they may (after our King Henry's example) by Gods
book and the counsel of godly, wise, and learned men, alter their courses,
abolish his authority that alters Gods Laws, or deludes them: and establish
their state by more sound means. Humanum est errare, perseuerare diabolicum.

. 9.
VI. Other dispensations, See Verdunt discourse, anno 1563. Mense. Febr. in
hist. conc. Trid. lib. 7. page 676. See Tortura Torti. page 57.
for diverse things hurtful to the Church, States, and People, but very
profitable to the Pope and Court of Rome, are ordinary. About which one
Johannes Verdun spoke freely and iudiciously in the Council of Trent.
Dispensations (says he) are accounted dis-obligations from the Law, but Gods
Law is perpetual and remains inviolable for ever. The Pope is not Lord, and
the Church his servant, to bestow favors as a master upon his servants He is
but a servant (at the best) to him who is Spouse of the Church: neither can he
by dispensing unbind any that is bound; but only declare to him that is not
bound, that he is exempted from the Law. Indeed, humane Laws through the
imperfection of the Lawmakers, and Cases not foreseen may admit dispensations
in sundry occurrences; as exceptions from the general Law, where it may be
justly thought, the Lawmakers would have made exceptions if they had foreseen
those Cases: but where God is the Lawgiver (from whom nothing is concealed,
and by whom no accident is not foreseen) the Law can have no exception, but
all his Law is equity it self, perpetual and immutable.

Hist. conc. Trid. lib. 4. page 321.
The King of France (anno 1551.) in a Printed Manifest, published to his
subjects, that they were not to regard the Popes dispensations, which were not
able to secure the conscience, and are nothing but a shadow cast before the
eyes of men, which cannot hide the truth from God.

Even in men's laws, Dispensationes sunt legum vlnera, Dispensations are deep
wounds: In Gods Laws deadly wounds, both to the laws, and to the dispenser.
for laws often wounded, have little life left in them; and he that wounds them
has little feeling of conscience. Christ came not to dissolve the Law, but to
fulfill it, (Matthew. 5.17.) the Pope comes not to fulfill the laws but to
dissolve them. He vnbinds subjects oaths to Princes: yea, binds subjects with
oaths against Princes: both against Gods Law: binding where he should loose,
loosing where he should bind, as Antigod, and Antichrist. He binds his
Catholics for a time; while they want strength they shall not stir getting
strength, then they are loosed, then stir, kill^ and massacre.

Thus Gregory the 13. interprets the Bull of Pius the 5. And thus Princes of
the old Christian faith, that they live and reign, are beholden to the
Catholics of the new stamp, not for their faith, but for their weakness.
Hist. conc. Trent. lib. 8. page 815.
And with other Laws, Constitutions, Councels, and Ordinances, he plays fast
and loose as he list. Take for example that which is written in the end of the
history of the Council of Trent. When much debating had been between the
Pope and the Cardinals, whether his Holiness should confirm the Council or
no: because through the importunity of Princes, and some learned Divines, many
Decrees had passed for reformat on of diverse things, whereby the dignity and
profits of the Papacy and Court of Rome would be much impaired: at last
Cardinal Amulius told the pope, Since he could not possibly avoid the calling
and celebrating of the Council, so much desired by the clamor of the world,
he must now either quickly confirm it to satisfy the world, or else Princes
and States would use other means by national Counsels, or by another
general Council to satisfy themselves. But now by confirming all, and giving
as much quick execution as was possible, the pope might stay and quiet the
humor of the world for the present: and afterward by insensible and
irresistable degrees, by his dispensations he might bring all to the same
estate, wherein it was before; without seeming to violate the decrees of the
Council, and this policy took effect; and so both frustrate the good
reformation intended by the Decrees, and also gulled the world and all the
Princes and Prelates pains, and turned all to the profit of the Pope, his
Court, and Cardinals. Whereby it plainly appears, The popes faction aymeth
not at the good of the Church, or Christian Commonwealths, but only at their
own wealth and greatness, and hereby appears also the great power and
iniquity of the Popes dispensations.

Antiquus. Whatsoever they aim at: I am resolved that many of these things
cannot be of God; they are certainly the faults of men, and abuses practiced
under color of Religion I cannot, I will not defend them. But I do much
wonder, how, not being of God, they should be so generally received, believed
to be of God, and so long continued, and not rather long since driven out of
the world by Princes and People.

Antiquissimus. Sir, if ye knew and considered the policies and power, which
have been used, to bring them in and maintain them, your wonder would cease.

Antiquus. I pray you make me acquainted with them.

Antiquissimus. Some of the principal and most obuious, I will: but my wit
cannot sound the bottomless depth of the Mystery of Iniquity.

Antiquus. A taste thereof shall content me.

CHAP. 6. Of policies to maintain the Popes Princedome and Wealth. 1 Depriving
men of the light of the Scriptures. And 2 of their ordinary preachings, and
setting up ambulatery Monks and Pryars, to preach without control of Church
Ministers and Officers. 3 Schoolemens too much subtilty and Philosophy,
darkning and corrupting Divinity. 4 Jesuits, their original noted, their
Seminaries, their Emissions, faculties, insinuations, and imploiments. 5
Cardinals. 6 Provision for men and women of all sorts, by Monasteries, etc. 7
Auricular confession. 8 Other policies to gather wealth. 9 Purgatory, a rich
thing. 10 So are Indulgences or Pardons. 11 Jubilies. 12 Corruptions of
doctrine, touching merits and Justification, etc. 13 Things hallowed by the
Pope. 14 Extraordinary exactions.
. 1.
THe Popes principal means to make the people his own, were 1 to keep the
Divine Scriptures from them, by which else they might discern his
unjustifiable policies. Psalm. 119.105. and 19.7, 8.
For Gods Word is the light and lantern of Christians, which S. Paul would
have to dwell plentifully among them, Col. 3.16. and S. Peter would have Babes
in Christ to desire the sincere milk of the Word, that they may grow thereby,
1 Pet. 2.2. which is able to make them wise in the points of faith, 2 Timothy
3.15. and perfectly furnished unto all good works, verse 17. Chrysostom. sermon.
2. de Lazaro.
S. Chrysostom (as do many other Fathers also) exhorts all people (Laymen
especially, Tradesmen, Carpenters, etc.) to get them Bibles more carefully then
any other tools of their occupation: and the more they dealt in the world, and
met with temptations, il examples, and occasions of sin, so much more
carefully to read the Scriptures, for direction and armor against them.
Christ himself commands, Search the Scriptures, ( Joh. 5.39.) and says, (
Matthew. 22.29.) Do ye not err not knowing the Scriptures? So that, herein They
are Anti-Pauls and Peter's, Anti-chrysostomes, and Antichrists, that teach and
practice the contrary: Matthew. 5 15.
hiding the light of Gods Word under their Latin bushels, from the vnlatined
people in Gods house; yea, and from the Latined too, under great penalties,
except they be licenced. Surely as this is a means to obscure the truth, and
lead men as Captives blindfold whether they list 2 Timothy 2.26.
; so it is a sign, they love not the truth, but are evil men and hate the
light, lest their deeds should be reproved, Ioh. 3.20.

. 2.
But it was not sufficient to take from men the true light, except there be
added also a false light, to misguide them; for men's minds being naturally
desirous of knowledge, and given to devotion, must have that hunger satisfied
and quieted either by truth or appearance. Their second policy was therefore; 2
To put down the ordinary Pastors and Preachers, or to take a course that they
are discouraged, disabled, grow unlearned and unfit to preach: and set up
others. For Saint Paul appointed Bishops to ordain Presbyters (...), Tit. 1.5.
in every City and Town, to wit such as dwell among the people, might best
know the wants, sins, capacities of their own people; See Tit. 5, 6, 7, etc.
1 Timothy, 3.2, etc. and 5.22. Acts 20.17, 18.
and apply their teaching the best way to inform, reform, and win them: and
such as being fixed in their places might best be called to account by the
Bishop, either for life or doctrine.

This was Gods excellent means to preserve sound doctrine and sincere holy
lives of Ministers.

But when the Popes ambition and covetousness grew so great, that they were
not content with Christ's heavenly Kingdom, but would super-adde unto it an
earthly kingdom, and make of Christ's militant Church, and Church triumphant
upon earth, a visible Church Monarchy (as Doctor Sanders entitles it)
ouer-topping all other Kingdoms of civil Princes, Kings and Emperors: and
draw out of all Countries the Wealth and Treasure of the world to maintain it:
Then the Ministers and Preachers of Christ's ordaining, would not serve their
turn, but would rather oppose. And therefore it was the popes best policy to
disgrace and disable them: and to find out and set up others fitter for their
purpose, to preach in all places of the world, by the authority and privilege
of the Popes only, and wholly exempted from the Bishops jurisdictions, and
from all control of other Ministers or Officers whatsoever. So that these new
Preachers merely depending upon the pope, and maintained by him, might
answerably maintain him, uphold his authority and all his proceedings, with
the disgrace and beating down of all his or their adversaries.

. 2. See Hist. council. Trent. lib. 2. page 167. 169. 170. an. 1546. and lib. 4.
page 322.
This course was found to be very hurtful to the Church, and was complained of
by many learned men in the following Ages: and in the late Council of Trent,
Reformation thereof was very earnestly called for by many Bishops, especially
the Spanish; as a thing that utterly abolished the Apostles Institution, and
the holy Fathers practice, and took away the Bishops office, and was the cause
why all things were out of order, and so had grown by degrees from bad to
worse for three hundred years. Neither was it possible to amend them, wh le
these ambulatory Monks and Friars did so swarm in the world, with privilege
to preach where and what they list, against the Bishops wills.

Upon such great and frequent complaints in Trent, Ibid. page 170.
the pope and Cardinals at Rome, took the matter into their consideration: and
they quickly saw, that if these exemptions and privileges of preaching Monks
and Friars were taken away, the popes authority would decay. For it was a
clear case, that after the six hundredth year, the primacy of the Apostolic
Sea, had been vpheld by the Benedictine Monks exempted, and after by the
Congregations of Clunie and Cistercium, and other Monastical Assemblies,
until the Mendicant Friars arose, by whom it had been maintained till that
time. And therefore to take away those privileges, were directly to oppugn
the Papacy, with a manifest depression of the Court of Rome.

These motions therefore were by all possible means to be silenced.

Note (by the way) something of the Monks here named, and the Ages they lived
in.. 3. Tritem. de viris illustr. ord. Benediclini lib. 1. cap. 2. and. 5.
Tritemius writes that of the Benedictines there were before the Council of
Constance, 15000 Religious houses: and that out of this order, there had been
taken of Popes, eighteen; Cardinals, one hundred and eighty; Archbishops, one
thousand, one hundred sixty four; Bishops, three thousand five hundred and
twelve; by which you may guess at the multitudes, power, estimation, and
authority that this order had in the world.

Azor. instit moral. lib. 12. c. 21.
Azorius says, when this order grew slack and swarued from their first rule;
the Cluniacenses arose out of them, an. 913. And the C^sternienses, anno 1198.
And these were they that vpheld the Papacy so notably in those middle times of
darkness, when all Learning, both Divine and Humane (yea, and almost all
goodness) was decayed out of the world: and ignorant men were apt to believe
any thing, and take it for current and authentical, which their seeming-holy
Churchmen taught, being no way able to examine the truth thereof.

. 4. Legend Aur. Iacobi de Voragine in vita Dominici. c. Also in vita Dominici,
addita Lipomano De historia Sanctorum. These things (they say) were made known
to diverse devout Monks by Visions or Revelations: whereof Iacobus de Voragine
Bishop of Genua, recites some. In legenda S. Dominici.
But in succeeding times, when the worlds eyes were better opened, and the
opposers of the Papacy (specially, the Waldenses, or Albigenses) grew to
greater numbers and strength: Innocent. 3. hit upon better means against them:
by the two orders of begging Friars, newly devised by S S. Dominick and
Francis. There is a wicked and profane story (which I thought, the learned of
this Age had been ashamed of, but that I find it new written again by
Costerus the Jesuit, in the Preface of his Institutions) how that Jesus Christ
was in a great chafe that the Albigenses increased so fast and seemed to
overcome the world so that he said he would presently destroy the world. But
the holy Virgin his Mother, prayed him to be patient a while, that she might
first send two men into the world, S. Dominicke and S. Francis; and if they
could overcome them, all should be well: if not, then let him take his pleasure.

They write also that Dominicus having devised a new order against Heretics,
better then any former, came to pope Innocent 3. to have it confirmed. The pope
in some suspense, whether to grant or deny it, one night saw in his dream, the
great church of Lateran shrinking in his joints, and ready to finke to the
earth: whereat affrighted, he thought he saw Dominick presently come, and hold
it up with his shoulders. Upon which vision he confirmed his new order. Thus
writes Vincentius in Speculo histor. Antoninus, Theodoricus, Bertrandus, Bonav.
de vita Francisci cap. 3. in fine apud Lipomanum.
Baptista Mantuanus. But Bonaventure says. It was Saint Francis that held up
the Church. See Bishop Usher, De successu Ecclesiae cap 9. 9, 10.

Howsoever, it is certain they that wrote, and they that believed these
stories, had a strong conceit that these two Orders were -- magnae spes altera
Romae, Strong successiue props to uphold the Majesty of the Papacy

And so they were, many ways: 1 by their multitude, for they quickly spread
over the face of the earth (some say, Chawcer in the wife of Bathes tale.
as thick as the Locusts darkning the air, Revel. 9 or) as Chawcer says, as
thick as motes in the Sun Beam.

2 By their credit and estimation among the people, for they were received and
admired as most holy men, vowing poverty, forswearing riches lands, or other
worldly goods for Christ's sake, contented with their Houses, Gardens, and
Orchards, living on Alms, begged or brought to them, simply clothed, with
ropes for their girdles: and preaching very diligently in all places, specially
quaint Tales, and Legends delighting the people. But the sense of their credit
made them vntolerably audacious, See these things at large in Mat. Paris. page
404. and 673. And in B. Usher De Eccles. cap. 9.. 14. and seq.
in vilifying all ordinary Ministers of the Gospel, creeping into, and
usurping their Offices; and magnifying themselves, as the only men of Gods
privy Council, full of inspirations and Revelations: they only knew how to
distinguish (lepram a lepra) one sin from another how to open hard and knotty
questions, resolve all doubts, give true penance and absolution, etc. And they
kept books of the names of all theit Clients that chose them to be their
Confessors and counselors, and by such devises drew infinite store of people,
and much wealth after them, whereby they built very stately houses like Kings
Palaces; and professing poverty, abounded with all wealth and superfluity; and
so robbed the ordinary Ministers of their maintenance, and brought them into
such contempt and poverty, that they made grievous complaints thereof to the
Emperor, Pope and Cardinals, in which complaints some Bishops joined with
them. Yea, the famous University of Paris complained to the Popes of their
wrongs also, but all in vain; for the pope favored the Friars, and curbed the
Universities privileges.

. 5. See Vsherabidem.
During this contention at Paris, The Friars forged a new Gospel (fitter, it
seems, for their purpose then Christ's Gospel) and called it the Gospel of
the Holy Ghost, and the everlasting Gospel, Evangelium aeternum; laboring to
make men believe it was more perfect, better, and worthier then the Gospel of
Christ, as the Sun was more perfect then the Move, and the kernel of a Nut
better then the shell; and that Christ's Gospel should then cease, and this
should come in the room of it and continue for ever. And this Gospel
continued 55 years without any open reprehension of the Church of Rome, and at
length was set forth to be openly read and expounded in the University of
Paris, anno 1255. But it was opposed by some Parisian Doctors, Gulielmus de
Sancto amore, O do de Duaco, Nicholaus de Barro and Christianus Belluacensis,
who wrote against it, and showed the monstrous impieties and blasphemies of it.
After much contention, finally the matter was brought before the pope, anno
1256. who (with advice of his Cardinals) took order, that this Gospel and all
the copies thereof, should be secretly burned, and not openly reprehended for
disgracing their Orders: and also that the Parisians books written against it,
should be publicly burned. The popes Decree for this purpose, is inserted in
Bishop Vshers book, De successione Ecclesiarum, cap. 9.. 28. Where also the
whole story is set down somewhat largely, collected out of many approved
Historians there cited, ibid.. 20. and seq.

By this story appears the little conscience these seeming holy Friars made
of the truth of their teaching,. 6.
or of corrupting Gods Word or abrogating it, or of teaching any thing that
might serve for their purpose.

And these were the worthy men, whom the Jnnocent pope made choice of, to
uphold (not Christ's Church, but) the Papacy: authorizing them to preach where
and what they list, without control of any man, for the maintenance thereof.

3 And not only to preach, but to exercise the authority and power of a most
cruel Inquisition, Hos prosternamus, deleamusque said Dominic^ to Francis. in
vita Deminici.
yea made them the chief Inquisitors to search out and deliver up to death,
all those that gaine-said and withstood without yielding unto the Doctrine and
government of the Pope, although otherwise they lived never so holily, justly,
and quietly; which bloody office they executed with all diligence and cruelty.

. 3.
4 About the same time also, and out of their School, arose another Evil of
unprofitable and idle Sententiaries, Questionists, Summists, Quodlibetists, and
such like: 1 Timothy 6.4.
fit men to corrupt the simplicity of the Gospel, and fill men's heads with
dark, thorny, and brawling disputes, to languish about questions, 2 Timothy 2, 23.
and strife of words, and by too much subtilty, making plain things obscure;
losing the pith, marrow, and kernel of true Theology: 1 Timothy 6.20.
and bringing true saving knowledge of good life to profane and vain
ianglings, and oppositions of science falsely so called. For now was Theology
made conformable to their rules of Philosophy, and must have no other sense
then their fore-conceiued opinions allowed it: and all other senses must be
shifted of by subtle distinctions. Viues in his notes upon S. Augustine de
civ, Dei.


The Schoolmen (says Lodovicus Viues) through ignorance of tongues, have not
only marred and smoothered Lib. 3. cap. 31.
all other Arts, but Lib 3. cap. 13. and. lib. 19. c. 12.
Divinity too: and and have Lib. 11. c. 11. and. 14. Lib. 13. cap. 1. lib. 18.
cap. 1. lib. 20. cap. 16. and lib. 21 cap. 7. As D. Rainolds has collected
them in the Preface to his Conference with Mr. Heart. But these places are now
purged out by Index Expurg. in the later Prints.
profaned it with their curiosity, their vanity, their folly, their rashness
in moving and defining questions; As Aristotelians rather then Christians, and
Heathen Philosophers, then Scholars of the holy Ghost.

. 4.
When M. Luther had reproved the great abuse of Pardons, Council. Trid sess. 21.
c. 9.
anno 1517. and that so justly, that shortly after, the Fathers of the Trent
Council, utterly abolished the pardoners, as vntollerably scandalous to
Christian people: and thereby justified Luthers beginning and proceeding:
Ignatius Loiola, a Spaniard, lately before a Courtier and a Soldier, and now
disabled by a wound in one of his legs, thought upon a better remedy against
the enemies of the Popes sovereignty, Genebrard. lib. 4. chron.
then had been devised before, and in the year 1521. began a new order of
Jesuits; he observed as he traveled in many Countries and Universities, such
rules and orders as best fitted his purpose, Possevin. Bibl. select. lib. 1.
cap. 38.
and having joined ten other choice men to himself, came to Rome, anno 1540.
to get his order confirmed by the Pope: and by means of Cardinal Contarenus,
Massaeus Iesuita. lib 2. c. 1 ^. vit. Ignatij Loiola.
offered the form of his new order to the Pope, wherein he had to the three
vows of other orders, super added a fourth vow, that the Jesuits should
willingly and readily go into any Country of Christians or Infidels,
whethersoeuer the Pope would send them, for the affairs of Religion. This the
Pope greatly liked saying it would prove a notable help to the afflicted state
of the Church. Ribadeneira. vit. Ig^at. lib. 2. c. 18.
Thus writes M^ssaeus the Jesuit: and another Jesuit Ribadineira says, God
by singular providence sent Jgnatius to help his Church now when it was ready
to fall. They say Satan sent Luther, and God sent the Jesuits to withstand
him: We say the contrary. But let it be judged by the purport of their
Doctrine, who came from God and who from the enemy. They that teach disloyalty
and rebellion against Kings, and lead their people into Conspiracies and
Treasons, against States and Kingdoms (to let all other points pass
untouched, for the present) let them be branded for the Emissaries of Satan.

This order then was first confirmed by Paul, Azor. Institut. moral. lib. 13.
cap. 7.
3. 1540 and again 1543. and by Julius 3. 1550. also by Pius 5. 1565. and
1571. and lastly by Gregory 13. 1584. as Azorius the Jesuit writes, and sets
down the Confirmation at large.

But this order of Jesuits never came to the height till Gregory 13 his time,
when Claudius de Aqua viva, was made their General. Possevin. Bibl. select. l.
1. c. 39.
Then was a project laid to build Colleges and Seminaries to train up young
men, and make them fit instruments to maintain the Papacy and Romish Church.
To that end sundry choice men were brought from diverse Countries Ioannes
Azorius from Spain, Jasper Gonzales from Portugal, Jacobus Tyrius from
France, Petrus Buseus from Austria, Antonius Guisanus from upper Germany, and
Stephanus Tugius who remained at Rome.

All these, of extraordinary learning and experience, having bin Governors of
Colleges or Schools, a long time in their several Countries. These were
appointed by the Pope and Aqua viua, to consult of the best manner of trayning
up young men in the Seminaries. They had consultations, instructions and
intelligences from other places, a whole year together; and doubtless
concluded upon the most politic and likely course that humane wit could
devise, to subdue the the world to their own purposes. Mean season there were
entised or drawn out of diverse Nations (by books published, ee B. Bilson
^ifference of subjection, and rebellion, part. 1. page 149. and seq.
and other means) many of the best wits, such as wanted maintenance, or had
missed preferments in the Universities or other places, or were otherwise
discontented, or desirous of novelties, etc. they were drawn by magnificall
promises of preferment, degrees, honors, employment, and most exquisite
education in all manner of learning, to come to the most bountiful Pope, and
receive them. And, by this means shortly were furnished many Seminaries with
Jesuit Governors, and Readers, and with plenty of hearers or students,
Seminarium Romanum, Germanum, Anglicum, Graecum, and Maronitanum or of the
Inhabitants of Montlibanus, to train up and make fit instruments in the
shortest time to be sent again into their Countries to put in practice the
things they had learned, and with all possible wit and diligence to recover and
restore the authority of the Roman Church where it was decayed: and in all
other places also to prevent such blows and wounds as the Papacy had already
otherwhere received. To which purpose they had privileges (contrary to other
orders) as times and occasions required to go disguised not in Religious but
Laymens habits, like Gentlemen, gallants or seruing-men. Dialogue between a
secular Priest a Gentleman. page 90.
(One of their secular Priests reports, that a Jesuit has worn a Girdle,
Hangers, and Rapier worth ten pounds: a Ierkin worth as much: and made himself
three suits of apparel in a year: his horse, furniture, and apparel valued
at an hundred pounds) the better to insinuate into all Companies unsuspected,
and creep into their minds with cunning persuasions ere they were aware, and
so go forwards or fall off, as hopes or fears should meet them. And
wheresoever they could find or work out entertainment, they had privileges,
Bulls, and Faculties to hear Confessions, to pardon sins, to reconcile and
receive penitents into the bosom of the Church of Rome, to instruct them that
Princes, not of the Catholic Romish faith, nor subject to the pope, were no
Princes: but had lost their authority, rule, government, and dominion: their
Officers, no Officers, their Laws, no Laws: their subjects were freed from
obedience to them, further then for fear or want of strength they might obey:
but when they had strength and power, they might and ought by all means to put
such Princes down, and set up others, such as the pope should like of.

That they should by no means come to the Protestant Churches or prayers, but
maintain an irreconciliable hatred to all religious Acts and Doctrines of
theirs, seemed they never so good: and as they should be able, utterly to
extirpe them as people worse then Infidels.

And for their cunning and appearing sanctity, they became Confessors and
Counselors to Kings and Queens, and great personages: and thrust themselves
into counsels and actions of state, government, intelligences: and had such
connexions amongst themselves, as no kind of men could go beyond them in wit,
learning, power, or policy. They nested themselves in places of best advantage
of Princes Courts, chiefest Cities, greatest men: and where they could once
place Seminaries or Colleges of their own Society, they made account that
Country was their own. Their Colleges (as it is observed) placed upon the
walls of Cities, afforded them passage into the City or abroad into the world
at pleasure, to give or receive intelligence as occasion served. They ha^ their
General at Rom^, at the popes elbow, (as the aforesaid Claudius de Aqua viva)
and under him Prouincialles, and Arch-priests in every Country, (as George
Blackwell, Henry Garnet, and after him George Bircot in England) to give order
and directions to inferior Jesuits, and there to appoint them their limits
and employments, call them to account; and send them when and whither they
thought good. And so erected a new Jesus ticall government, and clasped the
King^ome (as far as was pos^ible) in their own fists.

See the full discou^se h^re of in M^^^^to Ga^lob^l^i^o Da^t^cano anno. 1607.
page 67.
It was w^ll discoursed to the P^lonian Nobility, assembled for Reformation of
the troubles in the Land, That the greatest en^mies to that and other free
estates, were the Jesuits, who had a Monarchical policy, fittest to move and
act, tied to one head at Rome, and tied to their superiors in straitest form
of Obedience; that the lower may not enquire into any (no not the absurdest)
commands of the superiors; but must yield ready obedience without knowing any
reason of the equity or danger thereof. Which blind obedience has brought
forth many desperate audacious instruments and designs. So that the Jesuits
faction is a most agile sharp sword, whose blade is sheathed at pleasure in
the bowels of every Commonwealth, but the handle reaches to Rome and Spain.
So that the very life, death, and fortunes, of all Kings, Magistrates, and
Commonwealthes, hangs upon the horoscope of the Jesuits pleasures.

If the Jesuits be as lucky stars in the ascendent and culminant, they may
live, continue, and flourish: if maleuolent, they perish, but that Deus
dominabitur Astris.

. 5.
See Rainold. and Heart. confe^. cap. 1. din. 6. ^p. 382.
The great estate and authority of Cardinals was an especial means to advance
and uphold the Papacy, after that the parishes grew so populous, that there
needed more Priests and Deacons then one, in every Parish and Ward in Rome, the
principal was called the Cardinal priest and Cardinal Deacon: Bell^r.
Apolog. con^^a praesat. m^^ ^ortum Jacob Reg^s cap. 4. pa^. 34. 38, 39, Ibid.
page 337. con^. Lat^ran. cap. 1.
and this honorable name was in time also given to the chief Bishops near
unto Rome, they were also called Cardinal Bishops: as the Bishop of Alba,
Tusculum, Preneste, Sabine, Portuesse, and Ostia. And until the year 1180.
they all (Bishops, Priests, and Deacons) lived on their own charge, and
discharged it in their own persons, though also (as nearest) often employed in
the popes affairs. But by Alexander the third, Cerem. Eccle. Romans lib. 1. and.
3. August. Triumphus d^ potest. eccl q est. 8. art. 4. Antonin. Sum. part. 3.
tit. 21. cap. 1., 2. Ceremoniar. Rom eccl. s. lib. 1. sect. 8 cap. 3. Some
fetch a prophecy of Cardinals from Sam^ch M^ther (1 Samuel 2.8.) where h^ says,
Do^ini su^t cardines terrae, and posunt super eos orbem (which is in English,
The pillars of the earth are the Lords, and he has let the world upon them:
but) which they understand thus: The Cardinals are lords of the earth, etc.
Cardines (id ^st) Cardinales, super q^ibus diu j^m, qua deb^it qui^scere,
mouetur t^^^ra, says our Bishop Andrews. Ad Cardinalis ^ella^mini Apologiam
Responsic. cap. 4. page 97. Cardin^ls are such henges as the earth moves upon
when it should be quiet. [This dignity is not n^w (says Bella^m^ne ib.) for it
is 5^^ years old: but surely that is new that came n^^ in till after twice 500
years and more.] This is alleged and confuted by Azorius Instit. moral.
part. 2. l. 4. c. 1.. 3 queritur. B. Mo^^^n Appeal. l. 4. c. 19 sect. 3.
they were made the only Electors of the Pope, after that the Emperor was
first thrust out from the election, then the people, and afterward the Clergy.
And in short time the Cardinals grew to be fellows to Kings, guardians to
Princes, and Protectors of Nations; but all to the popes best interest, they
were created with these words, Estote Fratres nostri, and principes mundi. Be
ye our brethren, and princes of the world. Pope Pius 2. spoke thus to his new
created Cardinals, -- Vos Senatores vrbis, and regum similes eritis very mundi
cardines, super quos militantis ostium Ecclesia voluendum ac regendum est. You
Senators of the City, and like to Kings, shall be the true hooks or henges of
the world, upon which the door of the militant Church is to be turned and ruled.
They were by Innocent the fourth dignified with Purple. In the age when
Transubstantiation was made an article of Faith, they were (not
transubstantiated, but) transaccidentated, and made more glorious to the eyes
of the world; about anno 1250. Thus their dignity and authority was great, and
as great was their maintenance and wealth. For to this dignity were chosen the
greatest prelates of sundry Diocesses and Provinces, as of York (for example)
and Canterbury in England; Rhemes and Roane in France; Toledo in Spain; Lisbon
in Portugal; Mila^, Ravenna, Venice, in Italy; In Germany, Colen, Trier, and
Men's; in Bohemia, Praga; in Poland, Cracovia; in Hungary, Strigonium: and so
forth, the chiefest Bishops in all Christendom, to be the ^ardinall Priests
and Deacons of Rome. And although their dignity was named of some parish or
Deaconship of Rome, yet they held their Bishoprics still and many other added
to them, under the name of perpetual administration. As Tho. Wolsey,
Archbishop of York, had the title of priest of S. Cicilies parish in Rome, and
perpetual administrator of the Archbishopricke of York; Stow. Speed, etc.
and of the other Bishoprics which he inioyed by other tricks and titles our
Chronicles reckon Turney in France, Rainol. and Heart. cap. 7. div. 6. page 386.
Onuphrius lib. de Romans Pont. and Card.
Lincoln, Winchester, Bathe, Worcester and Hereford in England: seven
Bishoprics, besides the Abbey of S. Albones. Cardinal Hippolitus, being
Deacon of S. Lucies in Rome, and Archpriest of S. Peter's, had three
Archbishopricks some hundreds of miles distant, Milan in Lombardy, Capua in
Naples, Strigonium in Hungary; besides three other Bishoprics, one in Hungary,
two in Jtaly, Agria, Mutina, and Ferrara. Though others had but 5 4, 3, 2, or
but one. And if living failed to maintain the Cardinals pomp, The popes used
reseruations and provisions of Benefices (besides Bishoprics and Abbyes) such
as then were void, Walsingam. hist. Angl. in Edw 3.
or should next fall void) in all Countries, until they amounted to a
certain rate (as of 2000 marks in England, for two new Cardinals in King
Edward the thirds time: Onuph. in Romans Pont. and Card.
and the like for ten others in other Countries at the same time, newly
created by pope Clement the sixth)

This exceeding great Dignity and Wealth, meeting together, allured many to
desire these places. And the politic popes used to choose Cardinals of two
sorts: some of Noble and potent families, to add strength by the aliance of
Princes and great Nobles, and to get intelligence and Oars in their
government: others of great wit and learning, by that means also to enlarge
and uphold the Papacy against learned Adversaries. For even Princes and Nobles
second sons, or other kinsmen wanting maintenance to support their Nobility,
were either of themselves desirous, or might easily be induced to accept of
such places: and their parents and friends were glad to be so eased of the
charge to maintain them: and the whole families became thereby assured friends
to the Papacy, and good instruments to uphold and defend it. On the other side
many learned men, that wanted both Nobility and maintenance, and thirsted after
both, by having such brave places bestowed upon them, took themselves to be
bound, by all their wit, learning, and diligence to maintain them.

But it was not altogether safe to have Cardinals in whom both these things,
(Nobility of blood, and excellency of learning) did meet, lest knowing a double
worthiness in themselves, they should not be so much beholden to their places,
as their places to them: nor so pliable or ready to do their best in their
defense, when they found themselves able to stand without them.

These Cardinals of both sorts, by their kindred, wit, learning, policy,
counsel, and diligence in managing the state, are great vpholders of the
Papacy: and yet beyond all this, the pope makes a further use of them: to wit,
to show a needlesnesse of any councels, either general or particular. Since
that grave Senate of Cardinals is full sufficient to manage all the state of
the whole Church, without further trouble to the world.

Bellarmine confesses that the particular Roman Councels (exoleuerunt) are
worn out of use: Bellar. apologia ad praefationem monitoriam Iacobi Regis. p.
39.
and it seems (says he) the Consistory of Cardinals succeeds in their place;
See B. Andrews answer to it, page 107.
And the general Councels, (as he calls them) which the Church has had since
the Cardinals came to the height which now they enjoy, (three at Lateran, two
at Lions, one at Vienna, one at Constans, one at Flor^ns, and one at Trent)
were not true general Councels no better then the particulars of Rome (now
vanished) since all things were done there according to the appetite of one
man, and may more fitly be called, The decrees of Popes, then the Canons of
Councels; except only that of Constance, wherein matters were carried by the
Deputies of Nations, the popes brought into better order, three popes at once
abdicated, and where it was decreed that thenceforward there should be no more
then 24 Cardinals: and that evermore within ten years a Council should be
called: Things not performed, neither will be; and therefore it is wonder, the
Cardinal would mention this Council. And why should he call the other, which
he mentions, general, when the right manner of calling them, and of ordering
them, and safe coming to them, and freedom of voices, were all taken away: If
things be thus carried, what needs any Senate of the whole Church, when a
Senate of present Cardinals, either can do all, or must do all? Therefore
this invention, state, and choice of Cardinals, is a powerful, politic
device to maintain the Papacy, and keep off the strongest opposition.

. 6.
See relation of Religion in these Western parts.. 13. etc.
Monasteries also (as now they are used) are great vpholders of the Papacy; in
binding many thousands fast unto it, for their own maintenance. For there is
entertainment for all sorts of people, Men, Women, Nobler, baser, in the
higher or lower places. They are Havens, or final Refuges to receive men of
discontented humors, or despairing passions, or unfortunate, or unfit for
other Trades, or disgraced or crossed in the world, or distasted with the
world, or tired out with enemies or wanting maintenance: there they may be
discharged of toils and cares, and provided for without charge to their
parents or friends, to the great ease of parents, and better portions of their
other brethren, who are all bound to the Abbeyes and Papacy for this benefit.
And there are such diversities of orders, and degrees of Monasteries, in
strictness or slacknesse of their rules, that in one or other, every humor
may receive contentment: the more devout and melancholicke, in the more severe
and austere orders, the looser, in orders of greater liberty. All of them for
present maintenance without care, and protection without fear; and for hope of
rising to higher and higher places (among such multitudes and diversities:)
must needs love and defend to the uttermost of their powers, the authors of
their welfare.

And though they have frequent fastings and prayers, etc. yet with a little use
they can endure it well, as matters nothing comparable to the benefits they
receive: these are but physic to keep them alive against the diseases, which
else their ease and fullness at other times would breed. And their delights are
many, to content them and the rest of the world: inward hope that all their
outward courses highly please God, and they live in a state of perfection,
far above the best of ordinary Christians, meriting heaven and many
blessings, both for themselves and others their benefactors: they have their
legends, and familiar relations of visions, miracles, apparitions, and
revelations, much pleasing the credulous superstitious and fantastical: they
have their sweet Music, glorious shows, beautiful Images, rich vestments,
variable ceremonies, for the admiration of the simple Their Cities and great
places abound in all variety, both of things and times, and orders to content
and delight the several humors of all; their baits to allure, their hooks to
retain all kind of people. One day, all Maskes, Plays, and lollity: another
day, all Processions, Fasting, and whipping themselves: upon one door an
Excommunication, casting down to Hell all trangressors; upon another, a Iubile
or Pardon from all transgressions: on one side of the street, a house of veiled
Nuns; on the other side an house of open Curtezans: and the Stews allowed
for a pension paid to the pope, as well as the Nuns.

Never was any state in the world so strangely compacted of infinite varieties
to please variety of humors: and so strongly combined to maintain the
Masterpiece. Never was any prince so able to prefer his servants and
followers (and that at other men's cost) as the pope: nor so able (quickly and
easily) to take deep revenge of his enemies. His authority is so great, and so
settled in base peoples hearts; his power so strong; and adherents so many, his
agents so quick to execute his will: that any sin against him, is
unpardonable; and on the other side, any sin, either against God, or Nature,
or prince, or State, by intercession to him and respective attendance on his
Officers, may be dispensed with, or pardoned, or passed by without disturbance.

. 7.
See Relation of Religion in the West,. 17. See B. White against Fisher. page
186. etc.
Auricular confession, pretended for repentance, reformation, direction, and
comfort of sinners (and might with some cautions be profitably used to those
purposes) yet, by the abuse, does yield to the Romish, great benefit for the
managing of affairs; since thereby they pry into the hearts, dispositions,
consciences, and humors of all men, Nobles and inferiors, in every Country:
whereby the more wise and politic sort (which are confessors to great men)
may come to know many secret carriages of businesses; and also, who are the
fittest instruments to be employed, either in furthering or crossing their
designs; and by enioyning penance, may make great use of the dispositions,
which by such confessions are discovered. Beside the gifts which they may wring
from them upon their deathbeds, or other sicknesses. Of all which, I wish
there were no examples or practices.

. 8.
As we find the former policies make principally for the popes greatness,
strength, and honor, setting him up above all the world, Clergy and Laity: so
we find many others notably contrived to furnish him and his agents, with
treasure answerable to so great a State.

Beside his temporals given by great Princes, or won from them and others by
power or policy: his commings in are great from Abeyes, Bishoprics, and
Benefices, their Institutions, Inductions, Inuestitures, palles, first fruits,
tenthes, subsidies, and other impositions upon occasions, or at his pleasure.
And by suits to the Court of Rome, of Controversies from all Countries, and by
appeals, reseruations, exemptions, Relation of Religion in the West.. 38. page
98, 99.
dispensations, and other rich inventions. Abbeyes (many of them) have
extrordinary faculties granted them, whereby they gather much money: but the
pope uses them as spunges to drink what Juice they can from the people, that
afterward he may wring them out one by one into his own Cesterne. When
Religious houses and Bishoprics wax rich, his Holiness lets them blood in
their ouer-full veins. The masses of money were infinite, that from all
Countries of Christendom came in this way; so that their temporals (which
should have been their principal) was then but an accessory addition to their
greatness,

The people likewise paid their Peterpence, Usher. de succes. eccle. cap. 7..
8, 9, 10.
which in England was confirmed by W. Conqueror, and made an yearly tribute,
although the same King denied to take the oath of fidelity to the pope.

. 9.
Purgatory is a most politic device, as it is now held, to bring in great
store of treasure to the popes cofers. The pope has the keys of that terrible
burning prison, wherein souls must frye, which have not on earth satisfied for
their sins, until they have paid the uttermost farthing; except the pope by
Masses, Pardons Pilgrimages, Offerings, and such like, let them out. Which
helps are not to be affoorded without payment of money, testifying their
repentance: But upon good payments to his Holiness and the Churches uses, men
may redeem their own, or their friends souls from suffering there for any
sins at certain rates. A Merchandise as profitable for the Popes Church
triumphant on earth, as unprofitable for the patient in that fire.

. 10
Rossensis contra Lutherum art. 18. fol. 111. Quamdiu nulla fuerat de
purgatorio cura, nemo quae sivit indulgentias, etc. Indulgences were begun by
Urban 2. anno 1100. says hist. council. Trent. page 4.
Upon this opinion of Purgatory (as D. Fisher, Bishop of Rochester says)
depends the use of Pardons and Masses for the dead, and such like. These
Pardons were sent abroad to all Countries, to gather up money for the Popes
uses, and set souls free from Purgatory: and the abuse of Pardoners was so
great, that finally it caused M. Luther to oppose them, and from them to
proceed to detect many other abuses of the Papacy.

Pardons likewise were extended to them that went on pilgrimage to the Shrines,
Images or Relics of Saints, and there offered up their money and devotions.
Which was an incredible enriching of those towns in every Kingdom, where such
Images and Relics were, and to which the good pope had granted such
Indulgences: and where the Inhabitants had spread abroad that strange miracles
and cures were wrought, that town or City was made for ever, it needed none
other maintenance. But such blessings were neither purchased gratis nor
continued without gratifications to the pope. Such was at Walsingham in
England, See Erasm. colloquium. Peregrinatio Religionis ergo.
in our Grandfathers days, Thomas Beckets shrine, Vbi omnia auro ni ent (says
Erasmus) where all shone with gold, wealth, and magnificence, in the Temple and
town, to the great admiration of the beholders. And now, or lately, the Lady
of Laureto in Italy, the Lady of Hales, the Lady of Aspricol in Germany,
miraculous Images, draw hearts of people, and heaps of gold, the greatest
miracle they work, and the greatest cure to cure the town of poverty.

More specially, in later times the stations in Rome are used to this purpose;
that is, unto certain Churches, Saints and Images in Rome, there are
appropriated certain Indulgences to be granted upon the appointed Sundays or
Holidayes to all the visitors thereof, that come and offer upon the said days.
And of these stations and visiting days there are reckoned at least 89 in the
year: Moulins Defense. page 161. Erasman Mat. 11. page 55. Anno 1540.
wherein pilgrims and travelers come from all Countries to Rome, to the great
enriching of the Temples and the City. The like Indulgences are granted also to
the Visitors of some other places upon the like days. And this shows us a
notable politic and rich use of the multitude of their Holidays. For the
more Festival days, the more going to the offering, the more frequent
pardons. Those are the Market days for that Traffic: when other Tradesmen
shut up their shops, the priests open theirs. Poor men's hands are tied with
scrupulous Idleness, from getting their own living upon such Holidays, and
made wickedly devout against their wills, to maintain the Incomes of devout
superstition.

. 11.
And yet they have gone further. Bonifiace 8. Rainold. and Heart. cap. 7. diuis.
5. page 338. et 390.
(of whom it is said. He entered like a Fox, reigned like a Lion, and dyed like
a Dog) in the year, 1300. ordained a Iubile to be every hundredth year,
with grant to all people that in those years should come to Rome, and visit
the sepulchers of Peter and Paul, and other Monuments or Relics; a full
pardon of all their sins, and that they should go directly to heaven without
coming at all in Purgatory. These Jubilees were afterward drawn to every
fiftieth year, and lastly to twenty five. And because some Countries lay far
from Rome, the popes would grant and proclaim that it should be sufficient to
send their money, without coming themselves. Polydor Virgil, writing the
History of England, says, that in the year 1500 (a principal year of
Iubile) Pope Alexander 6. sent to King Henry 7. (as into all other remote
Nations) offers of pardons usual at Iubiles, to all that for dangers,
distances, weakness, etc. could not come to Rome, if they would give
bountifully toward the Wars which he intended against the Turk. And that the
King might more willingly further this gathering, the pope offered him part of
the money. Whereupon great sums of money were gathered: but yet no wars with
the Turk followed, Dij meliora. Thus writes Polydore Virgil.

Hist. conc. Trent. lib. 1. page 4, 5.
And within 20 years after ( anno 1517.) pope Leo, partly to supply his own
Coffers, and partly to bestow more liberally on his friends, sent an Indulgence
thorowout all Christendom, granting to all that would give money, freedom
from the pains of Purgatory, license to eat eggs and whitmeats on Fasting
days, etc. and the money which should be gathered in Saxony, and some other
parts of Germany, he appointed to his sister Magdalene, wife to Franceschetto
Cibo, bastard son of Jnnocent 8. by reason of which marriage, this Leo was
created Cardinal at 14 years of age; which was the first beginning of the
Ecclesiastical greatness in the house of the Medici. She committed the
preaching of the Indulgences and exacting of the money to such as promised to
raise the most profit by them: and they used most wicked and scandalous
courses, to abuse the peoples credulousnesse, withdraw them from the true way
of salvation, and draine them of their worldly maintenance. Which abuses M.
Luther, and many other learned men could not endure with silence, and being
once opened to the world, both Princes and people opposed them.

By these few Relations, you may guess at other times what has been done. And
you may well think, that never any Prince could so easily and so quickly get
together such masses of money out of his own Countries, as the pope could do
out of all Countries of Christendom: and that he could never want as long as
he could hold a pen in his hand. For by strange Alchymistry he can turn a
little piece of Lead into a great mass of gold.

. 12.
Observe here by the way, that to maintain the great profit that comes in by
purgatory and pardons, the popes positions found a necessity to corrupt the
true ancient Doctrine of Justification; and to teach otherwise then Saint Paul
and the Fathers had done: to wit; that a man endued with Gods grace, is able to
fulfill the whole Law: and consequently that he may be justified by his own
works, and that his works are truly meritorious of eternal life: yea,
further, that he is able to do works of supererogation (that is, more then he
needed to do for his own salvation) even works that may be imputed or
ascribed unto other men (that want) to merit their delivery out of purgatory:
and that these super-abundant merits (or works of supererogation) may by the
pope (Christ's Vicar or Vicegerent) be applied, given (or sold) to whom he
thinks good. A quaint devise! but without all this, purgatory, pardons,
pilgrimages, Masses for the dead, etc. are to no purpose. If Saint Paul's
doctrine (of Justification by Christ's merits only) stand; then have we no
merits; if no merits, no sup^rerogation: if no super-erogatory merits, then no
pardons: if no pardons, surely either no purgatory, or no deliverance by the
pope from thence: and then a great deal of the popes income is cut off. But
(horres^o ref^rens) rather then that earthly treasure be diminished, the
spiritual and heavenly treasure and worth of Christ's merits be diminished: the
sound Doctrine of Justification corrupted: man's free will, merit,
supererogation, pardons, and other gainful doctrines appendant thereunto,
devised, magnified, and established. Saint Paul said, 1 Timothy 6.6, 9, 10.
Godliness is great gain: these men make great gain to be godliness. He
says, They that will be rich, fall into temptations, snares, foolish and
hurtful lusts -- and that the love of money is the root of all evil, which
while some have coueted after, they have erred from the faith -- Alas, that
they that hold the chiefest places in the Church, should be of that number.

. 13.
I omit Crucifixes, Beads, Amulets, Grains, Medals, and other things of great
virtue, sent from the pope to be hanged about peoples necks, or otherwise
worn about them, 1 Cor. 3.12.
as defensatiues against evil spirits and other dangers: which, though they
may be thought to be but hay and stubble; yet when your Mida^ has touched
them, they are taken for pure gold, and of great virtue, far fetched and
dear bought.

. 14.
To omit these and many other things, I will speak only of extraordinary
exactions, and in our Country only, An. Dom. 1245. Regis 29.
or especially. Matth^w of W^stmi^st^r, ^n his book, called Flores Historiarum
writing of King Henry the thirds t^me, says, that the King (upon search
through every County of England) found the Roman reu^nues to amount to
threescore thousand marks by year equal to the Kings revenues And yet the
popes exactions were so great besides, Page 195.
that our Nobles made complaints thereof both by words an^ writing, in the
Coun^ell of Lions, showing the ^ntollerable grieuan^es and oppressions of the
popes Officers, most impudently and violently done, and that by the popes
Commiss^on and command, with a non obstante, which took away all laws or rights,
and authenticke writings. The pope for the present put off his answer, being
busied with excommunicating F^edericke the Emperor. But afterward, enraged
with anger and disdain at their complaints, he multiplied their oppressions
without measure or end. So that a Parliament was called to take some course to
save the land from utter spoil and ruin of the pope: Page 206, 207.
and all men rejoiced to see the Kings courage and constancy, hoping now they
should be powerfully delivered from the injuries of the Court of Rome. And
first, several letters were sent to the pope and Cardinals, wr^tten by the
Bishops and by the King, and by the Abbots and Priors and by the Earl Richa^d
and all the Nobles with him, all humbly petitioning to spare the exhausted
Realm of England, and recall the grieuances (which in their letters they
rehearsed) which letters were penn^d in such pitiful sort, that they were
able to soften an heart of iron (says the story.) But they received hard
answers, Page 209, 210, 217.
and drew more misery still upon them. For the pope shortly after demanded of
every Beneficed man in England, resident on his charge, a third part, and of
non residents, an half of their goods for th^ee years; which provoked all
Christ and in England to hate and curse the pope. And diu^rs Noblemen of
France, (to wit, the Duke of Burgundy the E^ le of Britain, the Earl of Saint
P^ul, and many other) conspired against ^im, and b^gan a Sch sme which t^^
pu^lished in writing (which is extent in ^he ^^ory, and in M^^^^ (...)
^erswading all men to reform, and live after the fashion of the Primitive
Church.

Anno 1247.
But the State and Clergy of England, wrote again to the pop^ and Cardinals,
for ease from these exactions, giving notice also of a dangerous Shisme else
like to foll^w. This caused the pope somewhat to mitigate the exaction in
England, and draw down to ^l^uen thousand marks to be paid for his present
necessities. Which sum our Bishops thought best to grant, to avoid the Roman
greater persecution. But out of this payment they left out all the Abbots of
England, page 219.
to be deeplier fleeced by the Court of Rome. At the same time also the pope
got up six thousand marks in Jreland: and in other Countries what could be
raked up.

page 210
After all this, new exactions came upon the English, especially upon the
Abbots, and exempted persons. page 222.
Of one Abbey of S. Albans, the popes Officer demanded four hundred marks:
which yet the pope was afterward induced to mitigate.

Math. Paris in vlla Henrici tertij. See also Speeds Chron. in Henry 3. nu. 52,
57, 60. anno 1234.
In the same Kings reign, Mathy Paris says, that by the popes [mandata de
prouidendo] for illiterate Italian Clerks, and [Gratiae expectativae] (to wit,
in giving Benefices, as they fell void, to Italians that never came at them,
but had the yearly revenues thereof in money brought into Jtaly to them) there
went out of the land yearly more treasure then the Kings revenues amounted
unto. And because it was not possible that the English of themselves should be
always funished with money to be sent in such sums out of the land: the
popes Merchants (as they called them) that is, men sent hither for that
purpose, supplied them with money upon usury: and the Roman Farmers and
Proctors (like greedy Harpies) scraped up all into their hands to the great
impouerishing and misery of the English. So that holy men, with
heart-breakings, tears, and deadly groans ( singultu cruentato, says Paris)
professed it were better for them to die, then to see such miseries upon their
Nation, and upon holy men: the Daughter of Sion becoming such an impudent
Harlot.

Against which, Robert Grosthead, Bishop of Lincoln, opposes himself,
writing to the Pope (his Epistle is extant in Mathy Paris) that his detestable,
abominable, soule-murdering actions, did euince him to be an Heretic, worthy
of death, yea, to be Antichrist, and to sit in the chair of pestilence, next
to Lucifer h mselfe: and that he had no power to excommunicate such as resisted
these his actions.

Paris tells further, that King Henry requiring the Prelates to bind
themselves to the Popes Merchants for a great sum of money: they replied,
English Prelates counted it rather Martyrdom to dye against the Pope, then for
him.
that they would rather dye then suffer such oppression: holding it a more
manifest Martyrdom to dye in such a cause, then was the death of Thomas Becket.

See, you that love the Pope so well, what a blessing you would bring upon the
Land, by restoring his authority: which our forefathers counted a burden most
intolerable.

Antiquus. Matthy Paris is noted to take too much delight in speaking evil of
the Pope: and Matthy of Westminster received his Narrations from him; and both
were too much affected to their own Country.

Antiquissimus. They were both of the Romish Religion, the one a Monk of Saint
Albones, the other a Monk of Westminster Abbey: both delighted to speak the
truth, and spoke well of the Popes, wherethey saw cause: and related other
Countries affairs with as upright affections as their own.

Paris says, that the injustice, impiety, and dishonesty (bear with these
words, they are his own) of the Court of Rome, made the Greek Church then to
fall away, and to oppose it self against the Roman: and that shortly
afterward, the Church of Antioch excommunicated the Pope and his Church, for
usurping primacy over them: and being also defiled with Simony, Usury, Avarice,
and other heinous offenses. And we read the same things plentifully delivered
in all foreign Historians, Nauclere, Vrspergensis, Krantzius, Aventinus,
Schasuaburgensis, Frisingensis, Trithenius, etc.

Vrspergensis in Chron. page 307.
Abbas Vrspergensis, at his being at Rome, (seeing among other infinite means
and mines of wealth) a great confluence of causes litigious about Bishops
places, and all other Ecclesiastical dignities, and Parish Churches, out of
all Countries, running to the Court of Rome, there to be decided: He applaudes
Rome with the Apostrophe. Rejoice, O Mother Rome, for unto thee are opened the
Cataracts of treasures in the earth! To thee run the Rivers and mountains of
money in great plenty. Be Jouiall for the iniquity of the sons of men, etc.
-- thou have that which thou always thirstedst after: Sing thy song, that by
the wickedness of men, not by thine own Religion, thou have overcome the
world. Men are drawn to thee, not by their devotion, or pure conscience; but
by perpetrating manifold mischiefs, and for decision of their Controversies,
to thee most gainefull.

Antiquus. Sir, suppose all you have alleged be true for the substance: will
you condemn the wisdom policy, and zeal of the Church, or any members
thereof, for the indiscreet managing of it by some particulars? Is not
wisdom, policy, power, and zeal, necessary to maintain good Doctrine, good
government, and to win souls? and must not learned men and good governors
be maintained with wealth, befitting their estate and dignity, to keep them
from contempt and poverty? are not all these things necessary?

Antiquissimus. Yes undoubtedly, very necessary and commendable, but under
color of necessity, you may not allow policies contrary to true piety, and
Gods Word, such as I alleged, to wit, The barring of the Scriptures from Gods
people, to keep them in ignorance. The disanulling of the Apostles ordinance
of placing preachers resident in Cities and Towns subject to Bishops
Jurisdictions, who may look to their good life and sound doctrine; and instead
of them, to allow and privilege ambulatory preachers to preach what they list,
mauger all Bishops and their Officers. Yea, to instill into the peoples minds
false doctrines, treasonous and rebellious practices, to the disturbance and
destruction of Kingdoms and Commonwealths: who find it best fishing in
troubled waters, and fish not for men's souls, but for Kingdoms, to subiugate
all to the Dominion of R^me or Spain: nor the gathering of wealth by wrongs or
oppressions, to the undoing of people, and making the Religion of GOD to stink
in their nostrils, as Helies wicked sons did, 1 Samuel Chapter 2. verse 27.
Wherefore the sin of the young men was very great before the Lord: for men
abhorred the offering of the Lord.

Antiquus. Well Sir, to let this pass, If you describe these polices truly,
they are very potent: those of the society of Jesus are very learned, diligent,
zealous, and constant, to endure all labors, pains and perils, to win men:
their policies, and plots are so strongly laid, constantly followed, wisely
managed, and powerfully backed with the Pope and Cardinals; yea, with Kings,
Princes, and States, favoring them, or tied to the Pope by some necessitudes:
that they are irresistable; and therefore you may do well to yield to them in
good time; for such wisdom, strength, and policy will prevail.

Antiquissimus. Think not so, Antiquus. This arm of flesh, be it never so
strong, is too weak for the arm of the Lord.

Note what is written in the Revelation, cap. 17. verse 12, 13, 14. The ten
horns are ten Kings: these have one mind, they give their power and strength
unto the Beast; these shall make war with the Lamb: but the Lamb shall
overcome them; for he is the Lord of lords, and King of kings. And they that
are with him, are called and chosen, and faithful. The power and policy of
Babylon should not amate us, but animate us. Chap. 2. sect. 8. Revel. 18.9. to
the chapters end.
Tu contra audentius ito. For Babylon shall fall ( Revelations chapter 18. verse
2. etc.) and Rome is that Babylon (your men grant it, as I have showed)
therefore Rome shall fall, and her fall shall be woeful, doleful, and
irrecouerable.

The Kings and Merchants her friends shall bewail her; the world shall stand
amazed, and Gods people shall rejoice at her fall.

She must fall fully and finally: and she has begun to fall already; See
History of the Council of Trent. page 4.
even when Pope Leo the tenth thought that state in greatest security, then
came an unexpected blow from one contemned man, Luther, which shook her
foundations: and since that time she has shrunk continually, and settled
lower. All the props of strength and policy have not been able to raise or
hold her up. She has all policies on her side; the Protestants have none, but
the plain downright truth, and ordinary teaching, as Christ has prescribed:
and yet that plain truth has prevailed against all her power and policies.

FINIS.
A JUSTIFICATION OF THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND. THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. 1.
The first Chapter is a full discourse of the visibility of the Church, and
shows where the Church of the Protestants was before Luthers time.

This Chapter is large, to give the fuller satisfaction, and for better
perspicuity, is divided into four Sections.

The first Section shows how visible the true Church ought to be.

The second shows that the Protestants Church has evermore been so visible,
as the true Church of Christ ought to be: in the ancient Primitive Church.
Greek and Eastern Church.


The third section delivers a sufficient historical discourse of the
Waldenses proving the point.

The fourth section shows that the Church of Rome (excepting the Papacy, and
the maintainers thereof) continued to be the true Church of God until Luth^rs
^^me, and was all one in substance with ours.

The first section is subdivided into subsections: and they into to many
smaller Paragraffes, noted thus.

The first subsection shows. 1. An objected description of the excel^ency of
the Church, and a necessity of the perpetual succession and visibility
thereof.. 2. That for a thousand years and more, our Church was all one with
the Roman.. 3. After that corruptions grew intolerable in the Roman Church,
many yet misliked them, and held the truth.. 4. The whole Catholic Church can
never be visible to men at once, but parts of it may and must.. 5. The promises
of purity and eternal life, do not belong to all the called, but to the few
chosen: which to men are invisible, though their persons and profession be
visible.. 6. And this, Bellarmine and many other Romanists yield.

. 1.
Antiquus.

YOu show no wisdom in disgracing thus the Church of Rome; for you must
derive your Church from it, or else you have no succession from the Apostles,
and consequently no Church at all, and therefore no possibility of salvation.
You that so much glory in the Scriptures, do you not mark how the Scriptures
describe the Church? calling it Ephe. 2.19.
the City of our Lord, Ib. and Hebr. 3.2, 6.
the house of God, Cantic. 4.12.
a Garden enclosed, a spring shut up, a fountain sealed, Psalm. 80.8.
our Lords vineyard, of his own planting, 1 Timothy 3.15.
the pillar of truth, Psalm. 27.13.
the land of the living, Cantic 4.15.
the fountain of living waters, Ephesians. 6.25, etc.
the Spouse of Christ, who gave himself for it, who sanctifies and cleanses
it, and makes it a glorious Church, without spot or wrinkle, that it may be
holy and without blemish: and (to omit other titles) 1 Pet. 3.20.
compares it to the Ark of Noah, out of which there is no salvation from the
deluge of sin.

And to the end that by it all men may come to the knowledge of the truth, and
be saved, it must be visible, conspicuous, and mounted aloft as a City upon a
hill Mat. 5.14.
, seen of all the world, shining to all the world, and so continuing to the
end of the world, with continual succession of holy government, teaching,
administering the Sacraments without interruption. For, if it be hidden or
invisible any time, how can it teach the people, convert Pagans, dispense
Sacraments, glorify God, lead men to salvation? Therefore the holy ^criptures
describe this Church to be most ample, conspicuous, and not only gracious but
glorious. Psalm. 45.9.
This Queen is all glorious, in a vesture of gold, wrought about with diverse
colors; to whom the daughter of Tire, and all Nations bring gifts: signifying
the magnificence of the Church gathered of all the Gentiles. Esaias 2.2, 3, 4,
18, 20. and cap. 49.5, 6, 7, 23. and 60.3, 4, etc.
It is the holy mountain of the Lord, to which all Nations shall come: and
Kings and Queens should come and do homage unto it. ^sal. 72.8 etc. Micah.
4.1.
David magnifies this Church, as extending from Sea to Sea, and from the River
to the worlds end: adding, that the Aethiopians should fall down (before the
great Messiah) the Kings of Tharshish and of the Isles should bring presents,
the Kings of Arabia and of Saba should offer gifts; yea, all kings should fall
down before him, and all Nations should serve him. The Messiah himself says,
Ioh. 12.31, 32.
Now shall the prince of this world be cast out; and I, if I be lifted up from
the earth, will draw all men unto me. Meaning, by his passion to draw all
Nations of the world from heathenish Idolatry, to become members of his holy
Church.

Now instead of this conspicuous and glorious Church, you Protestants obtrude
unto us an obscure latent, invisible Church, unseen in the world for more then
a thousand years, or rather never seen before Luthers time. But if these
prophesies of the Scriptures concerning the glory and amplitude of the Church,
be true (as they are most true) then is the conspicuous Church of Rome, the
true Church, and your so long latent visible Church the false.

. 2.
Antiquissimus The wis^dome which we use, is not groun^ed upon unsound
policies, but upon standing to the sound truth (which is great and will
prevail) the disgraces of the Romish Hierarchy, we either read in your own
Authors (who write them necessario potius quam libenter, as wrested from them
by the truth, rather then of any itching humor to disgrace it) or we observe
them with our own eyes, so manifest that they cannot be hid, so bad that they
cannot be excused. The prophetical promises to the Church which you allege,
with all reverence we do acknowledge: and we confess that within the first
thousand years after Christ, (before ^atan was loosed, Revel. 20.2 and 7 8.)
the most of them were fulfilled: and principally in the first age^ of that
period; when the Church was by the Apostles and their successors propagated to
the Gentil^^, and plant^d in all Nations: and while the Church of Rom tau^ht
the same pure doctrine which we now do and while your Church and ours, and all
other particular Churches in the world, were one Catholic Church. And although
some errors and abuses began to creep into the Church of Rome within that
time, and we^e by many espied and reproved; yet were they not imputed to the
whole Church of Rome, but to a faction breeding in it. Neither were they so
great, ^t so largely spread, or so strongly defended, or of such regard, as to
make any such breach or manifest sep^r t^on, as in the following ages ensued.
So that in the fir^^ thousand of years, the holy prophesies by you allea^ge^
make nothing more for your Church then ours, ^ot^ing more against our Church
then against yo^rs: yours and ours being then both one Church.

. 3.
S^con^ly, we affirm that when the Church of Rome grew vntollerably corrupt by
men's traditions and new inu^^^ions, especially in the Hierarchy thereof: there
wanted not multitudes of good Christians, both separated from the community
thereof, that followed their better teachers, and professed still the pure
ancient Doctrine: and other multitudes also living in community with the
unsound Romish governors, groaning under their corruptions, and longing for
reformation: which made a full sufficient visible Church, to whom the
prophetical promises belonged, and in whom they were fulfilled, so much as was
intended by them.

Which that you may the better understand, Handled in this section.
consider first more thoroughly the nature of the promises and state of the
Church, as it must be in these later ages: and secondly the state of our
Church, fully agreeing thereunto, and the state of yours, disagreeing.

You that cannot endure to hear of any kind of invisibility of the Church,
Handled in the second section.
must of necess^ty admit of some kind thereof, or else you involue all in
confused obscurity.

First if you take the Church for the whole Catholic Church, that is,
universal both in time and place,. 4. See Aug. in Psalm. 92.
continued throughout all Ages, and dispersed in all places (in which sense
only the Church is Catholic and one) then it is a point of faith, and not of
sight. For it is visible totally at any one time or place to any mortal eyes.
Some part thereof being in Europe, some in Asia, some in Africa, for place:
some part in heaven triumphant, some on earth militant, some not yet in the
world, for time. We believe therefore that there is one Catholic Church (we
see but a small part of it) that is, one universal company of Christians,
spread over the whole earth, and continuing from the Apostles times till the
day of Judgment, (part whereof is now in heaven, part on earth, and part yet
to come) called to be professors of Gods worship, and partakers of his glory
through Jesus Christ his son And though this whole company be never visible
to men at once, yet some parts thereof living upon earth are always visible to
men, by their persons and profession: some at one time some at another: some in
one Country some in another: as the Church of Jerusalem, and of Antioch, of
Rome, Corinth, Galatia, etc. In the Apostles times: the seven Churches of Asia
in S. John's time: the Churches of England France, and other Nations in our time.

. 5.
Secondly, if you take the Church for the company of Christians, living in any
one particular Age, and thereunto apply the prophetical promises: you must
admit a threefold distinction, one of the parts of the Church another of the
promises appliable to the several parts, and a third of the times wherein they
are to be fulfilled.

For, D. White Reply to Fisher, page 52.
most of the promises, though in general terms made to the Church in common
(to show what the whole is in respect of Gods outward vocation, or what the
office and duty of the whole Church is) yet do appertain formally and indeed
only to the better part of the common subject. As your own Doctors teach
Cornel. de ^apide com. Esa. cap. 2. v. 4 Cum Deus aliquid Synagoga vel
Ecclesiae permittit, quamvis ampl^ and universal bus v^rbis, ^^ tamen de bonis
and proba tantum, qui sae^^s and amicitiam cum deo promittente and pa^iscente,
servant, intelligendum.
.

The Scriptures give us a distinction of the Called and Chosen: saying, Many be
called, but few chosen, Mat. 20.16. The Called are the Professors: and the
Prof^ssors (says your Bellar. de Eccles^. militant lib. 3. cap. 2.. nostra
autem sententia.
Bellarmine) are the members of the true Church, though they be (reprobi,
scelesti, and impij) reprobates, wicked, and impious. For (says he) to be a
member of the Church, there is not necessarily required any inward virtues, but
only outward profession. But (I hope) you will not say, that to this company
in gross, these promises do belong, of purity, vnspottednesse eternal life:
but only to the better part thereof, that is the Chosen, that truly believe,
and holily live, according to Christ's doctrine which company, (because who they
are, is only known to God the discerner of the hearts, and not to men who see
only their persons and profession but not their hearts,) may well be called,
in respect of men, The invisible Church, as visible to God only. The Holy
Ghost describing the true members of the Church, calls them, such as should be
saved, Acts 2.47. The Lord added to the Church such as should be saved. And
this is the ordinary doctrine of Aug. de Bapt. contra Donatis^as lib. 6. cap.
3. Auari, raptores, faencratores, inuidi, malevoli, ad sanctam ecclesiam dei,
non pertinent, quamvis esse videantur: illa autem columba vnica, pudica, and
casta, sponsa sine macula and ruga, hortus conclusus, sons signatus, paradisus
cum fructu pomorum, etc. non intelligitur nisi de bonis, and sanctis, and
justice, -- intim^m and supereminentem spiritus sancti gratiam habentibus.
S. Augustine, that true godly men, such as shall be saved, are the only heirs
of the promises: the covetous, ravenous, usurers, envious, malevolous, do not
belong to the holy Church of God, though they seem to be in it. That only
Dove, that chaste and pure Spouse, without spot or wrinkle, that garden
enclosed, fountain sealed, paradise of Pomegranats, etc. is not understood but
of the good, holy, and just, -- such as have the inward and supereminent grace
of the holy spirit. Thus Saint Augustine.

Again Aug. ib. lib. 7. cap. 51.
he says, All things considered, I think I shall not rashly say, that some
are so in the house of God, that they are also the very house of God, which is
said to be built upon a Rock, which is called his only Dove, his fair Spouse
without spot or wrinckle, etc. -- for this is in the good, faithful, The like
De vnitate eccle. cap. vlt. and Epist. 48. and De Bapt. cort Donat. lib. 5. c.
27. and in praesatione in Psalm. 47. and De doctr. Christiana. lib. 3. cap. 22.
In the rules of Tychonius De corpore Domini bipartito.
and holy servants of God, every where dispersed, and yet conjoined in
spiritual unity, and in the same communion of the Sacraments, whether they
know one another by face or not. And it is certain that others are said so to
be in the house, that they belong not (ad compagem domus) to the frame of the
house, nor to the society of fruitful and peaceful righteousness, but as the
chafe among the Corn, etc -- of whom it is said, They departed from us, but
they were not of us. In many other places Saint Austen has the like.

Insomuch as Bellarmine being ouerpressed with the Scriptures and Fathers, and
especially Saint Augustine,. 6.
cannot but yield, and says, in plain terms; Bellar. de eccle. milit. lib 3
cap. 2.. nota^dum autem.
that wicked men without any internal virtue, are no otherwise members of the
Church, then our excrements and diseases are parts or members of our bodies, as
our hayres, our nails, and evil humors in our bodies, and elsewhere. Ib.
cap. 9.. Ad vltimum a^o, malos non esse membra viva corporis Christi, and hoc
significari illis scripturis (obiectis.)
He says that evil men are no other then dead members of Christ's body; and
he cites many learned Papists that say, (Malos non esse membra vera, nec
simpliciter corporis ecclesiae, sed tantum secundum quid, and aequivoce.) That
evil men are not true members, nor simply of the body of the Church, but only
after a sort, and equiuocally. His Authors alleged there, are Johannes de
Turrecremata, Alexander de Ales, Hugo, B. Thomas, Petrus a Soto, Melchior
Canus, and alij.

I will conclude this point with Saint Augustine, who says, Aug lib. 2. contra
Cre^conium cap. 21. Ac per hoc etiam nesciente ecclesia, propter malam
pollutamque conscientiam da^nati a Christo, ^am in corpore Christi non sunt,
quod est ecclesi^, ^uoniam non potest Christus habere membra damnata.
Though the Church know them not, yet they that are condemned by Christ for
their evil and defiled conscience, are not now in the body of Christ, which is
the Church, because Christ cannot have any damned members.

To which place, and many other like, cited out of Saint Augustine, Bellarmine
Bellar. ib.. Argum^ntum octauum.
answers, That wicked men are not of the true inward part of the Church, but
of the outward only, as he had said before, not true members, nor simply of
the Church, but equiuocally.

By all this (I hope) you see our Doctrine and distinctions agree with the
truth taught by the Scriptures and Fathers, and your best learned men, to which
even Bellarmine himself (after much disputing and shifting) is compelled to
yield. And though you are loath to allow us the terms of visible and invisible
(the one noting the outward mixed number of professors, the other the purer part
of the Church, to whom the promises belong, and who are only known of God:)
yet you are compelled to yield us the matter meant by them.

Antiquus. If you mean no other thing by those terms, we yield you both the
matter and the terms; But,

Subsection. 2.
. 1. Some promises of God concern the outward spre^ding of the Church, some
the inward graces.

. 2. The outward spreading and glorious visib^lity, is not at all times alike.

. 3. So S. Ambrose, and S. Austen teach, by comparing the Church to the Moon.

. 4. Many Fathers and Romish Doctors say, that in the time of Antichrist, the
Church will be obscure, and hardly visible.

. 5. Which (say Valentinianus, and many Fathers) was fulfilled in the Arrians
time.

. 6. The Jesuit, Valentinianus grants as much invisibility of the Church, as
Protestants desire.

. 7. Observations out of his grant.

If you mean that the whole true Church may be latent and invisible many
years,. 1
without being seen of the world by her Government, Doctrine, and Sacraments:
we deny all possibility of such invisibility.

Antiquissimus. We never held or taught any such thing. See B. Wh^^e against
Fishe^. page 62.
Now then since you yield us those distinctions of the Church, and grant that
the most or best of the promises, belong only to the better part thereof,
which is only known unto God, and not to all the professors that are visible
to men: I go forwards to distinguish of the promises: whereof some are of the
outward Canaan only) and of outward subjection of Kings and peoples to the
profession of the truth.

Some are of the inward purity, grace, and holiness it, uniting it as his
immaculate Spouse unto himself, and making it partaker of his glory.

The former are pliable to the visible Church, in the generality thereof. But
it you apply the latter also to that whole visible company, you run into
inextricable errors. For they are appliable only to the better and sounder
part thereof, which is only discerned and known unto God, and in that respect
invisible to men. This distinction you grant also in granting the former. I
come therefore thirdly to

. 2.
or not at all times alike. For in some Ages the Church is more conspicuous
then in other: yea, the false Church more conspicuous then the true.

If you think the Church must be always gloriously visible to the end of the
world without interruption, you are deceived. Consider one part of the
Scripture with another.

Esaias 2.2. Mat. 7.14.
You look upon Esayes mountain, to which all must flow: but you see not
Christ's strait gate and narrow way which few do find.

Esaias. 49.23.
You note, how at sometimes Kings and Queens shall be nursing Fathers to the
Church; but you note not that at another time, Revel. 17.2.
The Kings of the earth shall commit fornication with the Whore of Babylon: and
the Inhabitants of the earth be made drunk with the wine of her fornication.

Psalm. 45.9.
You think of a Queen all glorious in a vesture of gold, wrought about with
diverse colors, to whom all Nations bring gifts (the Church spreading her glory
to the Gentiles: Revel. 12.1, 6.
) but you forget the woman flying into the Wilderness to hide her self from
the rage of the Dragon: (which woman signifies the persecuted Church, by your
Rhemish confession.)

Mark 16.15.
You remember well that the faith of Christ must be spread over the face of the
earth: but you forget that toward Christ's coming there shall scarce be found
any faith upon the earth. Luke 18.8.


You remember that the Church shall extend from sea to sea, and from the River
to the worlds end; Psalm. 72.8.
and the Kings of Tharsis, Arabia, and Saba, shall bring gifts, and all Nations
shall serve the Messiah. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4, 7.
But you forget there must be an Apostasy, a revolt, a falling away, (which
your Rhemists say, shall be from many points of true Religion) and that the man
of sin shall sit in the Temple of God, carrying himself as if he were God
(not in plain terms, but) in a mystery.)

Saint Ambr. Epist. lib. 5. ep. 31.
Ambrose and S. Aug. in Psalm. 101. and De Temp. ser. 134. epist. 48. and ^^.
Augustine compare the Church to the Moon,. 3.
which recei^eth her light from the Sun, and sometime shines in her full
light, some times with half light, sometimes obscurely, and sometime is
ecclipsed. You would have this Moon always in the full. And if she show but
little light to us, or be ecclipsed, you will not yield she is the Moon. And
yet (except in the eclipse) Astronomers demonstrate that the Moon has at all
times as much light as in the full: but oftentimes a great part of the bright
side is turned to heaven, and a lesser part to the earth.

And so the Church is ever conspicuous to Gods eye, though it appear not
always so to us. As when Elias thought there had been no more true servants
of God but himself, yet God knew of 7000 more; though their names be not
recorded.

I pray you consider well these and other places of Scripture, that describe
the Church persecuted, scattered and obscured, as well as those that describe
the largeness, conspicuousnesse and glory of it. And remember the one must be
true as well as the other, and each must have their times to be fulfilled in.
So shall you run straight forward, and not on a byas as you have done.

Consider the Doctrine of the Fathers,. 4. B. Usher grau. quaest. cap. 6.. 5.
and of your own learnedest men, speaking especially of the time of Satan let
loose. Aug. epist. 80. a^ Hesychium
Saint Augustine says, [Ecclesiam non app^rituram, impijs tunc persecutoribus
vltra modum saeuientibus.] The Church shall not appear, the impious
persecutors then beyond measure raging. Greg. in Job lib. 9. cap. 29.
Gregory, The Church as one weakened with old age, will scarce bring forth
children by preaching. Serm^n d^ consummatione mundi and Antichristo edit
Colo^. 1603. page 219
Ephraim Syrus, Men will earnestly enquire, whether the Word of God be any
where upon earth, and it will be answered, No where Soto in 4. S^nt. did. 40.
q. 1. ^rt. 1.
Dominicus a Soto, your great schooleman says, That faith will be extinguished
in the world, and under the leading of Antichrist, the City of God will be
overthrown. And of preaching the Word of God, your Aquin. Comment. in cap. 9.
Apocal.
Aquinas says, At first when Antichrist is borne, before he have enlarged his
power, there will be preaching: but after he is in his greatest domination,
then preaching (he means preaching of the truth) will be particular, and not
(as now) general, nor so solemn as now. And before Aquinas, This wrote Apud.
Usher. ibid. Valent. post. lit. t. Usher. ib.. 7.
Joachimus Abbas Florensis; The whole Church of the Saints will be hidden, for
so the Elect of God will be wise for themselves, that they will not presume to
preach publicly (the darkness prevailing) not that they will cease to
encourage and exhort the faithful more secretly, but because they will not
dare to preach openly.

. 5.
Happily you will appropriate this to be the last times of Antichrist (which your
Doctors hold to be very short) but your Valentinianus extends it to other
former times and applies it to the times of the Arrian Heresy. Of which
Nazian. initio Orat. 25. ad. Arianos.
Nazianzen writes thus: Where are they now that object poverty unto us, and
insolently brag of their riches? which define the Church by multitude, and
scorn the little flock? whereof See Hilar. contra Aurent. B^sil. ^pist. 70,
71. and Vitam. A^tonij inter o^^ra At^an^^ij
other Fathers say V^ncen^. (...) comm^^i^o^^.
that almost the whole world was shooken with the cruel tempest of that sudden
heresy: (...) B^c^^ri. (...),
so that it defiled not only the parts of the East and West, but entangled
also the South and North, and the Islands, with the perfidiousnesse thereof:
Hieronymus contra Luciferianos.
So that the whole world groaned, and wondered that it was become Arrian. But
the Athanasius epist. ad solitariam vitam agentes.
godly, true followers of Christ (as that great Prophet Elias) were hidden, and
thrust themselves into holes and dens of the earth, or continued wandering in
the Wilderness. For, Basil. epist. 69.
avoiding the houses of prayer (which were then become schools of impiety)
they were compelled to lift up their hands to the Lord in deserts: and Vincent.
Lirin. in commonitorio.
the greatest part being thrust out and banished from the Cities, were among
the deserts, holes, savage Beasts, and rocks, with hunger, thirst, nakedness,
afflicted, worn and wasted. And Basil. epist. 17.
when they suffered the same things that their Fathers suffered, yet they were
not thought to suffer for Christ, because their persecutors also were called by
the name of Christians.

Thus was it with the true Christians in the Arians times: thus with the Church
of God in the middletimes, after Satan's loosing: thus with the Protestants in
those later times: all persecuted by them that called themselves Christians and
Catholics, and held the chiefest places in the Christian world.

And such was the paucity and obscurity of Christians in the Arians times, that
S. Basil. ib.
Basil cries out, An Ecclesias suas prorsus reliquit dominus? Has God verily
forsaken his Church? Is it now the last hour? and does the defection or
departure thus take beginning, that now henceforth that man of sin, that
son of perdition may be revealed? etc.

But let us hear the very words of your own learned Jesuit Greg. de Val.
Analysis fidei lib. 6. cap. 4. probatione 4.. Iam vero.. 6.
Gregory de valentia, who grants as much as we desire. Now to refute the cauils
of Sectaries (says he) Note -- we do not say, The Church is always alike
conspicuous, or always alike easy to be discerned. For we know it is
sometimes tossed with the waves of Errors, Schisms, Persecutions; so that to
the unskillful, not wisely esteeming the reasons of Times and Circumstances of
things, it is hard to be known. Which then specially happened, when the
perfidiousnesse of the Arians, domineerd well near in all the world. For at
that time wrote Saint Ierom, that the ship of the Church was almost
overwhelmed. And Hilary admonished in many words, that the Church at that time
was not to be sought, Jn tectis and exteriori pompa, sed potius in carceribus
and speluncis (not in houses or Temples and outward pomp, but rather in
prisons and caves.) Therefore we deny not, but that it is harder to discern
the Church one time then another. But this we affirm, that it may always be
known of them that weigh things wisely. For in that very time when it seemed
to be hid, compared with the times foregoing, it might be perceived, that the
Church was not with the multitude of Innovators, but rather with those few who
followed that which the ancient Fathers of the Church and all the faithful
held, with great consent, and long continuance. Thus writes Gregory of Valence.

. 7.
Out of which testimony I observe.

1 That he excludes the perpetual and vn-interrupted glory of the Church, as
not necessary, nor any mark of the Church, as you and many of your side make
it.

2 He grants that the Church may be in a few, and not always in the great
multitudes.

3 It may be only in secret places, prisons, dens, and caves, and not be
found in temples and houses.

4 It may be hard to be discerned and known.

5 It is discerned and known (not to every one, but,) to them that weigh
things wisely.

6 It is not with Innovators (such as bring in novelties, or new doctrines) but
with them that hold what the ancient Church and Fathers held with great
consent, and long continuance. This note makes wholly for the Protestants, who
reform the Church according to the first and best times: and against the Church
of Rome which has brought in the worshipping of Images, the Popes supremacy,
half Communions, private Masses, sale of Pardons, and other things unknown to
the Fathers and the Primitive Church.

Antiquus. Of these things we shall consider hereafter.

. 2.
The Protestant Church has evermore been so visible as the Church of Christ
ought to be.

Subsection 1.. 1. for it has evermore taught the same doctrine which the
Scriptures and the Fathers taught.

. 2. As appears by Irenaeus, Tertullian, and the Creedes. But,. 3. The Romists
Cannot allege the Fathers for their new Doctrines.

Now, prove your Protestant Church to have been so visible in all Ages, as the
Church of Christ ought to be, or else you have said nothing.

Antiquissimus. It might be sufficient (according to your own Valentinianus)
to show that our Church was sometime in some few, and them hidden as the woman
in the Wilderness, Revel. 12.6.) and unknown to the greatest part of the
world, which weighed not times and things wisely; and was slandered by the
persecutors thereof, as a false Church: But I will not take all advantages, but
give you a full visibility thereof at all times.

Subsection. 1.
First I say,. 1.
our Church (for the doctrine thereof) is the same which the Primitive Church
of Christ was for many ages. For neither it nor ours taught any other points of
faith necessary to salvation, then such as are contained in plain places of the
Scripture, or necessarily deducted from them by good consequence. When the
Fathers are urged against B^llarmine in this point, he yields De verbo De
lib. 4 cap. 11.. his notatis.
that whatsoever the Apostles publicly taught to the people which was
necessary, all that they wrote: De iustific. lib. 3. cap. 8.. prima ratio. This
I have proved more fully cap.
That nothing can be certain to be believed with the certainty of faith, but
what is immediately contained in the Word of God, or thence deducted by evident
consequence.

Now it is our General course to examine all doctrines by the Scriptures:
holding the Scriptures the undoubted Oracles of God for the ground of all our
belief, King James praemonition to all Christian Monarks page 35, 36.
as the Fathers did: and holding the true sense of the Scriptures, as it is
delivered for all fundamental points, in the three Creeds, and in the four
first general Counsels, and the uniform consent of the ancient Fathers. In
which is contained, the full instruction for salvation, and the unity of the
Catholic Church.

. 2.
Jrenaeus Bishop of Lions in France, living within 200 years of our Savior (a
disciple of those that heard Saint John the Apostle) writing against the
Heretics Valentinians, Gnostics, and others: lays down in his first book
and 2 chapter, no other Articles of faith, and grounds of Religion then our
ordinary Catechism teaches: and in his third chapter shows that in the
unity of that faith all the Churches of Germany, France, Spain the East Egypt,
Libya, and all the world, were founded: therein they sweetly accorded, as if
they all dwelt in one house, had all but one soul, one heart, and one mouth,
and this ground he lays for the confutation of all Heresies.

(...) ^b. ^e praescript aduers^s hereti^o. fol^o q^arto.
The like does Tertullian, liu^ng 200 years after Christ. He gives the
fun^am^ntall points of Religion, gathered out of the Scriptures, and delivered
by the Churches, the same which our Church delivers and no other, for the
rule of faith.

See King James P^aemonition, p^g 35.
The three famous Creeds, named the Apostles, Athanasius, and the Nicene Creeds
ordained for rules of Christians belief, and badges differencing them from
Infidels and Heretics, we hold entirely and firmly, and proclaim them
ordinarily in our Churches.

And whatsoever the Fathers held uniformly, and agreed upon as necessary to be
believed unto salvation, we do with reverence receive. But the particular or
private opinions which any of them held different from other Fathers do not
bind us now, more then those other Fathers then, or the Romans at this present.

The four first general Councels with reverence we receive as Orthodoxe, See
B. Andrew Ad Bellarmine Apologiam Responsio. cap. 7. page 161.
and so they are acknowledged by our Church, and by our Acts of Parliament The
following Councels are subject to some exceptions.

We therefore holding the same points of faith which the Primitive Fathers held
uniformly to be necessary to salvation, and holding no other points that do
any way cross or weaken them; may justly challenge them for our predecessors:
and their Church and ours in point of doctrine to be all one.

Antiquus.. 3.
We challenge the same Fathers to be ours also: and we deduce both our Bishops
and doctrine by good succession from them: which you cannot do. But I require
not of you a discourse of those times, which either of us lay alike claim
unto: but of the times nearer unto Luther. Show me any visible Church in the
world that held Luthers doctrine for 500. years next before Luthers time.

Antiquissimus. You may challenge the Primitive Fathers for the points wherein
you and we agree, as the Canonical Scriptures, the doctrine of the Trinity in
Unity, Baptism, and such like: But you cannot challenge them to be yours in
those additions and corruptions which they never knew, and which you have
brought into the Church in later times, and which make the great difference
betwixt you and us: as the worshipping of Images, the Popes pardons, private
Masses, or Communion without communicating half Communions without the Cup,
the Popes transcendent supremacy, and such like.

. 4.
But in calling us to these later times, you are good disciples of the Poet
Horace, who in his Art Poetica, says, A witty Poet must use this Art, The
point which he has no hope to burnish fair, and bright, he must leave
untouched, Et quae desperate tractata nitescere posse, relinquit.

This is good Poetry indeed in them, but pitiful Divinity in you, to leave the
best times and purest patterns and draw us to the worst. But,

Sectionis. 2. Subsectio. 2.
. 1. Propounding (1) the Easternt and Greek Churches, (2) the Waldenses, etc.
And (3) the Roman Church it self, misliking and groaning under the tyranny of
the Papacy, and desiring reformation.

. 2. The Greek Church condemned by the Romish as Heretical.

. 3. Js cleared by Scotus, Lombard, Aquinas, and others.

Now presupposing you yield us those best times, wherein our Church was very
gloriously visible, we follow you to the worst.

Grecia, D. Field of the Church. book 3. cap. 5.
Armenia, Aethiopia, and Russia; which holding the same rule of faith which we
hold, and believing all points absolutely necessary to salvation, as we
believe, and refusing the same corruptions of the Church of Rome, which we
refuse; were the same with our Church: true Churches of God; notwithstanding
some defects, errors, and divisions among them, which stained their beauty,
and hindered their perfection, but did not cut them off from possibility of
salvation. And so (for ought I know they continue till this time.

These Churches therefore in the East, South, and North, especially the Greek
Church, so famous for many Ages before our Western reformation, as for all
other things, so also for their separation from the Church of Rome, for the
enormities thereof, we may rightly call our predecessors, which maintained our
doctrine long before Luthers time.

Again, in the West we propose unto you the Waldenses, Romish Hierarchy, and
their followers, continuing unto Luthers time.

And great numbers of others also that held Community Romish Hierarchy, but
misliked their tyranny and corruptions, groaned under them, longed for
reformation, and gladly embraced it when they found it. What say you to these?

Antiquus. I except against them all. First,. ^.
against the Greek Church (which yet is far better then the Armenian,
Ethiopian, or Russian) I say it is no Church at all, both because it is cut
off by Schism from the Catholic Roman Church, and because it is heretical
in a fundamental point, denying the procession of the Holy Ghost, from the
Son of God.

Antiquissimus. See the answer to Mr. Fishers Relation to his third Conference
by R. B. page 5, 8.. 3.
You offend much against charity in condemning such famous Churches for
separating from the particular Roman Church by Schism: and against verity by
charging it with fundamental heresy. Of schism afterward, now for the
heresy.

It seems by Scotus, Scotus in 1. Sent did. 11. quaest. 1.
that the Greeks held no other Heresy then Saint Basil and Gregory Nazianzen
held 370 after Christ; whom yet no man durst ever call Heretics. Surely out
of their words (as they express themselves) saying [That the Holy Ghost
preceeds from the Father by the son and is the spirit of the sonne] you
cannot gather the denial of the proceeding of the Holy Ghost from the Son,
or that they make the Son unequal to the Father, or make any difference in
the consubstantiality of the persons. If the manner of their speech by some
great judgments be condemned as incommodious, and containing an error, yet
happily not an error simply fundamental, sufficient to cut them off from
being a true Church. Magister Sententiarum says, Magister 1. Sent. did. 11. d.
The Greeks from the Latins in this point, Verbo discordant, sensu non
differunt. And Scotus says, The difference is in voce and in modo explicandi
potius quam in re. And Aquinas says, Aquin. 1. part. q. 36. art. 2. in cor^ore.
that Quidam Graecorum dicuntur concedere, quod fit a Filio, vel profluat ab
eo, non tamen quod procedat. And whereas Damascene says, Spiritum per filium
esse dicimus, ex filio non dicimus: Bellar. de Christo. lib. 2. cap 27..
Responde digitur.
Bellarmine answers with Bessarion and Genuadius, that Damascen denies not
spiritum sanctum procedere ex silio quod ad remattinet, but thinks it may be
more safely said, per filium quam ex filio, for the manner of speech, to avoid
the heresy of Macedonius and Eunomius, who said the spirit proceeded from the
Son, as from the primary cause, yea indeed the only cause. But (says
Bellarmine) as to avoid the heresy of Macedonius, it was rightly said,
Spiritum esse a Patre per filium, so for the error of the Grecians, it is now
more rightly said, a patre et filio.

Lastly, Thomas Aquinas Aquin, ib. part. 1. q. 36. art. 3. ad. 1.
says, Spiritus sanctus immediate a Patre procedit, in quantum est ab eo, and
mediate in quantum est a Filio. Et sic dicitur procedere a patre per filium.
Yet I hope you account not Saint Thomas an Heretic.

To shut up all without exception: Azorius (a learned Jesuit, a choice man to
deliver the Roman doctrine, as it is held at this day:) in his book dedicated
to Pope Clement 8. and Printed by the approbation of Claudius Aqua viva,
General of the Jesuits, and of the Master of the sacred Palace, etc. He
reckons the Grecians Armenians, and other Christians of the East for
Schismatickes only, because they obey not the Bishop of Romes government: but
he excuses them of heresies imputed unto them. Azorius Institut. moral. part.
1. lib. 8. cap. 20.. Decimo quaeritur.

. 3.
A sufficient historical discourse of the Waldenses in 4 Subsections. The
first of their doctrine; the second, of their great numbers, and visibility;
the third, of their large spreading into all Countries; the fourth, of their
continuance above 400 years, until Luthers time and after.

Sectionis 3. Subsection 1. The Doctrine.
. 1. Of the Waldenses.

. 2. Their diverse names: but all one, and

. 3. All of the Protestants Religion, as say Aeneas Sylvius, Du Bravius,
Poplinerius, Cocleus, Eckius, Gretserus, etc.

. 4. Many bad opinions, badly and falsely imputed to them.

. 5. Nine Articles different from the Protestants ascribed unto them by Parsons
the Jesuit, but cleared by authenticke Authors.

Antiquissimus. What say you then, to them that refused the new doctrines and
usurpations of the Pope in these Western parts? the Waldenses, Albigenses,
Bohemians.

Antiquus. You know our men count them all Heretics.

Antiquissimus. So they account us, and all that speak against their abuses:
but unjustly. So was Saint Paul accounted by some: but he answered as they and
we may, Acts 24 14. After the way which they call heresy, so worship we the
God of our Fathers: believing all things which are written in the Law and the
Prophets. 15 And have hope toward God, which they themselves also allow, that
there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust. 16 And
herein we exercise our selves to have always a conscience void of offense
toward God, and toward men.

But now the question is not whether they and we be heretics, or no: but
whether they were not of our faith, and in number sufficient to make a visible
Church.

Antiquus. I deny both; for neither were they of your Faith or Religion, but
differed much from you: neither were they so great and visible a company as the
Church ought to be.

Antiquissimus. That they were of our Faith, and our predecessors, I prove
first by your own Writers confessions. Who first did yield us that these names
Waldenses, Albigenses, Leonists, or Pauperes de Lugduno, Picards, Bohemians,
Thaborists, and such like, were all one kind of people, for their faith and
Religion, and the diversity of their names were given them by their enemies,
partly of the places of their inhabiting (as Leonists, and poor men of Lions,
a City in France; Picards, of the Country Picardy; Albigenses, of the City and
Country of Albi; Bohemians, of Bohemia; Thaborists, of the City of Thabor,
etc.) and partly of their principal teachers (as of Peter Waldus. Waldenses:
of Peter Bruis, Petrebrusians: of Henry, Joseph, Espernon, Arnold, Wiclife,
Hus, Henricians, Iosephists, Esperonists, Arnoldists, Wiclifists, Hussits,
etc.) to omit other nicknames given them upon other causes.



Hist. Waldens. Book. 1. cap. 8.
Aeneas Sylvius, and John du Bravius, in their histories of Bohemia, make the
doctrine taught by Calvin, all one with that of the Waldenses.

And the same Sylvius says, Aeneas Sylv. hist. Bohem. cap. 35.
The Hussites did embrace the opinions of the Waldenses. And Hosius (here is.
lib. 1.) says, the leprosy of the Waldenses infected all Bohemia.

Lindanus (in his Analyticke Tables) makes Calvin inheritor of the Doctrine of
the Waldenses. Thomas Walden Walden lib. 6. de reb. Sacram. tit. 12. cap. 10.
says, The doctrine of the Waldenses crept out of the quarters of France into
England, meaning by Wiclife, against whom he wrote.

D. Usher. Gravis. quaest. cap. 8.. 1.
Poplinerius says, The Waldenses and Albigenses about the year 1100, and the
succeeding times spread their doctrine (parum differentem) little differing
from that which the Protestants now embrace. Lancelotus du voisin Poplinerius
histor. Franc. lib. 1. fol. 7. b. edit. anno 1581.

Ib. cap. 9.. 22.
Gretserus the Jesuit, calls the Albigenses, Waldenses, and Berengarians,
(Caluinianorum atavos) the Caluinists great grandfathers. Gretser. proleg^m. in
scripta edita contra Wald. cap. 5.

D. Abbot against Hill. Reason 1.. 18.
Francis Guicciardin an Italian, and Florentine Historian writing of the year
1520. ( lib. 13.) says, that Luther set abroad the doctrine of the Bohemians
(naming Hus and Hierom.) And Petrus Messiah, a Spaniard (in the life of
Wenceslaus) mentioning the opinions of Hus and the Bohemians, says, They were
the seed of those errors (as he calls them) which were afterward in Germany,
(to wit, taught by Luther.)

Ib.. 29.
And Johannes Cocleus (a man that had labored in the story of the Hussites, and
set out books thereof, and also wrote sharply against Luther,) says, that
Hus did commit spiritual fornication with many aliens, with the Wiclivists,
the Dulcinists, the Leonists, the Waldenses, the Albigenses, and others of that
sort, enemies of the Church of Rome. And he says, that Luther followed Hus his
Doctrine, lib. 2. de. Actis and scriptis Lutheri. And calls the Lutherans new
Hussites. And again, lib. 3. and lib. 8. he says, that unto his time (till
Luthers time and after) there remained the sect of the Thaborites in many
places of Bohemia and Moravia, under the name of Picards and Waldenses.

Histor. Albigens. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Eckius (in his common places, cap. 28.) says, Luther had done nothing else
but renew the heresies of the Waldenses, Albigenses, Wiclife, and John Hus.

Antiquus. Sir, our men deny not, but these Waldenses and others, were Luthers
forerunners in many things: but they held some things which you are ashamed to
hold, and therefore were not of your Church or Religion.

Antiquissimus. I know well, that many errors were imputed to them which they
never held. As B. Usher. Grauiss. quaest cap. 10.. 15.
Bernardus Girardus, the French Historian ( lib. 10.) says: Although they had
some ill opinions, yet these did not so much stir up the hatred of the Pope
and great Princes against them, as their freedom in speech which they used in
blaming and reproving the vices, dissolute manners, life, and actions of
Princes, Ecclesiastical persons, and the Pope himself. That was the chief
thing which drew the hatred of all upon them. (and effecit vt plures nefarie
affingerentur eis opiniones, a quibus omnino fuerant alieni) this caused many
wicked opinions to be devised and fathered of them, from which they were very
free and guiltless.

Ib. cap. 8.. 28.
Thuanus (histor. lib. 5. anno 1550.) reckons up their opinions thus: They held
that the Church of Rome, because it had forsaken the true faith of Christ, was
that Whore of Babylon and that barren tree which Christ cursed, and therefore
we ought not to obey the Pope and Bishops which fostered his errors: that the
Monastical life was the sink and kennell of the Church, the vows thereof
vain, and serving only for unclean lusts: that the Priests orders were notes
of that beast mentioned in the Revelation: that purgatory fire, sacrifice of
the Mass, Sanctuaries, or hallowed places about Churches, worshipping of
Saints, offerings for the dead, were the Inventions of Satan. Then he adds,
To these certain and chief heads of their doctrine (alia afficta) others are
fained and devised, concerning Marriage, resurrection, the state of souls after
death, and of Meats.

B. Jewel Apol. cap. 1. diuis. 1.
Bishop Jewel says, our ancient Christians were slandered, that they made
privy meetings in the dark, killed young babes, fed themselves with men's flesh,
and like Savage and brute beasts did drink their blood: In conclusion, how
that after they had put out the Candles, they committed adultery or incest one
with another, brethren with sisters, sons with their mothers, without shame
or difference: men without all Religion, enemies of mankind, unworthy to be
suffered in the world.

Thus they said of the ancient Christians, and thus they said of the Waldenses,
most unjustly and untruly of both: you doubt not of the former, let many of
your own Writers satisfy you of the later.

Usher grav. qu. cap. 6.. 11.
Rainerius (whose book Gretserus the Jesuit lately set out among other
Writers of the Waldenses) says, The Waldenses, were the most dangerous sect to
the Church of all other, for three causes: the third whereof is, that whereas
other sects, through the outragiousnesse of blasphemy against God, work a
horror in men, this sect of the Leonists has a great show of piety; because
before men they live justly, and of God they believe all things piously, and
hold all the articles contained in the Creed: only they blaspheme and hate the
Roman Curch for which the multitude is easy to believe.

Hist. ^ald, book 1. cap. 5.
Iacobus de Riberia (in his collections of the City of Tholous) says, the
Waldenses won all credit from the Priests, and made them little esteemed, by
the holiness of their lives, and excellency of their doctrine. The like says
Rainerius, cited ib. De forma haeret. fol. 98. And Clau^ius de Scissel,
Archbishop of Turin, says, they lived vnreproueably without reproach or
scandal among men, cited ib. In his Treatise against the Waldenses. The B. of
Canaillon, sent a certain Monk, a Divine, Vesembec. Oration of the Waldenses
citat. ib.
to confer and convince the Waldenses of Merindal in Province, who upon his
return, said, He had not so much profited in all his life in the Scriptures,
as he had done in those few days conference with the Waldenses. Whereupon the
Bishop sent diverse Doctors to confound them, but upon their return, one of
them said with a loud voice, that he had learned more touching the Doctrine
necessary to salvation, by the Waldenses, instructing their children in their
Catechisings, then in all the disputations of Divinity which he had ever heard
in Paris.

Antiquus. I will not stand upon those foul errors which some authors
attribute to the Waldenses; but there are nine points which the late learned
Jesuit, Parsons three Conversions part. 2. cap. 10.. 26.
Robert Parsons says, All Authors that write of the Waldenses, do attribute
unto them, which I hope you will be ashamed to maintain: Those show that you
and they are not of one Church.

Antiquissimus. Those show the vanity and shamelessness of that man, that to
the face of the world avouches all Authors, when many Authors say the plain
contrary.



A filthy slander, laid as well upon the Origenes lib. 6. contra Celsum. Eusebius.
hist. lib. 4. cap. 7. See Cecilius his wicked Oration in Minuty Felicis
Octauio. recited also by D. Usher Grau. quaest. cap. 6.. 12 See him also ib..
20.
Primitive Christians, as upon them. And them your own Rainerius (cited
before) clears, saying, Haec Leonistarum (secta) magnam habet speciem
pietatis: eo quod coram hominibus just viuant, and been omnia de Deo credant,
etc. Again, Casti sunt Leonistae, page 231. lin. 48. And again, Quaelibet
natura turpia deuitant. Item, suos subditos ad eadem diligenter informant. Ib.
page 232, 42. Rerum Bohemic. script. a M. Frehero edit. Hanov. an. 1602.

They In their book of remedies against sin, cap. 21. cited in the History
of the Waldenses, book 1. cap. 4.
inform their people against this sin, thus: The sin of luxury is very
pleasing to the Devil, displeasing to God, and injurious to our neighbors:
because therein a man obeys the basest part of his body, rather then God who
preserves it. A foolish woman does not only take from a man his good, but
himself too. He that is given to this vice, keeps faith to no man, and
therefore David caused his faithful servant to be slain, that he might enjoy
his wife. Amon defiled his sister Thamar. This vice consumes the heritage of
many, as it is said of the prodigal child, that he wasted his goods living
luxuriously. Balaam made choice of this sin, to provoke the children of
Israel to sin, by occasion whereof there dyed 24000 persons. This sin was
the cause of the blindness of Sampson: it perverted Solomon, and many have
perished by the beauty of a woman. Prayer and Fasting, and distance of place,
are the remedies against this sin. For a man may overcome either vices by
combating with them, but in this he is never victorious, but by flying from it,
and not approaching near unto it, whereof we have an example in Joseph. It is
therefore our duties to pray daily to the Lord, that he will keep us from the
sin of luxury, and give us understanding and chastity.

Thus they taught and professed: and is it credible, had they practiced the
contrary, they could have continued so long, and drawn so much of the world to
embrace their Religion, with so great dangers and persecutions as they did? No,
(says your Rainer. cited before,. 4. l^t^n.
Rainerius) the honesty and r^ghteousnesse of their lives was the greatest
attractiue that drew the world after them, to the greatest danger of the Church
of Rome.

The s^co^d article of Parsons, is, They held all oaths N^lit^^urare, do not
swear, M^tth. 5. James 5. Answer. Indeed they eschewed the common practice of
swearing, according to Christ's precepts, Matthew. 5 37. but (says your
Rainerius) to avoid corporal death, and the revealing of their brethren, they
would swear But how agrees that with that which Gabriel Prateclus. Pauperum de
Lugduno error 3^.
Pratoclus says of them: That they held that no deadly sin was to be
tolerated, though it were to avoid a greater evil? The truth is, in judgment
they sticked not to swear truly, but in triuiall matters they would not
swear rashly, which gave occasion of that cavil: As your Rainerius says,
D^cent vitare mendacium, detractionem, iuramentum, ibid. 222. 15, 16.

In their book entitled, The spiritual Almanacke, in the third comment, cited
by Hist. Wald. Book. 1. cap. 4.
Their own doctrine is, that there are lawful oaths tending to the honor of
God, and the edification of our neighbors, as in Hebr. 6.16. and as Israel was
enjoined to swear by the Name of the eternal God, Deuteronomy. 6.13. and by the
example of those oaths that past betwixt Abimeleck and Isaac, Genesis 26.30. and
the oath of Jacob, Genesis 31.53.

Nolite Iudicare, Matthew. 7. luke 6. Answ. But Rainerius tells a contrary tale,
of a Waldensian Glouer, who being condemned and led to death, said openly in
the hearing of all, You now condemn us rightly for if we had power over you as
you have over us, we would exercise it against your Clerks and Religions. ib.
222. 47.

This cavil arose upon their complaining of the Magistrates, (to whom they
were delivered up by the Inquisitors, Priests, and Friars, who were their
enemies, not indifferent men, but passionate) and so they were condemned and
executed by them, without hearing, examining, or knowing of their cause. This
cruel simplicity of the Magistrates they spoke against in their complaint to
Ladislaus, King of Hungary and Bohemia, and elsewhere.

In their book entitled, The light of the treasure of Faith. fol. 214. cited
ibid.
But their doctrine was, That they were not to suffer the Malefactor to live:
and that without correction and discipline, doctrine serves to no purpose,
neither should judgments be acknowledged, nor sins punished. And therefore
just anger is the Mother of discipline: and patience without reason, the seed
of vices, and permits the wicked to digress from truth and honesty.

The fourth article is; That the Creed of the Apostles Answ. Who would think
that wise men would thus play the fools? In deed, they account not the
Salutation of the Angel to the B. Virgin, nor the Apostles Creed to be prayers
says Rainerius (ibid. 232. 10.) Rainerius supra. 4. lit. m.
But yet they reverently receive the whole New Testament, and the Apostles
Creed which is gathered out of it: Et credunt omnes articulos qui in Symbolo
continentur, says the same Author. And in their books they have very good and
Catholic Expositions of the Creed.

The fifth Article is, That no other prayer is to be used, Pator noster, set
down in Scripture.

Answ. And yet their own Writers (Rainerius, Eymericus, etc.) record diverse
other of their prayers, as for Grace before meat, this: He that blessed the
five barley loaves and two fishes, in the Desert to his Disciples, bless this
Table unto us. And after meat, that of the Revelation, 5.12, 13. Blessing, and
honor, and wisdom, and thanks, and virtue, and power, be unto our God for
ever and ever, Amen. Also, God give a good reward and recompense to all that
do well unto us. And, God which has given us corporal food, give us also
spiritual life. And, The Lord be with us, and we with him for ever. And the
rest answered, Amen.

There is a large and punctual confession of sin, set down in the third
part of the History of the Waldenses and Albigenses, book 1. cap. 2. taken out
of their book, Entitled, New Comfort.

All which and many other show the vanity of this cavil.

Answ. The first part of this Article they held not, but rather the contrary,
that neither Priests nor Laiks could consecrate the body of Christ. For Rainer
in summa de Catharis and Leonisti^.
Rainerius says, They do not believe the Sacrament to be the true Body and
Blood of Christ, but the Bread consecrated is called in a certain figure, the
Body of Christ, as it is said, The Rock was Christ, and the like. The second
part they said truly, James 5.1^.
and we hold, That the power to hear Confessions, is left by Christ, not only
to Priests, but to discreet and godly Lay People, who are able to counsel and
comfort them.

Answ. That their Ministers may not lawfully take and enjoy Livings, or that it
was sin so to do, they taught not, So they profess in their answer. Ad
literas August^ai Olomucensis ann. 1508. and before in scripto ed^to 1572.
but were sorry they had not sufficient stayed Livings for them, whereby they
might have more time to their studies, and greater opportunity to instruct them
with necessary doctrine and knowledge: but they were not ashamed of their
Ministers that were content to work with their hands to get their living,
since the doctrine and example of the Apostles lead them to it; and they had
rather see them so to do, then to live idly, follow Tauerns, venery, vanity,
usury, sacrilege, and other wickedness. That all Ministers must be equal,
they meant in orders, but not in Jurisdiction, for they allowed Deacons,
Presbyters, and Bishops, as both Guido and Sanders observe.

when the Sacrament was instituted, and the Apostles made Priests. For that
Christ said, Do this in remembrance of me, to wit, (say they) that which he
did at that time, Luke 22.1 Cor. 11. Answ. Parsons pretending to bring no
articles but such as all Authors charge the Waldenses withal, brings this,
which no Author imputes to them, but only one Guido Carmelita; and Alphons. de
Castro lib. 6. adv. haereses tit. de Euchar.
Alphonsus de Castro, wonders where Guido found it. Aeneas Sylv. hist. Bohem.
cap. 35.
Aeneas Syvius mentions it not, but contrarily says, they hold that the Priest
may consecrate in any place, and at any time, and minister to them that require
it. Rainer. ib. 224. 12.
And Rainerius, They mislike that the faithful should communicate but once in
the year: and they communicate daily. And concerning the Mass, he says. Ib.
224. 14.
They hold that the Mass is nothing, that the Apostles had it not, and that it
was made for gain. And Ib. 224. 17.
that the oblation made by the Priest in the Mass, profits nothing.

The ninth and last Article objected by Parsons: That Pater noster, seven times
said over the bread, etc. Answ. Alph. Castro ibid.
Alphonsus de Castro says, It is possible that the Waldenses might have had
this, but not probable; for only Guido Carmelita says it; but Aeneas Sylvius,
a far more diligent man, and of better judgment, mentions it not; neither
Antoninus, nor Bernardus de Lutzenburge, (though they all professedly reckon up
their errors) but rather they say the contrary. That the Waldenses held, The
Priest might consecrate in every place, and time, and minister to them that
desire it; and that it was sufficient to speak the Sacramental words only.
Rainer. pa. 224. 14. Edit. Froheri.
And Rainerius says, They receive not the Canon of the Mass, but only the
words of Christ vulgarly.

By these nine selected Articles, whereby Parsons would make the world believe
the Waldenses differed much from us the world may see they differed nothing at
all: had there been greater differences, doubtless he would have showed them,
for he purposely sought the greatest. Finding therefore no difference, we may
safely conclude, they were fully of our faith and Religion, our predecessors
and forerunners, and that the Protestants doctrine was held and taught in the
world openly and professedly above 400 years before Luther taught it in
Germany.

Sectionis. 3. Subsectio. 2.
. 1. Of the great numbers of the Waldenses.

. 2. Their disputations.

. 3. Wars against them.

. 4. By the famous Simon Montfort.

. 5. Carcasson taken.

. 6. and 7. New Armies by Croysadoes against them out of all Christendom.
Tolous taken, the King of Aragon slain.

. 8. Tolous recovered. Simon slain. The King of France continues the wars.
The Albigenses thrive, recover Carcasson, spread in many Countries.

. 9. The Earl of Tolous deceived by the Pope or his Legate, fortifies Avignon.
The King of France besieges it, dies mad; the Legate unable by force, gets it
by fraud and perjury.

. 10. Tolous overthrows the French Armies. The Pope offers him peace. The
great wars cease. Councels are held to root out the Albigenses.

11. Jgnorance of Histories makes men love the Pope.

. 1.
Antiquus. Well Sir, if it should be granted, that these Waldenses held your
doctrine entirely, without difference, and so were of your Church: yet were you
never the nearer, because their numbers were so few and scattered, that they
did not make a Church so visible, as the true Church of God must always be.

Antiquissimus. I will prove they did, and that plentifully and manifestly,
without all exception, out of your own Authors.

This Rainerius is set out by Freberus, among other writers of Bohemian matters
Hannov. anno 1602. see there page 222. 223. and by Grets. Iesuita. Ingolstad
anno. 1603. see there Rainer. contra haeret c. 4. page 54. And his testimony is
often cited by Protestants, as Morney Mysterium iniquitatis page 731. aedit.
Salmuri^n 8. 1612. Usher grav. quaest. c. 6.. 11. Archb. Abbot. contra Hill
Reason 1.. 29 etc.
Rainerius says, That of all Sects which either are or have been, none has
been more pernicious to the Church (he means of Rome) then that of the
Leonists. For three causes (mark them well) first, for the long continuance:
for some say it has continued from the time of Sylvester (he sat anno Christi
314.) others say, from the time of the Apostles. Secondly, for the generality,
for there is almost no country into which this Sect has not entered. Thirdly,
that whereas all other have wrought a horror through their outrageous
blasphemies against God, this of the Leonists has a great show of piety,
because that before men they live justly, and of God they believe all things
well, and all the Articles which are contained in the Creed; only they
blaspheme and hate the Roman Church: wherein the multitude is prone to hearken
unto them.

Note you the antiquity, and the generality in all Nations, arguing a
visibility suitable to the Church? Now hear your Poplinerius, Genebrard
Chronol. lib. 4. an. 1581. page 782. edit. Paris. 1600.
(whom Genebrard calls an upright and right learned man, and one who has
written all things purely and simply, according to the truth of the History,
not for favor of the cause.) He Palinerius hist. Franc. lib. 1. edit. an.
1581. fol. 7. b.
says, The Roman Church was never more sharply oppugned, then by the
Waldenses and their successors in Aquitania, and the Regions adjoining, etc.
For these (says he) against the wills of all Christian Princes about the year
1100, and in the succeeding times, spread abroad their doctrine, little
differing from that which at this day the Protestants embrace, not only
through all France, but almost through all the Countries of Europe also. For
the French, Spanish, English, Scots, Italians, Germans, Bohemians, Saxons,
Polonians, Lithuanians, and other Nations, have obstinately defended it to this
day. Gretserus the Jesuit says, Gretserus prolegom. in script. edit. contra
Wald. cap. 2.
The Waldenses multiplied so, that [vix aliqua regio ab hac peste immunis and
intacta mansit: adeo se diffuderat, vt cum plurimorum exitio in varias
provincias infuderat, etc.] Scarce any Region remained free and untouched of
it, so greatly it spread it self into all Provinces.

The Albigenses error so increased (says Cesarius Caesarius Heisterbach.
hist. lib. 6. cap. 21.
) that in a short time it infected [Vsque ad mill ciuitates] a thousand
Cities: and if it had not been repressed by the sword, I think (says he) it
would have corrupted all Europe. This also your Jesuit Parsons three
conuersions. part. 2. cap. 10.. 28.
Robert Parsons acknowledges, and says, they had an army of 70000. men to
fight for them. Observe here their multitude, and observe how it was repressed,
not by soul-convicting disputation, but by body-killing-persecution.

We read indeed of some disputations and conferences with them, wherein the
Popes learned Doctors and Bishops sought to convince and win them: but all
without fruit. Altissiodorensis Chronloog. an 1207. Usher cap. 10,. 20, 20.
Diverse Abbots of the Cistercian order (by appointment of the Pope) and one
Bishop (Episcopus Oximensis,) with their assistants, to the number of 30, went
by two or three together through their Cities, Villages, and Towns, preaching
for three months space: but (says the Author, Pauc^s revecant) they converted
but few.

Ibid.
At other times the like preachers assayed to persuade them, but profited little
or nothing.

Bertrand. de gest. Tholossanor. fol. 46 col. 4.
One among all other disputations, is most famous, Montreal.
apud montem Regalem, in the Diocese of Carcasson, betwixt Fulco B. of Tolous;
Didacus, B. of Exon. Saint Dominicke, Peter de Castro nouo, and Ranulphus, on
the one side: and Pontanus Iordanus, Arnoldus Aurisanus, Arnoldus Ottonus,
Philebertus Castrensis, and Benedictus Thermus, Pastors of the Albigenses, on
the other side: Iacobus de Riberia in collectaneu de vrbe T^lcsa.
before four Moderators or Arbiters (two of them Noble men, Bernardus de villa
noua, and Bernardus Arrensis: and two Plebeians, Raimundus Godius, and Arnoldus
Riberia.) The herosies (or questions) were these: That the Church of Rome is
not the holy Church nor Spouse of Christ, but a Church defiled with the
doctrine of the Devil, and is that Babylon which Saint John describes in the
Revelation, the Mother of fornications and abominations, made drunk with the
blood of the Saints, and that those things are not approved of God, which are
approved of the Church of Rome. And, that the Mass was not ordained by Christ
nor his Apostles, but is an invention of men. This disputation held them many
days, without fruit: saving, that diverse histories give the victory to the
Albigenses Histor. Albig. book 1. cap. 2. See Usher. ib.. 22.
And it is certain, that Chronolog Altisiod. an. 1208. fol. 103. b Albigenses
saepius attentati, nullatenus gladio verbi Dei poterant expugnari.
Odo B. of Paris, finally informed the Pope, that, The Albigenses being often
set upon, could by no means be conquered by the sword of Gods Word; and
therefore it was fit to beat them down by wars. Hilagarus hist. of Foix page
126.
And some say, It was the Popes policy to entertain them with conference and
disputations, that in the mean season he might prepare great Armies to root out
them and their Religion.

These often and great travails in preaching, conferring, disputing, needed not
to men invisible, obscure, of small numbers, or contemptible;. 3.
much less needed those great Armies which were gathered to put them down, if
they were few and obscure. Usher ib. cap. 8. 31, 32, 37.
Pope Alexander 3. had cursed them, anno 1163. persecuted them with war,
1170. and with Inquisition 1176. And after this, spoiled a great number of them
( anno 1181) exercitu militum peditumque infinite, with an Army in number of
horse and foot infinite (says Nangiacus Gulielmus Nangiacus chron. M S.
) and yet (says the Monk Altissiodorens. chrono. an. 1181.
Altissiodorensis) they recovered, returned to their former opinions and
multiplied, Antonin. hist. part. 3. tit. 23. cap. 1. prope mitium.
which, Innocent 3, seeing, and foreseeing the great danger of the Popes
downfall by their spreading doctrine: thought best to arm both heaven and
earth against them. Authorizing the Friars original, about 12 hundred yeer^
after Christ.
new-sprung Friars Dominicans and Franciscans, to preach in all places,
(whether the Bishops and ordinary Pastora would or no) and to uphold the Popes
falling kingdom: and withal to execute a most cruel Inquisition against
heretics (for by that odious name were all good Christians branded, that would
not be subject to the popes tyranny and Romish corruptions.) But all this being
insufficient, Rigordus histor. anni. 1208. page 207.
he published his Croysadoes, promising pardon of all sins, and the joys of
heaven to all that would take the sign of the cross upon their Coats or
Armor, and become soldiers against the Waldenses, and continue in the war
for forty days together, after they came, or that happened to dye in their way
coming thither. A very politic and a thrifty course: he promised paradise
and eternal life, very liberally to his crossed soldiers, but bestowed not
one cross of silver to maintain them. But withal, they that were once
crossed thus for the holy wars, in what land soever, were no longer the Kings
subjects, but the popes: neither might they be arrested, sued, or troubled for
any debts or actions; but must be suffered freely to go about to prepare
themselves; and all men must think it a holy and meritorious deed to furnish
and aid them with whatsoever they needed, and account them the undoubted
citizens of heaven, whether they lived or dyed.

Thus the politic pope turned the Croysadoes, and Armies, ordained to go
against Christ's enemies the Sarazens or Turks, now to go against the popes
own enemies, Christians, the best servants of Christ. Gretserus Prolegom. in
scripta edita contra Waldens. cap. 6. Vsh. ib. cap. 9.. 4, 5.
The Catholics (says your Jesuit Gretser) which took the badge of the
cross upon them, to war and root out the heretics, ( Albigenses or
Waldenses) were promised to enjoy the same Indulgence and be guarded with the
same holy privilege, which was granted to them that warred against the Turk,
for defense of the holy Land.

And further, the better to gather numbers of soldiers in every place, Vmbert.
Burgund. Sermon. part. 2. sermon. 64.
the pope used the help of Preachers to stir up the people. And the
Preachers taking this, or some such like text [ Psalm. 94.16. Who will rise up
for me against the evil doere? or who will stand up for me against the workers
of Iniquity] would commonly conclude their Sermons with this exhortation
[Behold, dear Brethren, you see the malice of the Heretics, you see how much
hurt they do in the world: and you see again how carefully, and by all holy
means the Church does labor to recall and recover them: but with such men she
cannot prevail; no they defend themselves with the secular power. And
therefore our holy mother the Church, sore against her will, and with great
sorrow, is compelled to call together a Christian army against them. Whosoever
therefore has any zeal of Religion, whosoever is touched with the honor of
God, whosoever desires to be a partaker of that great Jndulgence, let him take
upon him the sign of the cross, and join himself to the army of our Lord
crucified.] By these means the pope drew out of all parts an innumerable
company of Soldiers, in the year 1209. conducted by many Bishops, Earls and
Barons, etc. The King of France himself (says Guilielmus Armoricanus) sent
fifteen thousand at his own charge, giving example to others. This great Army
in short time, took one great strong populous City, Vrbem Biturensem.
and put to the sword threescore thousand, among whom were many of their own
Catholics. Caesarius Heisterbachensis histor. lib. 5. cap. 21. Let our
English Catholics consider what they are to look for in like cases of our
enemies prevailing.
For Arnoldus the Cistercian Abbot (being the Popes Legate in this great War)
commanded the Captains and soldiers, saying, Cedite eos; novit enim Dominus
qui sunt ejus: Kill them all (Catholics or Heretics) for the Lord knows who
are his.

Then the Army marched on to Carcasson, a City both of it self, strong and
well manned: not likely, without strong siege effusion of much blood, and great
loss of time to be taken with this great Army, and therefore the Leaders were
glad to gain it by composition, suffering a wo^ld of people, of the Albigenses
religion, thence to depart, so they would leave the City vnweakned, and
undefaced: which City thus gotten,. 4.
they made the head City of the war, which they foresaw would be very long,
the number, strength, and resolution of the Albigenses, being very great. Usher
cap. 10.. 26.
This City tnerefore they fortified and furnished with all manner of store for
all future events, and made Simon of Montfort (a Noble man highly descended,
and allied to the Kings of England, and of France) governor of the City, and
general of the whole Army, and Lord of all the Land already conquered or to
be conquered by these wars.

The cunning Legate, to get the great Earl of Beziers into his hands persuaded
him with fair promises and safe conduct to come to a parley, Vsh. ib. Hist.
Albig. book 1. cap. 6, 7.
and when he had him in his power, contrary to promise took him prisoner,
saying, that faith is not to be kept with Heretics. He dyed shortly after in
prison, suspected by poison: and Simon Montfort succeeded him in his Lands, and
in a months space took an hundred Castles with much slaughter of the
Albigenses and their favorers. But this course of victories had interchanges
of losses. For the Gentlemen of the Vicounty of Beziers, by secret instructions
of the King of Aragon, took such advantages, that Simon was feign to send to
all the Prelates of Europe for new supplies, affirming he had lost above forty
Towns and Castles since the last departure of the Pilgrims. Then Simon taking
the Castle of Beron, near unto Montreal, caused the eyes of above an hundred
Albigenses to be put out, and their noses cut off, leaving only one with one
eye to conduct the rest to Cabaret.

. 7. See ib. and the Authors there alleged.
The new pilgrims (or crossed soldiers) arriving, the next year 1210, Simon
takes Minerbe, a strong Castle situate upon the Frontiers of Spain, where
140. (some say 180) men and women chose rather to be burned on earth then in
hell for changing their Religion.

Among many other, he took also the Castle of Thermes, and Remond lord of the
place and Country, spoiling all with fire, even the lord also, his wife,
sister, daughter, and other Nobles, for their constancy in their old faith.

Usher ibid.. 9 and seq. Caesarius hist. lib. 5. cap. 21.
The next year also 1211.. 6.
another great Army arrived, which took many Cities and Castles, hanging and
burning many of the Albigenses: and besieged Lavallis, a town strongly
fortified and defended: during which siege, others of the Religion took Montem
gaudij, and flue great numbers of the Pontificians: But after along siege
Lauallis was taken, the soldiers slain, four hundred Albigenses burnt, the
rest hanged, and the like executions were done in many other Cities and
Castles. But the City Tolous, though besieged, could not then be taken. Remond
Earl of Tolous, was a great man, near in blood to the King of France, in the
2. degree: he had married Joane once Queen of Sicilia, sister to John King of
England, by whom he had a son, called also Remond, (who was the last Earl of
Tolous) and after the decease of Joane, he married Elenor, sister of Peter, K.
of Araegon. He was strong therefore in blood, affinity, and confederacy, and
Armoricanus philippid^^ lib. 8.
one says, he had as many Cities, Castles, and Towns, as the year has
days. He had many great provinces under him: Bertrandus Bertrand de gest^s
Tulosar fol. 32. col. 4.
reckons them thus, Tenebat Cemes Tolosanus comitatum Tolosae, comitatum de
Sancto Egidio, Prouinciam, Delphinatum, comitatum venaissimi, Ruthenensem
patriam, Cadurcensem, Albigensem, and Tolosae circumvicinas Iudiciarias,
linguam Occitanam, and lata dominia intra and vltra Rhodanum and Aquitaniam.

But because he was a great defender of the Albigenses, and was one of their
Religion himself; The pope proscribed him, and exposed him to extirpation and
ruin, and to be a prey to Simon Montfort with his pilgrims. So says ^^m.
Marian ^^^ch. h^span. lib. 1. cap. 2.
The Earl therefore gathering an Army of an hundred thousand, was very likely
to have utterly overthrown Simon, had not the unexpected death of the King of
Aragon (intercepted by ambush) quite discouraged and dissolved the Albigenses
Army, so that they could not be stayed by their Captains from running away,
Usher ibid.. 34. and seq.
Some write that the Albigenses lost 15000 fighting men, some say 17000, others
say, 32000 Hist. Albig. lib. 1. cap. 11.
By this means, Simon now able to take the City of Tolous sends for the King
of France his son, to come and have the honor of taking the City: who came
accordingly, took it, and dismantled it, beating down the towers thereof.

. 7.
Yet this great mifortune cast not down the Albigenses, but their courage and
power was still so great, that new Croisadoes and Jndulgences were sent abroad
to gather new crossed soldiers against them, anno 1213 by whose aid Simon
won many other Castles and towns. And now in a Council of many Bishops, was
Simon declared Lord of all the Countries and Dominion^ gotten by this holy
war; and possession shortly after given unto him by Lewis, eldest son of
the King of France, and confirmed also by the pope in the Council of Lateran,
anno 1215.

. 8.
Yet for all this, while Simon made a journey to Paris to the King, and stayed
there about honorable Ceremonies, and making marriages for his children:
Remond was returned to Tolous, and joining with many Aragonians (that were come
to revenge the death of their King) took the City and many other Castles, anno
1217. Upon the news whereof, Simon returned, and for recovering of the City,
besieged it, but was most strangely and suddenly slain with a stone which a
woman threw out of an Engine. Whereupon the siege brake up, that town remained,
and many other towns and Castles returned under the obedience of old Remond,
Earl of Tolous.

Again, anno 1219. The King of France sent his son (now the second time,
taking upon him the sign of the cross) with a great Army against the
Albigenses; who slew of them 5000, and besieged Tolous again, but in vain.
The Albigenses also retouer many Castles.

Again, anno 1221 King Philip of France sent 10000 footmen, and 200 horsemen
against them, still without fruit of their labors.

In the year 1223. by the popes appointment, Vsh d cap. 10.. 46.
was a Council held at Paris by the popes Legate, two Archbishops and 20 other
Bishops, against the Albigenses: and King Philip of France at his death
appointed 20000 pounds (or as some write 100000 pound) to be bestowed in
winning the Albigenses lands (says Rigord. page 225.
Rigordus.) For now the Albigenses had recovered the strong City, head of the
war, Carcasson, and many other Castles which their enemies had won and held
14 years: Math. Paris hist. an. 1223. page 306.
And were now grown so powerful in Bulgaria, Croatia, and Dalmatia, that
among many others they drew some Bishops to their party.

But on the other side, Remond the Earl of Tolous, 9.
submitted himself unto the pope, and upon his oath that he would endeavor to
root out the Albigenses, the pope restored him. Yet when he came before the
Legate, in a great Council of French Bishops, and there claimed restitution of
his lands, according to the popes grant: Simons son came also and claimed the
same lands, as won by his father, and assured by the pope, and also by the
King of France: hereupon the Legate demurred, Usher ib. 51. and seq. Math. Paris
hist. page 319. and seq.
and underhand procured the King of France, Lewis to to gather a great Army of
crossed soldiers, to win from the Albigenses the City of Avignion, (a place
of theirs of great strength, and thought to be invincible) The King (make ng
peace with the King of England by mediation of the pope) raises a great army (
anno 1225) of 50000 horse, and innumerable foot, and marches toward Avignio^,
(then being in the power of the Earl of Tolous,) and being denied entrance,
besieges it: The warlike Earl defended it bravely: He had very prouidently
before the kings coming withdrawn all kind of provision out of the Country
round about, into the City to furnish them within, and disfurnish them without:
and now by often sallies he mightily afflicted them, killing at one time 2000,
at another 3000, being helped by the breaking of a bridge: and the pestilence
daily wasted great numbers. So that the King (though he had sworn never to
depart, till he had taken the City) went aside to an Abbey not far distant to
avoid the pestilence, where he dyed shortly after (as some write) out of his
wits. The Legate, the more easily to win the City, kept secret the Kings
death: and despairing to prevail by force, attempted to do it by fraud. He
cunningly persuaded the City to send unto him 12 of their Citizens to confer
about some good conditions, giving them his oath for their safe return: but
when the gates were opened to receive them so returning, his Army rushed in and
took the gate, and finally the City, contrary to his oath given. For the Pope
(or himself by the popes authority) could easily enough dispense with such
oaths.

Thus the city of Avignion, which could not be taken in three months siege and
assault by the power of the King of France, Math. Paris. hist. an 1228. (...)
237.
was easily taken by the fraud and perjury of his Holiness holy Legate.

. 10.
In the year 1228, thrice in that Summer did the Earl of Tolous overthrow the
French Armies. In the end peace was offered to the Earl by Legates from Rome,
and from the French King, and confirmed upon condition that he should root out
all of the Religion of the Albigenses in his Countries. Which he undertaking,
^^a^c. ^^gna. (...) 11 V^^^t. (...) 1 8^. Mass^^^^. (...) ^sh. ^5. V^^^^. cap.
10. (...) seq.
was absolved from his excommunication, Tolous reconciled: and at Tolous (in
the year 1229.) a Council was held against Heretics; and shortly after,
another Council at Narbona, and a third at Biterras. In which Councels it was
finally concluded, that all guilty persons should abjure their heresies, that
the houses of Heretics should be demolished, etc also many strait statutes
were made at Tolous against the Albigenses, anno 1233.

What say you Antiquus? were not here great numbers visible enough, and mighty?
against whom so great Armies were so often raised throughout Christendom, so
mighty Wars made to bring them under the popes subjection, such miserable
massacres and bloodshed of so many thousands, and yet could never subdue them?

Antiquus. You relate more then ever I heard,. 11.
or read, or ever imagined could be said for this point. I have always
thought, and so have been taught, that there was never any great assemblies,
or numbers of your Religion, but some few single, simple, obscure persons, that
happily held some points with you, and many points different from you: nor ever
any multitude, nor any of worth or respect, that opposed the Church of Rome.

Antiquissimus. It is very likely that ignorance was the mother of your
devotion to that Church, wherein not only the light of the Scriptures, but
also the histories of the Church and of States, that would discover these
things, are kept from you,, by your politic Leaders; and your selves are
willingly blinded, and affected with that selfe-pleasing idle-ignorance. But if
you did iudicially read your own Authors, which write these things at large,
or ours which collect them more briefly, and confirm them strongly by yours,
(out of which I have abridged my short Narration) you could not but manifestly
see and admire the tyranny of your popes, that thus sought the rule and riches
of the world; and both the multitude and constancy of Gods servants, who sought
the salvation of their souls with contempt of the world, and their own lives:

Sectionis. 3. Subsectio. 3.
The Waldenses were spread into all Countries: namely, for example, Spain,
England, Scotland, Italy, Germany, Bohemia, Saxony, Pomerania, Polonia,
Livonia, Lituania, Digonicia, Bulgaria, Croatia, Dalmatia, Constantinople,
Sclavonia, Sarmatia, Philadelphia: in all parts of France: In Italy, also they
had Churches in Lombardy, Millan, Romagnia, Vicence, Florence val Spoletine,
etc.

Antiquus, But Sir, all you have yet said (for ought I conceive) concerns but
one part of France, and that for a short time, some twenty or thirty years.
Suppose your Religion had abundance of open professors in that little place,
for that little time: what is a small part of France to all Christendom? and
what are so few years to such succession and continuance as the Church of God
must have throughout all Ages.

Antiquissimus. If you desire satisfaction rather then contention, truth rather
then victory, or victory only joined with the truth; you may gather sufficient
out of that I have said to satisfy you; but to show this point more
distinctly, (which in the lump, it may be, you observed not) first I cited
out of your Subsect. 2.. 1. lit. a
Rainerius, that there were three causes of danger to the papacy from the
Waldenses, whereof the second was, because there was almost no Country free,
into which that sect had not entered: and out of Ib. lit. c
Polinerius, that the Waldenses were spread, not only throughout France, but
almost throughout all the Countries of Europe. For the French, Spanish,
English, Scots, Jtalians, Germans, Bohemians, Saxons, Polonians, Lithuanians,
and other Nations, have strongly defended it (yea, and he adds) even to this
day. And out of Ib. lit, d.
Gretserus your Jesuit yet living, that scarce any Region or Nation remained
f^ee, and untouched of it. And your Matthew. Paris ib.. 8, 9
Mathy Paris says, The Albigenses were so mighty in the parts of Bulgaria,
Croatia, and Dalmatia, that they also drew Bishops, besides many others of
those Regions to their parties.

And that the Waldenses were not only in one part of France, but spread through
all the parts thereof:. 2. History of the Waldenses book. 2 cap. 2.
the history of the Waldenses (gathered out of authenticke Records, and public
writers of your own side) shows abundantly, and in several Chapters of the
several places. Insomuch that the Archbishops of Aix, Arles, and Narbonne
assembled at Avignion (anno 1228.) about the difficulties of the executions of
those which the Dominican Friars had accused: said plainly, There were so many
apprehended, that it was not possible to defray the charge of their fooding;
nor to find enough lime and stone to build prisons for them.

In the third Chapter mention is made of many Churches of the Waldenses in
Daeuphine, Piedmont, Province, Calabria, and of great numbers of them in the
Diocese of Aix, Arles, Ambrun, Vienna, Aubonue, Savoy, the Venetian Country,
Dyois, Forests, the Principality of Orange, the City of Avignion, and Selon.

More particularly: in the fourth Chapter are described the persecutions in
Piedmont.

In the fifth Chapter, of the Marquisate of Saluces, and nere thereunto, from
whence above five hundred families were banished.

In the sixth Chapter, in the new lands, and in the Alps.

In the seventh Chapter, in Calabria, where the Gentlemen used means to
continue the Waldenses, a long time without persecution, because they were
exceeding good Tenants, made the ground formerly barren, very fruitful by
their diligent husbandry, paid great Rents, discharged all duties, were honest,
just, innocent, peaceable and dutiful, and paid good Tithes to their Parsons,
such as in former times the ground would not yield. Yet in the end, they were
miserably persecuted and killed up, because they would not yield to the Romish
doctrine, government, and ceremonies, which they abhorred worse then death. The
Romish Inquisitor Pauza, cut the throats of fourscore of them, as a Butcher
does his Muttons, and set up their quarters on stakes in the high ways, and
hanged others. Threescore women of Christ were racked, and most of them
perished: nine of the chiefest and handsomest women were delivered to the
Fathers of the Inquisition, and what became of them it is unknown

The eighth Chapter describes them of Province, the parts of Cabriers, Meridal,
la Cost, and other places adjoining, with their great persecutions and
massacres.

. 3.
The ninth, tenth, and eleventh Chapters speak of their further spreading in
great numbers in Bohemia, and Austria, and of the Communion by letters and
messengers betwixt them. And of many in Germany, especially in Alsatia. About
anno 1213. and 1220.

. 4.
The twelfth Chapter shows there were many of the Waldenses Religion in
England, Matthew. Paris. in anno 1174.
some burnt in anno 1174, says Math Paris, and in King Henry the second his
time, many were grievously persecuted in England, says Thomas Waldensis an
English man. Waldens de Re sacram. lib. 6. tit. 12. cap. 10.
Wiclife taught their very doctrine, and greatly spread it in England. Also in
Saxony and Pomerania, and in the Diocese of Eisten, in Germany, (ib. cap 11.)
were many Waldenses, they had twelve Pastors known, besides the unknown. Yea
(as Trithenius reports) they were in such numbers, and so spread in Germany,
that they could travel from Colen to Milan in Italy, and every night lodge
with hosts of their own profession.

. 5.
The thirteenth Chapter shows many in Flaunders, the fourteenth in Poland,
Sigonius de Regno Italiae lib. 17. Rainer. in summa fol. 18.
the fifteenth in Paris it self: the sixteenth in Italy, as writes Sigonius.
Rainerius says, in anno 1250. The Waldenses had Churches in Albania, Lombardy,
Millan, Romagnia, and also in Vicence, Florence, and Val Spoletine. Anno 1280.
there were many Waldenses in Sicilia, says Du Haillan. Roger, Haillan in the
life of Philip. 3. Sigonius lib. 17.
King of Sicilia, made constitutions against them: and Pope Gregory the ninth,
persecuted them in Jtaly, especially in Millan, as says Sigonius. So did
Honorius, and Boniface the 8.

The seventeenth Chapter shows, Rainerius de forma haereticor. fol. 10. an.
1250.
the Waldenses had Churches in Constantinople, Philadelphia, Slavonia,
Bolgaria, Digonicia, by the testimony of Rainerius, and they were spread into
Livonia and Sarmatia, Vignier. histor. Biblio thec. part. 3. page 130.
as Vignier shows.

Sectionis 3. Subsectio 4.
. 1. The Waldenses continued above 400 years, until Lutherrs time and after.

. 2. Jn England by means of Wiclife.

. 3. His doctrine, and many followers. Oxford Divines.

. 4. The story of John Hus, Ierom of Prage, and Bohemian affairs.

. 8. and 9. The continuance of the Waldenses after Luthers time. Luther wrote a
Preface to one of their books. Letters passed betwixt them and Oecolampadius,
Bucer, Calvin, etc.

Antiquus. Enough Sir of their spreading, but except you show also their
succession and continuance till Luthers rising, you can have no hope to
satisfy.

Antiquissimus. I have showed Councels, consultations, persecutions, massacres,
and mighty wars against them: whereby many thousands of them have been
burnt, slain, rooted out, banished and wasted: Usher. ib. cap. 10.. 64.
but yet the marvelous hand of God, still appeared in preserving multitudes of
them, in diverse and many places, in the midst of all their grievous and
continual persecutions, their doctrine was still preserved, preached,
believed, spread, continued, and delivered to posterity. Your Thuanus hist. sui
temporis in praefatione.
Thuanus writing but the other day, says, Supplicia parum prof^cerunt.
Persecutions or punishments prevailed little. They were slain, banished,
spoiled of their goods and dignities, and scattered into diverse Countries,
rather then convicted of error, or brought to repentance. Surely as the
persecution of the Apostles at Ieru^alem quenched not the Gospel, but Acts.
occasioned the spreading thereof in Samaria and remoter parts: so did the
persecutions of the Waldenses in some parts of France, occasion their spreading
into other parts and other Countries, as Germany, Bohemia, Polonia, Livonia,
etc. as Thuanus ib.
Thuanus there shows.

. 2.
In Britany (or England) the Waldenses doctrine was quickly received by many.
Happily by means of the intercourse of the English people, with the great Earl
of Tolous his subjects, by reason of the Before subs. 3.. 4.
affinity betwixt those Princes, for in the year 1174, and in Henry the
seconds time, there was persecution and burning of them, as Subs. 2. 6.
Mathy Paris, and Thomas Walden have recorded. But that doctrine was more
generally received, and had fuller passage in King Edward 3 reign, when See
Archb. Abbot against D. Hill. Reason. 1.. 25 and Fox i^ ^ita Wicl ^^.
John Wiclife, a learned Doctor of Divinity, Bailiol Colled^^.
Master of a College in Oxford, and public Reader of Divinity in that
University, taught it there with the great liking and applause of the hearers
and approbation of the whole University. For the Vicechancellour, Proctors,
diverse Preachers and Batchelors of Divinity, took part with him. And when Bulls
came thick from Rome against him and his Doctrine; First from Gregory 11. anno
1378. And afterward from Gregory the 12, whereby he was to be condemned for an
Heretic: The whole University gave a testimony in favor of him, under their
seal, in their Congregation house, in these words among others. Anno 1406.
October. 5.
God forbid that our Prelates, should have condemned a man of such honesty for
an Heretic, etc.

. 3.
This man's doctrine (as the said Bulls of the two Popes did say) agreed with
the doctrine of Marsilius Patavians, and Johannes de Ganduno. Abbot. ib.
This Marsilius, a very learned man in that Age (about the year 1324) had
written a book (entitled Defensor Pacis) in defense of the Emperor Lewis of
Bauier (who was mightily laid at by three Popes successively) demo^strating the
supreme authority of the Emperor, and beating down the iniquity of the Popes
usurpations over Christian Princes and general Councels: showing that things
are to be decided by the Scriptures; that learned men of the Laity are not to
be debarred voices in Councels; that the Clergy and pope also are to be subject
to Princes; That the Church is the whole company of the faithful; that Christ
is the foundation and head of the Church, and has not appointed any one to be
his Vicar; that Priests may be married as well as other Christians; that S.
Peter was never at Rome; that the Popish court or Synagogue is a den of
thieves; that the doctrine of the Pope is not to be followed, because it
leads to everlasting destruction. The popes being informed that this was also
Wiclifes doctrine, must needs condemn him, or yield themselves guilty. Many
other positions were attributed unto him also, some bad enough, and undoubtedly
false, as had been before to the Waldenses, and the Primitive Christians: but
what he truly held, may be seen in his own works that remain, and in Mr.
Fox writing his life, and in Catalogo testium veritatis, lib. 18. Gabr. Powel.
De Antichrist^: In Prafatione n. 25.
The sum whereof Mr. Gabriel Powel (a diligent searcher and obseruer)
delivers thus: He taught, that there ought not to be one supreme Bishop in
the Church: that the pope is not only not Christ's Vicar, but also that he is
Antichrist: that his privileges, bulls, dispensations, and indulgences are
not only idle and unprofitable, but also wicked and impious: that to
spiritual men is not to be given the politic Dominion: that the pope and his
Clergy have engrossed the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven into their custody,
and neither enter themselves, nor suffer others to enter: he disallowed
Transubstantiation, Masses, Offices, Canonical hours, and other Battologies:
from Baptism he removed the Chrisme, and taught that the faithful ought to be
baptized with simple water, as Christ did: he disallowed Auricular confession,
the papists doctrine of penance, satisfaction and worship of Relickes: and the
Invocation of Saints, (whom he called Servants, not Gods: for the word Knave
which he used, signified in those days a servant, not as it does in our days
a wicked Varlet, as his enemies maliciously interpret it, Bellarmine for one, a
man utterly ignorant of the English tongue.) He rejected humane rites, new
shadows and traditions: he denied it to be lawful for any man to add any
thing to the religion contained in holy Scriptures, and to make it harder, as
he complained the pope had done: he thought fit that the palaces, and all
that pomp and majesty of the Pope, and also diverse degrees of the Spiritualty,
should be taken away: he condemned the orders of Monks, as superstitious,
impious, and very hurtful to true Religion: and said they were to be forsaken
as soon as could be: he defended the holy Communion in both kinds: he wrote
(as Aeneas Sylvius witnesses) above two hundred volumes, mostwhat against the
impious lives, traditions, and abuses of the Popes, Monks, and Clergy: for
which he lived a while in banishment: but at last being restored, he had many
favorers, (as appeateth by the writings of Walden) Knights and Peers of the
Land, who in places under their government abolished Images, and cast out other
rites of the Popes. [He flourished anno Dom. 1360. See Bale. century 6. chap 1.]

These were the points of doctrine which Wiclife taught: for which, and other
such like fathered upon him, he was condemned by the Council of Constance,
forty years after he was dead and his bones dug up and burned. D. Abbot
contra Hill. reason 1.. 25. Histor. Waldens. lib. 2. cap. 12.
His preaching while he lived, was evident, and so powerful, that beside the
University of Oxford, it gained him many great favorers of the Nobility, as
John of Gaunt, and the Lord Henry Percy, the one Duke of Lancaster, the other
Marshall of England: Fox ex Regisiro and Ce^^tney. and Aot. Parlam. An. 5.
Rich. 2. cap. 5.
also Lewis Gifford, and the Chancellor, the Earl of Salisbury: and in a
manner, all the inferior people, among whom it was preached in many places, in
Churches, Churchyards, Markets, Faires, and other places of great
Congregations, so generally, commonly, publicly, with such plainness and
euidency of the truth, and notoriousnesse of the abuses which he reproved,
that it won all men's assent and liking; and took so large and deep root that
it could not be rooted out, Gabriel Powel De Antichristo. edit. Land. 1605. in
praefatione.
by all the means that for many years after his death, the popes, Princes,
Bishops and their officers could devise or use. Gabriel Powel reckons up a
great number of Divines of that one University of Oxford (beside all others)
that from time to time, and age to age, even to Luthers time, maintained
Wiclifes doctrine in England and many of them were persecused and put to death
for it: of which number, these are some: Vtred Bolton anno 1380. Io. Bale.
cent. 6. cap. 85.
and John Ashwarby, fellow of Oriel College, Doctor of Divinity Pastor of S.
Mary's in Oxford, both of them much troubled for preaching and promoting
Wiclifes doctrine the same year, anno 1380.

John Ashton, Fellow of Merton College, anno 1382. Ib. cap. 78.
persecuted and finally condemned to perpetual prison.

Philip Repington of Merton College, Ib. cap 90.
afterward Bishop of Lincoln, 1382.

Nicholas Herford, Doctor of Divinity, Jb. cap 92.
he taught that there was nothing in Wiclifes Doctrine disagreeing from the
holy Scriptures, 1382.

Walter Brute of Merton College: Ex catalogo sociorum Merton. and Fox act.
tom. ^. Bale. cen^. ^. cap. 2. ib. cap. 10.
persecuted by the Bishop of Hereford, 1390.

Peter Pateshal preached Wiclifes doctrine ordinarily at London, and in the
Court: avoided persecution by flying into Bohemia, 1390. At the same time,
Richard With of Merton College, preached the same doctrine.

Henry Crumpe, an Irish man, Doctor of Divinity in Oxford, Ib. cent. 14. cap.
58. Ex Waldeni fasciculo zizaniorum.
first an adversary to Wiclife, but after convicted by his doctrine, taught it
boldly: and being therefore persecuted by the Bishops, fled into Ireland, and
there was long imprisoned by a Bishop, 1393.

Catal. sociorum Mert.
Richard Wimbleton, Fellow of Merton College. 1394.

Fox act. and monu.
William Sawtrer, a Divine of Oxford, imprisoned degraded, and finally burned,
by Thomas Arundell, Archbishop of Canterbury, 1400.

Fox tom. 1.
William Swinderby, of Kings College in Oxford: after preacher at Leicester,
taught Wiclifes doctrine being maintained by the Inhabitants against their
Bishops will: at last taken, was compelled to recant: but shortly after,
repenting and gathering strength, and renewing his doctrine, he was burned in
Smithfield, 1401.

Walsing. in chron.
Thomas Ocleue, maintained the doctrine of Wiclife and Berengarius, publicly
in the schools at Oxford, 1410.

Ludovic. Rabus in 3 part de martyr. Fox. to ^1. Fox ib.
William Thorp, Fellow of Queens College in Oxford: examined, imprisoned, and
there secretly put to death, by Thomas Arundell, Archbishop of Canterbury, 1407.

Laurence Redman. David Sawtrey, William James, Thomas Brightwell, William
Hawlam, Radulph Greenhurst, John Schut, grievously persecuted by the popes
friends, 1420.

Capgraue lib. 1. de nobilibus Hen. Fox tom. 1.
Sir John Oldcastle, Lord Cobham, student in Oxford under William Thorp, after
many wars and victories for his Prince and Country, embracing Wiclifes
doctrine, with other Lords and Knights ( John Clenborow, Lewis Clifford,
Richard Sture, Thomas Latimer, William Neuel, John Montacute, he was lastly
accused before the Archbishop of Canterbury, and finally condemned and burned
in Saint Giles fields, 1417.

Puruey in com. in Apoc. Bale. cent. 7. cap. 50.
John Puruey, who wrote a learned Commentary upon the Revelation, reproving the
pope as Antichrist, and the Babylonian whore: complained that many before him
who had oppugned this spiritual Babylon, had bin imprisoned, killed, and their
books burnt: and that none was suffered to preach, but such as first swear
obedience to the pope. He was secretly made away in prison by the Archbishops
appointment, 1421.

William White, Fellow of Wickam College, Fox tom. 1.
for his preaching was taken by the Archbishop, and compelled to recant, 1424.
but quickly repenting, and publicly confessing his weakness and inconstancy
with great lamentation, and renewing his former doctrine, at last he was taken
and condemned to the fire by the Bishop of Norwich, 1428.

Richard Wiche, Fellow of Wickam College, Ibid.
burnt for the like profession, 1428.

Peter Clerk, an Oxford Divine, Caxton. in aucta rio Polychron. cap. 19.
Fabian. in Chron Bale cent. 7. cap. 86. Hondorf^n theat. hist.
disputed with Thomas Walden, publicly in the Schools of Oxford, of many
questions of Wiclifes doctrine, for maintaining which being persecuted, he fled
into Bohemia. afterward he was chosen to be preacher to certain Christians,
at Melda in France which misliked the corruptions of the pope; where in
process of time, he and 62 of his hearers, were surprised by the Magistrate,
and sent to Paris, bound in Carts: where 14 of the principal were burned the
rest tormented, and put to other deaths o^ banished: he and Steven Mangris (in
whose house they had used to meet and hear the Gospel preached) had their
tongues cut out, then were hanged, and lastly burned 1433.

The next day the Clergy went in solemn procession (carrying the host)
thanking God for that happy execution: and a Doctor inueighing against the
Martyrs, said it was necessary for every man to believe to his salvation, that
these men were damned, whose bodies they had burned: and that God could not be
God, if he did not damn them, 1433. Aeneas Sylv. in discript. Europae. and cap
49. hist. Iohem.


Peter Pain, or Peacocke, Fellow of All-S ules College in Oxford for his
constant preaching against the Roman Antichrist, was feign to fly into
Bohemia, whence he was sent with other Legates to the Council of Basil, where
he defended the doctrine fifty days. He flourished, 1438.

Bale. ibid. cent. 8. cap. 4.
Roger Oueley in Oxford, Divine, Chaplen to the Lady Elenor Cobham, wife of the
Duke of Gloucester: wrote a learned book against the peoples superstitions: and
for attempting something with the said Lady, against the papacy: he with some
of his associats was executed and quartered at London: and the Lady banished
into the I Will of Man, 1442.

Bale. ibid. cap. 2.
Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, son of King Henry the fourth, brother to the
fifth, uncle to the sixth, having bin educated in Oxford in Baliol College,
was a great favorer of Preachers of the purer Religion: he was the Founder of
a worthy Library in Oxford, which he enriched with an 129 most choice books,
procured out of Italy and France. The Bishops and others hated him deadly, by
whose means he was taken in Bury Abbey in the night, cast in prison, and there
shortly after found suddenly dead, whether smothered by pillowes or by some
other means, 1447.

Bale. cent. 14. cap. 99.
Philip Norise an Jrish man, Deane of Dublin, a Divine of Oxford, inveighed
against Antichristian Monks and Friars, calling them Antichrists, Wolves,
Thieves, Traitors, Swine, Hypocrites, Heretics, more pestilent then the
Arians, Pelagians, Donatists, Nestorians, orother Heretics whatsoever. For
which the Friars complained of him to pope Eugenius, 4. from whom he appealed
to a general Council, 1446.

Bale cent. 8. cap. 12.
David Boyse, Fellow of Merton College, a witty and learned man, embraced the
sincere Religion, and abhorred the blindness and tyranny of the Clergy of his
time, 1450.

Ibid cap. 63.
To omit many others, I conclude with John Colet, a Divine of Oxford, and Deane
of Saint Paul's in London; he taught in Oxford, that Man's justification was by
the mere grace of Jesus Christ: that Images are not to be worshipped: that
Bishops not feeding their flocks, are Wolves, etc. He was accused of heresy,
by Richard James, Bishop of Land n, and two Franciscan Friars, Bricot and
Standish, 1507. which was but ten years before Luthers rising.

John Hus might well say,. 4. Hus tomo 1. in Replica conta^ Anglicum Joan.
Stoaks fol. 108. a. and 109 b. and 110 a.
that for thirty years (from Wiclifes time to the time of Husses writing) the
University of Oxford did read Wiclifes books, and he yet says further, that
there was scarce a man to be found in that University, which did not read,
hold, and study the doctrine that Wiclife taught.

Hus speaks of 30 years, we find 100 years and more, even unto Luthers
days. And if Oxford was so fruitful of such teachers, can we imagine that her
sister Cambridge was barren? or that the Country yielded them no disciples?
No, we read in most kings reigns of persecutions, and executions of them,
beside the secret ones, whose persons escaped their enemies, and their names
the histories, which doubtless were not a few. But were they many or few
remaining in England, we see the learned professors being persecuted here,
found good refuge and entertainment in Bohemia where (as we formerly observed)
many Waldenses had planted themselves before. Some of them carried thither,
first the books of Wiclife, entitled, De realibus Vniuersalibus, (says
Aeneas Sylvius. Aenean Sylvius hist Bohem. cap. 35. Cochleus hist. de Hussitis
lib. 1.
) Afterward (says Cocleus) Peter Pain brought into Bohemia, Wiclifes books
in quantity as great as Saint Augustins works, many whereof John Hus
translated into the Bohemian tongue, for the better instruction of the
Waldenses there, of whom the said Hus, and Ierom of Prage were the chief
pastors: Cochl. hist. lib. 2. Bellar praefat. general. cont^ouers.
and of his name their adversaries called them Hussites. Cochleus and
Bellarmine join the VViclefists, Hussites and Waldensis together, as holding
the same points of doctrine, and reproving the same abuses of Rome. The same
Cochleus also says, The Hussites and Thaborites were branches of VViclife,
Cochleus ib. lib. 2. 3. and 6. Platina in vita Joan. 24.
and ( lib. 6.) calls the German Protestants, New VViclifists. And Platina
says, The Hussites as Sectators of VViclife, were condemned in the Council of
Constance.

Thus therefore (by these confessions and many other) the Waldensis doctrine
was continued (not now to name others) in the VViclifists, and Hussites. John
Husse (a very careful and painful man) translated also the holy Scriptures
into their mother tongue: whereby the common people were so well grounded in
the soundness of his doctrine, and multiplied so much in short time, that
Onuphrius in tabula council. ad Platinae hist.
partly to repress them, and partly to take away the schism between the
Popes, the Council of Constance was called. Fox in council. Constant. histor.
D. Abbot. ib..
The Nobles of Bohemia so much favored Hus, that they wrote two several
supplications to the Council in his behalf: but for all that, and contrary to
their and the Emperors safe conduct, (or promise that Hus and Ierom of Prage
should go and come safely) both Hus and Ierom were there burnt: whereat the
Nobles of Bohemia greatly displeased and complaining, the Emperor Sigismund
Cochleus lib. 4.
laid all the fault upon the Council.

. 5.
Ibid.
The Bohemians thus robbed of their principal Pastors, were much moved at the
perfidiousnesse of those at Constance; and assembled together to the number of
thirty thousand, and in the open fields, upon three hundred Tables (which they
erected for that purpose) they received the holy Communion in both kinds.
Afterward rushing into the Churches and Monasteries, Cochleus lib. 5. and
Petrus Messiah in Sigismundo
they brake down the Images there: and not long after under the conduct of
Joannes Zisca (a noble and victorious Warrior) they grew to be forty thousand
strong in one Army, and got into their hands the Castle of Prague the chief
City of Bohemia. Shortly after (contemning the Curses and Croysados of Pope
Martin) they wanne many victories under the leading of Procopius and other
Captains; but especially under Zisca, of whom lib. 5.
Cochleus says, scarce any Histories of the Greeks, Hebrews, or Latins, does
mention such a General. He built a new City of Refuge for his men, named
Thabor, whereof the best of the Hussites were called Thaborites.

Upon a new Croisado of Pope Martin (wherein he promised remission of sins
to all that would either fight or contribute money against the Hussites) forty
thousand German Horsemen were gathered to destroy them:. 6.
but upon their approach they turned their backs and fled; not without some
secret Judgment of God, says Cochleus lib. 6.
. Then was the Council of Basil called (says Onuph. ib.
Onuphrius) against the Hussites: and in that Council (contrary to the Act of
the Council of Constance Session. 13.
) the use of the Cup in the Sacrament was granted to the Bohemians: an argument
of their great numbers, and irresistable strength at that time. For the Books
of Hus, full of wholesome and moving Doctrine lived though he was dead; and
through the memory of his constant standing for the Truth against the whole
Council, and the Counc^ls perfidious and outrageous burning of a man so
learned, so painful, so greatly beloved and lamented, his books were
earnestly desired and read, and wanne many. The like wrought the memory of
Ierom his admirable learning, eloquence, memory and patience in his death:
Poggius Epist. ad Leonardum Aret. number.
which Poggius in an Epistle does very much commend, (being an eyewitness)
and feelingly describes the same, as one much affected with his excellent
parts. Recorded also by Cochleus Lib. 3.
. So that notwithstanding the continual opposition against them, they
continually increased, and in short time got a Bishop, Suff^agan to the
Archbishop of Prage Ib. lib. 4.
and after him Conradus the Archbishop himself on their side, to give orders
to their Clerks, and to help for the compiling a confession of their faith,
anno 1421 Ib. lib. 5.
. Which the Archbishop and many Barons afterward did stiffely maintain, and
complained against the Emperor Sigismund, for offering wrong to those of their
Religion. Alexander, Duke of Lituania, gave them aid, and was reproved by pope
Martin 5 for it. And Sigismund in fine (in a treaty with the Bohemians) granted
that the Bishops should promote to holy orders the Bohemians even Hussites
which were of the University of Prage Ib. lib. 8.
.

. 7.
Aeneas Sylvius complains, that (about the year 1453.) the Kingdom of
Bohemia was wholly governed by Heretics for that all the Nobility, and all
the Commonalty were subject to one George or Gyrzik^, who then was governor
under K Ladislaus, and afterward was King himself. Who with all his Nobles
showing undaunted constancy and resolution, rather to dye then forsake their
Religion, caused the pope Pius to tolerate many things in them. But his
successor Paul the second excommuicated King George, publishing a Croisado
against him, and gave his Kingdom to Matthias, King of Hungary: for which they
warred for seven years space, and in the end concluded a peace. But while some
Princes mediated to the pope for King George his absolution, Abbot. ib.. 18.
he dyed, anno 1471. not long before Luthers rising,

. 8.
And your Cochleus lib. 2.
Cochleus (who wrote his history in Luthers time) shows that the Hussites
continued to those days. For (says he) Hus has slain souls for an hundred
years together, neither does he yet cease to slay them, by the second death.
And again, Ibid.
Hus did so rend the unity of the Church, that at this day there remains a
pitiful division in Bohemia. And, lib. 8.
unto this day remains the sect of the Thaborites in many places of Bohemia
and Moravia, under the name Picards and Waldensis. And, lib. 12.
in the year 1534, he wishes that he may see the remainders of the Hussites
to return to the Church, and the Germans to cast out all new sects. And it is
certain that in the very year 1517. wherein Luther began to oppose the
corruptions of Rome, the Council of Lateran ended under pope Leo the tenth,
and consultation was had there and then, of reforming the manners of the
Church, and of recovering the Bohemians to the unity thereof.

See the book extant. And D. Featlie^ Reply to Fisher page 154.
Luther himself writes a Preface to the confession of faith, which the
Waldenses (then odiously called Picards) dwelling in Bohemia and Moravia, did
set for^h, which he greatly approves and commends to godly men to read: with
thanks to God for the unity which he found betwixt them and us, as the sheep
of one fold.

Besides, we find many Waldenses remaining in France,. 9.
in, and after Luthers time.

Vesembe^. Oration of the Waldenses citat, in history Wald. book 1. cap. 5.
See ib. book 2. cap. 8.
Anno 1506, Lewis 12. King of France, hearing much evil of the Waldensis in
his Realm, sent the Lord Adam Fumce, Master of Requests, and Parvi a Doctor of
Sorbon, his Confessor, to try the truth; who visiting all their parishes and
Temples in Provence, found indeed no Images, nor ornaments of Masses or other
Ceremonies: but they found also no such crimes could be found in them as were
reported: but that they Religiously observed the Sabbath days, baptized their
children after the order of the Primitive Church, taught them the articles of
the Christian faith, and the Commandments of God, etc. Upon which report, the
King said, (and bound it with an oath) that they were better men then he or his
people.

The same King being informed that in the valley of Frassinier, in the Diocese
of Ambrun in Dauphiney, there were a certain people that lived like beasts,
without Religion, having an evil opinion of the Romish Religion: he sent his
Confessor with the official of Orleance, to bring him true information
thereof: who found them all so truly righteous and religious, that the
Confessor wished in the presence of many, that He were as good a Christian as
the worst of the said valley.

Ioachim Camerar. in his hist. page 152.
King Francis 1. successor to Lewis 12. seeing th Parliament of Provence,
grievously afflict the Waldensis of Merindal, Cambriers, and places adjoining,
appointed William de Ballay, Lord of Langeay, then his Leiutenant in Piedmont,
to search and inform him more fully of them. Upon whose information of their
piety, honesty, charity, peaceablenesse, painfulnesse, and dutifulness, he
much p^ttied them.

Hist. Wald. book. 2. cap. 8.
And one Guerin an advocate, was hanged for falsely informing the King against
them. But the Ecclesiastickes persecuted and massacred them cruelly.

Ibid. cap. 4.
In this Kings time the Waldensis sent two of their Pastors, one George Morell
of Frassiniers in Dauphine, the other Peter Masson of Burgundy, to the
Protestant Ministers, to wit, to Oecolampadius, Minister at Basse, to Capito
and Martin Bucer at Strasburg, and to Berthaud Haller at Berne, to confer
with them about some points of Religion; where they found so great agreement in
their faith, with equal mislikes of the Romish corruptions, that they much
rejoiced and praised God, that had continued them and their fathers in the
truth of that doctrine above four hundred years in in the midst of many
troubles, as they write.

The letters passing between them are to be seen in the History Ibid. cap. 8.
and lib. 1. cap. 6.
.

The like letters passed betwixt Preachers of the Waldensis and Calvin To be
seen among Calvin's Epistles Epist. 250.
.

I hope I have satisfied you concerning these Waldensis; first, that they were
fully of our Religion S^bsection 3. subsect. 1.
.

Secondly, that they were in great numbers, and made great visible Churches
Subsect. 2.
.

Thirdly, that they were spread in diverse Countries Subsect. 3.
.

Fourthly, that they continued from the time of your great Revolt from the
purity of Religion, unto the late and more public Reformation by M. Luther
Subsect. 4.
.

Antiquus. Indeed you have said very much, both for the Greek or East Church,
that it held your faith, and so continues: and also for these Separatists, the
Waldensis in the West.

But you Section 2. subsect. 2.
mentioned a third part, that many continuing in outward communion with the
Church of Rome, were yet truly of your Faith and Religion: let me hear what
you say of that part, and you shall have my reply against them all.

Section. 4.
. 1. The Church of Rome (excepting the Papacy, and the maintainers thereof)
continued to be the Church of God until Luthers time: proved by many
Protestant Divines.

. 2. Their Reasons.

. 3. But now then the state of that Church, is much altered, since the new
light in Luthers time and since, fully discovering the corruptions thereof.

. 4. And since the great alteration made by the Council of Trent.

Antiquissimus. I say, first, that I have already alleged a great number
living in community with Papists in outward Ceremonies, which yet in substance
of Religion, were ours and not yours: as the followers of Wiclifes doctrine,
and other teachers in all Countries, which were innumerable (as may appear by
my former Relation) many of them being persecuted for it, and many other
(known among themselves, but) concealing themselves from the^r persecutors..
1. B. Usher. B. White. Mr. Ric. Hocker.


But now I say further (with D. Field, Luther, Calvin, Beza, Morney,
Melanchthon, Bucer, Mr. Deering, Bishop Carlton, and many other learned
Protestants) that setting aside the pope and Cardinals, and their Hierarchy,
with the maintainers thereof (which I account no part of the Church, but a
domineering faction, tyrannizing over the Church) the Church of Rome
(consisting of the rest, which were innumerable) continued to be the Church of
God, and in substance all one with us until Luthers time.

Thus teaches Doctor Field, Of the Church, Book 3. chapter 6. And in the 8
chapter, he adds, although we do acknowledge Wiclife, Hus, Jerome of Prage,
and the like, to have been the worthy servants of God, and holy Martyrs and
Confessors, suffering for the cause of Christ, against Antichrist: yea, we do
not think that the Church was found only in them, or that there were no other
appearance or succession of the Church and Ministry, as Stapleton and other of
that faction falsely impute unto us. For we most firmly believe all the
Churches in the world, wherein our Fathers lived and dyed, to have been the
true Churches of God, in which undoubtedly salvation was to be found, and that
they which taught, embraced and believed those damnable errors which the
Romanists now defend against us, were a faction only in the Churches, as were
they that denied the Resurrection, urged Circumcision, and despised the
Apostles of Christ, in the Churches of Corinth, and Galatia. This matter D.
Field prosecuteth there, and also in the Appendix to the fifth book, part. 3
page 7.

Luther is also alleged by Bellarmine, De not is Ecclesiae cap. 16. out of
his book against the Anabaptists: we confess (says Luther) that under the
Papacy, there was much good, yea all Christian good, and it came thence unto
us, the true Scriptures, two true Sacraments, true keys for remission of
sins, true office of preaching, true Catechism, as are the Lords Prayer, the
ten Commandments, the Articles of Faith; Yea, I say moreover, that under the
papacy was true Christianity, yea the very kernel of Christianity.

Calvin in his fourth book of Jnstitutions, chap. 2.. 11. says, That God
suffered not his Church to perish, in France, Italy, Germany, Spain, and
England, having made his Covenant with them, but it continued there through
effectual Baptism and other remainders: though for men's ingratitude he
suffered the building to be much wasted, rent, and torn.

Beza in his questions says, The Church was under the papacy, but the papacy
was not the Church, Master Perkins has the like, in his Exposition of the
Creed, page 405. edit. Cambridge, 1596.

Morney, in his Treatise of the Church, chapt. 9. In the later end delivers
the same: That under the papacy was the Church and Flock of Christ, but
governed, partly by hirelings, partly by wolves, and that Antichrist held it by
the throat, the people were of the Christian Commonwealth: but the pope with
his faction, a Catiline to set it on fire, whom Cicero fitly calls a plague,
and not a part of the Commonwealth, borne Ex luxu reipublicae; as an impostume
or disease is no part of the body, but a corruption bringing damage and death.
Bucer and Melancthon teach the same.

Mr. Edward Deering, in his Lectures preached in Paul's Church in London, upon
the Epistle to the Hebrews, Lecture 23. page 374. has these words. In this
was the great goodness of God, that in time to come, his children might
assuredly know, he reserved to himself a Church, even in the midst of all
desolation: and that he called them by his word, and confirmed by his
Sacraments, even as at this day. For seeing there could be no sin so great,
but faith in Jesus Christ scatters it all away, it was impossible, that the
man of sin does not so much adulterate, either the Word of God, but that it
should be to the faithful a Gospel of salvation: or else the Sacramenta of
God, but that they should be pledges of eternal life to those that did
believe. And a little after, God of his infinite goodness, who calls things
that are not, as though they were, even in that Ministry gave grace unto his
Saints.

Bishop Carlton, wrote a book of purpose, entitled, (Consensus Ecclesiae
catholica contra Tridentines) to show that although the doctrine of Christian
Religion was much altered in the chiefest Articles of Faith by Friars: yet a
great number of godly learned men held the ancient truth, and preserved the
Church until the times of Reformation, and that the Reformed Churches still
continue the same, and are separated only from the Roman Court, so far as
the Roman Court had separated it self from the Roman Church: and that our
Fathers and Ancestors, living and dying in the Roman Church, had sufficient
means to bring them to salvation. And this he shows in the several
discourses of the principal fundamental points of faith.

See of this matter also Bishop Usher, De successione Ecclesiarum, cap. 6, 8,
9. and his Sermon. And Archbishop Abbot, against Hill. Reason 5.. 28. And Mr.
Richard Hookers discourse of Justification.

. 2.
Their Reasons are, I. The corruptions in the Roman Church, sprung not up all at
once, nor came to their full height until these late years: and were not so
dangerous in their Spring, as in their full growth and strength.

D. Field. book 3. chap. 6. Of the Church. and Append. to the 5. book part. 3.
page 8. etc.
II. They were not generally received by all men, nor as the undoubted
determinations of the Church: but controuerted and variously disputed among the
learned, and holden with great liberty of judgment by the greatest Doctors (as
appears by their own books of Controversies written by Bellarmine, Suares,
Azorius, etc. which confute their own writers as much as they do Protestants:
and by those 27 points which D. Field mentions in his Appendixe to the seventh
Chapter of the third book of the Church, printed at the end of the fourth
book) for had they been the undoubted doctrines and determinations of the
Church, all men would have holden them uniformly, entirely, and constantly, as
they held the doctrine of the Trinity and other articles of the Faith. As long
therefore as men yielded outward obedience to the Church-ceremonies without
scandal, and in other things were suffered to abound in their own sense,
there was no such danger in holding the right faith.

III. Our forefathers held the true foundation of Religion that is,
Justification and Salvation, by Jesus Christ his merits only: and so were
taught ordinarily in their books of visitation and consolation of the sick As
we shall show in the article of Justification.
: and they erred only in points inferior, of less moment and danger (which
defaced indeed and blemished, but did not nullify or take away the being of
the Church.) Diseases in the heart, brain, liver, and vital parts, are
dangerous and deadly: but wounds or blemishes in the fleshly, sensual, or
organicall parts only (as the hands, feet ears, eyes, etc. do only impair
the beauty and actions, but endanger not the life, nor cut of hope of recovery.
Greg. Nissen. de opific. hom. cap. vlt.
It is Saint Gregory Nissens Simile. So (says he) it is with the Church of
God, and Religion. A man is a man while he has life, though he be sore
diseased; as Naaman was in his leprosy.

IIII. They misliked and derided (as Chawcers plowman) many of their ceremonies
and idle things (as holy water, pardons, relickes, etc.) and deplored the
greater corruptions and abuses: and cried for reformation, most readily
receiving it when it came.

V. In what they erred, they erred ignorantly, Aug de vtilitate credendi ad
Honorat. Idem epist. 162. ad Donat.
with minds ready to be reformed, upon better information. Saint Augustine
puts a difference betwixt Heretics and them that believe Heretics. And he
says, They that defend an opinion false and perverse without pertinacious
animosity, especially which not the boldness of their own presumption has
begotten, but which from their seduced and erroneous Parents, they have
received; and themselves do seek the truth with care and diligence: ready to
amend their error, when they find the truth: they are in no wise to be
reckoned among Heretics. This was the case of our fathers under the Papacy.

VI. If any did err in points fundamental (as long as they denied not the
foundation directly: See of this more, chap. 4. sect. 3.
for that is plain infidelity or apostasy, and quite cuts them off from the
Church) if they did it only upon mere ignorance, with a mind ready to reform
their error upon better instruction: those were still the accounted members of
the true Church. For this was the case of the Corinthians, denying the
resurrection of the dead (1 Cor. 15.10,) and of the Galatians, erring
dangerously about Justification ( Gal. 3.3, 4 5. and 5.4.) whom yet Saint Paul
calls Churches of God, 1 Cor. 1.2. Gal. 1.2. and doubtless he would not have
taken such pains to write unto them, except he had so thought them, and had
hope to find them tractable and recouerable.

. 3.
Antiquus. Sir I heartily thank you, I need hear no more, nor trouble you any
longer: since you allow the Church of Rome to be the true Church of God,
wherein salvation may be had, and you allege great Doctors of your own side,
and good reasons for it: I am satisfied. I have no reason to cleave to your
Church (which all our Catholics condemn for heretical and schismatic)
and to leave the Roman, which you acknowledge to be the true Church, wherein
salvation is to be had. The Roman Church is justified on all hands, by friends
and enemies to be safe: yours is condemned of all but your selves. I will take
my leave.

See this more at large in D. Field in the places before alleged, and B.
Carlton, Jurisdiction, and consensus, etc.
Antiquissimus. Stay, good sir, and draw no more out of my words then they
yield you. I spoke of the Church of Rome, as it was till Luthers time, and you
conclude of the Church of Rome, as it is now: Deceive not your self, there is
great difference betwixt them; betwixt the times, then and now; and betwixt
that Church, then and now. In those times the errors of our forefathers were
of mere ignorance: what they perceived to be evil, they misliked, they
desired knowledge, they wished many things reformed, and gladly embraced
reformation when they found it coming. But now it is all otherwise: now men
are admonished of their errors, offer is made them to be better instructed:
and yet either they dote on their own old opinions, unwilling to be instructed
in the revealed truth: or after sufficient knowledge and conviction, for some
worldly respects they wilfully and obstinately persist in their old errors;
and (which is far worse) they hate and persecute the maintainers of the truth.

Saint Cyprian says, if any of our predecessors, Cypr. ep. 63.. 13.
either of ignorance or simplicity, has not observed and held that which our
Lord has taught us by his Word and example: by the Lords indulgence, pardon
may be granted to his simplicity; but to us, that are now admonished and
instructed of the Lord, pardon cannot be granted.

The ignorance therefore wherein our Fathers were bred and trained freed them
from the danger of those things, which being well understood and known, B.
Usher. sermon. at Wans^ed. page 39.
might have been prejudicial to their souls health. They knew not these
depthes of Satan, they could not diue into the bottom of such mysteries of
iniquity; This was a good and a happy ignorance unto them. But this ignorance
is now taken from you, Revel. 2.24.
and a more happy knowledge offered you; happy, if you have grace to receive
it, if not, then remember that, John 3.19.
This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved
darkness more then the light. And, John 15.22.
If J had not come and spoken unto them (says our Savior) they had not had
any sin: but now have they no cloak (or excuse) for their sin.

There is therefore great difference of the former times, and these, then means
of better knowledge was denied to our Fathers; now it is afforded to you that
gave some excuse to them, this takes all excuse from you. They that walk in
the night, though they stumble and fall, foil and soil themselves, yea, hurt
their bodies, and tear their clothes, by rushing upon bushes, or into bogges:
yet are ordinarily pitt^ed, and pardoned, yea, and commended for their desire
and pains to find home: but so are not they that rush into the same evils in
the fair daylight. God pittieth the blind, that would feign see and cannot:
but will he pity them that may see and will not? that harden themselves in
their affected wilful blindness? He delivered Jonas from drowning in the
bottom of the Sea: Usher. ibid. page 41.
will you plunge your selves therefore, to see if God will deliver you? Because
we grant, that some may escape death in Cities, and Streets, infected with the
plague; will you therefore choose to take up your lodging in a Pesthouse? If
you do, we may well say, Lord have mercy upon you: but you may justly fear,
that you dangerously tempt the Lord, to deliver you up to the efficacy of
delusion and damnation, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.11.12.

You see therefore a manifest difference of the times: the times of darkness
before, and the times of light now.

. 4.
Mark now also another difference of the Roman Church, as it was in those
times, and as it is now. In those times the errors that were, D. Field. Church
book 3. chap. 6. and cap. 47. and Append.
were the errors of some men only in that Church: now they are the errors of
the whole Church. In those times men might be of that Church, and not of that
faction: now that Church and faction are all one.

B. Carlton.
The faction has so prevailed by the Art of the Council of Trent, that the
errors which some held before, now all of that Church must hold. Before, they
were held with much liberty of judgment, they were not determined, men might
assent or dissent, and abound in their own opinions: now they are all made De
fide, the absolute determinations of that Church, and imposed upon all men,
under pain of Anathema, or curses annexed. That Council (being wholly ruled
by the mere faction of the Papacy) has quite altered the state of that
Church, taking away all liberty that former Ages enjoyed in many things, and
making many new points of faith, which were not so before.

Therefore, before the Council of Trent, D. Hall Columba Noe.
men might do well in that Church, when meat being set before them, they might
pick out the worst, and eat the best; pick out the unwholesome, and feed on
the wholesome; pick the worm out of the apple, pare away the corrupted, and
eat the sound; take the Spider out of the bowl of Wine before they drink it.
But now, where they are cursed, if they eat not all, and compelled to drink
down all: they that love their lives must take heed of that society.

To answer your question therefore directly [Where was the Protestant Church
before Luthers time?] that is, where was any Church in the world, that taught
that doctrine which the Protestants now teach? Sect. 2. subsect. 2.
I say it was not only apparent enough in the Greek and Eastern Churches:
and in the open separatists ( Waldenses, Section 3.
etc.) from the Romish corruptions in these Western parts: Section 4.
but it was also within the community of the Romish Church it self. Even there
(as in a large field) grew much good corn among tares and weeds: Lib. 1. cap.
1.
there (as in a great Barn, Heap, or Garner) was preserved much pure Grain,
mixed with store of chafe.

And (as I said in the beginning of our Conference) there is no other d
fference betwixt the Reformed and the Romish Church, then betwixt a field well
weeded,. 5. D. Field Church Book 3. cap. 6.
and the same field formerly ouergrowne with weeds: or betwixt heap of corn
now well winnowed, and the same a heap lately mixed with chafe. And if it be
a vain and frivolous thing to say; B. Usher ser. ibid. page 48.
It is not the same field, or the same Corn, now after the weeding and
fanning; as vain and frivolous it is to say the Church is not the same it was,
or in the same place, after it is swept, and cleansed of the filth and dust: or
to say, the Churches of Corinth and Galatia (after their reformation occasioned
by Saint Paul's writing) were new Churches, and not the same they were before:
because that in them before, the Resurrection was denied, Circumcision
practiced, Discipline neglected, and Christ's Apostles contemned: which things
now are not found in them: or to say Naaman was not still the same person,
because before he was a leper, and now is cleansed.

As long as we can demonstrate that nothing is altered that does constitute the
Church or is of the true essence or being of it: the Church is the same it was,
only the leprosy, and other corruptions are cleansed away; and the health,
beauty, and better habit restored, that it may more comfortably breed and bring
up children to God, and heirs of salvation. And this is the blessed and
long-wished alteration, that we have made. And I would to God you had not made
an unworthy altration, from a corrupt Church, to a far worse, and either
altogether, or very near none at all! by continuing, increasing, establishing
the corruptions you found, making them now De fide, points of faith, compelling
all to receive them, and persecuting, even to extirpation (as far as by power
and policy you can) the gainesayers of them. See before sect. 4.. 4, initio.
If the Protestant Church be new, yours is newer. The Tridentine faith is not
so old as Luther, never seen in the world of many years after his death.

CHAP. 2. Answering the vain alleging of some words and customs, and
corrupt alleging of the Fathers words against Protestants.
1. Objection. None (alleged in the former chapter) agree with Protestants in
all things: ergo, are not of their Church or Religion.

2 Answered. It is no consequent. For so also every one of them differed from
the present Romish Religion, and yet are accounted theirs. Protestants have
justly abstained from some words and phrases of some Fathers.

3 And also have left off some ceremonies and customs.

4 As the Church of Rome has left many, known to be ancient, and thought to
be Apostolical.

5 Which confutes the vanity of W.G. his book; and shows his own alleged
authors, by his own argument, to be none of his Church and Religion.

6 By the same argument, many Fathers (for example, Athanasius, Ierom,
Gelasius, Gregory, Chrysostom, Augustine) are plentifully proved to be against
the present Church and Religion of Rome.

7 Four several ways (at the least) the Romish make show of the Fathers to
be for them. The first, by alleging counterfeit books, falsely bearing the
Fathers names. Many examples hereof.

8 The second, by corrupting the books which the Fathers wrote, putting words
in, or out, and altering the text, to speak contrary to their meaning.

9 The third, by blinding or perverting the sense of the Fathers sentences by
glozes and interpretations.

10 The fourth, by citing the Fathers to prove that which is not in question.

. 1.
Antiquus.

NOw that you have said what you can, or will, to show that Protestants had a
sufficient visible Church in all Ages since Christ: I reply, you never had any.
For neither the Fathers nor Greek Church, nor Waldenses, nor the Church of
Rome before Luthers time, were of your Religion.

Campian. Ratio 5.
For the Fathers, it was Mr. Campians fifth reason, why he challenged combat
with the Protestants, because all the Fathers backed him. Ad Patres si quando
licebet accedere, confectum est praelium. If we may try it by the Fathers, the
fight is at an end. For they are as sure ours as Pope Gregory the 13. These,
and the other three sorts, every one of them, either in many points, or at
least in one or other differed from you. As the Rhemists say in their
Annotation upon Romans 11. ver. 4. We will not put the Protestants to prove that
there were 7000 of their sect, when their new Elias, Luther began: but let them
prove that there were seven or any one his either then, or in all Ages before
him, that was in all points of his belief. Thus the Rhemists.

. 2.
Adrationes Campians G. Whitakeri responsio, ad rationem. 5.
Antiquissimus. The vanity of Campian, you may see by D. Whitakers answer, who
shows that every one of the Fathers, whom Campian picked out and named, held
points directly against him and for us. Even Dionysius Cyprian, Athanasius,
Basil, Nazianzin, Ambrose, Ierom, Chrysostom, Austen, Gregory.

The vanity of your Rhomists, and other lipellers following them, is palpable,
in that they think every small point of doctrine, or practice, yea, every small
rite or ceremony, used by some, and not used by others, makes a difference of
their Religion. We do not deny, but that we have left off and disused diverse
traditions, ceremonies, and phrases, which were used in the ancient Church, but
we constantly affirm we carefully and entirely hold all the substance of
doctrine, and all things necessary for salvation, not only for the essence,
but for the perfection, beauty, and ornament of the Church: so that
notwithstanding the things left off we are wholly and fully of the Primitive
and ancient Religion.

A^tiquus. Why have you left off any words and phrases of the ancient Fathers:
if you hold their doctrine, why forsake you their words?

Antiquissimus. Bellar. De cultu Sanctorum lib. 3 cap. 4. Ad testim. patrum
dico. and De Romano Pontif. lib. 3. cap. 13.. Ratio autem cur Apostoli in
Scripturis nunquam vocant sacerdotes Christianos, sacerdotes, sed solum
episcopos and presbyteros etc. See Here. cap. 5 sect. 9. See this matter
handled a^ large by. B. Morton. Appeal. lib 2. cap. 7. and B. Andre^es. Ad
Bellarmini Apologiam, Responsio cap 8. page 184.
Because those words are now taken to signify such doctrines as then they
intended not. Their doctrine we hold, though some of their words we do not so
frequently use: you usurp those words, but refuse their doctrine. Your
Bellarmine tells us truly, that the Apostles and first Christians abstained from
the words Temple and Priests, using the words Ecclesiae, Episcopi and
Presbyteri. And thus, Justinius, Ignatius, and the other most ancient Fathers
used to speak. The reason was, lest people might understand them, as if they
meant that the Jewish ceremonies continued, with the Temple of Solomon, and the
sacrificing Priests. But afterward in Tertulli^ns time, when the danger of
that misconceit was worn out, Christians began to call Presbyters and Bishops,
by the name of Priests, etc. So that the words which the Apostles and first
Fathers never used, for fear of mistaking, the following Fathers ordinarily
used, hoping (after that long disusing) they should not be mistaken: they used
the words, Priests, (or Sacerdotes) altars sacrifices, oblations, and such
like, not properly, but by allusion to the Priests, altars and sacrifices of
the Jews, which were types, figures and (as it were) foretokens or
foreprophesies of Christ's sacrifice, offered once by himself for the sins of
the whole world, which was the Antitype and verity of those of the Jews; and was
continually to be remembered again, as often as the blessed Sacrament of his Body
and Blood was celebrated. ^useb. demonstr. Evang. lib. 1. c. 10. Chrysostom. hom.
17. in Hebr. Ambr. in Epist. ad Hebr. 10. (...) August. in Psalm. 75. Jdem. lib.
20. aduers. Faustum Manichaeum cap. 21. tom. 6.
Thus the Fathers have expressed their own meanings: Eusebius, Christ has
offered a marvailous sacrifice for the salvation of us all, commanding us to
offer unto God a memorial instead of the sacrifice of his Body and Blood.
Chrysostom, we offer up the same sacrifice which Christ offered, or rather a
remembrance thereof: the like has Ambrose.

Augustine says, when we do not forget our Saviors gift, is not Christ daily
offered for us? Christ was once offered for us: -- and by that memory he is so
daily sacrificed for us, as if he daily renewed us. And more fully, Sacrificij
nostri vera caro, and caro Christi olim in veteri lege per victimas
pollicebatur, in passione vero Christi and in cruce per veritatem reddebatur:
at hodie in nostre sacrificio per sacramentum, memoriae celebratur.

Sententiarum lib. 4. distinctio. 12. lit. g.
The Master of the Sentences asks, whether that which the Priest holds, may
be called properly a sacrifice or offering; and he answers, that which is
offered and consecrated by the Priest, is called a sacrifice and oblation,
because it is a memorial and representation of the true sacrifice, and holy
offering made upon the Altar of the Cross.

Bellar. De Missa lib. 1. cap. 15.. Alter modus.
These, and many other testimonies Bellarmine alleges, and labors by wit to
elude, saying, it is so indeed, but not only so. He will not only have it to
be a commemoratiue and representative, but a true and proper sacrifice of
Christ's Body and Blood, really the same host, not differing from his Body in
heaven, and the immolation or sacrificing of him in the forms of Bread,
Council. Trid. sess. 22. cap. 2. and Alanus de Euchar. sacrif. lib. 2. c. 12.
the very same with his sacrificing upon the Cross: as the Council of Trent
speaks. The controversy therefore is, concerning the proper and improper
signification of the Fathers terms. They take them as properly spoken, as of
a true real propitiatory sacrifice, available in it self for remission of
sins; and so turn the Sacrament into a sacrifice, profitable without
receiving: and the Priests office (which should be in preaching and ministering
the Sacraments, Matthew. 28. Mark. 16.) is now only to say Mass, or offer up
the daily sacrifice, frustrating Christ's institution with a gainful invention
of their own.

In regard of this mistaking of the Fathers words of Priests, altars,
sacrifices, Ministers the ordinary word of the new Testament, Rom 15.16. 1 cor
3, 5. and 4.1. and 2. cor. 3.6. and 6.4. Ephesians. 3.7. cor. 1.7, 23, 25. and 4.7. 1
these. 3.2.1 tim. 4.6. And their office or work called Ministry, Act. 6.4. and
20.24. and 21.19. and 12.25. 2 cor. 58.1. and 6.3. Ephesians. ^ 12. col. 4.17 4.2 1
timoth. 1.12 1. tim. 4. Communion 1 cor 10.16. table 1 Corinthians. 10.21. The
Lords Super. 1 cor. 11.20. 2 Kings 18.4. See Cassander consultatio artic. 7. De
ecclesia De Pontifice Romans
etc. and of the abuses arising thereupon; we rather choose the words of
Scripture and of the more ancient Fathers, Ministers, Communion Table,
Sacraments, then those words which are never used in the New. Testament, nor in
the ancientest Fathers, but by them purposely avoided, for fear of being
mistaken, by your own confession.

The same reason therefore that moved the blessed Apostles and Primitive
Fathers to abstain from those words, the same r^ason ^o^es us to do the like.

. 3.
Antiquus. But why have you left off any of those customs and ceremonies which
were used by the Fathers? what reason had you for that?

Antiquissimus. First, the same reason that Hezekiah had to break and abolish
the brazen Serpent, which had been of good use to the honor of God, and
edifying of men: but in his time was abused to be an instrument of Idolatry.

Secondly the same reason that S. Paul had, against the Agapae or Feasts of
Love, 1 Cor. 11.19, 20, 21, 22. For, (as your Rhemists acknowledge upon that
place) at first the richer Christians made feasts (bringing store of meat and
drink to the Churches) to joy and cheer up themselves and the poor that
wanted, when they came to receive the holy Sacrament: which Feasts were called
Agapae, Feasts of Charity. These Feasts afterward through abuse, became
occasions of pride in them that had to bring, of contempt to them that had not,
of gluttony and drunkenness, yea, of rejecting the poor, and of the foremost,
devouring all without expecting one another. This occasioned Saint Paul's
reproof of them then: and the whole abrogation of them afterward.

August. epist. 119 ad Ianuar. cap. 19. See B. Morton. Appeal. lib. 1. cap. 3.
sect. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Thirdly, the same reason also that Saint Augustine had to complain of the
multitude of rites and ceremonies grievous and burdensome to the Church in his
time, which continually increased till our times, and with the mulitude and
painful or too careful observance thereof, much decayed the due observance of
the substantial points of Religion. As too many branches of the Vine, hinder
the fruitfulness; and therefore good husbands prune them off.

Fourthly, and finally, the same Reason which the Roman Church it self had, to
disuse or abolish many customs, traditions, rites and ceremonies formerly
used, whereby they justify us.

Antiquus. Name some of them I pray you.

. 4.
See B. Morton. Appeal lib. 2. cap. 25. sect. 10. and the Authors there
alleged. and Bellar. De Euch. lib. 4. cap. 28.
Antiquissimus. Our B. Morton delivers you a dozen at once, citing his Authors
and places of their books for them: (1) the threefold dipping in Baptism, in
memory of the Trinity, thought by Dionysius, Basil, Athanasius, Ierom, Austen,
Ambrose, to be an Apostolical tradition; now (says Binius and Canus)
abolished, and one dipping or sprinkling, thought sufficient by the common
consent of Divines.

(2) Removing the old custom of tasting honey in Baptism, spoken of by
Tertullian and Ierom.

(3) Of abrogating the ceremony of washing the feet, in Baptism, spoken of by
Saint Ambrose and Augustine, epist. 119. cap. 28.

(4) Decreeing also (in the Council of Trent, sess. 21. cap. 4) the
administration of the Eucharist unto Infants, (used six hundred years in the
Church) to be unnecessary and unfitting, Maldonat, comment. in Ioh. 6. Binius.

(5) ^he custom that it was not lawful to Baptize but only at Easter and
Whitsontide, is abrogated, be-because of the dangers of common life. Durand.

(6) Night vigils mentioned by Tertullian and Ierom, and praised by other
Fathers, forbidden to Women by the Council of Elliberis, to be in Churchyards:
and afterward in the Toletan and Tridentine Councels. Binius.

(7) The standing at public prayers, all the time betwixt Easter and
Whitsontide, decreed by the Nicene Council, and observed by the ancient
Fathers, as Saint Ambrose and Ierom witness, and counted an Apostolic
constitution: now have left no footsteps of it, Durand. Cassander.

(8) Washing of the bodies of the dead, used by the Ancients, mentioned by
Tertullian, Eusebius, and Gregory. Durand.

(9) The Feasts of Charity (called Agapae) mentioned in the Constitutions of
Clement, reproved by S. Paul to the Corinthians, but in other Churches long
continued, the Council of Laodicaea forbad; now they are forgotten. Bouius.

(10) The dispensing with an Apostolical Canon concerning the Consecration of
Bishops. Bell. Binius.

(11) The neglecting of the Wednesdayes and Fridayes Fast in the East Church,
(by the 68 Canon of the Apostles) or of Friday and Saturday in the West (by
Apostolic Constitution) mentioned by Clemens, Jgnatius. Epiphanius, Athanius
and others. Bouius.

(12) Of fourscore and four Canons of the Apostles, scarce 6 or 8 are
observed in the Latin Church, says Michael Medina; cited by D. Rainolds, These.
5.

Unto which I might add many other things, as 1. The times of prohibiting
marriage, much abridged. For by some ancient Councels (as namely that of
Laodicea, celebrated above twelve hundred years agone) there were three times
prohibited from the celebration of marriage (which the Church of England still
observes. Council. Laodice. cap. 25. Bellar. De Matrimonio. lib. 1. cap. 31..
Alterum imped. and. Ratio hujus. Council. Trident. session. 24. ca. 10
1 From Aduent to the Epiphany; 2 From Septuagesima, until a week after
Easter; 3 From the days of Rogation, until a week after Whitsontide.

But the late Council of Trent, has only continued the first entire: cut the
second shorter by 16 days (beginning with Lent, and ending a week after
Easter) and the third it has quite cut off.

Council. Trident. sess. 24. canon. 3.
2 The degrees prohibiting marriage, both enlarged and abridged. For, the
Council of Trent has this Canon; If any man say, that the degrees only
expressed in Leuiticus of consanguinity and affinity, do hinder the
contracting of Matrimony, and dissolve it being contracted: and that the Church
has not power to dispense in some of them, or constitute that more degrees may
hinder and dissolve: let him be Anathema.

Here is a change of Gods law, loosing where God has bound, binding where God
has loosed. And they accursed that grant not this power to the Roman Church.
Bellarmine de Matrimonio lib. 1. cap. 29. initio.
And here is a change of the Churches custom also. For Bellarmine adds,
Recte Catholica Ecclesia conjugia prohibuit olim vsque ad septimum, postea vero
vsque ad quartium gradum consanguinitatis and affinitatis. The Catholic
Church in former time rightly forbad marriage to the seventh degree; and
afterward to the fourth degree of consanguinity and affinity.

Council. Trid. sess. 21. cap. 3. and canon 1, 2, 3.
3 And yet the Church of Rome is bolder, even to change Christ's own Ordinance
and Institution of the Blessed Sacrament of his Body and Blood, denying the Cup
to the people, and accursing them that hold it necessary for the Laity;
although the whole Church used it above a thousand years together. And yet
they hold themselves to be one and the same Catholic Church that so long used
it.

In their opinion therefore, the abrogating or changing of traditions or
ceremonies (howsoever they declaime against Protestants for such matters) cuts
not men off from being of the same Church that used them.

Antiquus. Indeed, ceremonies are inventions of men, and therefore alterable by
the wisdom of the Church, as times place, and occasions require. And the
Church may ordain new ceremonies also, as Bellarmine teaches. lib. 2. de
effectu Sacramentorum cap 31,. tertia propositio, etc.

Antiquissimus. I let pass much superstitious and sacrilegious doctrine which
Bellarmine there utters, attributing almost as much to Ceremonies invented by
men, as to the Sacraments ordained by Christ. And I accept what is granted,
that being invented by men, they are alterable by men: and not being of the
substance of Religion the using or disusing of them makes no alteration or
difference in Religion.

Saint Augustine discoursing of the diversity of ceremonies and customs in
several Churches and Countries, tells a story of his mother Monica, Aug. epist.
118.
who coming to Milan, and finding that they fasted not upon Saturdayes, (as in
her country they did) was much disquieted in her mind (as at diversity of
Religion,) and knew not what to do: but she was resolved by Saint Ambrose,
Bishop of that City, that such things made no difference of Religion. When I
come to Rome (says he) I fast on the Saturday, when I am at Milan, I fast not.
So you to what Church soever you come, Ejus morem serua, si cuiquam non vis
esse scandalo, nec quenquam tibi. Observe the custom of that Church, if you
will not be offensive to others nor others to you.

Here observe, Rome and Milan, two great Cities in one Country, both in Jtaly,
yet had several customs and ceremonies, which to some weak consciences,
through ignorance might be offensive, yet were they all of one Religion in
substance; and for rites or ceremonies, at that time Milan was no more bound to
obey Rome, then Rome to obey Milan.

. 5.
As your Rhemists insinuate Annot. upon Romans 11. ver. 4.
But now if a man be not in all points (though never so small) nay in all
traditions, rites, and ceremonies conformable to the ancient Church, or to the
Church of Rome late before Luthers days; you count him not of the same
Religion.

One of your idle Pamphleters (idle for the matter he brings, but too to busy
in lying and railing, one W. G. (ashamed belike to add his full name)
professor in Divinity, writes a Book, points and repoints it, Permissu
superiorum 1619. entitled, A Discovery of shifts, etc. His principal matter
is to show, that before Luthers time, No man was ever of the Protestants
Religion: His reason, because all men held one point or other, at least
tradition, rite, or ceremony different from the Protestants, which he labors
to show by running through a great number of Instances, not considering, that by
the same reason it might be as well prooved, that never any man until the late
Council of Trent was of the Papists Religion.

For he asks thus: First, was Dionysius Areopagita, a Protestant? and
answers, No, for he maintained traditions, spoke of Altars, places
sanctified, rasu^e of Priests, burning of incense at the Altar, etc.

Answer. To omit that many doubt, and some censure the books imputed to him to
be counterfeits, (as Casetan, Valla, Erasmus, Possevin, and Bellarmine: see
Censura librorum Roberti Coc. page.) I ask again, was Dionysius Areopagita, a
Papist? No: for he has many things of the Eucharist, which condemn Private
Masses, Communion under one kind only, and Transubstantiation. See C^talogus
testium veritatis lib. 1.

Secondly, Was Papias (scholar to Saint John Evangelist) a Protestant? No,
says W. G. for he defended Traditions, and Peter's primacy, and Romish
Episcopality.

How then? was he a Papist? No, say we, for he taught such traditions as
Papists condemn, as namely the error of the Chibiasts or Millenaries, and
said it was a Tradition delivered from the Apostles, Baronius anno 118. n. 5.
etc. and n. 2.

Thirdly, was Ignatius a Protestant? No, for he approved traditions, limbus
patrum merits, and the real presence. Not so, But was he then a Papist? no,
for Protestants cite him against Transubstantiation, and Communion under one
kind; private Masses, and the Popes supremacy. Catalogus testium, lib. 2. and
appendice page, 2087. Bellarmine re^ects the Greek copies of his works being
against the Papists.

Fourthly, was Tertullian a Protestant? no for he hold the Montanists heresy.
Was he a Papist then? no, for the same reason, also he writes sharply against
the Popes budding supremacy, and against Transubstantiation, and for the
sufficiency of Scriptures to confute heretics, See Catal. test. lib. 3.

Fifthly, was Saint Cyprian a Protestant? no, says he, for he was a Montanist
also; was he then a Papist? no, for Papists condemn Montanists as well as
Protestants also, he equals all the Apostles with Peter, reiects the popes
authority and infallibility, gives sentences against Purgatory, acknowledges
two Sacraments only, has much against Transubstantiation, and denial of the
Cup. See the allegations out of him in Catalogo testium lib. 3.

Sixthly, was Jrenaeus a Protestant? no, for he defended free will so far,
that Protestants count it Pelagianisme. So did many other Fathers, Hilary, and
Epiphanius: yea, Chrysostom, Cyril, Ambrose, Theodoret.

What then? were all these papists? No, for though in heat of exhortation they
gave sometimes too much to free will, and in hatred to the Maniches and
Stoicall Christians that held such a fatal necessity of men's actions as took
away man's guiltiness of sin: yet in their more moderate and settled
writings, they taught as the Protestants do. August. contra Iulianum l'clag.
lib. 1. cap. 2.
Pelagianis nondum litigantibus, Patres securius loqu^bantur; says Saint
Augustine, Until the Pelagians began to wrangle, the Fathers took less heed
to their speeches.

But such their speeches, The Papists themselves condemn. Maldonate in John,
6.44. page 701. Pererius in Romans 9. nu. 33 page 1001. Sixtus Senensis. Tolet,
etc. See D. Mortons Appeal. lib 2. cap. 10. sect. 1, 2.. 4. and. sect. 3.. 7.
lit. n. See also my Chapter of Free Will.

. 6.
I might run through the rest of this W. G. his allegations, and show his
vanity and folly, in shooting such arrows against the Protestants, as being
retorted and shot back again, do mortally and unrecoverably wound his own
cause.

But I will leave off following his order, and add a few more; and by occasion
of this last, I ask of Saint Cyprian, Augustine, Fulgentius, Gregory Nyssen,
Gregory the Great, Anselm, Bernard, were they Papists o^ of the now
Roman-Catholicke Religion? No, for they taught concerning Free Will, just as
the Protestants teach, Morton ib. sect. 3.

Was Athanasius a Papist? no, for he reckons the number of Canonical books,
otherwise then Papists do, and magnifies them for their perspicuity, certainty
and sufficiency, as Protestants do: he teaches Justification by faith only;
writes against adoration and prayer to Saints, and Idolatrous worship of
Images: shows the custom of the Church in his time, to minister the Communion
in both kinds, and not on Altars but tables of wood, writes to the Bishops of
Rome, as his brethren and equals: gives reasons why the dead cannot appear
again to men, for fear of teaching lies, and errors, and because the good
are in Paradise, the evil in Inferno.

He counts marriage of Bishops, a thing indifferent, and used indifferently in
his time, and it appears by his books, that in his time the sacrifice of the
Mass, and the five new Sacraments were not known.

Was Saint Ierom a Papist? no, for he earnestly maintains the sufficiency
and excellency of the Scriptures; and exhorts married Women, Virgins, and
Widows, diligently to study them; he teaches Justification by Gods mercy,
and beats down man's merits: he writes sharply against free will without
Gods grace against purgatory, against transubstantiation and orall manducation:
he taxes the popes supremacy, and the Clergies lives: and for his sharp
writing he was feign to fly from Rome. See Catalogus testium lib. 4.

Was Gelasius (your own Bishop of Rome) a Catholic of your now Roman
Religion? no, for he condemdemned (as sacrilegious) your now-halfe Communion
(without wine) and severely commanded either to minister both the kinds, or
neither to the people. The necessity whereof now you call heresy. De
consecrat. did. 2. comperimus.

Was S Gregory (your own Bishop likewise, long after Gelasius) of your Church,
and now-present Religion? no for he taught the sufficiency and perfection of
the Scripture, rejected the Apochryphall books from the Canon, held the
reading of Scripture profitable for all men; Justification by faith, and not by
inherent righteousness, wrote against man's merit, and for the glory of Gods
grace and mercy; he forbad the worshipping of Images: and wrote sharply
against the title of universal Bishop, as a badge of Antichrist, or his
forerunner, etc.

And (for conclusion of this point) were the other two greatest Doctors of the
Church, Saint Chrysostom, and S. Augustine, of your present Religion? No, for,

Saint Chrysostom Homil. De Lazaro. and passim alibi.
extolled the authority, dignity, sufficiency, perspicuity, necessity, and
commodity of the Canonical Scriptures, and exhorted Laymen, and Tradesmen to
get them Bibles, and read the Scriptures at home, and that man and wife,
parents and children, should reason and confer of the doctrine thereof. In 4.
cap. Ephesians. hom. 10.
He taught that the Church of God was nothing but a house built of our souls,
and the stones thereof were some more illustrious and fair polished, other
more obscure and of less glory: In Matthew. hom. 55. and 83. and Sermon. de
Pentecost. tom. 3.
that the Church was built not super Petrum, but super Petram, not upon Peter,
but Peter's confession, (that Christ was the Son of God, the Savior of the
world:) In Matthew. hom. 35. ad cap. 20.
That whosoever desired primacy upon earth, should find confusion in heaven,
and not be reckoned amongst the servants of Christ: In 2 Thessalonians. homil. 3, and 4.
That Antichrist would command himself to be honored as God, and fit in the
Church: that he would invade the Roman Empire, and strive to draw to himself
the Empire or Rule of God and men. And though he extolled the power of
free will in the Regenerate, and exhorted all men to use the power they had:
yet he In Genesis hom. 29.
persuaded the godly to acknowledge it to proceed from Gods grace: and taught
all men, that sin entering lost their liberty, corrupted their power, and
brought in servitude: and Hom. de Adam.
that without Gods grace man could neither will, nor do any thing that was
good; that Hom. 1. in Acta.
as they that die Purple, first prepare it with other colors, so God prepares
the cares of the mind, and then infuseth grace: that Hom. 1. dom. Advent.
before sin, we had free will to do good, but not after: that it was not in
our power to get out of the Devils hand, but like a ship that had lost his
stern (which guided it) we were driven whither the tempest would, even
whither the Devil would drive us, and except God by the strong hand of his
mercy did loose us, we should continue ti^l death in the bonds of our sins In
R^m. ^om. 5. and 17.
That the Law would justify man, but cannot; for no man is justified by the
Law, but he that wholly fulfils it, and that is not possible to any man. In 2
cor. hom. 11.
He that must be justified by the law, must have no spot found in him, and such
an one cannot be found, but only Jesus Christ; In Romans hom. 5 and 17.
therefore he only has attained the end and perfection of the Law; Hom. 7. in
3. cap. ad Romans
as soon as man believes in him, he is presently instified. Consequently, In
Psalm. 142. Ne intres in iud^cium.
man can have no merits to trust unto, there is nothing properly his own, but
sin. In 1. cap genesis hom. 2 and sermon. de fide and de lege not.
Yet faith wrought in us by Gods grace, will be fruitful in good works, or
else it is a dead faith and unprofitable.

He taught Hom. 4. de penitentia. and hom. 12. in Mat. and in 15. de muliere
Chananaea.
prayer to God only, and directly; without running about to Patrons or
Intercessors, Mediators, Porters (naming James, John, Peter, and the Quire of
Apostles) take (says he) repentance for thy companion, to supply the place of
an advocate, and go to the head fountain it self.

Of the Eucharist (though he have many rhetorical and hyperbolicall speeches
in the vehemence of his moving the people to humble devotion; as, Thou see,
touchest, eatest Christ; and he suffers teeth to be fastened in his flesh,
and to be made red with his blood: which Bellar de Euchar. lib. 1. cap. 2..
quinta Regula and de Missa l^b. 2 cap 10.. ad illad. Valentinian. tom. 4. in
Thom. disp. 6. quest. 4. punct. 3. quare non est assentiendum Alano.
Jesuits confess cannot be understood properly, without impiety: but
tropically of the signs only, not of the body which cannot suffer of us, nor
be violated: yet) he has much against Transubstantiation; for he says, Hom.
de Eucharist.
The Table is furnished with mysteries, thou see bread and wine, but think
not that you receive the divine body, of a man. Ne putetis quod accipiatis
divinum corpus ex homine. And, Hom. 11. Op. imperfect. in Mat.
in his vasis sanctificatis, non est verum corpus Christi, sed mysterium
corporis ejus continetur. In these hallowed vessels there is not contained the
true body of Christ, but the mystery of his body. Also, Hom. 83. in Matthew.
if thou wast incorporeall, he would have given to thee his incorporeall gifts
naked: but because thy soul is joined to a true body (in sensibilibus
intelligenda tibi traduntur) in things sensible, are delivered unto thee things
to be understood. Again, Hom. 7. in 1 Cor.
An vn^eleeuer seeing the water of Baptism, thinks it is simply water: but I,
do not simply see what I see but I consider the purging of the soul by the
spirit, and the burying, resurrection, sanctification, justice, redemption,
adoption, inheritance, and Kingdom of heaven. For I judge them not by sight,
but by the eyes of my mind. He writes also Jn 1 Cor. hom. 27.
against private Communions, when people do not communicate (called now
private Masses) and Hom. Oportet. haereses esse.
half Communions, without ministering the Cup to the people.

Against Purgatory after this life, he says, In Matthew. hom. 4. and hom. 3. de
poenit, and hom. De Lazaro.
He that washes not away his sins in this life, shall find no comfort
afterward: Hom. 7 in Matthew.
as when a ship is sunk, or a man dead, neither can the Saylor, nor Physician
help it. When we are once gone, nothing is lest to satisfy for us. Homilia 2.
de Lazaro.
while we are here, we have fair hopes: but being once departed, it is not in
us to repent afterward, or to wash off our sins.

Saint Augustine writes fully and plentifully Aug. De vnitate Ecclesiae, and
alibi p. s^^n.
for the perfection and sufficiency of the Scriptures to determine where the
true Church is, and to end all Controversies, and De doctr. christ. lib. 2. ca
9.
plain enough to ground all necessary doctrines upon: De Bapt. contra
Donatistas. lib. 6. cap. 3.
that the Church to which the promises of grace and salvation belong, is the
company of faithful believers and that wicked men do not belong unto it: Ib.
lib. 7 cap. 51. and de vnitatate Eccl. cap. vlt and alibi saepe.
they may be in the Church, but not of the Church, in the house, but belong
not, ad compagem domus.

Retract. lib. 2. cap. 21.
That Peter was not the Rock wherein the Church is built, but Christ, In psalm.
44. and psalm. 60. and
and that we are Christiani, not Petriani, etc. the Rock was Christ, De verb.
Dom. sermon. 13. in mat. and tract. 124.
and upon the Rock which Peter confessed (saying, Thou art Christ the Son of
the living God) I will build my Church; Upon me, not upon thee. They that
would be built upon men, said, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas,
that is, Peter; but others that would not be built super Petrum but super
Petram, said, Ego sum Christi. Quomodo nec in Pauli, sic nec in Petri, sed in
nomine Christi, vt Petrus aedificaretur super Petram, and non Petra super
Petrum.

He writes that Tract. 118. and 114. in Joan. and libro quaest vet. and novi
test. quaest. 93.
the Keys of binding and loosing were not given only to Peter alone, but in
him to the whole Church, that all the Church might have power to bind and
loose sins.

Of Antichrist, he says, De civ. Dei l b. 20. cap. 19.
He shall sit in the Church of God, and In psalm. 9.
extol himself above all that is worshipped, and come by wicked arts to that
vain height and domination: and De civ. Dei. ibid.
when the Roman Empire is taken away, then Satan by Antichrist shall work
mirabiliter, sed mendaciter, with lying wonders.

Saint Augustine reports and applauds Saint Cyprians speech to the Donatists,
thus: De Baptismo contra Donatist.
None of us makes our selves Bishop of Bishops, nor does by tyrannical terror
compel his fellows to the necessity of obedience: seeing every Bishop for the
license of his liberty and power, has his proper judgment, as if he could
not be judged of another, as himself cannot judge another, but we must all
expect the Judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ, who alone has power, both to
set us in the government of his Church, and to judge of our acts. A doctrine
plain against the popes supremacy.

Against Transubstantiation (though Bellarmine cite him for the truth of
Christ's body delivered, which we deny not) he writes plainly; delivering a Rule
how to know figurative from proper speeches in the Scriptures: De doctrine
Christiana lib 3. cap. 15. and ib.
that When a precept seems to command a foul or wicked act, or forbid a good
and profitable thing, then it is to be taken figuratively: He gives this for an
example; Except you eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood,
you, have no life in you: this in the proper sense seems a foul and wicked
thing: figura est ergo: Therefore it is a figurative speech. And he defines
Sacraments to be Contra Maximinum. lib. 3. cap. 22. Sacramenta sunt signa,
aliud existentia, aliud significantia.
signs, being one thing, and signifying another.

And of this Sacrament he says, In psalm. 98. Non hoc corpus quod videtis
manducaturi estis, and bibituri illum sanguinem quem fusuri sunt qui me
crucisigent. Sacramentum aliquod commendavi vobis.
You shall not eat this body which you see, nor drink this blood which they
will shed which crucify me. I commend a certain Sacrament thereof unto you.
And he often beats upon this, that though wicked men do eat the sign and
Sacrament, yet none but the worthy receivers do eat rem Sacramenti, the very
Body of Christ Sermon. 11. de verbis Apostoli
. And Manducabant illi Panem dominum, Judas panem domini contra dominum: illi
vitam, ille paenam Tract. 59. in Iohannem. See also Tract. in Joan. 11. and 13.
and 26. and De civ. Dei. lib. 21. cap. 25. De Doctp. christiana lib. 3. cap. 9.
epist. 23. ad Bonifacium and epist. 57. De Trinitate lib. 3. cap. 10. Contra
Adimantum cap. 12. Contra Faustum lib. 20. cap. 21. and alibi passim.
.

He held two Sacraments of the new Testament, only Epistola 118. and Libro 3.
de doctrina Christiana. cap. 9.
Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

Calvin Calvin. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 17. 28.
, Peter Martyr, and the rest of the Protestants count Saint Augustine wholly
theirs, as did Berengarius before them, by Bellarmines confession Bellar. de
Euchar. lib. 2. cap. 24. initio.
.

Saint Augustine condemns Image Worship. Follow not (says he De moribus
ecclesiae lib. 2. cap. 34. and De civ. Dei. lib. 8. cap. 27. See Vines comment
upon it.
) the company of ignorant men, who in true Religion are superstitious,
worshippers of Sepulchers and pictures, which customs the Church condemns,
and daily labors to correct. And he says De fide and symbolo. cap. 7.
Contra Adimantum cap. 13.
, It is great wickedness to place the Image of God in Churches. And that to
worship the Prototypon (sampler, or thing resembled) by an Image resembling it
(as the Heathen excused their Idolatry) is an absurd, servile, and carnal
thing De doctr. Christiana. lib. 3. cap. 7, 8, 9. See in psalm. 113 and epist.
49.
. And he writes against Pilgrimages for Religion. Sermon. 3. De Martyribus.

Of Purgatory (a thing which came to be imagined in his days) in some places
Encherid. cap. 69. and de octo quaest. Dulci^ij qu. 1. De side over. cap. 16.
De civ. Dei. l^b. 21. cap. 26.
he doubts whether there be any such place or no: but in many places he
gives sound reasons to overthrow it. The Catholic Faith (says he Contra
Pelag. Hypogn. lib. 5.
) resting upon Divine authority, believes the first place, the Kingdom of
Heaven: and the second Hell: -- a third we are wholly ignorant of: Yea, we
shall find in the Scriptures, that it is not. De pecc. merit. and remiss. lib.
1. cap. 27. and lib. 24. De civ. Dei. c. 15. and sermon. 232. de tempt.
There is no middle place, he must needs be with the Devil, that is not with
Christ. De verbis Apostoli sermon. 18.
There are two habitations (after death) Vna in igne aeterno, altera in regno
aeterno. And, Homil. 5.
when we are passed out of this world, no satisfaction remains. And, Epist.
80.
wherein every man's own last day finds him, therein the worlds last day will
hold him: For, such as in this day every one dies, such in that day he shall
be judged. Again, Epist. 54.
there is no other place then in this life to correct our manners: for after
this life every one shall have that which in this life he sought to himself.
For, De verbis Dom. sermon. 37.
Christus suscipiendo paenam, and non suscipiendo culpam, and culpa^ delevet
and panam. Christ by taking upon him our punishment, and not taking our sin,
has put away both our sin and punishment. He that holds these things, cannot
hold Purgatory.

In brief therefore, In all these former points: And furthermore, against
Free Will, and for Gods grace: against Man's merits, and justification by our
inherent righteousness: and for Justification by Gods free mercy, and Christ's
merits only: for the doctrine of faith and good works: for prayer to God
alone, and by the only Mediator Jesus Christ: against the adoration and
invocation of Angels and Saints departed: and other the most necessary and
profitable points of Theology, Saint Augustine was no Papist, but wholly and
entirely of the Protestants Religion.

..7
Antiquus. How can this possibly be so? when (you see) our Catholics do
continually cite Saint Augustine, Chrysostom, and the rest of the Fathers, for
confirmation of their doctrine, and against yours?

Antiquissimus. They may, first cite books under the names of the Fathers,
which the Fathers never wrote: secondly, they may corrupt the Fathers, putting
in or out, words or phrases, to alter their sense, and speak contrary to their
meaning: thirdly, they may by glosses and interpretations wrest the sentences
which they find in them, to mean otherwise then they intended: and fourthly,
they may alter the state of the questions betwixt us, and then allege the
Fathers against their own fancies, not against our Doctrine. And by these
means they may cite and multiply the Fathers names in show against us, but in
truth nothing to the purpose. And thus they do.

First, they allege many books and writings, which were not written by those
holy learned Fathers whose names they bear. For examples.

Our Bishop Jewel propounding 27 Articles which the Church of Rome holds at
this day: for confirmation of any one of which, if any man living could show
him any sufficient sentence of any old Catholic Doctor, Father, or general
Council, etc. within 600 years after Christ: he would yield and subscribe.

See Casaubon. Prolegom.. Spectare ad.
Master Harding undertaking to answer, alleged for ancient Doctors and
Fathers; The Constituions Apostolical of Clemens, Abdias, Dionysius
Areopagita. The decretall Epistles of ancient Popes, Amphilochius, and such
like: which are all censured by their own learned men, for counterfeit
writings, unjustly attributed to the Reverend Authors, whose names they bear.
Observe them well.

Clements Apostolic Constitutions are cited also by the Rhemists Rhemes Test.
annot. in Luc. 4.1
to prove Lent Fast to be as ancient as the Apostles times: and by Bellarmine
Bellar. lib. 1. de clericis c. 12.
, for the antiquity of Ecclesiastical Orders: Also See Bellarmines several
Treatises of these things.
for vows of continency; for prayer for the dead; for holy water, for
reservation of the Sacrament, for mixing Wine and Water in the Sacrament, for
confirmation, etc. And yet Saint Hierom (a great searcher of Antiquities) knew
not these Constitutions of Clement. And 227 Fathers in the Trullan Council
rejected them, as corrupted writings. And so does Baronius anno 32. n 18.19. et
anno 102 9.
Baronius in his Annals.

Abdias is rejected for a counterfeit by Baron. an. 31. n. 18. and 51. n. 51.
Baronius, by Possevin. Apparat sac verbo Seuerus Sulp.
Possevine, by Bellar. De bonis operib. in particulari. lib. 2. cap. 24.
Bellarmine; yea by Sixtus Senens. Bibl. lib. 2. Apostolorum.
Paul the fourth Bishop of Rome, says Sixtus Senensis.

Dionysius Areopagita, is not author of the books that go under his name,
says Caietan. comment. in Act. 17
Cajetan, as also Valla. and Eras. in act. 17.
Valla, and Erasmus, and Photius apud Possevinum Apparat. sac. verbo Photius.
Photius, Bellarmine Bellar. lib. 2. de confirm. cap. 7
doubts of them, Yet those books are cited by the Rhem. in Luc. 21.19.
Rhemists, for the sacrifice of the Altar: and by See Cook cens^ra page 50.
Bellarmine, for Invocation of Saints, and for Purgatory, and to prove the
book of Wisdom to be Canonical, and for the form of Monastical profession.

The Decretall Epistles, which are said to be written by more then thirty of
the first Bishops of Rome, which lived in the first three hundred years (set
down in the late Editions of the Tomes of the Councels of Crab and Binius,
printed anno 1606.) and often cited for the popes supremacy, and in other
Controversies, and greatly magnified by some popes: yet are plainly found to be
counterfeits, both by many reasons, and by the Romists own confessions.

Reasons, first, the barbarous Latin, or rather Lead of their style, most
unlike the elegant style of that Age.

Secondly, the likeness of the style in them all, which proves them to be all
of one man's writing; and that in a far more barbarous Age.

Thirdly, the scriptures in them alleged after Ieroms Translation, which
Translation was not made, nor in use of d^uers h^ndred years after. For the
last of these Bishops dyed before Ierom was borne Baronius, says the last of
these Bishops, dyed anno 333. and Ierom was born anno 342. See conference of D.
Rainolds and Heart, chap. 8. divis. 3. and D. Field. church. book 5. chap. 34
and 42.
.

Fourthly, neither Eusebius in the East, nor Ierom in the West (after search of
al libraries, to furnish their histories and memorialls) do any where mention
these Epistles.

Fifthly, Nether were they ever spoken of, or alleged in the tough
Controversies betwixt the Bishops of Rome, and the Bishops of Africa,
concerning Appeals to Rome, which Controversies, these Epistles would have
clearly ended, if they had been at that time extant, showed, and approved.

Beside all this, the Romish Doctors themselves account them no better then
corrupted writings, or suppositious. So their own Cardinals, Cusanus De
concordia Cathol. lib. 3. cap. 2.
Cusanus, Bellar. de Romano Pontif. lib. 2. cap. 14.
Bellarmine, and Baron. anno 265. n. 6, 7.
Baronius find them: and Conlius annot. in did. 16. c. septuaginta.
Contius utterly condemns them as false.

Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium, and the Narration of Saint Basils life going
under his name, gloriously cited by Master Harding. art. 1. divis. 33.
Harding, to prove private Masses, and by Bellar. de confirm. cap. 5.
Bellarmine, to prove confirmation a Sacrament, and by Cosler. in Enchiridio.
Costerus the Jesuit, for the Real presence: yet is rejected as false, by
Baron. anno 378. n. 10. and anno 363. n. 55. Possevin. Apparat. sac. verbo
Amphilochius. Bellar. lib. de script. eccles. ad ann. 380.
Baronius, and by Possevine; yea, and by Bellarmine himself.

To avoid infiniteness, I will insist upon Tracts falsely imputed to Saint
Augustine. Bellarmine in one place lib de script. eccles. ad annum 420.)
amongst many others reckons these: 1 liber de Eccl. dogmat. 2 lib. de Fide ad
Petrum. 3 lib. de mirabilibus scripturae. 4 lib. de spiritu and anima. 5 lib.
viginti vnius sententiarum. 6 lib. de salutaribus documentis. 7 lib.
hypognosticon. 8 lib. de Predestinatione and gratia. 9 The Epistles to
Boniface, and of Boniface to Austen. 10 Explicatio Apocalypsis 11 Some Sermons,
De verbis Domini. 12 Sermones ad Fratres in Eremo, which also Baronius reiects
Baronius anno 382. n. 26. and anno 385. n. 12.
among many other. Also,

13 Epistol. ad Cyrillum, de gestis and obitu Hieronymi, cited by Bunderius for
invocation of Saints, and by Peresius, for choice of meats: is not Saint
Austens, says Bellarmine De script. Eccles. ad annum 390.
and Baronius Baronius an. 420. n. 46.
.

14 De spiritu and anima (cited by Turrian, to prove that Saints in heaven
hear the prayers of the living, and by the Colonienses for Invocation of
Saints;) is not Saint Austens, say Trithem. de script. eccles.
Trithemius, Louan. in censura in tom. 3.
Theologi Lovanienses, and Delriu^ disquis mag. lib. 5. cap. 26.
Delrius.

15 Sermones de tempore sermon. 2. cited by Bellar. for the real presence: sermon.
55. for Canonical hours: sermon. 60. and 62. for satisfaction to God by
fasting: sermon. 124. and 142. for Peter's primacy: and sermon. 226. cited by the
English of Doway, to prove the book of Tobias Canonical: and sermon. 228. and
229. cited by Serarius, to prove the book of Judith Canonical: and sermon. 244.
cited by Sonnius, art. 3. for invocation of Saints, etc. These Sermons de
tempore, were not written by Saint Augustine, say Erasmus, and Martin Lipsius.
The Louan Divines reject 48 of them, and suspect all the rest but 47. so that
48 are counted plain bastards and 145 doubted.

16 De vera and falsa poenitentia (cited in the Tridentine Catechism, for
auricular confession, Cathechis. Trident. fol. 320.
and by Alan. defens. purgator. cap. 1^.
Alan and others, for Purgatory) rejected by Erasmus Erasm. cens. sura in hunc
libruus.
, and the Lovanienses censura in Append. tom. 4.
Divines of Lovan, and Trithemius de script. Eccles.
Trithemius, and Bellar. lib. de Script. Eccles. ad annum 420.
Bellarmine, and many others.

17 De quaestionibus vet, and novi testamenti, cited by Turrian, for Confess.
Aug. lib. 4. c. 9. sec. 11.
Priests vestments, and by Dial. 1. c. 13.
Cope, and the Annot. in Matthew. 17.27.
Rhemists, for Peter's primacy: and by Dial 1. c. 14.
Cope, and Euchir. c. 19.
Eckius, for the single life of Priests: This book (says Bellar. de gratia
primi hominis cap. 3. and lib. 1. de effectu sacram. c. 10. and lib. de script.
eccles ad. an. 420 and lib. 1. de missa cap. 6.
Bellarmine,) is not Augustines, nor the work of any Catholic man, (for
which he shows great reasons,) but of some Heretic, who teaches many
things against the faith, and against Augustine. So says also Angelus Roccho,
Espencaeus, The Divines of Lovain, Alfonsus de Castro, Maldonatus, Salmeron,
Azorius, Leusaeus, Velosillus, Penerius, and Harding, as they are alleged by
Robert Cook, in Censuraquorundam scriptoru^ veterum, aedit. Londini 1623. who
adds these words: Here I must in few words meet with your conscience, you
Pontificians, and especially with yours o Turrian, o Harding, o Bellarmine. I
demand of thee Turrian, why did thou write. Jn praesatione confess.
Augustini.
Be it so, that all are not Augustines books, which have Augustines name
inscribed, yet surely most of them are of Saint Augustines equals, and plainly
all of them are the works of learned and godly men? when it is plain by this
very book, the Author was an Heretic, and by the confession of your own
brethren, a blasphemous and wretched man. I demand of thee Harding, with what
face could thou allege those questions under Saint Augustines name for the
primacy of the Pope? which elsewhere thou did confess was none of
Augustines. I demand of thee Bellarmine, with what forehead could thou
reckon up the Author of these questions Bellar. de Romans Pontif lib. 1. cap. 25.
among the 24 Fathers which thou comparest to the 24 Elders in the Apocalypse,
while thou fightest for thy pope? since elsewhere thou have written plainly,
that neither Augustine, nor any Catholic man, but an heretic was the author
of these questions. May we not truly say here, Frons Meretricis facta est
vobis? you have the forehead of an whore and cannot blush! Ier. 3 3 Thus said
Mr. Cook out of his just indignation for this one book. And we may say the
same of many more.

To reckon up all that is falsely fathered upon S. Augustine alone, would fill
a good volume, says Trithemius Trithem. de script. eccles. Aug.
. And the like may be said of S. Chrysostom, Jerome, and other Fathers. Let
this taste which I have given you, suffice, and thereby guess at the rest. If
you desire to see more of S. Augustine, you may read Paulus Langius in Chronico
Citizensi, anno 1259. And Erasmus epistle ad Archiepisc. Toletanum Parisijs
1531. And li. 3 de methodo concionandi. If of all the Fathers; read Mr.
Perkins Problem, but especially Mr. Cooks censure aforenamed. And D. Mortons
apologia Catholica pars 2. l. 2. c. 1. and seq.

. 8.
2 In the books which the ancient Fathers, and other learned Authors have
written, much intolerable corruption has been used.

Lodovicus Vives Vives Comm. in August. De civ. Dei. lib. 22. cap. 8.
upon one Chapter of Saint Augustine says, In hoc capite non dubium quin multa
sunt addita, velut^ declarandi gratia, abijs qui omnia magnorum autorum scripta
spurcis suis manibus contaminabant. It seems, in that long tract of time, when
all books were in such men's hands, they were shamelesly bold to corrupt them.
For Viues speaks of the generallity, Omnia; and of their sauciness, to meddle
with magnorum autorum scripta; and of their wickedness contaminabant; and of
their beastliness spurcis suis manibus. No doubt (says he) but many things
were added to this Chapter (of Saint Augustine) by them which with their
unclean hands, defiled or corrupted all the writings of great authors. This
happily was then a work only of darkness, done secretly and without
authority, (tares sown in the night, by wicked men among the good wheat of the
Fathers.) But now, the like is done by authority, avowed and commended. For
what else means this of Sixtus Sinensis in his Praefat. in ^pus Bibli.
Epistle Dedicatory to pope Pius Quintus? Tu Beatissime Pontifex expurgari
fecisti omnium autorum Catholicorum and praecipue Veterum Patrum scripta. Thou
most blessed Bishop have caused the writings of all Catholic authors, and
especially of The ancient Fathers to be purged or cleansed. For now are
dispersed to Printers certain books called Indices Expurgatorij, appointing
both in ancient and latter books, what must be put out which the authors wrote,
and what to put in which the authors wrote not; and so to print the books new
again (being so altered for the best advantage of the Church of Rome) to the
end, that men may not find in the new prints any thing against them (though it
be in the old) and yet many things for them (which the old and true books had
not) sometimes altering one word will serve the turn: See D. Morton Apologia
Cath. part. 2 l. 2. c. 17^ page 239.
as in stead of Non habent Petri hareditatem, qui Petri FIDEM non habent, to
print Non habent Petri haereditatem, qui Petri SEDEM non habent; the seat of
Peter, put for the faith of Peter, to tie salvation to Peter's seat, (Rome) in
stead of Peter's faith (Christ, confessed by Peter.)

Sometimes whole sentences, or pages, are altered or left out, etc.

See D. Featly Appendix to the Romish Fisher page 13. and seq and D. Mort. ibid.
Thus have they served Gratian, with his gloss, Cajetan, Ferus, Polydore,
Vives, Stapulensis, Stella, Arias Montanus, Masius, and hundreds of others
their own writers. As you may see in the Index Expurgatorius committed to the
Belgicke Printers 1571, and brought into the open light by Junius, anno 1586.
and another Index expurgatorius, printed at Madril in Spain, anno 1584. by
commandment of Gasper Quiroga, Cardinal and Archbishop of Toletum, and found
by the English in their voyage to Cales, and published to the world at Salmure,
anno 1601. And a third Index expurgatorius, ordained by the Cardinal of
Sandovall, and Roxas, printed, anno 1612. Beside others not yet so publicly
known.

Observed by Mr. Bedell in his letters to Mr. Wadsworth, page 100, 101.
Among many hundreds of examples of these corruptions, I give you these even in
the Fathers, for a taste. Pope Pius the fourth, called Paulus Manutius, (an
elegant Printer) from Venice to Rome, to print the Fathers without spots. In
his print of Saint Cyprians works, See B. Bilson. D^ffer. of subjection and
rebellion, first part. page 89 in 8.
In the Epistle De vnitate Eccl^siae, these words are added, [Et primatus Petro
datur] and afterward, these [Vnam cathedram constituit] and these also [and
Cathedra vna] And in the edition of Pamelius, another clawse is added, [Qui
cathedram Petri super quam fundata est ecclesia, deserit, etc.] though the
supervisors of the Canon law appointed by the Commandment of Gregory 13,
acknowledge that in eight copies of Cyprian found entire in the Vatican
Library, this sentence is not found. And had these passages been in old Cyprian
in Waldensis time, when he wrote for Peter's chair and primacy, he would not
have failed to use them being so pregnant for his purpose.

In the same edition of Manutius, Bedel. ibid. See D. Field. 5. cap. 42. fol.
vlt.
the Epistle of Firmilianus, Bishop of Cesaria, beginning Accepimus per
Rogatianum, is quite left out: (although Saint Cyprian thought it worthy his
translation and publication.) and good cause why. For that Bishop tartly
vilifieth the Bishop of Romes both place and person, far beneath that height
which they now assume. Firmilianns reproves the folly of Stephanus, that
boasting so much of the place of his Bishopric, and succession of Peter, be
stirred up contentions and discords in all other Churches: and bids him not
deceive himself; he is become aschismaticke, by separating himself from the
communion of the Ecclesiastical unity: for while he thinks he can separate
all from his Communion, he has separated himself only from all He taxes
him for calling Cyprian a false Christ, a false Apostle, and a deceitful
workman; which being privy to himself, that these were his own due,
preuentingly he objected to another. This Epistle is omitted in the new prints.
And thus grave Authors are shamefully curtalled and corrupted; when they speak
against the Pope and his doctrine, their tongues are cut out; and contrarily
words and sentences are foysted into their works, to make them seem to speak
for him, when they never meant it.

Franc. Iunius reports that he coming (in the year 1559.) to a familiar
friend of his, Junius in praesatione ante Indicem expurgatorium Belgicum a se
editum 1586
named Jews Sauarius, Corrector of a Print at Leydon, found him ouerlooking
Saint Ambrose Works, which Frellonius was printing. Whereof when Junius
commended the elegancy of the Letter and Edition, the Corrector told him
secretly, it was of all Editions the worst: and drawing out many sheets of
now-waste-paper, from under the Table, told him they had printed those sheets
according to the ancient authenticke copies: but two Franciscans had by their
authority cancelled and rejected them, and caused other to be printed and put
in their rooms, differing from the truth of all their own books, to the
great loss of the Printer, and wonder of the Corrector.

Gretzer. De iure prohib. libros lib. 2. cap. 10.
The Jesuit Gretzerus defends these doings; and writing of the purging or
altering of old Bertram, he says the Index has done him no injury, when it
has done him that favor, which is done to some of the ancients, as Tertullian
and Origin. Them and some others, though very ancient, Gratian quite cut off:
and the Church has this authority (says he) to proscribe whole books, or
any parts of them, great or small, Thus Gretzerus.

And indeed, of the two, it were better to proscribe or cut them off (as no
witnesses) then to corrupt and make them (false witnesses) to speak what they
thought not, or what is not true. But for a Particular Church, to proscribe or
corrupt all the witnesses that speak against her is intolerable.

See more in D. Morton. Apologia Catholica part. 2. lib. 2. c. 17
In the former point (of Counterfeits) the Children begot the Fathers: In this
point (of Corruption) the Children will teach the Fathers to speak, and alter
their testimonies and testaments at their pleasure.

. 9.
Index Expurg. Belg. fol. 4. and per Iunium edit. page 12.
3 By devised glosses, and witty (but wrong) interpretations, they wrest the
sentences of the Fathers to mean otherwise then the Fathers intended. This is
confessed by the Divines of the University of Doway; speaking of Bertrams
book: The title, Vt liber Bertrami presbyteri de Corp. and sang. Domini,
tolerari emendatus queat. Iudicium Vniversitatis Duacensis Censoribus probatum.
Then their judgment follows, with some reasons why they rather mend the book
then forbid it: lest the forbidding should make men more desirously seek it,
and greedily read it: and condemn the Church for abrogating all antiquity
that is alleged against them etc. Therefore they will use it as they do
other ancient Catholic books, which they deliver in these words. Cum^ in
Catholicis veteribus alijs pl^^^os feramus errores, and extenuemus, excusemus,
excog^^ ^^omento persaepe negemus, and commodum ijs seasum ^ffingamus, dum
opponuntur in disputationibus, aut in confactionibus cum aduersarijs: non
videmus cur non candem aequitatem and diligentem recognitionem mereatur
Bertramus, etc. that is, Seeing in other ancient Catholic writers, we bear
with many errors and we extenuate, excuse, and oftentimes by witty expositions
deny, and d^uise a commodious sense unto them, when they are opposed in
disputations and conflicts with our adversaries: we see no reason why Bertram
may not deserve the same equity and diligent recognition.

In this passage we may observe these things. 1 They acknowledge many errors
to be in ancient Writers, whom yet they account Catholics, and of their own
Church or Religion. (Otherwise they must have a small, and the Protestants a
large Church.)

2 That those opinions, though many (which they Call errors) make for their
adversaries (the Protestants) and are against Romes present doctrine, and so
objected by the Protestants.

3 How they avoid them: even by applying their Art, Wit, and Learning (Gods
talents committed to them) to obscure the Truth, corrupt the witness thereof;
deceive the simple, and gull the learned: making all believe that the ancient
Writers are nothing at all against them, but fully for them by perverting their
allegations to speak quite contrary to the Authors meaning. O wit and learning
wickedly bestowed! conscience seared! poor people miserably deluded!

And note further 4, the generality of this practice, Iudicium Vniuersitatis
Duacensis, Censoribus approbatum.
confessed, professed by a whole University at once, and delivered for their
deliberate judgment, and approved by the most learned and judicious censors,
appointed to that great office by the Hierarchy of the Church of Rome: and
though this practice was a long time closely carried in darkness; yet now it
is defended in the open light by Gretzer the Jesuit.

. 10.
4 The Roman Doctors may bring in whole Armies of witnesses on their side, when
they change the question, and prove what no body denies; Bedel. letters to
Wadworth page 109.
As when the question is whether the pope have a Monarchy over all Christians,
an uncontrollable Jurisdiction, an Infallible Judgment, etc. Bellar. de summo
Pontifice. lib. 2. cap. 15. and 16 answered by D. Field. lib. 5. cap. 35, 36.
Bellarmine alleges a number of Fathers, Greek and Latin, to prove only
that Saint Peter had a primacy of honor and authority, which is far short of
that supremacy which the popes now claim, and which is the question.

So, to prove the verity of Christ's Body and Blood in the Lords Supper; Bellar
de Eucharistia. l^b 2. toto.
Bellarmine spends the whole book in citing the Fathers of several Ages. To
what purpose? when the question is not of the truth of the presence, but of the
manner, whether it be to the teeth or belly (which he in a manner denies) or to
the soul and faith of the Receiver.

So also Bellarm. De Purgat. lib. 1. cap 6.
Bellarmine for the proof of Purgatory, alleges a number of Fathers (as
Ambrose, Hilary, Origin, Basil, Lactansius, Jerome,) but far from the purpose
of the question, and quite beside their meaning: for they spoke of the fire at
the end of the world, (as Sixtus Senens. Bibl. lib. 5. Annot. 171.
Sixtus Senensis says,) and Bellarmine cites them for the fire of Purgatory
before the end. Bellar^ib.
He cites many other Fathers also to prove Purgatory, because they commended
prayer for the dead, though he well knew, that proceeded from an S^arez in 3.
pa t, ^^ome qu. 59. art 6. disp. 57.. 1. page 1159.
error which they held, that men's souls were not judged till the last day,
nor rewarded or punished but reserved in some secret receptacles unto the
universal Judgment. Which opinion is as contrary to Purgatory (to confirm
which he alleges them) as it is to the truth, and therefore they are
guilefully alleged, beside their meaning.

Antiquus. These practices of alleging counterfeit book^s, under the reverend
names of ancient holy Fathers: and of corrupting the genuine writings of the
Fathers: and of avoiding or perverting their true meaning by any sophistical
interpretations; and of producing them in show to the purpose, but indeed,
beside the purpose and the true question: and by all or any of these means, to
seek the victory by obscuring the truth: are things to my heart and soul
odious and abominable. Neither should I believe that ever any such thing was
done by Men that profess Religion; but I should think it rather a malicious
slander devised by their adversaries, if I had not seen manifest proof of all
by their own books, laid open before mine eyes. But to let pass my just
grief of this, for the present: I must add, that --

CHAP. 3. Of the differences of the Fathers and Protestants and of their
contentions.
. 1. Many Fathers are confessed (by all sides) to have held some erroneous
opinions, which none are boun^ (...) receive: and yet in the substance of
Religion were good Catholic Christians, and our predecessors.

2 Many differences also are noted among Romish Doctors, which yet hinder them
not from being all accounted Catholics.

3 The differences among Protestants are nothing so great or many, as those
before noted of the Fathers, and the Romish, The especial one, about Christ's
presence in the Sacrament, is much less then it seems.

4 The Popes unwillingness to reform manifest abuses by the way of general
Councels, was the cause of all differences in Reformed Churches.

5 The Protestants contentions for Gods cause (as they take it) are nothing so
hot or troublesome, as the contentions of many ancient holy Fathers have been
about smaller matters.

. 1.
Antiquus.

YEt I cannot think, but in the undoubted and uncorrupted writings of the
Fathers, you find many things differing from the Doctrine of Protestants. It
cannot be otherwise, for the Protestants differ among themselves, the English
from the German, the German from the French, one Nation from another, and in
every Nation one company from another. It is possible the Fathers may disagree
from them all; but to agree with them all, that agree not among themselves, it
is impossible. Besides, the Protestants disagreements are so great, with such
bitter contentions, and virulent writing one against another, that they show
themselves not to be of the Church of God, which is a City at unity in it
self; and consists of men more mortifyed in their affections. I tell you
truly, these disagreements and contentions do mightily alienate men's
affections from your Religion.

Antiquissimus. Your objection has three parts, 1 Differences of the Fathers
from us; 2 Differences among our selves; 3 The hot contentions of Protestants
for these differences. Let me answer them in order.

First, I do ingenuously confess that the Fathers do in many things differ
from us: and no whit less from you. Though they were very Reverend learned and
holy men, yet still they were men, and had their errors and imperfections.
Your own men first discovered them (as Cham did his Fathers nakedness and
told his brethren, Genesis 9.) and we cannot hide them (though we gladly would,
and with Sem and Japhet, turn our backs on the^) neither is it now expedient,
when you so much vilify the Scriptures, and magnify the Fathers beyond their
right: and seek to draw the trial of the truth of Religion, rather then the
Riuelets of Fathers and Histories, then from the Fountain of the Scriptures.
We must therefore tell you more necessarily the^ willingly, what your own men
have said, of the Fathers slips and errors, wherein not only we, but
themselves are constrained for the truths sake to forsake them. And yet both
we and they account the same Fathers our predecessors for the other necessary
points of saving faith, which they soundly held, neither do we any way doubt
but that they are blessed Saints in Heaven.

Baron. an. 118. n. 2. Senous. Bibl. lib. 5. amos. 233.
1 Your Cardinal Baronius, and Sixtus Senensis, reckon up many Fathers that
held the Millenary error, to wit, Papias the scholar of John the Apostle and
Evangelist, Apollinarius, Irenaeus, Tertullianus, Victorinus, Lactantius,
Seuerus, Sulpitius, Justin Martyr, and many other Catholic Fathers, being
deceived by Papias, Bish. of Hierapolis (a man much reverenced for opinion of
his Holiness and learning, Baron. ib. n. 5. etc. and n. 2. citing Eusebius.
but yet homo ingenij pertenuis, says Eusebius) who taught it as a tradition
received from the Apostles, and grounded upon Revel. 20. v. 4, 5. The matter
was this, That there should be two Resurrections, the first of the godly, to
live with Christ a thousand years on earth, in all worldly happiness, before
the wicked should awake out of the sleep of death: and after that thousand
years, the second Resurrection of the wicked, should be to eternal death, and
the godly should ascend to eternal life. Baron. an. 373. n. 14.
This error continued almost two hundred years after it began, before it was
condemned for an heresy: and was held by so many Churchmen of great account,
and Martyrs, that Saint Augustine and Ierom did very modestly dissent, says
Senensis, ib.

Council. Carthag. in Cypriani operib.
2 Saint Cyprian held, that such as were baptized by heretics, should be
rebaptized, and so determined with a whole Council of African Bishops.
Contrary to the African Bishops in the time of Aurelius, and contrary to
Cornelius, Bishop of Rome, and the rest of the Italian Bishops. And yet was
Cyprian always counted a Saint, a true member of the Church, and an holy
Martyr. Bellar. de confir. lib. 2. cap. 7.. respond. ad. 1. Aug. cont. 2. ep.
Pelag. lib. 4. c. 8. Aug. de Bapt. contra Donatum. lib. 1. and l. 2.
Saint Augustine wrote strongly against his error, but reverently of his
person, calling him Beatissimum, and corona Martyrij gloriosissimum.

3 But was Saint Augustine free from all error himself? No, for he held
opinion that Infants dying unbaptized, were damned to the eternal torments of
hell fire; Which none (either Protestants or Papists) do hold at this day.

Also he held that the holy Eucharist ought of necessity to be administered to
Infants. Aug. epist. 106. and 28. Maldonat. in Joan. 6. ver. 53. page 719. Usher
Answ. to Irish Jesuit page 23. and D. Field lib. 3. cap. 9. who shows that
Cyprian and Tert. were of Aug. opinion Bellar. de Christo lib. 2. cap. 3.
Maldonate says also, this was the opinion of pope Innocent the first, and
that it was the use of the ancient Church, and that it prevailed in the Church
about 600 years. Bishop Usher shows that the Christians in Egypt, and
Aethiopia, hold that use still. The Church of Rome now doing otherwise, yet
will not yield that she has forsaken the Religion of Saint Augustine, Pope
Innocent, or the ancient Church, but glories that she is of the same Church
with them.

4 Eusebius Casariensis favored the Arrians: and Eusebius Nicomediensis was an
Arrian heretic, says Bellarmine.

5 Tertullian held some errors of the Montanists, Bellar. de Romans Pont. lib.
4. cap. 8 Sexto, Respondeo. Bellar. de Christo lib. 2. cap. 23.. Sed objicies.
Bellar. de verbo dei non scripto lib. 4. cap. 12. arg. tert.
we grant: but Bellarmine says plainly, he was a Montanist, and so reported
Pope Zepherinus to be.

6 Damascen did plainly deny the Holy Ghost to proceed from the Son, says
Bellarmine.

7 Bellarmine also says, that Irenaeus taught (by tradition) that Christ
suffered about the fiftieth year of his age: and contrarily Tertullian and
Clemens Alexandrinus taught that Christ suffered in his thirtieth year: both
which doctrines by traditions are false, says Bellar. ib.

8 Many Fathers held that the souls of the Just enjoy not the vision of God in
heaven, neither are blessed, Sixtus Senens. Bibl lib. 6. annot. 345. D. Field.
church. lib. 3. cap. 17. and lib. 5. Append. 1. p. 54.
but only in hope: and kept in some secret receptacles, until the general
Resurrection. Sixtus Senensis reckons many of them, and cites their words:
namely, Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, See D. Whites Defense.
page 57. in fine and D. Morton. Appeal. lib. 1. cap. 2. sect. 15. Bellar. de
Sanctor. beat. lib. 1. cap. 4. and 5.
Lactantius, Victorinus Martyr, Pope John 22. Ambros. Irenaeus, Theophylact,
Bernard.

Bartholomeus Medina, adds many more, to wit, Saint James his Leiturgie,
Origin, Prudentius, Chrysostom, Augustine, Theodoret, Are^as, Oecumenius.
Bellarmine labors to clear some of these, whom his fellows condemn.

upon this error, we find in some of the Fathers, prayers for the faithful
departed, as for them that were not yet judged, nor in heaven: which all
Papists grant to be an error, and yet allege the prayers grounded thereon to
confirm their purgatory out of which they say souls may be fetched, and sent
to heaven long before the general Judgment, contrary to these Fathers tenets.

Bellar. de Sanctor. beat. lib. 1. cap. 6.. Sunt tamen. and Sanctus A^ton.
9 Many Fathers also thought, The very Devils should not be tormented with the
pains of Hell, before the Judgment day. Bellarmine reckons these, Justin
Martyr, Irenaeus, Oecumenius, Epiphanius, Antonius apud Athanasium, Ambrose,
Ierom, Chrysostom, Augustine, Gregory Theodoret, Bernard, and some of them he
excuses favorably: but of Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Oecumenius, and
Epiphanius, he says, Non video quo pacto little sententiam ab errore possimus
defendere; I know not how to excuse their opinion from error.

Bellar. de Baptis. lib. 1. cap. 3. Praeter hos errores. Ierom. contra
Vigilantium. Greg. dialog. 4. cap. 33. Aug. de cura pro mortuis. Hugo de
sacram. fidei lib. 2. part. 16. cap. 11. See D. Field. church. lib. 3. cap. 9.
Gloss. in Esaias ^3. 1 Aug. de civ. dei. lib. 21. cap. 18. and 24. 2 Jb. cap. 1^.
and 25. 3 Ib. cap. 20. and 25.
10 Bellarmine also says, that many Catholics held a wrong opinion that it is
sufficient to baptize in the name of one of the three persons, contrary to the
custom of the Church. Yet of this error he reckons Saint Ambrose, Beda,
Bernard, Hugo de Sancto victore, Magister Sententiarum, and Pope Nicholas.

11 Saint Jerome and Saint Gregory (beside many others) do confidently affirm,
that Saints departed are present in all places, know all things, and work
wonderfully where their memories are solemnized. All which is modestly doubted
of and denied by Saint Augustine, Hugo de sancto victore, the author of the
gloss, and others, and not so held by the Papists at this day.

12 Origin held, that all the wicked, even the Devils also, should finally be
saved. 1 Others held, that not the Devils, but yet all men should finally be
saved: 2 Others, that only Christians, whether Heretics or Catholics. 3
Others, that only Catholics. All which Saint Augustine refutes, lib. 21. de
civitate Dei, and in his Enchiridion ad Laurentium cap. 67. Bellar. de Purg.
lib. 2. cap. 1. D. Field. lib. 3. cap. 9.
and says they are deceived, as men led by a humane kind of pity toward
sinners.

13 Many Fathers, seeing the Maniches and Stoicall Christians teach a fatal
necessity of men's actions, which takes away man's guilt of sin: in their heat
of opposition gave too much to freewill, and taught that a man before he was
drawn to grace by grace, Maldon in Joan. 6.44. page 701. Perer. in Romans 9. nu.
33. pa. 1001.
might merit grace. Four great learned Jesuits, Senensis, Tolet, Maldonate,
and Pererius, find this error (and reprove it) in Chrysostom, Cyril,
Theophilact, Euthymius, Ammonius, Photius, Ambrosius, Theodoret, Oecumenius,
and Hieronymus.

Maldonate and Pererius say plainly. See D. Morton. Appeal. lib. 2. cap. 10.
sect. 1, 2.. 4. and sect. 3.. 7. lit. n.
These Fathers opinion is affinis Pelagianorum errori, nere of kin to the
Pelagian error, and contrary to the Apostles doctrine.

Yet many Roman Doctors in this point, object these Fathers against us. But we
may well interpret their heat by more cool places of their own writings,
wherein they speak more soundly of the point: and we oppose many other learned
Fathers that are fully Protestants in the point, as Gregory Nyssen, Anselme,
Bernard, Gregory, Cyprian, Fulgentius, and Saint Augustine, Erasmus epist.
dedic. ante libros Hilarij cit^a Mortono ib.
who is counted the mouth of the Fathers to deliver the judgment of the
Church, who stood so much for grace, that the Schoolmen say, he yielded too
little to freewill.

Moderate Master Hooker says well; Hooker discourse. of Justification 26.
The heresy of freewill was a millstone about the Pelagians neck: shall we
therefore give sentence of death inevitable against all these Fathers in the
Greek Church, which being mis-perswaded, died in the error of freewill? He
adds in the Margen: Error convicted and afterward maintained, is more then
error. For though the opinion be still the same, yet the men are not the same,
after that the truth is plainly taught them. This clears these Fathers from
heresy, but not from error.

Out of these premises you may conclude these Consequents.

1 It is unjust for the Romish Doctors to bind us to the Fathers opinions,
when themselves refuse them.

2 It is not reasonable to make the Fathers tenets rules of our Doctrine, when
it is confessed on all hands, that the Fathers have in many things erred.
Bellar. lib. 3. de verbo Dei. cap. 19.. dices quid ergo.
Bellarmine says, who can deny that many of the ancient Fathers had the gift
of interpreting in great excellency? and that they were spiriuall? and yet it
is manifest that some of the chiefest of them have slipped in some things non
leuiter, not lightly.

Rossensis in responsione ad prooemium Lutheri. veritate septima in fine fol.
10. and 11.
Bishop Fisher answering Luthers objection, That the ancient Fathers have
sometimes erred, says, This do not I deny; they have erred sometimes, and
they were suffered to err, that we might know they were but men.

3 It is not only unjust, and unreasonable, but impossible, to make us in all
things agree with the Fathers, who do not in all things agree among themselves
When Saint Austen confutes Cyprian for rebaptization: Irenaeus and Tertul^ian
differ in the time of Christ's suffering: some Fathers against freewill before
grace, some for it, etc, How is it possible to agree with them all?

Aug. lib. 2. contra Crescomium gram. cap. 30. Ego Cypriani autoritate non
teneor sed ejus dictum ex Scripturae autoritate considero, quodque cum ea
congruit, cum ejus land recipto; quoth non, cum cius pace respuo.
4 Therefore there is a necessity, to try the Fathers doubtful tenets by some
superior and undoubted rule: and that rule (the Fathers selves say) is the holy
Scripture, inspired by God, and therefore infallible: examine all doctrines by
that rule, hold what agrees to that, and refuse that which disagrees.

Thus did Saint Augustine by Cyprians writings. I am not bound with the
authority of Cyprian (says he) but I weigh his sayings by the authority of
the Scriptures, and what agrees to them, with his due praise I receive; what
agrees not, with his good leave I refuse.

And thus would Augustine have men do with his writings. Aug. de trinitate.
lib. 3 cap. 1. Sane cum in omnibus literis meis, non solum pium lectorem, sed
etiam liberum correctorem desiderem, multo maxim in his, etc. -- sicut
lectorem meum nolo mihi esse deditum, ita correctorem nolo sibi: Jlle me non
amet amplius quam catholicam fidem, iste se non amet amplius quam catholicam
ve^tatem. Sicut illi dico, Noli meis literis quasi scripturis canonicis
inservire, sed in illis and quod no cred^bas cum inveneris incunctanter creed.
in istis autem ad certum non habebas nisi certum intellexeris, noli firmiter
retinere: Ita illi dico, Noli meas literas ex tua opinione vel contentione, sed
ex divina lectione vel inconcussa ratione corrigere.
In all my writings (says he) I desire not only a pious Reader but a free
Corrector: as a Reader not wholly yielding to me, so a Corrector not yielding
to his own affections: not loving me more then the Catholic faith, nor
loving himself more then the Catholic truth. As I say to him, Be not
subject to my writings as to the Canonical Scriptures. But in those when thou
find what thou beleeuest not, believe without delay: in those what thou
thoughtest not certain except thou understand to be certain, do not firmly
hold: so I say to him correct not my writings by thine own opinion or
contention, but by the holy Scripture and sound reason.

. 2.
Antiquus. You have said enough to clear you for differing from the Fathers in
some things: now clear your Protestants (if you can) of the great scandal of
differences among themselves.

Antiquissimus. This was your late second objection, which you may partly
answer by that which we have said of the Fathers: for if the different
opinions of the Fathers in some points hindered not their union in substance of
the says, and their being members of all the same Church: why should the like
or lesser differences now among the Protestants, hinder their union in
substance of the same faith, and their being members all of the same Church,
both among themselves and with the Fathers? You see differences among the
Fathers that touched not the foundation, life, and soul of Christianity, brake
not their unity; still they were all of one Church, and of one faith in the
most necessary substance thereof. In which respect also we truly say they were
our Predecessors, and of the same Church whereof we are, notwithanding our
differences and theirs in other lesser points: your new-Catholikes also
challenge them to be theirs, notwithstanding many differences betwixt them. But
of this point, more fully hereafter.

For the present, I will show you a number of great, and many of them (for
ought I see) endless differences, among your own Doctors, and yet you account
them all Catholics and of one Religion.

Archb. Abbot. against D. Hill. reason. 3.. 11.
1 In Peter Lombard, a prince of the Schoolmen, called by that honorable name
of Master of the Sentences, for searching and iudiciously delivering the
Sentences and doctrine of the Fathers, so far as he could see in them: In him
(I say) the Divines of Paris have noted 26 errors, in quibus Magister non
tenetur, wherein the scholars of Rome must not hold with him. These errors are
added to his four books of sentences, to warn the travelers through his
books, of his rocks and sands.

2 Those four books of Sentences, alone may show the great and numberless
variety of opinions, which he recites in most points of doctrine, and yet all
the Authors of them Catholics. The like may be said of Thomas Aquinas his
sums.

See D. Hall. The Peace of Rome.
3 The latter books of Controversies, written by the Jesuits Bellarmine,
Gregory de Valentia, Azorius, Suarez, and other their large writers, do as
ordinarily confute men of their own side, as they confute Protestants. Yea
oftentimes I find in Suarez, five columns against their own Doctors, for one
against ours. Yet these confuted Doctors are still Catholics with them.

Archb. Abbot. ibid.
4 The whole Nation of the Dominican Friars following the Thomists, do hold
that the Virgin Mary was conceived in original sin: the whole Nation of the
Franciscans hold the contrary, Council. Basil. session. 36.
following the Scotists. The Council of Basil ratified the Franciscans
doctrine for the vnspottednesse of the Blessed Virgin. The Dominicans, excepted
against that Council, as not lawfully called. The contention continued and
grew so great, that Pope Sixtus was feign to interpose his authority,
commanding by a solemn decree, that the matter should never be disputed
afterward. Hist. of the Council of Trent.
Notwithstanding, in the Council of Trent, either of the sides contended with
great earnestness to have it determined on their side. But to avoid the
endless offense of both sides, the Cardinal de Monte, President of the
Council, told them, The Council was called to end Controversies with
Heretics, not to meddle with Controversies of Catholics. And so it
continued undecided. Lately Cardinal Bellarmine has written much hereof, on
the Dominicans side: but yet without resolution. And so they stand
irreconciliably contentious.

5 Cardinal Caietan, a deep learned Divine, Arch. Abbot. ib.
and much employed by the pope against Luther, wrote many books of several
matters: Sixth. Senensis Bibliotheca sancta libro 4. and 6.
against which Ambrosius Catharinus, Archbishop of Compsa, wrote six sharp
books of Annotations and Inuectiues, as Sixtus Senensis records, and reckons
up the particular points, leaving to every man his free judgment thereof.

6 In the great piont of Justification Cardinal Contarene agrees with the
Protestants, in his book printed anno 1541. some few years before the
Council of Trent.

7 Albertus Pighius, also taught the Protestants doctrine of Justification in a
book published, anno 1549. which he dedicated to Paulus, then pope,
complaining of the Schoole-Diuines who had much obscured the doctrine of
Justification and who (he feared) would contemn his judgment.

8 The learned Divines of Colen also taught the Protestants doctrine of
Justification by faith in Christ's merits; and wrote against the merit of our
works, in their Antididagma, and Enchiridion, Antididagma. page 30.
as Bellarmine confesses. And yet both Pighius and the Doctors of Colen are
excused by Bellarmine, Bellar. de Iustif. lib. 2. cap. 1. in candem sent. and
Deinde quod est discrimen.
they were no heretics, though they erred, because they kept community with
the Church of Rome, and submitted their writings to the censure thereof.

9 Their great Doctor Durandus, had many errors, which Bellarmine meets
withal, and confutes in many Controversies. And concerning the Eucharist, he
held that the matter of the bread remained still after the Consecration, and
that there was only a transformation, Bellar. de Fucharistia libro 3. cap. 13.
initio.
but not a transubstantiation of the matter, Whereof Bellarmine says,
Sententia Durandi haeretica est, licet ipse non sit dicendus haereticus, cum
paratus fuerit Ecclesiae iudicio acquiescere. The opinion of Durand is
heretical, though he is not to be called an heretic, seeing he is ready to
rest upon the Churches judgment.

Sentent. lib. 4. distinct 11. litera a.
10 Peter Lombard, Bishop of Paris, Master of the Sentences, found such variety
of opinions concerning the elements in the Sacrament, that he knew not what to
determine. Some held that the substance of the bread remained, some that it
vanished, or was resolved into his first matter, some that it was turned into
Christ's body. But for his own part, what kind of conversion it should be,
whether formal or substantial, or of some other kind, he says, Definire non
sufficio, I am not able to define.

Ibidem. did. 13. b. in sine.
11 Lombard also says, that bruit Beasts that ear the consecrated host, do
not eat the body of Christ. What do they eat then? He answers, Deus nouit
hoc, God knows that. Aquinas Summa 3. part. qu. 80 ut 3. ad tertium.
But Tho. Aquinas teaches the contrary that Christ's body is still under the
species, as long as the species remain, though a Mouse or Dog should eat
them. For it is no dignity (says he) to Christ's body to be eaten by Beasts,
when they touch not the body in its proper species, but only according to the
Sacramental species.

Lombard. ibid. d^st. 11 lit.
12 Lombard also says, that the Eucharist is to be received in both kinds. And
Gerardus Lorichius, a great Papist, protests that they are false Catholics,
Lerich. de missa publica proroganda.
hinderers of the Reformation of the Church, and blasphemers, who deny the
people the Cup in the Eucharist.

13 Bellarmine himself a great learned Jesuit and Cardinal, late Reader of
Controversies at Rome, Bellar de Euchar. lib. 3. cap. 18.. Ex his colgimus, etc.
teaches that the substance of the bread in the Sacrament, is not turned into
the substance of Christ's body productive, (as one thing is made of another) but
that the bread goes away, and Christ's body comes into the room of it,
adductive (as one thing succeeds into the place of another, the first be
voyded) and this (says he) is the opinion of the Church of Rome.

But Suarez, another learned Jesuit, Suarez. tomo 3. in Thom. disp. 50 sect.
4.. tertio principaliter. page 639.
(who has written many great volumnes, and is Reader of Controversies at
Salamanca, in Spain) confutes Bellarmines opinion, terming it Translocatio,
not Transubstantiatio; and says it is not of the Churches opinion. Thus these
great Master Builders are confounded in their language: and thus hard it is to
know what the Church of Rome holds. Her own dearest and learnedest sons
know not. Either Doctor Bellarmine, or Doctor Suarez mistook it, and
doubtless either of them have multitudes of followers, and all on both sides
Catholics. Yea I hope, both Suarez and Bellarmine, Durand and Lombard, the
Dominicans and Franciscans, Cajetan, Catharine, Contarene, Pighius, and the
Colen Doctors shall still be counted good Catholics, and all of one Church
notwithstanding their differences.

14 Beside these, See before, lib. 1. cap. 4. sect. 12, 13, ^4.
you may remember a number of learned Catholics (with their numberless
followers) which I reckoned before, which differed from you in some points, and
wrote against your doctrine and practices: as Saint Bernard, Ioannes
Salisburiensis, Cardinalis Camericensis, Cardinalis Cusanus. Robert Grosthead,
B. of Lincoln, Ockam, Cesenas, Clemangis, Gerson, Valla, Bradwardin,
Ariminiensis, Contarene, Bonaventure, Scotus, Clethoveus, Rhendius, etc.

Doctor Field reckons above 20 Fathers, and later Doctors, See above lib. 1.
cap. 4. sect. 14. B. Usher Answer to the Irish Jesuit, page 500. and seq.
that accounted those books only Canonical, which we so reckon, and the
rest Apocryphal.

Bishop Usher, reckons up, against your doctrine of Merit, above 50 authors new
and old, whereof some are manifold, as Liber Caroli Magni, composed by a great
number of Divines: Instructions of the sick, approved by all the Divines of
the Kingdom. The Canons and University of Colen.

The Chancellor and Divines of Paris. And both they, and all the rest, had
infinite followers of their opinion.

All which (to let pass See D. Field. Appendix 1. part. page 100. and seq. and
Appendix of 27 Articles, to the seventh chapter of the third book, printed at
the end of the fourth.
multitudes of others) you still count Catholics, and of your Church, though
they taught many things against you. And therefore, out of your own judgment
we may conclude, that some few differences in some points, betwixt Protestants,
do not hinder them from being all of one Church and Religion.

. 3.
Antiquus. Yes, for your differences are great and many, ours small and few.

Antiquissimus. When you look through false spectacles, things may be seen
greater or smaller then they are: take heed you look not on our differences
through the spectacles of malice, which makes every small thing great and ugly:
and on your own differences, through the spectacles of self-love, which makes
them seem small and tolerable.

One special point, of the manner of Christ's being, and being received in the
Sacrament: Archb. Abbot. ag. Hill. Reason 5. 26.
makes the maine difference bewixt the Lutherans in Denmark, and some places
of Germany, and the other reformed Churches.

Anthony, sometime King of Navarre, said to the Ambassador of Denmark,
Comment. Relig. and Reip. in Gal. lib.
exhorting the reformed French to be of Luthers doctrine; There be forty
points wherein Luther and Calvin do differ from the pope, and in 39 of them
they agree between themselves, and in that single one they dissent. Their
followers therefore should do well to join in the greater number against the
pope, till they have ru^nated him; and when his heart is broken, they should
fall to compound that last single difference. God in his good time grant it.

Now in that one special point, Zanchius de dissidio Cana Dom. Iudicium, tomo
septimo, in fine Miscelaneorum. D. Field. Church. lib. 5. Appendix part. 1.
page 114.
the difference is nothing so great, as you would have it thought. For (as the
most learned and judicious Zanchius observes, and our Doctor Field out of
him.) In all necessary points, both the parties agree, and dissent in one
unnecessary, which by right understanding one another, might easily be
compounded.

First, both parties agree in the necessity of the receivers due preparing
themselves, with knowledge of their sins, repentance of them, faith in Christ
for pardon of them, and resolution to live according to Gods Law.

Secondly, both sides agree in the acknowledgement of the excellent use of the
Sacrament for a perpetual memorial of the death and passion of Christ for our
salvation, and that with him we should dye to sin and be raised again to
newness of life; be made one with him; and nourished by him in a spiritual
life here, to eternal life hereafter.

Thirdly, both sides agree, that the very body and blood of Christ are to be
received in that Sacrament, that thereby we may be partakers of the life of
Grace, and also be strengthened, confirmed, and continued therein.

Fourthly, both sides agree, that the elements of bread and wine, presenting to
our consideration and faith, the spiritual nourishing force that is in the
body and blood of Christ, are not abolished in their substance: but only
changed in their use; which is, not only to signify, but also to exhibit and
communicate unto us, the very body and blood of Christ, with all the gracious
working and fruits thereof.

Fifthly, both sides agree, that the meaning of Christ's words, [This is my Body,
This is my Blood,] when he gave them the Bread and Wine, was this: This, which
outwardly and v^sibly I give you, is in substance, Bread and Wine, and in
mystery, or exhibitiue signification, my Body and Blood: but this, which
(together with them) I give you inuisibly, is my very Bo^y that is to be
crucified, and my very Blood which is to be shed for the remission of your
sins.

Sixthly, both parties agree, and profess they firmly believe, that the very
Body and Blood of Christ (which the Sacraments do not only signify, but
exhib t, and whereof the faithful are partakers) are truly present in the
Sacrament, and by the faithful truly and really received.

Thus far all parties agree, that is, in the whole necessary and sufficient
substance of the doctrine of this Sacrament: for the other matter wherein they
differ, De modo, of the manner how Christ is present in the Sacrament, seeing
it is not expressed in the Scriptures, In the judgment of Zanchius, it might
be well omitted: themselves confess, when they have gone as far as they can
to determine it, still it is ineffable, and not possible to be fully
understood. It is enough for us to believe the Body and Blood are there, though
how and in what manner we cannot define.

. 4.
Antiquus. Whether it be of so little importance or no, I dispute not: but I am
sure the Controversy still remains, and is hotly pursued; and yet this is not
the only difference betwixt your Protestants, there are many other.

Antiquissimus. The more greatly to blame is your pope and Romish Hierarchy,
that when many grievous corruptions of your Church both in Doctrine and
government were manifestly laid open, See D. Field. Appendix to the fifth book
of the Church part. 1. page 71. Gerson 3. part. Apologet. de concilio
Constantion. Id^m de concilio vnius obedientiae.
would not for all the importunity of Princes, Prelates and people, yield to any
wholesome reformation, but with obstinate resistance hindered all public
proceeding in Reformation by the course of a general Council: so that several
States and Kingdoms were feign to redress things amiss severally within
their own compass, without sufficient Intelligence and consultation one with
another: which could not be done without some differences, and it is l^ttle
less then miraculous that the differences were not many more and greater.

Cassander says when many were moved out of a godly affection sharply to
reprove certain manifest abuses, Cassander consultation, art. 7.
they were repelled and disdainfully contemned by them who were puffed up with
the swell ng conceits of their Ecclesiastical power, which caused the great
distraction or rent of the Church: and no firm peace is to be hoped for,
unless the beginning thereof be from them that gave the cause of this
division; that is, unless they that have the government of the Church remit
something of their too great rigor, and listening to the desires of many godly
ones, correct manifest abuses, according to the rule of sacred Scripture and
the ancient Church, from which they are departed, etc. Thus writes your
Cassander, though a papist, yet moderate and truly Judicious. Contarenus in
confutatione Articulorum Lutheri.
Also your Cardinal Contarenus, writing of the grieuances and complaints of
the Lutherans, for the manifold abuses brought into the Church; makes a prayer
to God, that he would move the hearts of the Prelates of the Church, at the last
to put away most pernicious self-love, and be persuaded to correct things
manifestly amiss, and to reform themselves. There needs no Counsel, those
need no syllogismes, there need no alleging of places of Scripture for the
quiering of these stirs of the Lutherans: but there is need of good minds, of
love toward God and our neighbor, and of humility, etc. Thus writes
Contarenus. I might cite your Thu anus, and many others, that lay the fault of
the divisions, rents, and differences in the Church, upon your Pope and
Prelates. Bad Statists, and worse Christians.

But I pray you, what other differences of moment do ye find among the
Protestants:

Antiquus. When the Divines of the Reformed in France were called to the
Mompelgart colloquy in the year 1586: they looked for no more differences then
of our Lords Supper, which you spoke of; but they found more, of the Person of
Christ, of Predestination, of Baptism, of Images in Churches.

Antiquissmus. They found those five indeed. And it was a wonderful providence
of God, that so many several Countries, Kingdoms, and States, abandoning the
abuses of the Church or rather Court of Rome, and making particular
Reformations in their own dominions, without general meetings and consents,
should have no more, nor greater differences then these.

And of these, the first two (of Christ's presence in the Sacrament, and of the
communication of properties of the divinity and humanity in the person of
Christ) are in a manner all one, and reconciled both alike: Concerning the two
next, the differences among the Fathers, (who notwithstanding still continued
members of the same true Catholic Church) may well excuse the differences among
the Protestants.

And for the fifth difference, concerning Images; it proved no difference at
all. Both sides therein fully agreed.

But these are not the Tithe of the differences amongst your men: and in these
five which you reckon, many of your own men differ one from another, and yet
with you are good Catholics.

Antiquus. Happily I might insist upon many other differences among you, if I
carried a mind rather to number then to weigh them. But I will name only one
more: the great and scandalous dissension among you about the government of
your Church betwixt the Bishops and Formalists on the one side, and the
Puritans or Separatists on the other side.

Antiquissimus. Both these sides agree in all necessary saving points of
doctrine.

But in this very point of government, D. Field. Appen. first part. page 120.
first pull out the beam out of your own eyes, before you stare upon our
motes.

Some of your Doctors hold that the Pope is above General Councels: some that
he is not.

Some hold that the pope has the universality of all Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction in himself.

Others hold the pope to be only the Prince Bishop in order and honor before
other, which are equal in commission with him: and at the most but as the Duke
of Venice among the Senators of that State.

Some hold that the pope may err Iudicially,

Others that the pope cannot err Iudicially.

Some hold the pope to be temporal Lord of all the world.

Others hold that he is not so.

Some hold, that though the pope be not temporal Lord of the world, yet in
ordine ad spiritualia, he may dispose of the Kingdom of the world.

Others hold that the pope may not meddle with Princes States in any wise.

. 5.
Antiquus. The differences among Protestants you say are not great, but I am
sure their dissentions are great, bitter, scandalous and odious, while they
write most virulent inuectiues one against another, and damn one another most
grievously for their different doctrine, without show of any touch of Christan
mortification or moderation.

Antiquissimus. Those that do so are much to blame. It is far from me to
defend them. Yet you know sometimes very holy and well mortified men, may
happen into strange contentions even for small matters. Saint Paul and Barnabas,
appointed by the Holy Ghost to join for the work of the ministry in planting
Churches among the Gentiles (Acts 13.2) which they did very laboriously,
cheerfully, and with good success, and though they suffered persecution in
doing it, yet were comfortably delivered, and always found God (who had sent
them) present to protect and bless them: and afterward they were sent by the
Church to Jerusalem to the Apostles and elders, Acts 15.1, 2.
about questions that troubled the Church: and by the whole Council of
Apostles, they were sent again Jointly to the Churches of Antioch, Syria and
Cilicia and other Nations, to give them notice of the decrees of the Council,
to direct and confirm the brethren: now having delivered their message and
done their business imposed, at Antioch, and were so to go forward to Syria
and Cilicia; They fell to contention: and for a matter of no great moment, to
wit, Barnabas would have John to go with them, and Paul refused him: the
contention grew so sharp, that they parted company, and went several ways.

See how flesh and blood boiled in these good men's hearts! Even in those men's
hearts, whom God had made special choice of, and Joined them together for his
most especial and extraordinary works: upon whom the Church of God after
fasting and prayer had laid their hands, and separated them to go Jointly
together about that holy business; who had power to do many miracles and
extraordinary works: Acts 15.
who made report of the wonderful success which God gave them in converting
the Gentiles, to the great admiration and consolation of the Apostles: whom the
Apostles sent again with their decrees to the Churches: even these holy men,
fell out for a light cause and parted company.

Happily some man might say, Are these to be accounted truly mortified and holy
men, who were carried away with such a humor of pride and self will, that
neither of them would yield to other? are these guided by the spirit of God?
the spirit of peace, love, concord, humility? are these fit to teach others,
that cannot ouerrule their own passions? or have they no part of the spirit of
God, but are men ouerborne with haughtiness wilfulness, stubbornness? unfit
for men of this profession, able to make men utterly distaste and abhor
whatsoever they preach?

Thus would some men gather out of this action: But Saint Paul (a chosen
vessel, yet still an earthen vessel, who knew well he had his cracks and his
flawes, himself gathers another thing: (2 cor. 4.6. 2 Cor. 4.6.
) God, who has commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Chirst: But we have this treasure in earthen vessels that the excellency
of the power may be of God, and not of us.

Secondly, At the first Council of Nice, many Churchmen offered up to the
Emperor Constantine Bills of Complaint one against another, Zozomen. hist. lib.
1. cap. 16.
which the Emperor took very ill, and said this was worse then all the evils
that the Church of God had endured, that it should be rent with contentions and
contrary opinions of her own children (for the contrary opinions among the
learned at that time, and their dissentions (says the Story) were so
scandalous, that many were thereby alienated from embracing Christian Religion)
But Constantine, appointing a day to receive all their Books of complaints,
when it came he exhorted them to unity and concord, and to join hands for the
holy work of their calling, and in one great fire he burned all their Books of
accusations.

Matthew. 11.29. 1 Pet. 2.21, etc.
Thirdly, Meeknes and mildnes is an excellent virtue in all Christians, and
especially in the Ministers of God, Leaders of others: our Savior Christ calls
us to learn it of himself, as his peculiar virtue. But yet when the cause is
Gods, and not our own, we may learn also even of him, a holy zeal and
earnestness: he pronounced many woes against the Scribes and Pharisees, Read
Matthew. 23. ver. 13. to the end.
for dishonouring God, corrupting his Religion, misleading the people, and
abusing them: he called them hypocrites, damned creatures, children of hell,
fools and blind guides, painted sepulchers, full of hypocrisy and iniquity,
serpents and generations of vipers. Ioh. 8 44.
And elsewhere says to the Pharisees and other Jews, ye are of your Father
the Devil, and the lusts of your Father ye will do etc.

Acts 8.20, 23.
So Saint Peter to Simon Magus, Thy money perish with thee, Thou art in the gall
of bitterness, and in the bond of Iniquity: Act. 13.10.
and Saint Paul to Elimas (who went about to turn Sergius Paulus the Deputy
from the faith) O full of all subtilty and all mischief, thou child of the
Devil, thou enemy of all righteousness etc.

Zeal of Gods glory is not only excusable, but commendable, even when it is
mixed with Error which is condemnable: Phil. 3.4, 6.
for so Saint Paul reckons it among the things wherein he might glory,
Concerning Zeal I persecuted the Church.

Bellar. De Romans pont. lib 4. cap. 7.. and per hoc respondetur.
Fourthly, Bellarmine somewhat excuses Cyprian, though (sa th he) he seems to
have sinned mortally in crossing and vexing the pope, being in the right,
himself being in the wrong. At least he should not have written such reuiling
and reproachful words against the pope (Steven,) as he did in that Epistle to
Pompey, calling the pope superbum, imperitum, caecae ac prauae mentis, etc.
Proud, unskillful, of a blind and corrupt mind. Yet (says Bellarmine also,)
It seems Cyprian sinned not mortally, because he sinned only of Ignorance,
thinking the pope (perniciose errare) to err, dangerously: and while he so
thought, he was bound (in conscience) not to obey him, because he ought not to
do against his conscience Thus says Bellarmine.

Fifthly the question of Rebaptizing such as were baptized by Heretics, See D.
White Way digress 21. Eu chapter hist. lib. 7. cap. 2. and seq.
bred many broils in the Church betwixt Saint Cyprian with the Council of 80
Bishops of Afric, and also the Metropolitans, Dionysius, and Firmilianus,
with most of the Bishops of Egypt, Cappadocia, Galatia, and Cilicia, on the one
part: and the Bishop of Rome with the Western Bishops, on the other part:
There was scarce any Church or Catholic Bishop therein which was not
entangled in this discord. And many bitter speeches and contumelious actions
and writings passed between them.

Sixthly, Eus^b. hist. lib. 5. cap. 21.
the strife betwixt the East and West Churches about the day of the celebration
of Easter, proceeded so far as to excommunications. The Eastern Churches
kept Faster day the 14 day of the first Moon in March after the vernall
Equinoctial, though it happened on the week day, by tradition from Saint John
and Saint Philip, Ibib. cap. 22.
and many other holy men and Martyrs, living and dying in Asia, as Bishop
Polycrates wr^teth. But in diverse Synods held, 1 in Palestina, under B.
Theophilu^ of Caesarea, and Bish. Narcissus of Jerusalem: 2 In Rome under pope
Victor: 3 in Pontus under Palmas: 4 in France under Irenaeus: 5 In Greece and
other places It was ordered that Easter should be kept (not on the week day
but) on the Sunday after the 14 day. And Victor, Bishop of Rome, Ibid. cap. 21.
Jbid. cap. 23.
procee^ed in sin^ to pronounce all the Reueren^ Eastern Bishops that kept it
otherwise, excommunicated: and inueighed sore against them by letters. But not
only they, but the Western Bishops also, disliked Victors doing therein: yea,
diss^aded, and sharply reproue^ him Especially Jrenaeus with his brethren of
France, alle^^ging that for such like differences as this. For example, for the
k^^p ng of Lent Fast some only one day, See the Epistle of Irenaeus in Eusebius.
History, ib.
some two, some more, some forty days before Easter and that by custom of
long time before that Age, in such difference of fasting they kept the unity of
faith, and peace one with another; and never proceeded to hate or excommunicate
one another for such petty differences.

D. Field. Appendix 1. part. page 116. Zozemen. lib 8. cap. 15. Socrat. lib. 6.
cap. 13.
Seventhly, Grievous were the differences and contentions betwixt Saint
Chrysostom and Epiphan^us, the one refusing to pray with the other; the one
accusing the other of manifest breaches of the Canons; the one cursing the
other, and praying that he should n^uer die a Bishop: the other cursing him
aga^ne, and praying that he should never return into his Country alive. B^th
which came to pass. For Chrysostom was cast out of his Bishopric, and dyed
in banishment. And Epiphanius dyed in his re^urne homeward. Yet were both of
these excellent holy and Catholic Bishops that thus contended.

Eighthly, And beside their own contentions, the taking of parts with them drew
on much mischieife. Theophilus Patriarch, of Alexandria joined with Epiphanius
against Chrysostom; and with them joined the other Bishops of the Provinces as
they fancied. The Empress was set against Chrysostom, being informed that he
had made a Sermon against women. She incensed the Emperor by whose
appointment, Theopilus called a Counsel of Bishops at Chalcedon, whither all
Chrysostom^s enemies resorted, and there pronounced him deposed. Cyrinus,
Bishop there, called him impious arrogant, and froward From thence most of the
Bishops went to Constantinople but none of the Clergy met them, to do them
honor. There they objected many crimes against him and cited him to answer.
But he refused to come, excepting against them as his enemies, and appealing to
a general Council. But finally they condemned him for obst^nacy, in not
coming unto them, and deprived him of his Bishopric. This being noysed in
the City, caused a great sedition multitudes watching about the Church to
hinder his carrying away, an^ cried out, his cause ought to be heard in a
greater Council of Bishops. But by the Emperors command and practice, he was
driven out. Notwithstanding within a few days after, to appeal the tumults of
people, he was recalled, Socrates lib. 6. cap. 16.
placed ag^ine in his Bishopric restored to preaching and so continued a
while: but not without tumults wherein many were wounded, and many killed

And when he was banished again, the Cathedral Church at Constantinople,
with the Senate h^use, were set on fire, and burned to the ground in the
pursuit of revenge.

Baronius beginning the story of this contention, Baron. tomo 5. anno 400. nu.
51.
says thus: I take in hand a great and lamentable narration, of strife, and
direful persecution, not of Gentiles against Christians, nor heretics
against Catholics, nor of wicked men against good and just but (which is
monstrous and prodigious) even of Saints and holy men one against another.

Ninthly, Socrates lib. 7. cap. 33. D. F^eld church. lib 5 cap 33. and ^p^end.
1 part. page 116, 117, 118. etc D Hall Columb^ Noe, page 44.
In the first Council of Ephesus (being the third general Council) there
arose great cont^ntions b^twixt Cyril of Alexan ria, and John Bishop of
Antioch, two Patriarchs, either of them thundering Anathematismes against other,
and depriving each other of their Churches. Theodores unhappily thrust his
sickle into John's harvest, against whom (at the ^nstigation of Euoptius)
Cyrillus grievously inueighed. Theodoret accused Cyrill of Apollinarisme, and
Cyrill accused Theodoret of N storianisme. And this fury spread so far, that
it drew almost the Christian world into sides. So that when afterward
Theodoret would have come into the Chalcedon Synod, the Egyptian and other
reverend Bishops cried; If we receive Theodoret, we cast out Cyril: the Canons
cast out Theodoret God abhorres him. This was done in the first action of the
Chalcedon Council, and again in the eight action, the Bishops crying out
openly he is an Heretic, he is a N^stori^n, away with the Heretic. Yet when
the matter was fully known, and that Theodoret had willingly subscribed to the
Orthodoxe Creedes, and to Leo's Epistles; The whole Syno^ cried with one v^yce,
Theodoret is worthy of his Ecclesiastical Sea let the Church receive her
Catholic Pastor.

Antiquus. Your discourse has ^ t me into a mixture of grief and ^o^: Grief
that any of the holy, ancient Fathers have held any errors at all; and that
there were such bitter contentions among them: Joy, that seeing there were
such, they are not hid from me. For that will make me more moderate in thinking
of them, though reverently as holy men; yet still as men, subject to humane
infirmities; and not in all things to make their sayings rules of my faith, or
their doings pat^ernes of my life: but altogether to make the most holy,
perfect, infallible, and unstained word of God, the guides of both; and it
shall make me also more wise in esteeming men now living, reverently for the
graces of God which I see in them notwithstanding their humane fra^lties, such
as I perceive the best Saints of God have had.

But yet I see not any sufficient rule to lead me, to Judge how you can
challenge the Fathers to be of your Religion more then the Romans may challenge
them to be of theirs. I perceive well, they diff^red from both in many things,
wherein you both refuse them.

Antiquissimus. You make that use of my discourse that I wish. For the Rule to
direct your judgment, I have pointed at it often: and now I will briefly and
as fully as I can, lay it open unto you.

CHAP. 4. Of the Rule, to judge the soundness and purity of all Christians,
and Churches by.
This Chapter has four Sections.

The first Section; of the Rule used in the Primitive Church.

The second, of the Rule enlarged and approved in this Age:

The third, of Objections arising from the former discourses, and their
answers.

The fourth, of the necessity of Preaching still to them that hold the Rule.

The first Section.
. 1. The Rule in general.

. 2. Opened by distinctions of the foundation of Religion.

. 3. A necessity to have a short rule drawn out of the Scriptures.

. 4. This rule is described by Saint Paul.

. 5. The practice of it, by the Apostles, who only delivered the most
necessary fundamental points to the Jews, and then baptized them.

. 6. The like practice used by the following Primitive Church, to their
Catechumeni before Baptism.

. 1.
THe Rule to Judge all Christians and Churches by, is this;

They that hold the same fundamental points of Christian Religion, which do
sufficiently constitute the Church of Christ: and hold no other opinions
wittingly and obstinately that overthrow any of these fundamental points; they
are undoubtedly of the same true Church and Religion.

. 2.
For the understanding of this Rule, note,

1 Saint Paul distinguishes betwixt the foundation, and that which is built
upon the foundation, 1 Cor. 3.10. As a wise Master Builder, I have laid the
foundation, and another builds thereon.

The word Foundation is taken two ways; First, for the principal thing which
is to be believed, and whereupon our salvation is builded; that is, Jesus
Christ: as Saint Paul says there, verse 11. Other foundation can no man lay,
then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Acts 4.12. There is no salvation in
any other; there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we
must be saved, 1 Timothy 3.16. This is the great mystery of godliness, God was
manifest in the flesh, etc. This was Saint Peter's confession, Matthew. 16.16.
Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God. Upon which confession (as Saint
Augustine and Chrysostom expound it) Christ said he would build his Church,
and the gates of Hell should not prevail against it.

Secondly, the word Foundation is taken for the Doctrine of the Scriptures,
which teach salvation only by Jesus Christ: as Ephesians. 2.20. The house (that is
the household, or Church) of God is built upon the Foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets: Jesus Christ himself the chief Corner stone. And so the
Apostles are called twelve foundations, Revel. 21.14. to wit, in respect of
their doctrine, whereby they laid the foundation of the Church, and of men's
salvation by Jesus Christ.

. 3.
2 Although the whole Scripture, and every thing therein contained, or from it
necessarily deduced, be a fit object for faith to apprehend; Yet that all
Christians should thoroughly conceive and uniformly profess them all, is not to
be hoped, B. Usher. Sermon. at Wansted. page 22.
nor in any Age has been found. As we have manifestly proved In the former
Chapter.
. Variety of Judgments in some points of lesser moment, which are not plainly
delivered in the Scriptures, may be tolerated, and must not dissolve the unity
which all must hold in the fundamental principles. Heaven was not prepared for
deep Clerks only, which understood all, or for such as never differed in any
opinion: 1 Cor. 132, 12.
but even for such also as knew but in part, and saw through a glass darkely.
Aug. epist. 57. Regula Fidei pufillis magnisque communis.
And therefore beside that larger measure of knowledge, whereof all are not
capable, there must be a rule of Faith common to great and small (as Saint
Augustine calls it.) And as there is a common salvation Jude v. 3.
(whereof the meanest believer is capable, as well as the greatest Apostles 2
Pet. 1.1.
) so there must be a common faith Tit. 1.4.
sufficient to conduct us all unto it.

. 4.
This Saint Paul calls, The form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13. hold fast the
form of sound words, which thou have heard of me, in faith and love, which is
in Christ Jesus.

1 It must be a form, frame or fashion, body, method, Rule of Faith, or of
sound and saving Doctrine, fit for all Preachers to frame their Sermons by, and
all Christians to frame their faith and life by; Timothy in preaching, and the
Ephesians in hearing and practizing.

2 It must be, not only (...) (as romans 6.17.) but (...) (here) a short form,
or brief method. There must perspicuity for the understanding, and breuity for
the memory of simple men.

3 To these must be added certainty (which thou have heard of me:) learned of
men, inspired by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. 2 Timothy 3 15, 16, 17. Bellar. De
verbo Dei lib. 1. cap. 2. quare cum.
Sacra Scriptura est regula credendi certissima, tutissimaque, says Bellarmine.

4 Add also sufficiency: both for Credenda all things to be believed (in
Faith:) and for Facienda all things to be performed (in Love,) which is the
fulfilling of the Law. For true Faith and good life contain all things
belonging to a Christian. And all things appertaining to these, that are
necessary for all men to know, are contained in the Scriptures: says Bell also
Idem ib. l. 4. c 11.9. His notatu Duo omnia illa scripta esse ab Apostolis, qua
sunt omnibus necessaria, and quae ipsi palam omnibus pradicaverant. Costerus in
Enchiridio c. 1. de sacra scriptura. Caeterum. Caeterum non insiciamur
praecipna illa capita qua omnibus Christianis ad salutem necessaria, perspicue
satis esse Apostolicis scriptu comprehensa. As Augustine also de doctr.
Christiana l. 2. c. 9. ^ellar. de Iustif l. 3. c. 8. prima ratio. B. Usher.
sermon. Wansted p. 42. Vincent. Lirinen si^ contra haeres. c. 3. Jn ipsa
catholica ecclesia magnopere curandum est, vt id teneamus, quod vbique, quod
semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est, hoc est enim vere proprinque catholicum.
Joan. Serran. in Apparat. ad fidem call ^l. edit. Paris. 1607. page 172. Usher
ib. page 59. See S. August. libr. de fi de and operibus cap. 9.
. Yea, and that plainly enough says the Jesuit Costerus.

5 And to these belong also that Antiquity, Universality, and Unity which are
so much spoken of, and are usually, (but most falsely) applied to the new
additio^s of the Roman Church, as well as to these fundame^tall principles: to
which only they belong. Vincentius Lirinensis says well; That is truly and
properly Catholic and to be held in the Catholic Church, which in all
places, in all times, and of all Christians, has been, and is believed. And
this (says Serranus a late learned man, who has written a full discourse of
this argument) is that doctrine, against which the gates of Hell shall never
prevail; and which the Father of lies by all his devises and attempts, could
never yet, nor ever shall abolish, or foot out of the hearts of men.

This Antiquity Universality, or Catholicisme, and this Unity or General
consent of Christian doctrine, will never be found any where, but in the
essential, substantial and fundamental points thereof.

6 Saint Paul yet adds these words, Which is in Christ Jesus, because he is
the deepest Foundation, root, Author, and finisher of our Faith and Love: of
our future salvation, and of our present gracious conversation. Other
Foundation can no man lay, says the same Saint Paul 1. cor. 3.11.

Not that there need no other principles of Faith then those that concern his
person only and directly, (for the Articles concerning God the Father, the
Holy Ghost, the forgiveness of sins, resurrection of the dead, the last
Judgment etc. have their place in the Foundation. Hebr. 6.1, ^.) but because
Christ is the most especial object of our Faith, and the primary Foundation of
all the other, for they have all reference unto him, being such as concern
either His Father, or His spirit, or His incarnation, or His office of
mediation, or His Church, or the special benefits which he has purchased for
it.

And also, all the Articles, as they build us upon the Foundation, and as they
incorporate us into the mystical Body, or as they are means of our
Justification and life, they look upon the son of God, and him only.

Also, we must not only know the original cause of our salvation, but also
our need thereof by knowledge of our original and actual sins, which deserve
damnation and the means to communicate this salvation unto us, the Church, the
Ministry, preaching, sacraments; and the duties which we must do. For ( rom
10.14) how can we know God, or pray to him, without believing; or believe
without hearing; or hear without preaching; or have preaching, except
Preachers be sent from God by means of the Church? or know our duties without
Gods comandments; Mat. 15.9. Faith is necessary. Romans 4.14. gal. 2.21. hebr.
11.6 so is new birth. Joh. 3.5. 2. cor. 5.17. Ioh. 13.8. Repentance. luc. 13.3.
Denial of our selves. luc. 9.23.24 etc.

. 5.
But how far these Fundamental principles (which are absolutely necessare to
salvation) must extend, is a Question of some difficulty.

The Apostles contented themselves in converting the Jews to Christian
Religion, to teach them that Christ Jesus was the Savior of the world, and
that Salvation was to be had only by Repentance from Dead works, and Faith in
him. For that he was the very Messiah foretold by the Patriarks and Prophets,
had died for our sins and rose again for our Justification.

They mentioned not God the Father, Creator, and Preserver of the world, nor
the doctrine of the Trinity and other things (which the hearers knew before,
without any new teaching, being Jews and well acquainted with the Old
Testament) but presupposing they were grounded in these points before, they
laid the foundation of the New Testament, to wit Salvation by Jesus Christ
only: B. Usher in his Sermon at Wansted, 1624 And Bellarmin. also lib. 4. de
verbo Dei cap. 11. allege these examples to this purpose.
which when the people received and believed, they presently baptized them, and
received them into the Congregation of Christ's flock.

Thus did Sant Peter Acts 2. and Acts 3. and Acts. 4.10, 11, 12. The like
course was used by Phillip to the Eunuch who embraced the Old Testament Acts
8.28-35-37. etc. And by Saint Peter to Cornelius, and his company (who had
before received the Religion of the Jews. Acts. 10.2, 22, 35, 43.) And by
Saint Paul Acts 13.14, 16, -32, -38, 39. etc.

The Apostles receiving the Conuerts to Baptism, upon adding to their former
knowledge these few principles of true Faith in Christ Jesus, and good life;
showed, that in their Judgment they wanted no essential thing, necessary for
the making of them true members of the Church, and perfect Christians: or (as
our Catechism calls them) members of Christ, Children of God, and inheritors
of the Kingdom of Heaven and that if God should take them out of this world in
their first entrance into these principal grounds of salvation, without
further knowledge or practice: yet undoubtedly they should die sufficient
Christans, and in the state of Grace.

. 6.
Conformable to the Apostles practice, the Christians of the Primitive Church
baptized those that were Catechized in the grounds of saving doctrine (as the
essential points of Religion, that constitute a Christian) as appears by
Irenaeus and Tertullian, See Irenaeus and Tertullian cited before. chap. 1.
sect. 2. sub. 1.. 2.
whom I alleged before, and by the Creeds which were ordained as Badges of
Christians and differences of true believers from either unbelievers or
heretics. The Western Churches used in their Baptism that short form of
confession, como^nlly called the Apostles Creed: which in the more ancient
times was breefer then now it is (as our Learned Bishop Usher has punctually
observed. B. Usher sermon. at Wansted. p. 28.
) The mention of the Fathers being Maker of Heaven and Earth, the Sons death
and descending into Hell, and the Commuion of Saints, being wholly omitted
(happily as not necessary for all men to know as Suarez says, or sufficiently
implied in other articles, or known by the light of reason, and so not making
difference betwixt Christians and heathen, these reasons some for one point,
some for another) But being in time made (for better explication) so full as it
is, now the whole Western Church has long received as a badge of their Faith
distinguishing the Believer from the unbeliever.

The Eastern Church used in Baptism a larger Creed, Usher. ib. p. 30. Eusebius.
ep. apud Socrat l. 1. hist. cap. 8. (al. 5.) and Theodoret. lib. 1. cap. 12.
the same or very little different from that we call the Nicene Creed, because
the greatest part thereof was repeated and confirmed in the Nicene Council; to
which it was presented by Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea, with this Preamble: As
we have received from the Bishops that were before us, both at our first
Catechizing, and when we received Baptism; and as we have learned from the
holy scriptures; and as we have both believed and taught, when we entered into
the Ministry, and in our Bishopric it self: so believing at this present
also, we declare this our Faith unto you.

To this the Nicene Fathers added a more clear explication of the Deity of the
Son (against the Arrians, which then troubled the Church) professing him to
be begotten not made: and to be of one substance with the Father.

The second general Council assembled 56 years after, at Constantinople,
approving all the former, added also something concerning the holy Ghost (which
then was oppugned by the Macedonian Heretics.) The same Fathers also then
added the Articles concerning the Catholic Church, and the privileges
thereunto belonging.

The Roman Church, after the days of Charles the Great, added the Article of
Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son. And the late Council of Trent
recommended it unto us, Council. Trident. seff. 3.
as That principle in which all that profess the faith of Christ, do
necessarily agree, and the firm and only foundation against which, the gates
of Hell shall never prevail. And by which alone, our Fathers sometimes drew
Infidels to the faith, overcame Heretics, and confirmed the faithful. Such
are the words of the Trent Council. So that in this Creed they confess, That
only foundation and principle of faith is to be found, in the unity whereof,
all Christians must necessarilly agree.

Section. 2.
. 1. The rule enlarged, and approved in this Age.

. 2 By Azorius, out of the School-diuines, in 14 Articles.

. 3. Some observations and censures of those 14 Articles.

. 4. The rule set down by Bellarmine, more briefly.

. 5. By D. Field, far more sufficiently, in 6 Articles, with his judgment of
the deductions therefrom; evident, or obscure.

. 6. B. Vshers distinction of superstructions upon the foundation.

. 7. Consequents of this doctrine.

. 1.
But, because we see, this foundation of faith, has from the Apostles times
continually been en^^ged by reason of errors and heresies arising in s^^erall
Ages; let us search a little further how the most Iud^cious men do^ bound it in
these our days.

. 2.
Azorius the Jesuit delivers the unanimous consent of all the Roman Divines in
14 Articles, Azorius Institu. tionum moralium part. 1. lib. 8. cap 5. At iuxta.
ibid tertio quaeritur. and seq.
whereof seven concern the Divine nature, and seven concern the humane all
which are to be believed explicit, (with distinct understanding) of all men.
Of the first seven, there is taught in the

First, That God is in Nature and Substance, eternal, infinite, immense, and
in majesty highest, every where, not only in power, might, and efficacy, but
also in deed and truly, present: who has power of life and death; is the
supreme Lord of all things: who can with his beck, and at his pleasure do all
things which he will: who knows, sees, cares for, and moderateth all things

Secondly, The first person in nature and divine substance, to wit, The Father
is the beginning of two divine persons and therefore the begetter of the Son
and breather of the Holy Spirit: unbegotten, subsisting of himself and by
himself; not receiving, and having his essence of another.

Third, The second person in the Divine nature is true God, begotten of the
Father only, from all eternity, the natural Son of God, consubstantiall and
equal to him in all things, the only Word and express Image of the Father,
most perfectly representing and expressing him.

Fourth. The third person in the divine Nature, the Holy Ghost, proceeding from
the Father and the Son from all eternity, is true God, coaeternall to them
both, co^quall, and consubstantiall, and to be worsh^pped with the same faith,
and with equal service and honor.

Fifth. God is the creator of all things, who by his only beck and word out
of nothing produced all things visible and invisible or the whole frame of the
worl^ in the beginning of time; and having produced them, preserues, directs,
cares for, and gouernes them with great goodness and wisdom. And as he is the
creator of all things, from whom all things be ng made of nothing did in time
proceed: so he is the end of all, to whom all things are referred

Sixth. God is the giver of all righteousness holiness, and grace. He forgiueth
sins and restores sinners by the grace of adoption to his favor and
friendship.

Seventh. God is the bestower of eternal glory and heavenly fel^city in whom
the highest happiness of blessed souls consists.

Of the other seven Articles concerning the humane Nature:

The First shows that the Son of God for our sakes debased himself from
Heau^n to these inferior parts, descended and assumed the hum^ne Nature, and
coupled it to himself with a marvelous knot and bond, in such sort, that after
that conjunction there was one person of both, subsisting in two Natures,
divine and humane; and therefore in time he was conceived, without Father, of
an vncorrupt Virgin, the power of the holy Ghost so working in her, that the
word was made flesh, and God Man.

The Second shows the same Son of God taking humane Nature of the undefiled
Virgin was borne into the world in such sort, that Many was at once the Mother
of God and a pure V rgin.

The Third shows how Christ our Lord did most excellently perform the office
of teaching and working miracles, died and made his end under Pilate the Judge
and President, and under him endured an unjust condemnation and suffered the
most shameful kind of punishment of the cross, and sustained the most bitter
death for us and refused not burial offered unto him in another Man's sepulcher.

The Fourth article teaches how Christ after he had died upon the cross,
descended in his soul into Or, the lower parts, infero^.
hell, both that he might show himself conqueror of death and Devils, and
also the d^liuerer of the Fathers there detayned: and in his body he lay three
days in the sepulcher.

The Fifth professes that Christ the third day returning conquer^n^ from the
lower parts, to l^fe immortal and full of glory, by his own force and power,
did rise from the dead.

The Sixth shows how Christ having performed the work of Man's redemption, the
fortieth day after his resurrection by his own power ascended into heaven,
that in his humane Nature he might be exalted above all things, and he above
all might be chiefly worshipped of all; who sits in heaven at the right hand of
the power of God, and as God exercising equal power with the Father, and
shining with divine Majesty.

The Seventh article sets out the last Judgment day, when Christ in his
humane Flesh shall descend again from the highest heaven, and performing the
office of the terrible Judge of the whole earth, shall openly render unto every
one according as he has done in his body, whether it be good or evil: before
whose tribunal all men both good and evil shall stand, whether that day of
Judgment find them yet alive in the flesh, or dead before.

These 14 articles I have set down at large, and in the full words of Azorius
(not that I approve every word and point therein, but) to show what is the
general doctrine of the present Roman Church, what and how much is necessary
for every man to know and to believe explicit to his salvation. Note, he is
said to believe explicit who assenteth to any thing that is told him, or which
he conceiueth in his thought; and he believes implicit, which believes any
thing in generality, and in that thing believes many other things which are
contained in it, as when a man believes all things which the Church believes.
Azor ib. cap. 6. in calce.
Thus says Azorius out of Gabriel the Schoolman.

. 3.
Abundant in superfluis, deficiunt in necessarijs. Be^^ s^pr^ l t^k See ^ellar
in that chapter at large.
First, These Articles upon due consideration will be found to have two faults,
they contain too much, and too little. Too much, for all things in them are
not taught in the Scriptures (as namely that of the fourth Article of the
Humanity, that Christ descended into hell to deliver the Fathers there
detained) as by Bellarmines confession, and the ancient Fathers testimonies
they should be. Costerus ^uchir. cap. 1. page 49. Caterum.
Costerus the Jesuit says also, that the chief heads of faith, necessary for
all Christians to know, and to believe unto salvation are plainly enough
contained in the Apostles writings.

Secondly, these Articles also contain too little, for here want somethings
that are delivered in the Apostles Creed, which Creed was ordained for the
necessary instruction of all Christians, and called Symbolum a badge, or sign
to d^stinguish Christians from Infidels and wicked people. Axor ib. cap. 5.
Postremo ob^^tes.
There were indeed three Symboles or Creedes received in the Church for brief
comprehensions of the public necessary doctrines thereof, for all Christ ans
to know and profess, the Apostl^s Creed, the N^cene and Athanasius his Creed
which three do not contain diverse doctrines, but rather one and the same
faith, set forth more largely o^ briefly, ^n more or fewer words, more clearly
and distinctly to confute heresies as they sprung up in the Church. In these
Creedes, we are taught that there is one holy Catholic Church, and Communion
of Saints, etc. which in these fourteen Articles are not mentioned.

Thirdly, Besides some other things which the Romanists account very necessary
Articles of their faith, as that of transubstantiation, that of Purgatory, that
of the Popes supremacy, which they have wholly left out, as they have done also
the worshipping of Images, Invocation of Saints, Prayer for the dead, (and
generally all other things almost which we refuse) showing thereby, (and so
much gratifying us) that in their own judgment these things are not necessary
for ordinary Christians to believe to salvation.

Fourthly, and the view of these Articles may confirm any man in the
sufficiency of the Protestants Religion, because they steadfastly believe
(excepting that one clause of one of them) all these Articles, which the
Romanists themselves say are sufficient for salvation. Neither do the
Protestants hold any thing at all that crosses them.

. 4.
But Bellarmine touching upon this point, Bellar. De verbo Dei lib. 4. c. 11.
initio.
in answering to Irenaeus, and diverse other Fathers that say, The Apostles
wrote all that they preached: says more briefly, There are some things simply
necessary for all men to salvation, as the knowledge of the Articles of the
Apostles Creed, and of the ten Commandments, and of some Sacraments: other
things are not so necessary, that without the manifest knowledge, faith, and
profession of them a man cannot be saved, if so be that he have a ready will
to receive and believe them when they shall be lawfully propounded unto him by
the Church. And this distinction, (says he) is gathered from hence, that
without the knowledge and faith of the Mysteries of the first kind, no man of
a ripe Age is admitted to Baptism: but without the knowledge and Faith (at
least explicit) of the latter, men were ordinarily admitted, Acts 2 after one
sermon of Saint Peter wherein he had taught the principal heads of faith in
Christ, in one day 3000 men were baptized, who whithout doubt knew nothing else
but those necessary things. And therefore it is added, that after baptism they
perseuered in the Doctrine of the Apostles, that is, they learned what yet they
had not heard of Christian Mysteries etc.

B. Usher. Sermon at Wanst^d page 32. See also his book De Christianarum
eccles. successu and statu cap. 1. 15.
This our Bishop Usher agrees unto, alleging the Apostles sermons to that
purpose, which treated only of the first principles of the Doctrine of Christ,
upon the receiving whereof (as of sufficient doctrine to make them Christians)
men were baptized. And this he further confirms by the writings of Irenaeus
and Tertullian, and the Creeds received by the Church, the Apostles Creed, the
Creed of Athanasius, The Creed of the East Church, See before, cap. 1. sect. 2.
subject. 1.. 2.
recited and confirmed for the belief of the whole Church in the Counsels of
Nice and Constantinople and the late Council of Trent. Whereof I have spoken
already.

5.
D. Field of the Church book 3. chap 4.
Our Doctor Field, does more fully and perfectly describe those things, that so
nearly touch the very life and being of Christian Faith and Religion, that
every one is bound particula^ly and expressly to know and believe them, upon
pain of eternal damnation.

He reduces them to six principal heads: First, concerning God, whom to
know is eternal life: we must believe and acknowledge the unity of an
infinite, incomprehensible, and eternal essence, full of righteousness,
goodness, mercy, and truth; The Trinity of persons subsisting in the same
essence; the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, coessentiall, coeternall, and
coequall: the Father not created, nor begotten, the Son not created but
begotten, the holy Ghost not created nor begotten, but proceeding.

Secondly, we must know and believe, that God made all things of nothing, that
in them he might manifest his wisdom, power, and goodness, that he made men
and Angels capable of supernatural blessedness, consisting in the vision and
enjoying of himself; that he gave them abilities to attain thereunto, and
laws to guide them in the ways that lead unto it; that nothing was made evil
in the beginning; that all evil entered into the world by the voluntary
aversion of men and Angels from God their Creator; that the sin of Angels was
not general, but that some fell, and other continued in their first estate;
that the sin of those Angels that fell is irremissible, and their fall
irrevocable; that these are become devils and spirits of error, seeking the
destruction of the sons of men; that by the misperswasion of these lying
spirits, the first man that ever was in the world, fell from God by sinful
disobedience and apostasy; that the sin of the first man is derived to all
his posterity, not by imitation only, but by propagation and descent,
subiecting all to curse and malediction; yet not without possibility and hope
of merciful deliverance.

Thirdly, we must believe, that for the working of this deliverance, the Son
of God assumed the nature of man, into the unity of his Divine person; so that
he subsisteth in the nature of God, and Man, without all corruption, confusion,
or conversion of one of them into another: that in the nature of man thus
assumed, he suffered death but being God could not be holden of it, but rose
again, and triumphantly ascended into heaven: that he satisfied the wrath of
his Father, obtained for us remission of sins past, the grace of repentant
conversion, and a new conversation, joined with assured hope, desire, and
expectation of eternal happiness.

Fourthly, we must constantly believe, that God does call and gather to
himself out of the manifold confusions of erring, ignorant, and wretched men,
whom he pleases, to be partakers of these precious benefits of eternal
salvation: the happy number and joyful society of whom, we name the Church of
God; whether they were before or since the manifestation of Christ the Son of
God in our flesh. For both had the same faith, hope, and spirit of adoption,
whereby they were sealed unto eternal life; though there be a great difference
in the degree, and measure of knowledge, and the excellency of the means,
which God has vouchsafed the one, more then the other.

Fifthly, we must know and believe, that for the publishing of this joyful
deliverance, and the communicating of the benefits of the same, the Son of
God committed to those his followers, whom he chose to be witnesses of all
things he did or suffered, not only the word of Reconciliation, but also the
dispensation of sacred and sacramental assurances of his love, set means of
his gracious working: that those first messenge^s, whom he sent with immediate
commission, were infallibly led into all truth, and left unto posterities that
sum of Christian Doctrine, that must for ever be the rule of our faith: that
these blessed messengers of so good and happy tidings, departing hence, left
the Ministry of Reconciliation to those whom they appointed to succeed them,
in the work so happily began by them.

Lastly, we must know, and be assuredly persuaded, that seeing the renouation
of our spirits and minds is not perfect; and the redemption, of our bodies
still remaining corruptible, is not yet; therefore God has appointed a time,
when Christ shall return again, raise up the dead, and give eternal life to
all, that with repentant sorrow, turn from their evil and wicked ways, while
it is yet the accepted time, and day of salvation; and contrary ways, cast out
into utter darkness, and into the fire that never shall be quenched, all
those that neglect, and despise so great salvation.

All these things, and these only, do directly concern the matter of
eternal salvation: says Doctor Field. These things (says he) make the rule
of faith, whereof a man cannot be ignorant, and be saved. By these all the
holy Fathers, Bishops and Pastors of the Church, measured and made their
Sermons, Commentaries, and interpretations of Scripture. This rule is delivered
by Tertullian, Irenaeus, Tertull. de praescriptionibus adversus hareticos, and
adversus Praxcam. Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 3. See here before. cap. 1. sect. 2.
subsect. 1.. 2.
and other of the Fathers: and with addition of conclusions most easily,
clearly, and vnavoydably deduced hence, by Theodoret in his Epitome Dogmatum.

For a second sort of things there are that attend on these first as
consequents deduced from them, or some way appertaining to them: such as a man
being persuaded of these, will see the necessary consequence and deduction of
them from these, if they be propounded unto him. As that there are two wills in
Christ: that there is no salvation, remission of sins, or hope of eternal
life out of the Church, etc. In such second things clearly deduced from the
first principles, if a man err he can hardly be saved.

A third sort of things there are, which are not so clearly deduced from those
first indubitate principles; as, namely, concerning the place of the Fathers
rest before the coming of our Savior Christ; concerning the local descending
of Christ into the hell of the damned, etc. Of this third sort, a man may be
ignorant, and err in them without danger of damnation, if error be not joined
with pertinacy.

. 6.
The like doctrine does our Bishop Usher deliver, B. Usher, Sermon at Wansled.
page 33. 1 Cor. 3.12.
in words of analogy to Saint Paul's similitude of building; Some build upon
this foundation, gold, Silver, precious Stones, Wood, Hay, Stubble. Some (says
he) proceed from one degree of wholesome Knowledge unto another; increasing
their maine stock, by the addition of those other sacred truths that are
revealed in the word of God: and these build upon the foundation, gold, and
silver, and precious stones.

Others retain the precious foundation, but lay base matter upon it; wood,
hay, stubble, and such other, either unprofitable or more dangerous stuff: and
others go so far, that they overthrow the very foundation it self. The
first of these be wise, the second foolish, the third mad builders. When day
of trial comes, the first man's work shall abide, Ibid. v. 14, 15.
and he himself shall receive a reward; the second shall lose his work, but
not himself. The third, shall lose both himself and his work together. --
And as in buildings there is great difference to be made betwixt such parts as
are more contiguous to the foundation, and such as be remoter off; So the
doctrines or conclusions nearly conjoined to the first principles of Religion,
and grate upon the foundation, may more establish or endanger the building,
then those that come not near the foundation; and therefore the nearer they
are to the foundation, the more important be the truths, and the more perilous
be the errors: And again, the farther they are removed off, the less
necessary is the knowledge of such verities, and the swaruing from the truth
less dangerous.

. 7.
Out of all this we may deduce these consequents.

First, to these fundamental points (which are absolutely necessary to
salvation) the unity of faith is to be restrained, and beyond them not to be
extended. So that such as hold diversity of opinions in other points of less
moment not crossing these may still be of one faith or Church, and heirs of
salvation, as long as they hold the true foundation.

Secondly, by this rule the ancient Fathers are cleared to be sound Christians.
This we have showed in the former chapter.
For though many of them (as is aforesaid) held the millenary error: many held
that the souls of just men shall not see God till the resurrection, many that
the very Devils should not be tormented in hell till the Judgment. Many taught
free will before Grace. Some taught the Omnipresence, and Omniscience of Saints
departed.

Cyprian and many more held rebaptization necessary for such as were baptized
by Heretics: Saint Augustine, and the greatest part of the Curch for six
hundred years, held a necessity of the Eucharist to Infants: and in many other
things they differed one from another and from the Church in the aftertimes:
See D. Field. Church. book. 3. chap. 5. All these.
Yet because they all entirely and steadfastly held all the necessary
fundamental principles which these errors did not infringe, neither held they
these errors obstinately or incorrigibly, but only for want of better
information: they were certainly of the same Church and Religion whereof we
are, and whereof all are that hold the same principles vnweakned by any other.

Thirdly the l^ke is to be said of the Waldenses, though many of those smaller
errors were true, which (as I have showed before) were falsely imputed unto
them.

Fourthly, the same may be said also of our Fathers that lived in the Communion
of the Church of Rome, before Luthers time, and before the Council of Trent.
Their holding and professing th^se necessary fundamental points as I have
showed before, See before chap. 1. sect. 4. per tot.
was sufficient to make them true Christians, if in life and death they showed
the power and virtue thereof: and maintained not obstinately any gross points
that infringed the foundation.

Fifthly, the same may be also said of all the Churches in the world, where the
ancient foundations are retained, B. Vshers sermon. at Wansted. page 43.
The Greek, Armenian, Ae^hiopian, Russian, etc. For if we should take a
general view of them all, putting by the points wherein they differ one from
another, and gathering into one body the rest of the Articles wherein they all
did generally agree: we should find, that in those propositions which without
all controversy are universally received in the whole Christian world, so much
truth is contained, as being joined with holy obedience, may be sufficient to
bring a man to everlasting salvation. B. Usher. ib. D. Field. church. book. 3.
chap. 5.
This is Bishop Vshers opinion, and Doctor Fields of these Churches.

Section. 3.
. 1. Objection. If holding the foundation will serve, then we may safely
obtain salvation in the Church of Rome.

. 2. Answer. The Curch of Rome holds many things which by consequent destroys
the Foundation, by master Hookers Judgment.

. 3. Objection. This crosses what was said before: That many before Luthers
time might be saved in the Roman Church. Answ. no, for they lived in those
errors of ignorance, not obstinacy; and not knowing any dangerous consequence
of them.

. 4. Such men, by particular repentance of sins known, and general
repentance of unknown; might by Gods mercy be saved.

. 5. Observations hereof.

. 6. Other learned Protestants join in opinion with master Hooker.

. 1.
Antiquus. If this be so: then (to omit other Churches) I see no reason, but
we may well and safely continue in the Roman Church, and therein receive
salvation: because (as you have said, and it appears by Azorius and all the
schoole-diuines) that Church holds the Foundation, which is (by your own
confession) sufficient to salvation: though she has added many other things,
not necessary absolutely to salvation, yet profitable for the fuller service of
God, beauty of the Church, and pious life.

. 2.
Antiquissimus. If she added none but such things, we should account them not
only tolerable, but commendable. But we charge her with addition of such
doctrines and practices, as being obstinately pursued, spoil and overthrow the
Foundation which she professes to hold.

Whereof hear one man, Mr. Richard Hooker, a man of great account for
learning, Judgment, and moderation, who used very carefully to weigh in the
balance of impartial discretion all the words, sentences and phrases, which
he wrote; and whose works have been already sixetimes printed without any
alteration: Hookers Discourse of Justification. 17.
He grants that the Church of Rome holds the foundation in profession, but
overthrows it by the consequence of many opinions and practices now generally
retained in it. As the Galatians held the foundation (to wit, salvation by
Jesus Christ) and yet withal held a necessity of joining circumcision with
Christ; which doctrine by consequence destroyed the very foundation, for so
Saint Paul wrote unto them, Gal. 5, 2, 4. If they were circumcised, Christ
profited them nothing, he became of none effect unto them, they were fallen
from grace.

In like manner (says he) The Church of Rome, profess^ng to hold the
foundation of faith, yet by joining other things with Christ, and by teaching
many things pernicious in Christian faith, does by consequence plainly
overthrow the foundation of faith.

Plainly (says his Margen) in all men's sight whose eyes God has enlightened
to behold his truth, for they which are in error are in darkness, and see
not that which in light is plain.

One of their pernicious errors, he touches there in the Margensaying, Ibid..
11.
They hold the same with Nestorius, fully the same with Eutiches, about the
proprieties of Christ's Nature. More he mentions else where in the text,
calling them such Impieties as by their law, they have established, and
whereunto all that are among them, either do indeed assent, or else are by
powerful means forced, in show and appearance, to subject themselves. See
also ibid. 2^.
For example: In the Church of Rome is maintained, that the same credit and
reverence that we give to the Scriptures of God, ought also to be given to
unwritten verities; that the Pope is supreme head ministerial over the
universal Church militant, That the bread in the Eucharist is
Transubstantiated into Christ; That it is to be adored and to be offered unto
God, as a sacrifice propitiatory for quick and dead; That Images are to be
worshipped; Saints to be called upon as Intercessors, and such like.

. 3.
Antiquus. How agrees this with that you said before, that the Church of Rome
(excepting the Papacy therein) continued to be the Church of God till Luthers
time? for even those (whom you call the Church of God) lived and dyed in the
profession of these errors which now you say destroy the foundation of the
Church of God.

Antiquissimus Understand us right; They that hold these and such like errors
for worldly respects, knowing them to be heresies, and make semblance of
allowing that which in heart and judgment they condemn: as also they that
heretically maintain them, by holding them obstinately after wholesome
admonition: Mr. Hooker makes no doubt, Cyprian cited before, cap. 1. Sect. 4 3.
Tit 3.1^, 11. so al^o ^il. 3.2 gal 3.^0, 12. and 1, 7, 8, 9.
but their condemnation without an actual repentance, is inevitable. And this
is confirmed by Saint Cyprians famous sentence by me cited before; and by Saint
Paul, saying, A man that is an heretic, after the first and second admonition
reject: knowing that he that is such is subverted, and sins being condemned
of himself.

But many lived in these errors in the Church of Rome, not knowing them to be
errors or heresies; Hooker ibid. 12.
nor ever understanding that the consequent thereof destroyed the Foundation of
Faith. They following the conduct of their guides, and observing exactly what
was prescribed them, Ibid. 13.
thought they did God good service, when indeed they did dishonor him. They
did but erroniously practice what their guides hereticallly taught. And though
the pit be ordinarily the end both of the guide and of the guided in
blindness, yet Gods mercy might save them that sinned only of erroneous
piety, and were merely deceived by thinking too well, and trusting too much
their heretical teachers; not being in the rank of them who received not the
love of the truth to believe it, and had pleasure in unrighteousness, and so
were worthy to be given over to strong delusions and damnation: 2 these. 2.10,
11, 12.

This is confirmed likewise by the former sentence of Saint Cyprian; Cyprian
cited before, cap. 1. sect 4. sect;. 3. Augustine cited before cap. 1. sect. 4.
in the V. Reason. 1 Cor. 1.2. and 15.14 gal. 1.2. and 5, 2, 4, 10. Hook. ib. 26.
and by the judgment of Saint Augustine, formerly alleged; and by Saint
Paul's embracing the Corinthians and Galatians, as Churches of Christ,
notwithstanding the errors which they held, being of mere ignorance and
seduced by false Teachers. For the false teachers of circumcision, or the
froward, stiff-necked, and obstinate defenders thereof, after wholesome
admonition, Saint Paul calls dogs ( Phil. 3.2.) and wishes them cut off, (
Gal. 5 12.) and pronounces them accursed ( Gal 1.8.) But them that held the
same error, of ignorance, not knowing the dangerous consequence of it, and
retained a mind docible and desirous to be instructed in the truth: and to
follow it, Them Saint Paul pittieth, to them he writes as to the Church of
Christ ( Gal. 1.2.) them with fatherly tenderness, he admonishes,
instructs, and imbraceth as his children.

. 4.
And although many of our Fathers in the Church of Rome, dyed in their errors,
not knowing them to be errors, and therefore may be thought never to have
repented of them: yet the same may be said of the Corinthians and Galatians,
that many of them dyed before S. Paul either heard of their seducing, or had
time to reduce them, but of their and the living also, in the very beginning of
his Epistles (before he delivered his instructions) he spoke comfortably, and
saluted the^ as the Churches and Saints of God. Hooker ibid. 18. and. 20.
And Mr. Hooker gives a reason, why they that hold the foundation of Christian
Religion, cannot be said to dye without some kind of Repentance, even for
unknown sins. The least sin in deed, word, or thought, is to be accounted
deadly without repentance, and Gods mercy. Yet many sins escape us without
knowledge of them, and many which we observe not to be sins: and without
actual and particular knowledge, or observation of them, there can be no
actual or particular repentance of them: yet for as much as all that hold the
foundation of religion inviolable in their hearts, have a general hatred of all
sin, though for actual known sins an actual and particular repentance is
required, See Archb. Abbot. ag. Hill. reason 5. 28.
yet for secret and unknown sins (as common ouersights, errors, and such as
we either know not, or know them not to be sins) a general hatred, and a
general repentance of all, obtaines the mercy of God, through the mediation of
Jesus Christ.

Psalm. 51. title. Psalm. 19.12.
David repented actually, particularly, and punctually for his known
particular sins: but of others he says in general, who can understand his
errors? or know how often he offends? Lord, cleanse thou me from my secret
faults.

See here chap. 3. 1.13.
Many ancient Fathers erroneously held free will, and yet were not accounted
heretics, because it was of mere ignorance, whereof they were never
convicted, neither was there any full sufficient settling of the truth of that
point in the Church before their times, nor the evil consequence thereof
discerned. And heresy is the obstinate maintaining of such errors, after the
truth is plainly taught, sufficient to convict them.

The like may be said of the Millenary error, See ibid.
and many other which diverse of the ancient Fathers held, as before is mentioned.

. 5.
Here you may observe,

First, the Church of Rome is charged with errors, Hock. ibid. 17.
by consequence whereof the very foundation of faith is plainly overthrown,
and the force of the blood of Jesus Christ extinguished.

Secondly, the wilful and obstinate maintainers thereof, after wholesome
admonition, are guilty of unavoidable condemnation, without actual repentance.

Thirdly, our Fathers that lived in those errors, D. Whi^^ Woy. page 448.
Morn^y church. cap. 9. end.
and held them only upon ignorance; as they were taught, not thinking they did
amiss, and never understanding the dangerous consequence of them; might, by
their general hatred and repentance of all sin, though unknown, be saved
through Gods mercy: and by holding the foundation, and nothing in their
knowledge and intent contrary thereunto, were to be accounted members of the
true Church of God.

Fourthly, this ignorance in these times cannot give any color of excuse,
since by reason of Luthers opposition, these things have been better
discussed, the errors discovered, and the dangerous consequence of them
sufficiently published to the world, not only by the Divines of other
Countries, but even by our own English; So that after so large a publication
thereof we may say as Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 4.3. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
If our Gospel he hid, it is hid to them that are lost. In whom the God of this
world has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto unto
them. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12.
And 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. In them that perish, because they received not the love of
the truth, that they might be saved: for which cause God sends them strong
delusion, that they should believe a lie; that they might all be damned, who
believe not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

. 6.
Antiquus. You bring forth but one man, and make him great with praises, as if
with his great person and big words, like Goliath, he were sufficient to scarre
and and fright the whole army of God.

Antiquissimus. No, Sir, I bring him forth as humble David against your Goliath
of Rome: and I will, (if you require it) adioyne unto him many other Worthies
(like David's) able to quell all your Giants, not with big words, but with
sound blows.

D. Field. appendix to the fifth book page vlt.
Secondly, Our worthy Doctor Field in his whole five books of the Church every
where shows your corruptions and refuteth them. But for the present read
only the last page of his whole work, where he lays to the charge of the
present Church of Rome, 2 number of erroneous points, wherein men living and
dying, can never be saved, and wherein that Church shows her self to be the
Synagogue of Satan, the faction of Antichrist, and that Babylon, out of which
we must fly, unless we will be partakers of her plagues.

Thirdly, our worthy Bishop Downam, in his books De Antichrist^, shows the
same. His whole third book sets out the opposition of the Pope to Christ's
especially the sixth and seventh Chapters contain a Catalogue of the errors and
heresies of the present Roman Church: and the eight Chapter shows her
opposition against the offices and benefits of Christ, every where alleging
your own authors for confirmation of that the says.

Fourthly, The like does D. Gabriell Powell in his two books, De Antichristo,
and De Ecclesia Antichristi.

If I should but reckon up the names only of Protestants which write of these
points Punctually (as these above named) or otherwise other largly or briefly,
either purposely or occasionally and obiter, by the way,) I should be needlessly
tedious.

Fifthly, M. Perkins upon the Epistle of S. Jude page 261.
I will therefore conclude with one in stead of all, to wit Mr. Perkins. In his
Lectures upon Jude verse. 19 he says, we may not separate from the (visible
particular) Church, 1 for the corrupt manners of Men (except from the private
society of notorious offenders only in private conversation. 1. cor. 5.11) but
only for errors in doctrine: 2 and not for all errors, but only for errors
great and weighty (for smaller errors cut not of salvation, and therefore must
not cause a separation. 1 cor. 3, 15) and 3 for those weighty errors even in
the substance of doctrine, or in the Foundation, if they beheld only of
frailty, we may not separate: but if they be held and maintained with
obstinacy, then with good conscience we may, and must separate from the
maintainers of them. 1 timothy 6.3, 4.5. Acts 19.9.2 Chron. 11.4, 16, 17.

Antiquus. I like well of Mr. Perkins Judgment, that we may not make
separation for any other cause but only for great and weighty errors against
the foundation of Religion, and for those only when they are held with
obstinacy. But where does he charge the Church of Rome with any such?

Antiquissimus. Even in the same Exposition of that Epistle of Saint Jude
verse. 3 where he speaks of the points of Common Salvation from page 37 to
page, 97. There he describes 21 grounds of Faith, and 11 grounds of Gods
service and good life: which the Church of Rome (as there he shows) does very
much infringe, and in many things overthrow, by the points of doctrine and
practice, which it maintains. Reed and weigh them advisedly.

Section. 4.
1. There is a necessity, or great profit of Preaching even to them that are
well grounded in all necessary Principles.

2. As Israel needed all helps after the giving of the Law: and all were too
little.

3. The profits of Preaching in general.

4. Some particulars, for continual spiritual food, cordial medicine and
comfort, memory, armor, etc.

5. The continual need thereof was found in all Churches, planted even by the
Apostles, and in their times.

. 1.
Antiquus. I will read them at my better leisure. But now by the way, by your
allowing these principal grounds of Religion, to be sufficient for all men to
salvation. You seem to cut off all necessity of so much preaching, as is used
amongst you. For what needs so much preaching and hearing, when men are
already instructed in all points necessary to salvation;

Antiquissimus. Preaching is still necessary, because faith and regeneration
must continually receive increase. 2 Pet. 3.1^.
As S. Peter exhorts in the last words of his later Epistle, Grow in grace,
and in knowledge, etc. If knowledge and grace were so perfect in all believers
at the first instant, that no relics of blindness or corruptions remained in
their understanding, 1 Cor. 13.9, 12. romans 7.23. gal. 5.17. ephesians. 6.11, 12, 13,
etc.
will, and affection: no temptation, auocations, suffocations and seductions in
the world to withdraw them; your speech were to some purpose. But since these
things are so common in this world, and so powerful; it is most necessary to
use of all those means which God has prescribed, especially the continual
use of the public Ministry, which by the inward working of the Holy Ghost,
renews, raises, and blows up (as Bellows do the fire) our faith and
love, which else would soon wax cold, die out, and be extinguished. 2 Cor.
4.10.
But by these means (whatsoever become of the outward Man) the Inward man is
renewed day by day.

. 2.
When the Israelites were already taught the grounds of Religion, in the ten
Commandments, Exodus 20. Yet the Lord thought it necessary to add
Interpretations, and fuller explications, thereof, and many ceremonies for
their better training and exercise in those grounds, and for the better keeping
of them from the Idolatry of the Gentiles. He thought it also necessary to give
them a Deuteronomie or Repetition of the Law, Deuteronomy. 1.3, 6. etc
after it had been fully delivered; Beside the extraordinary testimonies of
his continual presence with them, Exodus 13.21. and 16.11, 14. and 17.5.
by the pillar of fire by night and the cloud by day; by Manna from heaven.
Quaiks from the Sea, water from the Rock, strange victories, deliverances,
signs and wonders, blessings and punishments: all which were Sermons unto them
of Gods power and love to keep them in his obedience and service. And in the
land of Canaan, Acts 15.21.
(where they were settled) they had continual reading and interpreting of the
Law every Sabbath day; continual use of the Sacraments, Circumcision and the
Passover, and of all sacrifices and ceremonies to keep them in memory of the
Covenant, to stir them up and exercise them to obedience, comfort, faith, and
hope in the Promised Messiah, the salvation and glory of the world. And yet all
these were too little to keep them in the true service of God, or from falling
away to the Idolatry of the Nations. See 1 Cor. 10. the 11. first verses.
For all this many fell to Idolatry Adultery tempting of God, murmuring and
other sins, so that multitudes of them were one way or other destroyed. And
all these things happened unto them for our examples.

. 3.
Therefore we also have need not only of the grounds well laid; but of
continual explications, and applications thereof, excitations of our
affections, exhortations to obedience, renouations of our memories, armor
against temptations of seductions, or profaneness, comforts against all
afflictions, food against all faintings, and physic against all the maladies
of the soul. All which the contiunall use of the Preaching of the word
Ministers unto us. Col. 3.16. Heb. 10.25. Heb. 3.12, 13. Psalm. 1.1. Deuteronomy. 6.6,
7, 8, 9. Heb. 6.1. Ephesians. 4 11, 12, 13, 14. 2 Pet. 1.5-10.
And therefore we are every where exhorted that the word of God may dwell
plentifully among us, that we forsake not the assemblies, that we exhort and
stir up one another, that we meditate upon the law of God day and night;
that we grow up to perfection, to a full measure of knowledge and holiness; that
we be not as children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the sleights of men, and cunning craftines; that by adding to
Faith, virtue, and to virtue, knowledge; (by continual adding further degrees
to our first graces) we make our calling and election sure, and put our selves
out of danger of falling away.

Somethings are absolutely necessary Necessitate finis, to attain the end (as
are these Fundame^tall doctrines) other things are also necessary, but
Necessitate medi^, as profitable means to be used for that end: such are the
removing of all hindrances, and the using of all furtherances wherein the
Preaching of the word of God is a principal Instrument.

. 4.
Luke 8.11. 1 Pet. 2.2. Heb. 5.12, 13, 14.
1 Gods word is not only seed (to be once sown) but food (to be often
Ministered) milk for babes, and strong meat for men grown. As our bodies by
corporal, so our souls by continual use of spiritual food, must grow,
increase, and be strengthened.

2 Not only food, but wine, See psalm. 119.49.50, 9^. 2 Cor. 1.4, 5. Acts 2.46
and 3.15.31.
or medicine to comfort the fainting heart in all afflictions, in life or
death. The believers did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of
heart. And receiving letters from the Apostles, rejoiced for their consolation.

3 And for renewing of weak memories: 1 Pet. 1.12, 13. Romans 15.14, 15. Phil.
3.1. 2 Thessalonians. 2.5.
St. Peter says, he would not be negligent to put them always in remembrance,
though they knew the things before, and were established in the present truth.
The like says Saint Paul to the Romans, Philippians, Thessalonians. Upon which
last place Saint Chrysostom Commenting says thus much in effect, that we had
need often to review, and renew the seed we have sown, cover it well from the
Fowls of the air hedge and fence it from the beasts of the field, weed and
water it, that it may grow, etc.

4 For preserving the doctrine of salvation, pure and sound from corruption,
which may come into the Church by wicked teachers, and witless hearers.

Some may teach other doctrine, and turn aside to vain jangling yea to loose
faith and a good conscience; 1 Timothy 1.3, 6, 19. and 4.1. 2 Timothy 3.6, 7, 8.
to depart from the faith, and give heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of
Devils. Some creep into houses and lead captive silly women laden with sins,
led away with diverse lusts: ever learning and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth; men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith.

And of witless hearers Saint Paul says also, 2 Timothy 4.3.4.
The time will come, when men will not endure to hear sound doctrine, but
after their own lusts they will heap to themselves Teachers, having itching
ears: and will turn away their ears from the truth, and will be turned unto
Fables.

To prevent which mischief, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.
Saint Paul (for an especial remedy) severely charge Timothy to preach the
Word, be instant in season out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, withal
long suffering and doctrine. And gives him especial warning. To hold fast
(the foundation) the form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13.
which Saint Paul had taught him, in Faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus.

. 5.
These warnings which Saint Paul gave to Timothy, we shall find needful in
all Churches, even in those of the new Testament, where the foundation was
substantially laid by the Apostles themselves. Saint Paul had planted a
glorious Church at Rome, Acts 28.30, 31
continuing there two years together in his own hired house, receiving all
comers, and preaching the kingdom of God, no man forbidding him. He called
them in his Epistle Beloved o^ God, Romans 1.7, 8.
Saints and says their Faith was spoken of throughout the whole world: Romans
^5.14.
and that they were full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to
admonish one another. And yet Saint Paul was feign to admonish the same Romans,
to mark them which caused divisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine
which they had heard and learned, and to avoid them. For such serve not our
Lord Jesus, but their own belly, and by good words and fair speeches deceive
the hearts of the simple.

Romans 16.17, 18
The same Saint Paul had planted a famous Church at Corinth continuing there a
year and an half: so famous, that he said of it (1 Cor. 1.5) I thank God,
that in every thing ye are enriched by God in all utterance and knowledge etc.
But that Church of Corinth, which Paul had planted, Acts 18.11.
Apollo watered, and God so increased, The Devil and wicked men corrupted both
in life, 1 Cor. 5.1.
to suffer such wickedness as was not so much as named among the Gentiles: and
in doctrine to embrace such points as made the Apostles preaching vain, 1 Cor.
15.14, 19.
and their faith vain; Yea and made Christians of all men most miserable.
Which Saint Paul was feign laboriously to reform by writing two large Epistles
unto them.

The Galations erred so dangerously about the doctrine of Justification, Gal.
5.2, 4.
that Saint Paul told them if they reformed it not, they were fallen from
grace, and Christ profited them nothing.

The Philippians had among them dogs, evil workers, Phil. 3.2, 18, 19
enemies to the cross of Christ, whose God was their belly, whose glory was in
their shame, whose end was damnation: Of whom Saint Paul tells them weeping.

Saint Paul praised the Colossians. Col. 1.3, 4, 6. Col. 2.8, 16, 21 22.
yet he found it necessary to warn them of the danger of vain philosophy,
traditions, worshipping of Angels, and other fruitless observations after the
commandments and doctrines of men.

He praised the Thessalonians also: 1 These. 1.2, 3. etc. and 2.13, 14. ib. cap.
3.7, 5. 2 These. 2.2, 3.
Yet he found it fit to send Timothy to strengthen and comfort them, least the
tempter should by some means tempt them, and frustrate his labor. And by two
Epistles he stirs them up to continuance and steadfastness in the truth, and
gives them many good precepts of life. As he does also in all his other
Epistles to other Churches.

The seven Churches of Asia had their imperfections, Reu. 2.4, 5.
their dangers and their need of helps against them. Ephesus fell from her
first love. verse 7.
Smyrna dwelt by the Synagogue of Satan;

Pergamus by Satan's seat, verse 13.
in danger of Balaams stumbling blocks, and the Nicolaitans hateful Doctrine.

Thyatyra tempted by Iezabels fornication and Idols. verse 20.


Sardis had a name to live, and was dead. Reu. 3.1.


Philadelphia had but little strength. verse 8. verse 15.


Laodicea was neither hot nor cold: thought all well, and knew not she was
wretched, miserable, poor, blind and naked.

These Churches, to which (it may be presumed) all other may, in some sort more
or less, be resembled and ranked; had the foundation well laid in them: but
yet they stood in need of continual renewed instructions excitations,
exhortations, consolations, armor against temptations, physic against
diseases, and food against faintings: and consequently, of the Word of God
(which is all these) to dwell plentifully among them, and duly and daily to be
ministered unto them.

I verily think, the want of frequenting our Sermons, is the cause that so
many fall away to the Romish. It is the policy of your seducers, to keep them
by all means from hearing and knowing the truth. 2. These. 2.10, 11, 12.
Otherwise they could never be so blinded, to believe lies, to take Nouelty for
Antiquity, Idolatry for Gods worship treasons and massacres for holy acts: to
take pleasure in unrighteousness, and be carried away with such other strong
delusions and withal deceiuablenesse of unrighteousness to their own
perdidition: and not rather receive the love of the truth that they might be
saved.

Psalm. 58.4, ^.
These deaf Adders might be charmed, if they did not wilfully stop their ears
against the voice of the Charmer, Heb. 4.12. and 2 cor. 10.4, 5.
charm he never so wisely. For the word of God i^ quick and powerful, and
sharper then any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of the
soul and the spirit, and of the Ioints and marow, and is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart.

The fruit whereof you may see, where it is plentiful and graceously preached,
observing how religious, devout, just, and truly honest, the people become;
how temperate, sober, charitable upright dealing and blessed people, abhorring
all sin, desirous and diligent to practice all good duties that tend to the
honor of God, and the good of men.

I do not think, but if your backsliders would carefully hear many of our
Preachers, they would be (as Saint Paul says) convinced of all, 2 Cor. 14.24,
25.
and judged of all: and the very secrets of their hearts made manifest, and so
falling down on their faces, would worship God, and report, that God is in the
Preachers of a truth

Antiquus. Oh Sir, so we think of our Priests; we reverence them as Gods
Angels, we hear them as sent from God, as God himself; or as men sent and
endued with power from God, to teach us the true way to heaven; to absolve us
from our sins, to offer up the real sacrifice of Christ's body and blood for
us, and to give us the true natural body of Christ himself into our moothes
to our eternal salvation. Which privileges your titulary Ministers have not;
They are no Priests, they are mere secular men, without any power and
authority from God to do any of these things. And therefore we have no reason
to hear them: or to reverence them otherwise then we do other ordinary men,
for their personal honesty or ciuility, not for their offices. You have
therefore offered me just occasion to proceed and urge this thing, as

CHAP. 5. Of the succession of the Protestants Bishops and Ministers from the
Apostles.
Section 1. The necessity thereof, urged, without which there can be no such
Church.

2. This succession is clamourously denied to Protestants.

3. But manifestly proved, and the slanders confuted.

4. Particularly in Cranmer, our first Archbishop.

5. Jn other Bishops of King Henry 8 his time.

6. And of Edward 6. and of Queen Mary's time.

7. And of Queen Elizabeth's time.

8. The false reports hereof do alienate many from the Reformed Religion.

9. A proof of the sufficient ordination of Ministers in foreign Reformed
Churches.

10. Which is further confirmed by the Doctrine and practice of the Romish.

Section 1.
Antiquus.

ANother principal argument, to prove that you Protestants have no Church at
all: because you have no Priests (or true Ministers) sent and authorized by the
Lord. In urging whereof, give me leave somewhat to enlarge my self.

Antiquissimus. Say what you will. I hope to give you a sufficient and
satisfactory answer.

Antiquus. First, there can be no Church without true Ministers to teach the
holy Doctrine, to perform the holy service of God, and to minister the
Sacraments unto Gods people, and bring them to salvation. Ephesians. 4.8. etc.
And therefore when our Savior ascended into heaven, he gave all necessary
gifts unto men, making Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, for
the work of the Ministry, gathering and perfecting of the Saints, and
edifying of the Church, to continue (by succession) to the end of the world Jb.
verse 13.
. That all might be kept from error, and united in the Truth.

These are the Lords Ambassadors 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20.
, planters, waterers, husbandmen, builders; yea, co-adjutors, and
workers-together-with God 1 Cor 3.6, 9
.

Secondly, therefore these Ministers must be furnished Bellar. de sacra^. in
genere lib. 2. cap. 19. propositio. sexta and prop. tertia in sine.
that wheresoever it is, God is present, By Covenant or promise.
ex pacto, and concurreth to the producing of supernatural effects, which he
does not, where his Character is wanting. Therefore when Christ sent his
Apostles with this Commission, As my Father sent me, even so send J you Ioh.
20.21, etc.
: He breathed on them and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost, whose sins soever
ye remit, they are remitted unto them: and whose soever sins ye retain,
they are retained. Where he gave them both Commission and power to perform it.
And in the end of Saint Matthewes Gospel Matthew. 28, 18, 19, 20.
, first mentioning his unbounded power both in heaven and earth: he sends his
Apostles to teach, and bring the world into his subjection: adding, that he
would be with them to the end of the world, to wit, with their persons while
they live and with their successors while the world lasts, with his power and
effectual working with them. So that Christ must send, and he must furnish
with gifts and power. And no man takes to himself this office or honor, but
he that is called of God as was Aaron Heb. 5.4.
.

Ioh 20.21.
: so the Apostles Bellar. De notis ecclesiae lib. 4. cap. 8.
afterward chose and ordained other Bishops, and gave them the like power to
ordain others both Bishops and inferior Priests and Deacons, as Timothy at
Ephesus, Titus in Creet As appears by the Epistles to Tim and Tit.
. By this means all true Bishops and Priests have their succession and
ordination from hand to hand from the very Apostles. And none are to be
accounted true Bishops, that were not ordained by the imposition of hands of
former true Bishops, and they by other former, and so upwards ascending to the
very Apostles, and to Christ Jesus, from who^ they must derive their authority
and power for all works of the Ministry. Therefore Saint Ierom says
Hiero^ym. contra Luciferianos Ecclesia non est qua non habet sacerdotem.
, It can be no Church that has no Ministry. And Saint Cyprian, that the
Church is nothing else but Cypr. Plebs Episcopo adunata. lib. 4. ep. 10. citat.
a Possevino. bibl. select. lib. 6. cap. 31. ad interrog. 4. and D. Field.
Church. lib. 3. cap. 39.
People united to the Bishop. And Tertullian further, Tertull. lib. De
praescript. Bellar. quo supra.
Let Heretics show the original of their Churches, and run over the order
of their Bishops, coming down by succession from the beginning so that their
first Bishop had some Apostle or Apostolic man for his author and Predecessor.

For thus the Church of the Romans reckons Clement, ordained by Saint Peter.
And Saint Cyprian says Cypr. lib. 1. ep. 4. ad Magnum.
Nouatianus is not in the Church, neither can be accounted a Bishop, who
contemning the Apostolic tradition, succeeds no man, but is ordained of
himself. The like have many other Fathers alleged by Bellarmine Bellar. quo
supra.
. And by the Canons of the Apostles, and many ancient Councels So Bellarm.
shows l^o. citato. and D. Field. lib. 3. cap. 39. and lib. 5 cap. 36.
. A Bishop must receive his Consecration by three Bishops at the least which
were formerly consecrated in like manner. And all inferious Ministers must
receive orders of such a Bishop, or else they are not Canonical, Lawful, nor
to be received. They that come in other ways then by this door, are thieves
and robbers John 10.8.9, 10.
.

All this (describing, and proving the nature, succession and ordination of
true Bishops and inferior Ministers) is the first proposition, or major of my
Argument.

Then comes my Assumption, or minor proposition, thus: But the Protestant
Ministers are not such: 1 Kings 20.11
(namely, their Bishops were not consecrated by three Bishops, so formerly
consecrated as abouesaid: neither did their inferior Ministers receive their
orders from true Bishops.)

The conclusion will necessarily follow: Ergo the Protestant Ministers are no
true Ministers of the true Church. And consequently they have no true Church
among them. An argument inuinsible, unanswerable.

Sect. 2.
Antiquissimus. Good Sir, triumph not before the victory: let not him that
puts on his harness, boast himself, as he that puts it off. It is your
men's fashion first to confirm that with glorious words and arguments, which we
stick not at (as you have done your Major) to make the world believe (it
seems) that we denied all that which you so busily and so bravely prove, and
so to make us odious. And your other fashion is as ill, to leave the maine
matter in controversy, utterly unproven (as here your Minor) thinking to carry
it away with out facing, and great words. This is a charming and bewitching of
the credulous world without all truth and honesty; As I shall make it plainly
appear.

For why else do your Rabbis so generally declaime against us and never prove
it? Your Bristow, Motive 21.
Bristow, Harding, confut. Apol. part. 2. cap 5.
Harding, Sanders de schis. lib. 3. page 299.
Sanders, Howlet bri^fe discours^ason 7.
Howlet, Card. Allen. with Rhemists, Annot in Romans 10.15.
Allen, with his Rhemists, D. Stapleton princ. doctr. l. 13. cap. 6.
Stapleton, Doctor Kellison Reply to D. Sutclif. p. 31.
Kellison, Will. Rainolds Calvino-Turr. l. 4. c 15. p. 975.
William Rainolds, The Cath. Priests in their supplication to K. James, anno
1604.
The number of Catholic Priests, Bellar. eccles. milit. lib. 4. c. 8.
Bellarmine, Posnanienses assert. de Christi in terris ecclesia. these. 60.
Posnanienses, Gregorius de Valentia tom. 4. disp. 9. q. 3. punct. 2.
Valentianus, Turrian de Iure ordinand. lib. 2. c. 3. The like has
Turrianus, Mattheus Lanoius, and
Lanoius, D. Tyreus cited by Schaltingiu^ ^ib. cathol. t. 4. page 33. The words
of these ^uthors you may see in the book of Mr. Francis Mason. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Tyreus? and other not worth the reckning without measure or end. Why do they
so bitterly inueigh against our Bishops and Ministers (leaving their Doctrine
and discrediting their calling, to make people forsake them) as men unsent,
uncalled, unconsecrated, without successiion ordination or jurisdiction, yea
calling them false prophets, inuaders, usurpers, and other Apostataes from the
Church or Rome or mere Laymen: but neither true Bishops nor Ministers at any
hand. Which they only say, and repeat, and affirm with great vehemence, but
never prove.

Sect. 3.
Antiquus. Yes, they prove it too. Christ. a Sacrobosco de Invost. Christi
eccl. cap. 4.
Sacroboscus reports the story of the Consecration of the Bishop Jewel, Sands,
Scory, Horn, Grindal, and others, who met at a Tavern or Inn in Cheapside
(called the Horsehead) in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign: and being
disappointed of the Catholic Bishop of Landaffe, who should there have been
to consecrate them: some of them imposed hands upon Scory, and he upon the
rest: and so were sons made without a father, and the father procreated by the
sons. Thus says Sacroboscus adding that one Thomas Neal, Hebrew Lecturer at
Oxford, (who was present) told this to his old confessors and they told it to
Sacroboscus, and that afterward it was enacted in Parliament, that these men
should be accounted lawful Bishops. The same story is also reported in a
Preface to a Catholic book called. A discussion, numb. 135. citing
Sacraboscus for it. And thus (says that Preface) they used the like Art that
the Lollards once did in another matter, who being desirous to eat flesh on
Good Friday, and yet fearing the penalty of the Laws, took a Pig, and diuing
it under the water, said, Down Pig, and up Pike: and then after constantly
avouched that they had eaten no flesh but fish. So these caused him who kneeled
down John Jewel, to rise up Bishop of Sali^bury: and him that was Robert
Horn before, to rise up Bishop of Winchester: and so forth with all the rest.

Antiquissimus. I wonder that men of any foreheads are not ashamed to vent such
fantastical and false tales, which are confuted fully by the public Records
and Registers of those times. Bishop Jewel published his answer to Hardings
objections, threescore years agone ( Anno Dom. 1567.) wherein he plainly
shows Jewels Defense of the Apology 2. part. cap. 5, printed anno Dom. 1567.
that himself and all our other Bishops succeeded the Bishops that had been
before them, and were elected, consecrated and confirmed, as they were. So that
your learned men have had time enough to read, search, consider, and confute,
or be satisfied: and not still thus wickedly to proclaim to the world such
falsities. And Master Francis Mason has done it more thoroughly in a complete
Treatise Of the consecration of the Bishops in England: and ordination of
Priests and Deacons. Five books printed Anno Dom. 1613. Ex Register. Park. 1.
fol. 18. and fol. 39.
(printed anno Do^. 1613.) who shows out of the Register books of the
Archbishops of those times, among all other, the Consecrations of these Bishops
whom your Catholic scoffers thus deprave.

1 B. Scory was consecrated August 30. anno 1551. in the time of Edw. 6 by
Archbishop Cranmer, Nicholas London, and John Bedford.

2 3 B B. Grindall and Sauds were consecrated both upon one day, the 21 of
December, anno 1559. being the Sabbath day, and in the forenoone, in the
Chapel at Lambehith: by Matthew, Archbishop of Canterbury, William Cicester,
John Hereford, and John Bedford, Master Alexander Nowell, the Archbishops
Chaplein, then preaching upon this Text, Acts 20.28. Take heed to your selves
and to all the flock whereof the Holy Ghost has made you overseers: and a
Communion reverently administered by the Archbishop.

4 B. Jewel was consecrated, Ian. 21. 1559. being the Sabbath day, in the
forenoone, in the Chapel of Lambehith: by Matthew, Archbishop of Canterbury,
Edmund Grindal, Ib. fol. 46.
Bishop of London, Richard Gox, Bishop of Ely, and John Hodskius, Bishop of
Bedford: with Common prayers, Communion, and a Sermon preached by Master Andrew
Pierson, the Archbishops Chaplein, upon this Text, Matt. 5.16. Let your light
so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your
Father which is in Heaven.

Ib. fol. 88.
5 B. Horn was consecrated, Febr. 16. 1560. being the Sabbath day, in the
forenoone, in the Chapel at Lambehith, in all respects as the former, by
Matthew, Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Bishop of Saint David's, See also
Annals of Q. Elizabeth, Engl. Darcy. page 32.
Edmund, Bishop of London, and Thomas B. of Couentry and Liechfield, which I
do thus punctually relate, that the world may be satisfied thoroughly, and
wonder at the impudency of these forgers of lies, and at the folly of their
believers.

Antiq. I doubted always of that unlikely tale of the Consecration of the
Nags-head, depending only upon the report of one sole witness, Thomas Neal,
an obscure man, and telling it in darkness: and now I am fully resolved out
of public Records by you alleged, easy to be sought and scarched, that it
is utterly false. But if it be granted that all these Bishops mentioned in that
tale, were orderly consecrated by 3 Bishops at the least, according to the
Canons: how may it appear that those other Bishops which consecrated them,
were themselves true Bishops? Show me how your first Reforming Bishops (as you
call them) which upon the banishing of the Popes authority by K. H 8
consecrated the fallowing Bishops) were consecrated themselves by lawful
Bishops their Predecessors, and then you say something. All this out of Mr.
Mason lib. 2. cap. 7. and Antiq. Brit. page 321, 322. and Act. and Mon.


Sect. 4.
Antiquissimus. Our first reformed Bishop was Thomas Cranmer: who had been
sent before by King Henry to the Pope with other Ambassadors, who delivered to
the Pope a book of his own writing wherein he proved by ^criptures, Fathers and
Councels, that no mortal man had power to give a dispensation for a man to
marry h^s brothers wife: and told the Pope they had brought also other learned
men out of England, which were ready by dispensation to maintain it. The Pope
promised sundry times a day of disputation: but after many delays, giving them
good entertainment, he made Cranmer his ^enitentiary, and dismissed them. Then
the rest returning, Cranmer was sent by the Kings appointment Ambassador into
Germany to the Emperor, where he drew many to his side and among the rest,
Cornelius Agrippa. While he was in Germany; Archbishop Warhan dyed: and the K.
sent for Cranmer, to make him Archbishop of Canterbury: who delayed his
return, partly for business, and partly for conscience and fear that he
should be urged to receive the Bishopric as from the Popes Donation, when the
right or Donation was in the King; As he plainly told the King after his
coming home. But yet the matter was so handled, that both with the Kings and
the popes consent, Cranmer was made Archbishop. There are many letters from the
pope, so^^ to the King, some to Cranmer, in favor of Cranmer, recorded in the
Register of Cranmer, fol. 1, 2, 3. and related in Master Masons Book, lib. 2.
cap 6. Whereof one for his Consecration runs thus: Clement, Bishop (...) our
well-beloved son, Thomas, elect of Canterbuty; We^ grant he e^c^ to thee, that
thou m^^st ^^^eiue the gift of Consecration of whatsoever Catholic Prelate
thou will, so he enjoy the favor and communion of the Apostolic See, two or
three Bishops enjoying the like favor and communion being sent for, and
assisting him in this business, Dat. Bouon. 1532. Pontificatus numeri decimo.

And he was accordingly consecrated, March, 30. 1533 (24. H. 8.) by three
Bishops, to his Lincoln, John Exon, H^y^ry Assaph.

I hope there can be no quarrel picked against this Consecration. The most
busie-headed Jesuit of our times, Robert Parsons, acknowledges Cranmer a true
Bishop, in his three Conuersions, part. 3. page 340.

Antiquus. But did not Cranmer take the oath to the Bishop of Rome at his
Consecration, as his predcessors had done, and afterward brake it?

Sanders de schis. lib. 1 cap. 58. Mason lib. 2. cap. 7. Ex Regist. Cran. fol.
4. b.
Antiquissimus. Indeed your D. Sanders so slanders him: as if he had taken it
simply and absolutely: which he did not, but with a protestation often made and
repeat^d plainly and publicly, first in the Chapter House: secondly, kneeling
before the high Altar, in the hearing of the Bishops and people at his
consecration: thirdly, in the very same place, and in the very same words, when
by Commission from the Pope, they delivered him the Pall. The sum of the
protestation was this. That he intended not to bind himself to any thing
which was contrary to the Law of God, or contrary to the King or Common, wealth
of England, or the Laws and prerogatives of the some, nor to restrain his
own liberty to speak, consult, or consent, in all and every thing concerning
the Reformation of Christian Religion, the Government of the Church of England,
and the prerogat^ue of the Crown, or the commodity of the Commonwealth. And
every where to execute and reform such things, which he should think fit to
be reformed in the Church of England. And according to this interpretation, and
this sense, and no otherwise, he professed and protested, that he would take
the oath.

Sect. 5.
Antiquus. Well, I am satisfied for Cranmer. What say you to the rest of that
time? for he alone could not consecrate.

Antiquissimus. I say first, the Bishops in King Henry's time which had been
consecrated before the renouncing of the popes authority, lost not their power
of consecrating afterward. For their Character is indeleble, and cannot be
nullified by schism, heresy, or censure of the Church: being a thing
imprinted in the soul by God, and not by Man: as the Councels Council. of
Florence and Trent. cited by Bellar. De Sacram. in genere lib. 2. cap. 19.
and your own Doctors Bellarmine in the same chapter, and De Romans pont. lib.
4. c. 10. Respondeo. falsissimum esse in fine. he says, Quis ignorant
Catholicorum, baptizatos ab Haereticis vere esse baptizatos? and similiter
ordinatos vere esse ordinatos, quando ordinator vere episcopus fuerat, adhuc
erat saltem quantum ad Characterem.
teach.

Secondly, I say, that by the Statutes made in the 25 year of King Henry 8, it
was ordained that every Bishop should be consecrated by three former Bishops,
and with all due ceremonies. And this is acknowledged by your De schis. lib. 3
page 296.
D. Sanders: and was duly performed in all Consecrations: as of Cranmer of
Canterbury, 1533. Lee of Liechfield, 1534. Brown Archbishop of Dublin, 1535.
Wharton of Assaph, 1536. Holgate of Landaffe, 1537. Holbecke of Bristow, 1537.
Thurlby of Westminster, 1540. Wakeman of Gloucester, 1541. Bucklsy of Bangor,
1541. Bush of Bristow, 1542. Kitchen of Landaffe, 1545. Every one consecrated
by three Bishops, at the least, and with all due ceremonies. So that of King
Henry's time (both by the statute De jure, and by Records De facto) you may be
fully resolved, that (according to your own rules) all were true Bishops that
were consecrated either before or after the schism (as you call it.) nd so
they were acknowledged that lived still in Queen Mary's time, they that had
been thus consecrated in King Henry's time, were acknowledged (I say) by all
your Catholics, and by the Pope himself, to be rightly consecrated neither
needed they any new consecration, as B. Bouer, Bishop Thurlby, and Cardinal
Pole. But Thurlby made Bishop of Westminster in King Henry's time, was
translated to Norwich by King Edward, and to Ely by Queen Mary and made of her
privy Council. And Anthony Kitchen made Bishop of Landaffa, in King Henry's
time, so continued in King Edward and Queen Mary's time, and till his death in
the fifth year of Queen Elizabeth, without any new orders or consecration, the
first being sufficient, and in all times undoubted. Also Reginal Poole
Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Watson, David Pole, John Christoferson, made
Bishops in Queen Mary's time, derived their Consecration from Bishops which
were made in the time of the pretended schism, and some of them from Cranmer
himself. Now then if you allow them for Canonical, you must allow their
consecrators also to be Canonical.

Sect. 6.
King Henry's Bishops then being thus cleared come we to King Edwards time,
wherein, the Bishops formerly made and then continuing are cleared also to be
truly Consecrated: and the Priests also formerly made, and continuing in King
Edwards time must be acknowledged to be rightly ordered, and therefore to be
capable of consecration to be made Bishops, as were Ridley, Hooper, Ferrar.
These therefore being consecrated by three Bishops became true Canonical
Bishops and so were all throughout King Edwards days, as appears both by
your Doctor Sanders confession Sanders de schism. lib. 3. page 297.
. And by our public Records or Registers Extracted and published in Mr.
Masons book.
. Ridley, 1547. Ferrar 1549. Hooper 1550. Poynet, 1550. Scory and Couerdale,
1551. In whose consecrations good and fit prayers were used, and all necessary
ceremonies, as of imposition of hands, etc. Avoiding only unnecessary,
superfluous and superstitions Ceremonies (as we call them) which your own men
confess to be accidental things only, and not touching the essence of
orders: without which orders may well stand and be prefect enough.

Of Queen Mary's time you make no doubt: all was according to your mind: all
the Bishops and Priests were true and Canonical: and might well deliver the
like to posterity: I speak this ex concessis. And of Queen Elizabeth's time
you have as little reason to doubt.

Sect. 7.
Antiq. Yes, for in the very beginning of Queen Elizabeth's time, some Bishops
were deprived, See Arn^ls of Elizabeth Engglish Dar^^ page 32.
and the rest denied to consecrate new ones. So that for the consecration of D.
Parker Archbishop of Canterbury, there could not be found Bishops to do it, D.
Sanders says you had neither 3 nor 2 Bishps to do it: D. Kellison says you
could find none.

Antiquissimus. This is a shameless untruth. For when the Deane and Chapter had
elected D. Parker for their Archbishops according to the ancient and inuiolated
custom of the Church (as the Record Register Mat. Parker.
says) the Queen sent her letters Patents to seven Bishops, giving commission
that they, or at least four of them should consecrate him, etc And four of
them did it accordingly the 17 of December 1559. To wit William Barlow, and
John Hodgskins both made Bishops in King Henry's Days, and John Scory, and
Miles Couerdale, made Bishops in King Edwards days.

Antiq. There may be some doubt whether these were Bishops or no, because they
fled and left their Bishoprics in Queen Mary's days, and other Bishops were
placed in their rooms.

Antiquissimus. These prelates did but as Athanasius and many other holy Bishops
did in the dangerous times of the domineering Arrians, Matthew. 10.^3.
who according to Christ's precept fled to save their lives and reserve their
gifts to better times. But as Athanasius and those other Bishops, were still
accounted the true Bishops: and those that were set up in their rooms were
accounted usurpers, and put down, when those better times came, and the other
true Bishops restored to their places: so at the coming of Elizabeth's happy
times, these Bishops that fled were recalled returned, and restored to their
former places: or preferred to other. Now except you will condemn that most
worthy Athanasius (and the other) for no Bishops in the time of their exile,
when others had their places: you cannot reject these worthy men as no Bishops,
their case being the same with those ancient Bishops. And of all other, you
should least quarrel at these things. For you know there are many in your
Roman Church, both Bishops and Priests, which have no particular places,
Bishoprics or Benefices, and yet you account them true Bishops and Priests.
Such was Olaus Magnus, Archiepiscopus Vpsalensis Gentil. in Examine.
: and blind Robert, Archiepiscopus Armachanus Jdem ib.
. Who both were sent by the Pope to the Council of Trent, to fill up the
number of Bishops Sleidan. com. lib. 17.
. And Robert King, entitled Episcopus Roanensis Goodwin Catalogo.
, in the Archbishopric of Athens in Grecia, under the Turk, and many the
like: And your innumerable Priests without Benefices sent into England and
other Countries.

Your own Bellarmine says, Bellar. De Sacram. conf. lib. 2. cap. 12. in fine.
Respondeo Suffraganeos esse vere episcopos, quia and ordinationem habent, and
iurisdictionem, licet careant possessione pro priae ecclesia.
They are true Bishops which have ordination and Jurisdiction, though they want
the possession of their proper Church. And this also warranteth our Suffragan
Bishops (whereof we had some in later times) who had both due consecration by
three Bishops, and also Jurisdiction, though not very large as other Bishops
had By the statute of 26. H. 8. c. 14.
.

Antiquus. Since you have so well satisfied me of Archbishop Parkers
consecration, (when true Bishops, willing to put to their hands, were so hard
to be found) I need not doubt of the rest of all the Bishops the in more
plentiful reigns of Queen Eliz^beth or King James: since D. Sanders Sanders
de schism lib. 3. page 297.
confesses that the Law of King Henry 8 for consecration by three Bishops, was
revived by Queen Elizabeth, and stands in force: and has been very duly
observed in these later times.

Antiquissimus. If you desire yet fuller satisfaction, you may see the
Consecrations of the Bishops in both these Princes reigns set down largely in
Master Masons book; together with a deriuation of the Episcopal line from the
Bishops of King Henry 8 (which you acknowledge to be Canonical) unto George,
now Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; with the days and years when every of them
and their Consecrators were consecrated, ever more by three former Bishops, and
sometimes by four, or more.

I conclude with Bishop Andrews answer to Bellarmine: Eliensis Responsio ad
Bellarmini Apologiam contra Praefationem monitoriam Iacobi Regis cap. 7. page
168.
Our Bishops have been always ordained by three true Bishops. Bishops, not (as
you sometimes against the Canons) by abbots. Also by true Bishops, even your
Bishops (except yours be not true) This Canon was never violated by us, nor
that order ever interrupted. And in our Bishops there is res Episcopi, non
nomen solum; et opus, non opes, the office and not only the benefice. Which
they perform much more frequently and diligently then yours do.

Sect. 8.
Antiquus. I have been very much wronged and abused with the contrary opinion
which our teacherr hold so confidently, and urge so vehemently, with such
seeming certain knowledge of the truth, that I thought it a shame to doubt of
it. And I confess, it was one principal cause of my alienation from hearing
or regarding your Ministers whom otherwise I knew to be very honest and learned
men.

Antiquissimus. You may see by this, how men's minds leauened with malice will
Imagine evil without cause: and how mightily their passions and affections
transport them to receive vain surmises for truest oracles, and vent them for
arguments unanswerable. This may occasion you to suspect their dealing in other
things.

And as you do wisely and religiously to yield to the manifest truth, gr^euing
that you have been abused by the unskillful or deluded by the wilful evil
teachers: so (I hope) when others see the same truth they will be stayed from
falling: and they that have fallen, be restored to the bosom of their natural
mother: and the deceivers themselves be confounded and ashamed of the books
they have so falsely written; and all Godly people be confirmed in the truth so
manifestly cleared from forgeries which obscured it. All which I hope the
rather, because the Papist prisoners in Framlingham castle in Queen Elizabeth's
time said to the Protestant Ministers: if you can justify your calling, we will
all come to your Church, and be of your Religion Mason lib. 1. cap. 3. in fine
page 20.
.

Sect. 9.
Antiquus. Well Sir, be it that your English Clergy was canonically ordained
and consecrated; yet what say you to the Protestant Ministers in other
countries, which could have no Bishops to ordain them? But (as our learned men
say) they ordained one another very disorderedly and insufficiently.

Antiquissimus. You draw me to a Digression impertinent to the Church of
England, to speak of other countries, in whose affairs I am not sufficiently
acquainted, and am loath to meddle. It may be your learned men wrong them, as
they have done us. But if what they say, be true; It was your Popes fault so
auerse from all reformation, that did drive the Reformers in those countries to
that necessity that either one Minister must ordain another, or else the
Churches must be without many profitable Ministers.

By the way; because you dislike our word Minister, as we do your word Priest,
used in your sense for sacrificing Priest. (Though the word Minister be used
by the Bellar. de Romans pont. li. 3 cap. 13 page 392. Ratio autem cur, Apostoli
in Scripturis nunquam vocant sacerdotes Christianos, sacerdotes, sed solum
episcopos and presbyteros.
Apostles in the New Testament, for Minsters of the Gospel: and the word
Priest, never used at all by them; no, nor by the most ancient Fathers, as
Bellar, decultu Sanctorum lib. 3. cap. 4. Ad testimonium Patrum dico, page 275.
See before chap. 2. 2.
Bell. himself confesses) I will (to avoid offense to both) use the word
Presbyter: (which the Apostles used, and which I see our late learned writers
do more willingly frequent) to signify such as have taken full orders in the
Church of God. But note you also by the way, that our fault is very small, in
using sparingly the terms of some later Fathers, and using commonly the words
of the Apostles: yours is very great, in forsaking and deriding the word of the
B B. Apostles, and preferring the words of some Fathers, and using them
contrary to their meaning. But, Then I doubt not to affirm that Orders given
to Presbyters by Presbyters only, in times of necessity, when Bishops cannot
be procured to give them, are of full validity, and sufficiency. For, the
giving of orders was appointed to Bishops, not of absolute necessity, but for
their greater honor, and for the better government and preservation of peace
and unity in the Church, and for those and the like reasons, it is fit, that
course be observed, when possibly it may. But when it cannot: we must consider,
that even Bishops themselves do not give orders by any other power then is
found in any other Presbyter. Not by their power of Jurisdiction (for they may
ordain Presbyters living out of their Jurisdiction:) but by virtue of their
orders only: whereby they stand Presbyters. Which is manifest by this, that
Bishops and Suffragans which are not Presbyters, cannot give orders which they
never received: therefore seeing the power of giving orders, is from the virtue
of the orders formerly received (which virtue is in every presbyter, as well as
in a Bishop: and therein Priests, Bishops, and Popes are all equal See D.
Field. lib. 3. cap. 39. in medio. alleging many Schoolmen to this purpose.
.) Then for want of Bishops to give orders, Presbyters may give them. For that
is but a breach of decency and honorable conueniency, whereby that thing is
tied to some chief Presbyters (namely to Bishops) which otherwise all
Presbyters may do. But to the validity of the orders it makes nothing, what
Presbyter soe^er gives them.

The best learned in the Church of Rome in former times agreed to this.
A^machanus Armachanus lib. 11. in 4. Armenorum cap. 7.
, a worthy Bishop says, If all Bishops failed by death, (Sacerdotes minores
possent Episcopum ordinare,) Inferior Priests might ordain a Bishop. And
Alexander of Hales Halensi^ part. 4. q. 9. memb. 5. art. 1 cited by D. Field.
ib.
says. that many learned men in his time and before, were of opinion, that in
some cases, and in some times, Presbyters may give orders, and that their
ordinations are of force: though to do so, not being urged by extreme
necessity, cannot be excused from ouer-great boldness and presumption. And why
not orders by ordinary presbyters, as well as Baptism by meaner persons? For
your Doctors in times of necessity allow Baptism (which is a principal
Sacrament) to be administered not only by Bishops and Priests, but by Deacons,
or any Laiks Baptized, yea Laiks unbaptized, and very Pagans, (if they knew and
preforme the Rites of Baptism) and women also: by any person that is Homo
rationalis and intends to do as the Church would do.

The Baptism preformed by them is sufficient, effectual, and needs no
rebaptization, as Bellermine teaches at large Bellarm. de baptismo. lib. 1.
cap. 7.
. If this will not suffice, you may see more in Doctor Fields D. Field. lib. 3.
cap. 39. and lib. 5. cap. 56.
and Master Masons books Mason lib. 1.
.

Sect. 10.
Antiquus. Sir you may not think that your private Reason and judgment can
ouersway the judgment and determinations of grave, learned, and holy counsels.

Antiquiss. Far be from me the presumption to think so. Yet give us leave to
see what we see and to say what we know, we see it in your own learned men's
books, and know it to be your own practice, oftentimes to break the Canons,
both of ancient Councels and of the Apostles. If Protestants do it in times of
necessity, condemn them not, for necessity has no law, it is so great a
tyrant, that it will not suffer the Law to stand. Your men are feign sometimes
to yield unto it. Your This appears plainly by Greg. Epistles lib. 12. Iud. 7.
epist. 31. rectified by Bid of D. Stapletons own judicious edition and
translation, though other copies somewhat differ. See Mason lib. 2. cap. 5.
page 61.
Gregory the great Bishop of Rome, sending Augustine the Monk into England
(who was not until afterward made Bishop of Canterbury) appointed him to
ordain the first Bishops himself alone, in case the Brittan Bishops opposed
him, and that of the English or Saxons there were no Bishops, and that the
French Bishops would be slack and uncertain of ayding him. And accordingly
himself alone, ordained Melitus the first Bishop: and by the assistance of
Melitus only, he ordained Iustus the second: and when there was a Canonical
number, then they observed the number of three to consecrate others.

In like manner your Baronius Baronius anno 555. n. 10.
sticks not to record that pope Pelagius the first, was consecrated by two
Bishop only (when more could not be procured) and a Priest. And yet was he
accounted a good lawful Bishop: and in his time he ordained 29 Priests, and 49
Bishops. If his consecration were a nullity, then so were all theirs, and all
other consecrated by them: and so there followed a world of nullities in the
Church of Rome.

Euagrius Patriarch of Antioch, was consecrated by Paulinus alone, and yet
accounted a lawful Bishop, Ioannes Mayor in 4. Sent. did. 24. q. 3. inter
opera Gerson. Paris. 1606. page 681.
as Theodoret lib. 5. cap. 23.
Theodoret shows.

Joannes Mayor, a Doctor of Paris, says that Rusticus and Eleutherius who came
into France with Dionysius were not Bishops; But Dionysius alone ordained the
Bishops of France. He says also, Mayor quo supra.
who ordained Peter? they will not find us three ordainers. Therefore I say it
is an humane constitution that a Bishop shall be ordained by three. S. Paul did
not seek for two more for the ordination of Titus and Timothy. And Petrus de
Palude Petrus De Palude De potestate Apostol cited by B. Jewel Defens. 2 part.
cap 5 division 1. p. 130
says one Bishop, is sufficient to consecrate another, and it is only for the
greater solemnity a devise of the Church, that three shall concur. This is
therefore no essential part, but an accidental ornament of the Consecration:
a complement of honorable conueniency, fit to be used where it may be had; no
substanciall point of absolute necessity, making a nullity of consecration
where it wants. The like may be said of orders to be given by (...) Bishop
only. Pope Gelasius says Gelasius epist. 9. B^n. t. 2. page 243. Priscis pro
sua reuerentia manentibus cons^itutis, qua vbi nulla vel rerum vel temporum per
vrget necessitas, regulariter conuenit custodire.
when no necessity of things or times compel to the contrary, it is fit
reverently to keep the ancients constitutions. So says Leo also Cited by Ioh.
8. epist 8. Bin. c. 3. part. 2. page 977. Omittendum esse and inculpabile
iudicandum, quod intulit necessitas.
, but he adds, that may be omitted and judged unblameable which necessity
inforceth. And Foelix Ib. apud Bin. Aliter tractanda^ necessitatis rationem,
aliter voluntatis.
the respect of necessity is to be handled one way, the respect of voluntary
mind another way.

Andradius affirms Andrad. De genesis conciliorum autoritate. page 115, 116.
that humane laws made upon the best counsel and advise, are varied by the
variety of times, and may be inuerted and changed by the necessities of men,
and so are dispensable whereupon Saint Austen Aug. De lib. arb. cap. 6.
calls humane laws temporal, because though they be just, yet they may be
justly changed according to the times. Binius says Bin. t. 2. p. 243 in marg.
Pro temporum necessitate rigor canonum relaxatur. Haec pleraque apud Mason.
Canones Apostolorum 85. cum Ioannis Monachizonare commentarijs, set ^ut in
Latin by I^. Quintinus Haeduus printed with Zonaras and others at Frankford, by
Fa^rubendiu^ 1587.
according to the necessity of the times, the Rigor of the Canons is released.

But you make this necessity of times far larger then Protestants may, for of
the Canons of the Apostles you brake some willingly, yea you decree the
contrary and make it unlawful to keep them, as the fifth Canon that says that
Bishops or Priests that put away their wives for occasion of Religion, shall be
excommunicated: and the ninth Canon, which will have them excommunicated also
that after hearing the Scriptures and prayers, depart and do not with other
faithful receive the communion, This Canon, and that of thrice dipping in
Baptism (the 49 or 50 Canon) and diverse other, are abolished contraria
consuetudine says your Canus Canus De l^cis theol. lib. 3. cap 5. page 195.
. Christ's Doctrine (says he) may not be changed but must stand firm: but the
Apostles Rules for the government of the Church are not so fixed but they may be
removed. And your Michael Medi^a says Medina lib. 5. de sacrorum hom:
continentia cap. 106. as D. Reinolds alleges him. Defense, These. 5. Morton
appeal. lib. 2. c 25. sect. 10.
that of the 84. Canons of the Apostles, which Clement Bishop of Rome and the
Disciples of the same Apostles gathered together, scarce does the Latin Church
observe 6 or 8 entirely.

But (as I said) you draw me from our own Country into others: and yet thereby
you gain nothing: for if they be censured for their necessary and inevitable
breach of some ancient Church Canons, to maintain the substance of Christ's
Doctrine; much more must you be condemned for breaking them ordinarily and
wilfully without necessity. And on the other side, if their Ministry be
cleared though necessity has enforced the breach of some Canonical
circumstance: then much more is ours of England cleared, who never found any
such necessity, nor ever brake them. Nay we have evermore observed them far
more precisely then you have done that thus accuse us, and boast of your
strictest own observations.

CHAP. 6. Of the Popes supremacy over the whole Church.
Section 1. The necessity thereof urged,

2 As the maine pillar: the matter and method of the answer propounded.

3 The ancient Church yielded to Rome (the greatest

4 And among them sometime the chiefest place.

5 Which dignity their ambition and covetousness have impaired.

6 Bellarmine gathering the strength of all learned Writers, shows no
strength in them to maintain the Papacy; Mat. 16.18.

7 Or Ioh. 21.15, etc.

8 The Romish strange extractions out of the words, Feed my Sheep.

9 And vain allegations of diverse other Scriptures.

10 The Scripture is against the supremacy of Peter,

11 The Fathers urged for it in vain.

12 The Fathers are against it.

13 St Peter's prerogatives descended not to his successors.

14 The conclusion; collecting the parts of the chapter briefly, and justifying
the Protestants.

. 1.
Antiq.

I Am satisfied, that your Ministers have true succession from the Apostles,
and ordination according to the Canons. And for the present, I will suppose,
that all that you have said is true; that your Church has had a visible
succession derived from the Apostles without interruption: that it delivers
all the substantial points of doctrine necessary to salvation, sufficiently.
Suppose all this; and yet further: Suppose that in the Church of Rome there are
some things now taught and used, which were not in the Primitive Church; as the
use of Images, Purgatory, Indulgence, the doctrine of transubstantiation,
Communion of the Laity in one species, private Masses, and such like; yet all
this cannot prove yours to be the true Church, nor the Roman to be false;
because yet you are defective in this: That the Church being one only true,
entire body of Jesus Christ, you are separate from it, and will not be under
the government of that visible-hood, which Christ has appointed over it, to
wit, the Bishop of Rome, the successor of Saint Peter; to whom is given the
highest jurisdiction and government of the whole Church upon earth, and the
infallibility of judgment to guide it right, and keep it from error; so that
they that are not under his government and guidance, are out of the Church, in
which salvation is to be found, and no where else.

Neither can the things now used, which were not used in the Primitive Church,
any way nullify or disgrace the Church, since in the wisdom of him, that is
infallibly assisted by the holy Ghost, for the guidance of the Church, they are
judged profitable in these times, which were not so necessary in former ages.
All inferior and private spirits must submit to the judgment of that Head,
whom Christ has constituted over his Church, and does assist with his spirit
that he shall not err.

That Saint Peter was made Prince and Head of the Apostles by our Savior
Christ; the Proofs are plain in the Scriptures, and Fathers.

Mat. 16.16.
In the 16. of Saint Matthew, when Saint Peter had confessed, Thou art Christ
the son of the living God: Christ answered, Thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock will I build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against
it. To thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, to open and shut,
to bind and loose. In the 21 of S. John, Christ says to Peter, Ioh. 21.15.
Since thou love me more then these (the rest of the Apostles) Feed my
Sheep: Be thou the general Pastor over my whole flock, even over the rest of
the Apostles. In the 22. of Saint Luke, Christ says, I will pray for thee
Peter, that thy faith shall not fail; Luke 22.32.
and when thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren. Conformable to these
Scriptures the Fathers do ordinarily give unto Saint Peter the Primacy of the
Apostles; call him the Mouth, the Chief, the Top, the Highest, the Prince, the
President of the Apostles, the head and foundation of the Church; all which
laid together and well considered, do prove such a prerogariue in Saint Peter,
that the Church taught and guided by him and his Successors, shall never err
in matters of Faith and good life, but be infallibly lead into all truth, that
brings to holiness and happiness. And this is not promised to Saint Peter's
person, or for his life only, but to all his Successors, when Christ promises
to be with them to the end of the world, Mat. 28. in the last words. Whereupon
these things will follow:

1 That the Church of Rome, See the Relation of the Religion in the West parts.
page 15.
now governed by S. Peter's Successors, is undoubtedly the true Church of God,
delivering and practicing the true means of salvation, and has the
prerogative to keep men from erring in matters of Faith, and from falling from
God; has the keys of heaven in custody, to admit in by indulgence such as
shall be saved; and shut out by excommunication such as shall be condemned; so
that in it there is a happy facility, and without it an utter impossibility of
salvation.

2 And consequently, It is of the necessity to salvation, that all particular
Churches, and all men, be subject to the Bishop thereof, Christ's Vicar, and the
visible head of the Catholic Church upon earth; and whosoever, or what Nation
or people soever, are not subject to him in spiritual things, are no part of
the Catholic Church of Christ.

. 3.
Antiquis. Were all this true and substantial, it were able to charm all the
world to be of your Church, and to make the Pope absolute Lord of all. And you
do politikely to keep this point for your last refuge, and final ground of all
controversies betwixt us: for if you can euict this, you need no more. If your
Popes be Saint Peter's successors in all those things which you ascribe unto
Saint Peter, and thereby have full jurisdiction over the whole Christian world,
and cannot err, all is yours, Stapleton principio. doctr. lib 6. cap. 2.
Sanders Rock of the Church. Bristow Motive 47. etc. See Bellarm. letter to
Blackwell.
there is an end of all controversy and disputation. And therefore your
Chieftaines have great reason to fortify this piece with all the art and
artillery their wit, learning, and power can afford them: thereby to cut off
all particular controversies wherein they find we are too strong for them.
This Gorgons head alone is able to affright the simple, that they shall not
believe their own eyes, or see your palpable corruptions, or believe that any
thing can be amiss with you, be it never so foul and and manifest. But alas
(dear friend) I shall show you plainly that all this is but an Imaginary
Castle built in the Air without ground or foundation; and that all your men
stretch the Scriptures and the sayings of the Fathers far beyond their
meaning. B. Jewel. B. Bilson. B. Morton. B White. D. Rainolds. D. Field. etc.
To answer their books and arguments punctually, would ask too great time,
and be a needless labor, because our Learned men have done it sufficiently
and often already. But for your satisfaction, I Peter either by the Scriptures,
or thirdly by the Fathers; but contrary, that both the Scriptures and Fathers
are against it. Fourthly, that the true primacy Peter above the rest of the
Apostles, were personal, and did not descend to his successors.

. 3.
1. For the first: Aeneas Syluius (who was afterterwards made Pope, Aeneas
Syluius epist. 288. Ante conciliu^ Nicen^^ qu sque sibi viuebat, and paruus
respectus habebatur ad ecclesiam Romanam
and called Pius Secundus) says plainly, that before the Council of Nice
(327. years after Christ) little respect was had to the Church of Rome, yet
was Rome the chief City of the world, by reason of the Antiquity,
Magnificence, Dominion, and the residence of the Emperors there at that time.
The Apostles used to plant Churches in the chiefest Cities, from whence the
Gospel might best be propagated into the Countries adjoining. Cities therefore
were first Christians, the people dwelling in Country Pagis and Villis (in
Pages and Villages) being not converted, See D. Field. Church, book 5. epist to
the Reader, and cap. 27. 30, 31.
were called Pagans or Infidels. But for their conversion, and for the better
government of the Church, Bishops were by the Apostles placed in the Cities,
with power of jurisdiction to govern, and of Ordination to institute Ministers
(...), in every town; as was Timothy in Ephesus, Titus in Crete. If any
difficulty arose either in doctrine or government too great to be ordered by
these Bishops; the wise policy of the Church ordained it should be referred to
the determination of higher Bishops called Archbishops, that is, chief
Bishops, Metropolis in the Greek tongue signifies a Mother City.
by some fatherly authority over the other Bishops and Clergy, or being Bishops
of the chiefest or Mother Cities within the Nation, whereof they were called
Metropolitans. And over these Archbishops or Metropolitans in several Lands or
Nations some one was made the Primate, for better unity and commodity of
government, and calling together and guiding of National Councels upon
occasions. It was thought convenient also for the better keeping of all
Christian Nations in the unity of Faith, Holiness and peace, to appoint yet a
higher degree of Patriarchs in some of the most eminent Cities of the world,
who might have some oversight and authority over all the Primats, Archbishops
and other Clergy of all the Nations which were under their Patriarchall
Jurisdiction. Of these Patriarchs we read in the Counsel of Nice, and before
that in the whole Christian world, there were but three: B. Carlton.
The Bishop of Rome for the West parts, of Antioch for the East, and of
Alexandria for the South.

D. Field ib. li. 3. chap. 1 Council. Nicon. cant. 6.
The Bishop of Rome had these five principal Nations within his Patriarchship,
Italy, Spain, France, Germany, and Brittany. The other had their
Patriarchships bounded also by the Council of Nice. Afterward, when the
Emperors had translated the seat of the Empire from Rome to Constantinople
(whereupon that City was called new Rome) and that City was grown very great,
Noble, and Magnificent, it was thought fit there to erect a fourth Patriarch,
the Patriarch of Constantinople: And lastly, for the honor of Jerusalem (where
our Savior lived and dyed, and from whence Christian Religion was propagated
into all parts of the world) the Bishop of Jerusalem was made a fifth
Patriarch, and their dominions were assigned unto them.

D. Field ib. Bellar. praefat. in 16. de pontif. Rom Council. Constantinop. sub
Theodosio seniore. can. 1. and Socrat. lib. 5, cap. 8. Council. Chalcedon can.
23. Eliensis Responsio ad Apologiam Bellarmini. page 170, 171.
. 4.
Amongst these, the Bishop of Rome had the first place of dignity: and in the
second general Counsel holden at Constantinople (anno 383.) the Bishop of
Constantinople obtained the second degree of honor among the Patriarchs, next
unto the Bishop of Rome, and before the other of Alexandria and Antioch. And in
the great Counsel of Chalcedon (anno 454.) it was decreed that Rome and
Constantinople should have all Rights, Privileges, and Prerogatives equal:
because as Rome was before (Seeds regia) the seat of the Empire, so now was
Constantinople; this was the reason then alleged. But not long after, the
magnificence of Constantinople increasing, and with it the haughtiness of her
Bishop, he challenged to be superior to the Bishop of Rome, and encroached
upon the right of all other, as greater and more honorable then all the rest,
and to be the chief Bishop of the whole world, because his City was then the
chief City of the world. See before. lib. 1. cap. 4.. 4.
About this was the contention betwixt Gregory the first of Rome, and John
Bishop of Constantinople, whereof I have spoken before. But John carried away
the title and honor for ten years, during his life by favor of the Emperor
Mauricious; and Cyriacus his successor for eleven years more. Phocas is thus
described by Zonaras, who calls him pessimus tyrannus, and postis humani
generis: and says, he was worthily slaughtered by Heraclius, who cut off his
wicked hands and fee, and then his genitals by peecemeale. Paulus Diacouus in
Phoca. The same writes Bibliothearius in Bonifacio 3. and Platina in Bonifacio
3. and Sabellicus. 8 6. though Bellarmine lay that Boniface sued not for that
title in Apologia pro Torto Baronius anno 606. nu. 2.
But when Phocas the Emperor succeeded (a wild, drunken, bloody, adulterous
tyrant, who like another Zimry has sl^yne his Master Mauricius) Boniface the
third Bishop of Rome (who had been Chancelour to Phocas) obtained of him by
earnest suite, to have that title and honor of Primacy transferred from
Constantinople to Rome. And thus (says Paulus Diaconus) at the entreaty of
Boniface, Phocas appointed the seat of the Roman Church to be the head of all
Churches: or as Baronius delivers it, only the Roman Bishop should be called
universal Bishop, and not the Bishop of Constantinople.

But the contention betwixt the two Patriarchall seas ended not thus; for they
of Constantinople upon every occasion stirred again, until at length
difference growing betwixt the two Churches (the Greek and the Latin) about
the proceeding of the holy Ghost, either pronounced other to be Heretics and
Schismatics. In the year 869 (above 400. B. Usher. De Ecclesiarum successione
c. 2.. 28
years after the two Patriarchs were equalled at Chalcedon) in a Council at
Constantinople (wherein Image Worship was established) the two Patriarchs were
made friends, and it was agreed, that the one should be styled Universal
Patriarch, Onuphrius in Platinam, in vita Bonifaci. 3. G^nebrard l. 4.
Chronograph. Vniuersalis Patriarcha. Vniuersalis Papa.
and the other Universal Pope, and so the word Pope (which before that time
had been common to all Bishops) became then the proper title of the Bishop of
Rome.

Hereby we may observe,

1. That this Primacy or Supremacy of the Bishops of Rome was of no such
Antiquity as is pretended.

2. That in those times, it was not thought either by the Emperors or by the
Councels to have been given to the Bishops of Rome, or established upon any at
all, by the divine Scriptures (as now the Popes do claim) but left at the
discretion of Princes and Wisemen, to give it to whom they would, and to order
or alter it as occasion served, and the respect or dignity of Cities and times
required. For neither were their arguments that then claimed it, drawn from
the Scriptures, but from civil reasons of State and Policy: neither was it
upon any other reasons settled: and the controversy proceeded not from any
institution of the Omnipotent God, but from the ambition of Impotent men.

3. The author (that settled it upon the Roman Bishop) was Phocas, one of the
Devils eldest sons, a murderer of his master, a drunken adulterous tyrant, a
scourge and plague to mankind.

. 5.
4. Observe the Romish Bishops ambition in those times, swaruing from the most
honored humility of a number of their first Ancesters, holy men and Martyrs: to
whom the ancient Fathers, Councels and Emperors, yielded much honor and
reverence, as to men sitting at the principal stern of the Ship of Christ's
Church to direct and guide it, and men right worthy of their place, as
appears by innumerable testimonies in Histories and Fathers both Greek and
Latin, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Optatus, Ierom, Ambrose, Basil, Chrysostom,
Augustine, etc. Thus says your learned and moderate Cassander, and now mark
what he immediately adds. Georgi^ Cassandri Censul^atio artic. 7.. De
Pontifice Romano.
Neque vnquam credo, etc. Neither do I think that ever any controversy would
have been amongst us of this point, if the Popes had not abused this authority
to a certain show of Domination, and stretched it beyond the bounds prescribed
by Christ and the Church, through their ambition and covetousness. But this
abuse of that Bishops power, which first his flatterers stretched out beyond
measure, gave occasion to men to think ill of the power it self, which that
Bishop had obtained by the universal consent of the whole Church: yea, it gave
occasion to men wholly to forsake it, which yet I think he might recover
(says Cassander) if he would reduce it within the limits prescribed by Christ
and the ancient Church; and use it according to Christ's Gospel, and the
tradition of his ancestors, only to the edification of the Church. Therefore
at the first, Luther thought, and wrote modestly enough of the power of the
Pope, though afterward being offended and enraged at the most absurd writing
of some of his flatterers, he inueighed more bitterly against it, etc.

And in the next page before this, Cassander says, Non negarim, etc. I cannot
deny, but many men were compelled at first by a godly care sharply to reprove
some manifest abuses: and the principal cause of this calamity and distraction
of the Church is to be imputed to them that being puffed up with a vain pride
of Ecclesiastical power, did proudly and disdainfully contemn and reject
those that justly and modestly admonished them. Wherefore I think there is no
firm peace of the Church to be hoped for, except it take beginning from them
who gave the first cause of the distraction; that is, that those that sit at
the stern of Ecclesiastical government, remit something of their too much
rigor, and yield something to the peace of the Church, and harkening to the
earnest enertaties and admonitions of many godly men, correct manifest abuses
according to the rule of holy Scriptures, and the ancient Church, from which
they have swarued. Thus writes your Cassander.

D. Field Of the Church, book 5. cap. 50.. These are all.
Our D. Field says much like to Cassander, that if the Bishop of Rome would
disclaim his claim of universal Jurisdiction, of infallible Judgment, and
power to dispose at his pleasure the kingdoms of the world, and would content
himself with that all Antiquity gave him, which is, to be in order and honor
the first among Bishops; we would easily grant him to be in such sort
President of general Counsels, as to sit, and speak first in such meetings,
but to be an absolute Commander, we cannot yield unto him. Thus writes D.
Field, Idem. Appendix to the fifth book. page 78.
and more fully in another place: If the Pope would only claim to be a Bishop
in his Precinct, a Metropolitan in a Province, a Patriarch of the West, and of
Patriarchs the first and most honorable, to whom the rest are to resort in
cases of greatest moment, as to the head and chief of their company, to whom
it especially pertains to have an eye to the preservation of the Church in
the unity of Faith and Religion, and the acts and exercises of the same, and
with the assistance and concurrence of the other by all due courses to effect
that which pertains thereunto, without claiming absolute and uncontrollable
power, infallibility of Judgment, and right to dispose the Kingdoms of the
world, and to intermeddle in the administration of the temporalities of
particular Churches, and the immediate swaying of the jurisdiction thereof,
Luther in libro contra Papatu^.
Luther himself professes he would never open his mouth against him.

King James in his Praemonition to all Christian Monarchs. Of Bishops. page 46
Our late most learned and judicious King James of happy memory writes the like:
Patriarchs (I know) were in the Primitive Church, and I likewise reverence that
institution for Order-sake: and amongst them was a contention for the first
place. And for my self (if that were yet the question) I would with all my
heart give my consent that the Bishop of Rome should have the first seat: I
being a Western King would go with the Patriarch of the West. And for his
temporal Principality over the Signory of Rome, I do not quarrel it neither;
let him in God his name be primus Episcopus inter omnes Episcopos, and Princeps
Episcoporum; so it be no otherwise but as Peter was Princeps Apostolorum. But
as I well allow of the Hierarchy of the Church for distinction of orders (for
so I understand it) so I utterly deny that there is an earthly Monarch thereof,
whose word must be a Law, and who cannot err in his sentence.

Thus ye see, if the Bishop of Rome enjoy not the honors and privileges which
the ancient Church gave unto his predecessors; the fault is not in us, but in
him, who unworthily abusing his power to intolerable tyranny, has worthily
lost it, Jude verse. 6. Mat. 24.45.
as the Angels not content with their first estate, and the evil servant, that
instead of well guiding his Masters house entrusted to him, misused and beat
his fellow servants; and therefore was cut off, and had his portion with
hypocrites.

. 6.
Antiquus. I am joyful that such judicious moderate Princes as King James; and
such great learned men as Cassander, Luther, D. Field, etc. yield so much honor
to the Pope, but I doubt the greatest part of Protestants do not so, yet all
that they are content to yield comes far short of that which the Scriptures
and Fathers do attribute to Saint Peter and his successors.

Antiquissimus. Scriptures and Fathers never yield more. For the Scriptures,
will you stand to the examination and judgment of the most famous Jesuit
Bellarmine?

Antiq. That most Reverend, Learned, Judicious, and laborious Reader of
controversies at Rome, Bellarmine (the most eminent man, in the most eminent
City of the world) handling all points so exactly and excellently, that he was
therefore made an honorable Cardinal of Rome, and his books printed with the
privileges of the unerring Pope, the Emperor, and the State of Venice, etc.
he (I say) shall overrule my judgment in all points.

Antiquis. Yet take heed your implicit faith do not deceive you when it is
unfolded. Bellar. praesatio ante libros de Romano Pontifice.
But in this cause you need seek no further then to see what he says: for
first, This cause (of the Popes primacy and power) is the greatest of all
other, as himself says, it is De summa rei Christianae, the sum total of
Christianity depends upon it. In it the question is, whether the Church shall
stand any longer, or be dissolved and fall to nothing; for what is it else to
demand whether we may not take the foundation from the building, the Sheephard
from the Flock, the General from the Army, the Sun from the Stars, the
head from the body: but to ask whether we may not let the building fall, the
Flock be scattered, the Army dispersed, the Stars obscured, the body lie dead?

Bellarm. ibid.
Therefore secondly, to make this piece (of the stately height, wealth and
magnificence of the Papacy, which is forsooth the foundation of Religion) most
strong: the choycest men for wit, learning, and all other habilities have been
set on work to do their uttermost to maintain it: of which Bellarmine
reckons the chiefest of sundry Countries: In Polonia one, in France two, in
Germany five, in Low Germany six, in England six, in Spain six, in Italy
eight, in Graecia two.

And thirdly, if there be any strength in any of their writings, Bellarmine
has it, and sets it out to the uttermost: therefore if thou find him weak,
know for certainty there is no strength in the cause. He musters indeed
Scriptures and Fathers, and rangeth them into goodly ranks: but all ad Pompam,
rather than ad pugnam. For never a one of them strikes a sufficient blow for
him, nor against us.

Against his urging of the place of Math. 16. (when he has with all his wit,
stretched it as far as he can) he is feign to admit three exceptions of the
Protestant^ which overthrow all that he would prove. First, that as Christ
asked (not of Peter only but) of all, Wh^m say ye that I am? Peter answered
for all, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God; for all could not speak
at once, neither was it decent; one must be the speaker. So also Christ replied
upon him as upon all, and therefore what was spoken unto him belonged to them
all: And thus the ancient Fathers interpret it; Chrysostom upon the place, and
Jerome, and Austine, as Bellarmine himself Be lar. de pont. lib. 1. cap. 12.
Secunda ob^.
cites them, and recites their words: neither says he any thing to avoid
their testimonies, but adds this only, Peter answered for all; as the Prince
and Head of all: which in the true sense we deny not, neither makes it any
thing for them.

Secondly, the Protestants say, It was not upon Peter's person, but upon Peter's
faith (which was the says of all the Apostles) whereupon Christ would build
his Church: to wit, That Christ was the Son of the living God; that is, the
great Messiah promised from the beginning, the Savior of the world. Thus the
Fathers also teach, as Bellarmine ib cap 10.. quarta senten.
confesses, Hilarious lib 6. de Trin.
, Ambrose lib 6 cap. 9. in Luk
, Chrysostom Hom. 55 in Mat and 83. i^ Mat.
, Cyrill ib. 1. de Trin.
: He might have added also Augustine De ^erb^s ^ om sermon. ^^.
, who says, The Rock is Christ, not Peter, upon this Rock which thou have
confessed, upon this Rock which thou have known, saying, Thou art Christ, the
son of the living God, will I build my Church, I will build thee upon me, not
me upon thee, etc. but this your Doctor Stapleton De ^erb^s ^ om sermon. ^^.
Princip. doctr. l^b ^. cap ^. See (...) H^^t page ^0, ^^
calls humanus lapsus in Saint Austin. To all this Bellarmine says, they
meant not Peter's faith without some relation to his person. What is this to the
purpose? This we admit both in him and in all the Apostles: their persons may
be said to be foundations in some sort, (as in Ephesians. 2.20. Revel. 21.14.)
yet that is in regard of the Faith and Doctrine which they taught; the subject
and substance whereof was Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, the Protestants allege, that whatsoever was promised to Saint Peter
in the 16. of Matthew, was certainly performed to all in Ioh. 20.23. where
Christ said to all the Apostles, Whose-soeuer sins ye remit, they are
remitted: and whose-soeuer sins ye retain, they are retained. And this the
Fathers also plentifully teach; Cypr. de simplicitate praelatorum, sieve de
vnitate Eccl.
Cyprian, Hilari. lib. 6. de Trinit.
Hilary, Hieron. lib. 1. ad Iouinianum. At, inquit, dicis, super Petrum
fundatur ecclesia: licet id ipsum in alio loco superomnes Apo ^olos siat, and
cu^cti accip^ant, etc.
Jerome; and Saint Augustine in many places has the like. All which Ib. lib. 1
c. 12. Obi^^tio vltima.
Bellarmine confesses, adding still (lest he say nothing) that yet Peter was a
chief man among the rest, which is not the question, and none of us denies it.

Thus he grants, first, that what was there spoken to Peter, belonged to all
the rest: secondly, that the Church was built upon Peter's Faith (which was the
common faith of all the Apostles) and not upon Peter's person either wholly or
principally: and thirdly, that which there was promised to Peter, was afterward
performed to them all: and so this place of Mat. 16. makes nothing to the end
for which your men so often and so gloriously allege it.

Antiq. Were it not that I see it with mine eyes, and read the whole tract
advisedly, I should never have believed that Bellarmine had yielded thus much,
but yet he does it with modifications.

Antiquis. He must needs make some flourishes to satisfy his own side; but
you see, the substance of the matter is flat against him. But note what he
grants further. Bellar de Pont Rom li. ^ cap. 11.. Alterum arg.
Peter was made the foundation of the Church by those words of Christ ( Mat.
16.18.) upon this Rock will I build my Church: so all the Apostles were
foundations, and all the three ways that Peter was.

First, as efficient causes, by founding and planting Churches, some in one
Country, and some in another: for Romans 15.20.
Paul would not build upon another man's foundation: and 1 Cor 3.10.
he laid the foundation in Corinth, and another built thereon. And thus were
all the Apostles equally the foundations of the Catholic Church, Revel. 21.14.

Secondly, as material causes, by their Doctrine first reueiled unto them by
the Lord, and then taught by them in all Churches, which was pure without
mixture of error; infallible, being inspired by the holy Ghost, and sufficient
both for true faith and holy life; whereupon the Church for ever was to rest,
without need of any addition: And thus is the Church built equally upon all the
Apostles. Ephesians. 2.20.
And in this Saint Peter was no greater then the rest, nor more infallible.

Thirdly, as formal causes, by their gouenment; for all the Apostles were
(Capita, Rectores, and Pastores Ecclesiae Vniuersae) Heads, Governors, and
Pastors of the Church Universal.

Antiq. This Bellarmine says indeed, but he adds a difference in this third
point; the other were only heads, as Apostles and Legates, but Peter as the
ordinary Pastor; they had fullness of power, yet so as Peter was their head,
and they depended upon him, not he on them.

Antiquiss. What Bellarmine yields and proves against his own side, we may
well take as true, and wrested from him by the evidence of the truth. This
last, which he adds in favor of his side, he only says, but proves not,
as behooved him. For how depended the Apostles more on Peter then he on them?
where do we read, that ever he appointed, enjoined, limited, or re^^rained
any of them, or showed any authority over them? but contrarily. Acts 11.
We read that he was censured by them, and caused to give an account of his
actions, Act. 11. Gal ^.
And that he was reproved to his face, and openly by St. Paul: who protested
also that he was not inferior to St. Peter, neither received they ought from
him. And further, even lib. 4 depo^t. Romans cap. 23.
Bellarmine himself says, they were all equal in the Apostleship, which they
r^ceiued equally of Christ immediately, and none of them of Peter, as he
proves against many Cardinalis Turrecremata. Dominicus Iacobatius, etc.
great men of his own side in a whole chapter of set purpose ibid.
. For (the better to make all the Clergy depend upon Peter, though many succeed
the other Apostles) many great Catholics hold that the Apostles received not
their authority and jurisdiction of Christ immediately, but Saint Peter only,
and all the rest of Saint Peter, which ib.
Bellarmine soundly confutes, both by Scriptures and Fathers, showing that
Christ himself gave them all parem potestatem, equal power: that not Peter
but Christ himself did choose Matthias by Lot at the instant prayer of the
Apostles: that Paul was an Apostle not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus
Christ, and God the Father, Gal. 1.1. etc. All which makes for the equality of
Peter with the rest, and not for his superiority over them.

Antiq. Yet surely he holds the same Supremacy which other Catholics hold,
though he think it cannot be grounded so firmly upon these places.

Antiquis. You may well imagine, he gives not over (without much compulsion and
reluctation,) these castles and holds which other great Captains with all
their power and policy, held and maintained.

. 7.
But there is one poor castle more which he labors to hold, though very
weakly, that is in John 21.15. Bellar. de Romans pontif. l. 1. c. 12. ^ vt
autem. See D. Field. Church, book ^ chap 22.
where it appears, says he, that Christ gave more to Saint Peter then to
the other Apostles, for he said unto him, Love thou me more then these? and
then adds, Feed my sheep. To him that loved more, he gave more, to wit, the
care of his whole Flock, even the care over his brethren Apostles, making him
general Pastor over them also: for there can no cause or reason be imagined
(says Bellarmine) why upon Peter's answer of his singular love above the rest,
Christ should singularly say to him Pasce oues meas, if he gave him not
something above the rest.

To which, we say, the Fathers show another cause or reason: Peter had denied
Christ more then the rest, and being forgiven, was to love more then the rest,
( Luke 7.43.47.) and therefore Christ urged him singularly, by thrice asking
(Love thou me? Cyril. super Joan. lib. 12. cap. 64. Augustine. tract. in
Joan. 123. See this largely handled betwixt Raynolds and Heart. p. 135. and seq.
) answerable to his three denials, to perform the office enjoined in general
to all the Apostles. So says Cyril, Because he denied him thrice at his
Passion, therefore there is a threefold confession of love required of him: and
so the gloss: and Saint Augustine says, A threefold confession answers to a
threefold negation, that the tongue may express as much in love, as it did in
fear. And so in very truth, Christ's words were rather a stay of Peter's
weakness, then a mark of his worthiness, or a proof of his supremacy.

Thus we have the only place of Scripture (whereupon Bellarmine insisteth) of
performance and bestowing supremacy particularly upon Peter: Bellarmin says De
iustif^t 3. c. 8. initio. Non potest aliquid certum esse certitudine fidei,
nisi aut immediate contineatur in verho Dei, aut ex verbo Dei per euidentem
consequentiam deducatur, etc.
and that not a plain and evident place of Scripture, or by deduction of
evident reason (such as necessary points of divinity should have,) but only
their own infirm, and unsound interpretation: a poor and weak ground of so
great a building. The transcendent supremacy of the Pope of Rome over the whole
Church of Christ, and the many Doctrines and practices that depend thereupon,
have no other ground in Scripture but this, their own conceited and forced
interpretation of this place, [Peter love thou me more then these? Feed my
sheep:] that is, Take thou authority more then these, to make thy successors
above all theirs, heads of the universal Church, with such power, as
themselves shall list to take or exercise.

Antiq. I cannot but ingenuously confess this inference to be weak indeed,
and it does much amaze me, and makes me quake and stagger, to consider how
confidently I have been persuaded that the Scripture is most plain and
evident for the Popes supremacy, and now to see that nothing of any moment can
thence be alleged for it.

. 8.
Isa chus Casaubonus excrcitatio, ad Baronium Epist. dedic page 19. Luke 22.25,
26. Gasper Scioppius in Ecclesiastico suo ex pos. cap. 47 Is not this quidlibet
e quolibet? or rather Contrarium e contrario
Antiquis. By such alleging of Scriptures, they may make quidlibet e
quolibet, make any substance of any shadow. The learned Frenchman Casaubon
wonders at them. Pasce oues mea^, that is, as Baronius interprets it, Supremum
in ecclesia dominium tibi assere, Feed my sheep, that is, Take to thy self
the highest dominion in the Church: or as Bellarmine, Regis more impera, Rule
and command after the manner of Kings: as if he would of set purpose contradict
Christ's words; The kings of Nations exercise dominion over them, but ye shall
not do so. Nay further, and more strangely, Gaspen Scioppius says, that
Christ by those words has taken away Kings power and dominion over the
Nations, and forbidden it to be exercised among Christians: and has
established that infinite power in the Pope over Princes by this, and such like
places of Scripture. The pious world wonders at the Popes challenge to be the
highest Judge in controversies of Faith (which heretofore was the office of
Councels, by the word of God) but this power and right Bellarmine draws out of
the word Feed.

Men wonder at the Popes Immunity from error and infallibility in points of
Faith: but Bellarmine also rayseth it out of the words Feed my sheep. Men
wonder at the Popes claim of power (of many ages never heard of) to make Laws
in the Church to bind conscience, yea, as some say, to make new Articles of
Faith; but this also Bellarmine finds in the same words, Feed my Sheep.

They that are practiced in reading the Scriptures and Fathers, wonder at the
superabundant merits of the Saints, which the Pope dispenses at his pleasure:
but let them cease to wonder, the Scripture gives it to the Pope in that word
of Christ to Peter, Feed my Sheep, For so teaches Bellarmine in his book of
Indulgence. Those that will not be rebels to their Prince the Lords anointed,
wonder and that with indignation, that the Pope (corrupted by his flatterers)
should assume to himself a power to transfer kingdoms, absolve subjects
from the oath of fidelity, and make Kings no Kings: but this power of the Pope,
Bellarmine and others extract out of the word Feed. Nay, there want not them
that gather out of the same word a power in the Pope to chastise with temporal
punishments, yea, with death, such Princes as are undutiful to him. So taught
Becanus and Suarez, famous Jesuits in their most infamous books: such things
writes Casaubon.

If the word Feed should signify all these, it would be very inconvenient for
the Pope: for then all Ministers (which are bidden feed Acts 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2.
) should have all that power and privileges which the Pope by that word
challenges.

The Fathers took the meaning of Christ to be only feed by doctrine, and that
they bet upon and urged: See Tortura Torti, p. 52 and seq.
the Pope takes it to govern, Regio moro impera. Indeed the greek word (...)
(though most commonly it signify to feed, yet) sometimes signifies to govern:
but (...) always to feed. Yet (mark) (...) is twice in the Text, for (...)
once, but they catch at government, and let go feeding; what Christ meant not,
nor Peter ever used, that they lay hold on, governing the whole Church: the
feeding that Christ meant, and Peter used, they leave to others: to labor in
the Word and Doctrine is too laborious a feeding for them: and the Friars or
Jesuits to whom they leave that labor, feed vere strangely. It is strange
feeding, to teach men to be Law-breakers, vow-breakers, Oath-breakers; breakers
of all Laws and duties: this is not to feed the sheep, but to scatter them,
to kill their leaders, tread down their pastures, muddy their waters, stop up
their wells; not to feed, but either to starve or to poison them. In like
manner, they make Receive the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, to be also
exclude from the kingdoms of the earth. Christ restraines the keys to sins
( John 20.23. Whose sins ye loose) they extend them to Laws, Oaths, and
Vows: Whatsoever thou bindest, that is, whatsoever league of wickedness,
conspiracy, treason, rebellion, thou tyest, shall be ratified in heaven; and
whatsoever thou loosest, be it bonds of Laws, duty, faith, oath, obedience, or
allegiance, it shall be loosed in heaven. If this be so, Christ should rather
have said to Peter, Luke 12.32.
When thou art (not converted, but) preuerted (by such Doctrine) strengthen thy
brethren (strengthen thy brethren in evil, in their evils, with hope of
rewards from God, for breaking his Laws.) This is most damnable doctrine, not
only against Gods word and the analogy of Faith, but against common ciuility,
sense, and reason. Thus they abuse the Scripture to wrong purposes, and pervert
it contrary to the meaning, to strengthen evil.

. 9.
Antonim suma may. did. 22 c. 5. Psalm. 8. ver. 7, 8. Marta. Par. 1. c. 24.
Tortura Torti. page 177.
Some have very ridiculously turned the eighth Psalm to serve the Popes turn,
Thou have put all things under his feet, that is, under the Popes government:
all sheep and Oxen, and the beasts of the field, that is, men on earth; the
fowls of the air, that is, Angels; the fishes of the sea, that is, souls in
purgatory. And lately, D. Marta out of the same Psalm, very seriously brings
both Christians and Saracens under the Popes power; for sheep, says he,
signifies Christians, and oxen Saracens; and so he makes the Pope not only a
sheephard, but a Neat-heard, much like to that of Lumbard, Sent. lib. 3. d 25.
and Aquin. 2. 2. q. 2. art. 6.
interpreting a sentence of Job 1.14. The Oxen were plowing, and the Asses
feeding in their places: the oxen plowing, that is, says he, the Priests
reading the Scriptures; Archb. Abbot ag. Hill Reason 8.. 5.
the Asses feeding, are the people not troubling their heads with such matters,
but content to believe in gross, as the Church believes. A trim text, and
finely applied to keep the people from reading the Scriptures. Such lewd,
childish, and ridiculous expounding and alleging of Scriptures, shows,
first, their want of Scripture proofs for the maintenance of their errors:
secondly, their bad minds, striving against their own knowledge and
conscience, to blind and gull the world with a false show of Scriptures, when
in truth, the whole Scriptures are rather against them: thirdly, the base
opinion they had of people and Princes too, whom they thought they could coozen
with any false shadows. The observing whereof, Bedel. letters to Wadsworth,
page 62. 64. 66. Carerius de potestate Pape l. 2 cap. 12. ^x C. Solitae, de
mayor. and obed. Morton Appeal. l. 5. cap. 26. sect. 1.
not only in their other Authors, but even in their Decretals, is able alone
to make a man hate Popery. For example, in the Decretals, Deus fecit duo magna
luminaria, God made two great lights, that is, the Pope and the Emperor, and
that the Pope is so much bigger then the Emperor, as the Sun is bigger then
the Moon (which, Clauius says, is 6539. times and one fifth.) A notable text
to show the Popes greatness above the Emperor, and that the Emperor receives
all his power and glory from the Pope, as the Moon does her light from the
Sun, and is light only on that side that is toward the Sun, and dark on
the side that is auerse. Also, Mat 16.18.
alleging that text, Tu es Petrus, and super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam
meam: The Lord, says he, taking Peter into the fellowship of the undivided
unity (oh foul blasphemy!) would have him to be called that which he was
himself: that the building of the eternal temple might by the marvelous gift
of God, Cap. Fundamentu^ de clect. in 6
consist in Peter's firmness -- that from Peter as a certain head, he should as
it were power abroad his gifts into the whole body, -- that the Church might
stand upon Peter's firmness.

King James Remonstrance, page 163. English. 1 Cor. 2.15.
In these latter times, they have found out more texts, but no whit better for
their purpose then these. Our learned King James in his Remonstrance to the
Cardinal Peron, recites some of the chiefest.

Saint Paul says, The spiritual man discerns all things: ergo, (they
gather) the Pope must be Judge of all men and matters.

Mat. 28.18. Mat. 8.31. Mat. 21.2.
Christ said, All power is given to me both in heaven and earth: ergo to his
Vicar. The Devils said, If thou cast us out, send us into the heard of swine:
and Christ said to his Disciples, Ye shall find an Asses colt bound, loose him
and bring him to me. This shows that Christ disposed of temporal things,
ergo so must his Vicar.

Ioh. 21.15. Act. 10.13.
Jesus not only commanded Peter to feed his sheep, but also said, Arise, kill,
and eat: therefore, says Baronius, Duplex est Petri officium, vnum pascere,
alterum occidedere: Peter had two offices, one to feed, another to kill.
(Belike Peter is now come to the top of the house, and entered upon his second
office, to kill and devour.)

Ier. 1.10.
God said to Jeremy, I have establishd thee over Nations and kingdoms, to wit,
to preach Gods promises and threatenings; Luke 22.38. Mat. 26.52. Molina
Iesuita. lib. de iure, tract. 2 disp. 29.
and Peter said to Christ, See here are two swords; and Christ answered, It is
sufficient (not too many.) Also Christ said to Peter, Put up thy sword into thy
sheath; ergo the Pope has power over Nations and Kingdoms, and two swords,
one spiritual, the other temporal.

Psalm. 45.16.
It is said Psalm. 45. In stead of thy fathers thou shall have children, whom
thou shall make Princes in all lands.

Ioh. 12.32. 1. Cor. 6.3.
Christ said, If I were lift up from the earth, I will draw all things unto me;
and Saint Paul, Know ye not that we Paul and the Corinthians etc. shall judge
the Angels? how much more the things that pertain unto this life?

Upon these places the Papal monarchy for temporal causes has been built in
these latter ages.

As in former time, Pope Boniface the eight, Extrauag. vnam sanctam.
grapling and tugging with Philip the Fair, built his temporal power upon
this, that In the beginning God created heaven and earth.

Antiq. I am very sorrowful to see the sacred Scriptures so vainly alleged
by men accounted holy, wise, and learned, I cannot justify them: Bellarm. de
iustif. l. 3. c. 8. initio.
Bellarmines rule condemns them, when he says, that All we are bound to
believe with certainety of Faith, must be contained in Gods word in plain
words, or else evidently deducted from thence by good consequence of Reason.
But for this great point (I speak my conscience) here is neither evident words
nor scarce any show of consequence.

. 10.
Antiquis. But for the contrary, See K. James Praemonition. page 47.
you shall find in the Scripture, both evident words and manifest consequence.

The Scripture is plain, that the words Tibi [tibi dabo claues] in effect are
spoken in the plural number in another place, Mat. 18.18. [Whatsoeuer ye
shall binder loose in earth, shall be bound and loosed in heaven.] whereby the
very power of the keys is given to all the Apostles. And the words Pasce oues
used to Peter, were meant to all the Apostles, as may be confirmed by a Cloud
of witnesses, both of Ancients, and even of late Popish writers, yea, and
diverse Cardinals. Otherwise, how could Paul direct the Church of Corinth to
excommunicate the incestuous person, cum spiritu suo; whereas he should then
have said cum spiritu Petri: as our gracious King James gathers: adding also,
that all the Apostles used their censures in Christ's name, never speaking of
his Vicar: that Peter in all the Apostles meetings sat amongst them as one of
their number: that when letters were sent from the Council ( Acts 15.22, 23.)
the style was, It seemed good to the Apostles and Elders, with the whole
Church, etc. without mention of the Head thereof: that Saint Paul blames the
Corinthians, for that some said they were of Paul, some of Apollo, some of
Cephas, some of Christ, which he would not have done; if Cephas (that is,
Peter) had been Christ's Vicar, and head of the Catholic Faith: that Saint
Paul compares or rather prefers himself before Peter, Galat. 2. which had
been rudely done, had he thought Peter his Head. Such reasons alleges our
judicious King, See also before, sect;. 6.
to which might be added also that Saint Peter was compelled to give account
of his doings, to the rest of the Apostles, who contended Acts 11.

I hope these Allegations are far more pregnant against the Supremacy of
Saint Peter, then the Romists are for it.

. 11.
Antiq. Yet the ancient Fathers understand the Scriptures so, These Fathers are
thus alleged by Mr Heart; Conference with D. Raynolds, cap. 5 division 3. p.
217 out of Stapleton priu. do. l. 6. c. 13 Raynolds. ib. page 2^1.
that they gave S. Peter most honorable titles: S. Austen says, The Primacy of
the Apostles is conspicuous and preeminent with excellent grace in Peter:
Chrysostom calls him the mouth of the Apostles, the chief, the top of the
Company: Theodoret, the Prince of the Apostles; which title is given him by all
Antiquity. Others ad out of Epiphanius, The highest of the Apostles: Austen,
the head, president, the first of them. And Cyprian says, The Lord did choose
Peter first (happily he meant, his first Apostle, not his first Disciple: for
Audrew was first a Disciple, and followed Christ, as Saint Ambrose observes.)
And Saint Ierom says, Peter was of so great authority, that St. Paul went to
visit him, as himself writes, Gal. 2. and Ierom says also, that Peter was
chosen one among the twelve, to the intent that (a head being appointed)
occasion of Schism might be taken away. Of such sayings as these the Fathers
books are full.

Antiquis. Does not Doctor See Raynolds and Heart, ibid cap. 5. diuis. 3.
Raynolds there answer you soundly and fully? which you may read there at
large: the brief substance whereof is this; that all the Fathers sayings touch
only three prerogatives; the first of Authority, the second of Primacy, the
third of Principality, but all far short of the Supremacy which the Pope now
claymeth.

1 The authority mentioned by Saint Ierom, is only Credit and Estimation; for
so Ierom expresses his own meaning. Saint Paul went up to Jerusalem to
confer of the Gospel with them that were esteemed, that is, with Peter and
other Apostles, to wit, with James, Peter, and John, who were esteemed to be
Pillars, Gal. 2.2.9. for his conference with Apostles of such authority or
estimation might add some credit, authority and estimation to his preaching in
the peoples minds. If by authority Saint Ierom did mean supreme power over the
other Apostles, then James and John should have had it as well as Peter, which
is not your Catholic doctrine. Also an inferior (or equal) in power, may be
superior in authority or estimation: as Tully says of Metellus a private man
(though chosen Consul for the year following) That he forbade certain
plays (when an officer had allowed them) and that which he could not obtain
by power, Cicero oratione in Pisonem.
he did obtain by authority: that is, with the credit which he had with the
people.

2 The Primacy which the Fathers speak of, was the Primacy of Order, not of
Power, because Peter was first called to be an Apostle, and first reckoned;
this argues no more power then the Foreman of the Jury has over the rest.

3 The prerogative of Principality, was in the excellency of grace, and not of
power, (as we say, the Prince of Philosophers, Aristotle; the Prince of Poets,
Homer; that is, the wittiest, or most excellent, not Lord and master over the
rest.) In this sense Saint Austine speaks Peter the Apostle in whom that
grace and Primacy are so superminent, was corrected by Paul a latter Apostle:
by calling Saint Paul a latter Apostle, he shows his meaning of Saint Peter's
Primacy to be of his first being an Apostle: and by joining Grace with
Primacy, he shows that in greatness of grace consisted his supereminency. So
says Saint Austen also, Aug. in Joan. Tract. 124.
that Peter was Natura vnus homo, gratia vnus Christianus, abundantiori gratia
vnus idemque primus Apostolus. But to be chief in grace is one thing, to be
chief in power another thing. Turrecrem. in Summa de Ecclesia, l 2 c. 82.
Cardinal Turrecramata says, A mean Christian (yea an old woman) may in
perfection of grace, and amplenesse of virtues, be greater then the Pope; but
not in power of jurisdiction. If excellency of grace might carry the supremacy
of power, you should take it from Saint Peter, and give it to the blessed
Virgin. By gifts of grace, we understand all blessings wherewith our Lord
honored him, insomuch as in one thing or other, he surpassed every one of the
Apostles. Saint John might exceed him in multitude of prophesies and
revelations, and many gifts of grace, as Saint Ierom declares: Ierom. aduersus
Iouinianum lib. 1.
Saint Paul excelled him in the chiefest gifts, and labored more then all the
rest, (1 Cor. 15.) so that Saint Austen gives excellent grace to Peter De bapt.
con. Donatistas, lib. 2. c. 1.
, most excellent grace to Paul in Psalm. 130.
, and calls him The Apostle, by an excellency Cont. duas epist. pelagianorum
lib. 3. c. 1.
; yet Saint Peter excelled Saint Paul in Primacy (or being first chosen) and
Saint John in age (being the elder) and therefore preferred before them to be
the chief of the Apostles, by Saint Ieroms opinion Aetati delatu^ est, quia
Petrus erat senior. Hiero 1. adu. Iouin. lib. 1.
.

To this Bellarmine yields: Bellar. lib. 1. de romans pontif. cap. 27.
respo^deo Paulum.
seeing Paul was called The Apostle per Antonomasiam: quia plura scripsit, and
doctior as sapientior fuit cateris: also for planting more Churches then any
other, for the other Apostles were sent to certain Provinces, he to all the
Gentiles without limitation, and he labored more abundantly then they all, 1
Cor. 15. And after, testatur. ib. and fortasse,
Paul also may be called (princeps Apostolorum) quia munus Apostolicum
excellentissime ad impleuit, as we call Virgil prince of Poets, and Cicero
prince of Orators. Again, Nam etsi Petrus mayor est potestate, Paulus mayor
est sapientia. -- Leo makes them the two eyes of the body, whereof Christ is
the head: De quorum meritis atque virtutibus nihil diuersum, nihil debemus
sentire discretum, quia illos and electio pares, and labor similes, and finis
fecit aequales. The like has Maximus, ib. and Saint Gregory, Paulus Apostolus,
Petro Apostolorum primo in principata Apostolico frater est.

Again, Bellar. ib.. denique si hac.
Paulus videtur plus Ecclesiae profuisse quam Petrus; plures enim ex gentibus
ad Christi fidem adduxit; plures prouincias summo cum labor peragrauit; plura
scripta, eaque vtilissima nobis reliquit.

Antiq. Saint Ierom says further, that Saint Peter was made the head of the
Apostles, that all occasion of Schism might be taken away. Will you make
nothing of those titles which the Scriptures and Fathers so frequently give
him, of authority, primacy, principality, supereminency, the mouth of the
Apostles, the top, the highest, the president, the head and such like?

Antiquis. Nothing at all for that power which the Church of Rome now claymes
by them, and which he never claymed nor used, neither did the Scriptures or
Fathers give him: What they gave him we willingly yield, A principality of
Order, Estimation and Grace. For all Saint Peter's power is comprised in the
keys promised him, and in building the Church upon him: but all the Apostles
receive the keys by Ieroms judgment, and the Church is built upon them
equally: Ergo, by his judgment Peter was not over them in power: and if you
will yet say, he had some government over them, what can it else be but a
guidance, (not as a Monarch over subjects or inferiors, D. Raynolds. ib. page
226, 227. D. Field. l. 5. cap 24.
but) as in Aristocracy, head of the company, which in power are his equals.
For in all assemblies about affairs of government, there must needs be one
for orders sake and peace, to begin, to end, to moderate the Actions; and this
is Saint Peter's pre-eminence, which Saint Jerome Hieronym. adu. Iouin. lib. 2.
meant. For, having set down his adversaries objection, (But thou say, The
Church is built upon Peter) he answers; Although the same be done in another
place upon all the Apostles, and they all receive the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, and the strength of the Church is grounded on them equally: yet there
is one chosen among the twelve, that (a head being appointed) occasion of
Schism might be taken away. The like has S. Cyprian Cyprian de Vnitate.
Ecclesia. Erant vtique and caeteri Apostoli quod fuit and Petrus, pari
consor^io praediti and honoris and potestatis, sed exordium ab vnitate
prosiciscitur, etc.
: The other Apostles, says he, were that which Peter was, endewed with the
same fellowship both of honor and power: but the beginning proceeds from
unity, that the Church may be showed to be one.

To speak at once; view all the titles of excellency given by the ancient
Fathers to S. Peter, alleged by Bellarmine De romans pont. lib. 1. cap. 25.
, weigh them advisedly without prejudice or partiality, and you shall find
they prove no more, then the excellency of honorable estimation, the primacy
of order, and the principality of grace, and are far short of proving the
Supremacy of power over the whole Christian world now claimed and practiced by
the Bishop of Rome.

B. Carlton. jurisdiction, page 55, 56.
We may also justly allege that the honors and titles that other Bishops
gave to the Bishops of Rome for their great virtue in former times, the Romists
of these latter times unjustly draw to prove the jurisdiction of that Sea:
because they may find the same or greater given to other worthy Bishops: as to
Saint Ambrose, to whom Basil. epist. 55.
Saint Basil writing, says, He holds the stern of that great and famous
ship, the Church of God, and that God has placed him in the primacy and
chief seat of the Apostles. So Sidon lib. 6. ep. 1 and 4.
Sidonius Apollinaris Bishop of Arvern calls Lupus (a French Bishop) Pope
Lupus; and his Sea Apostolic. And writing to Fontellus (another French Bishop,
Lib. 7. ep. 4. Quod Apostolatus vestri patrocinium copiosissimumconferre vos
comperi.
says, he greatly rejoiced, that he found he did abundantly defend his
Apostleship. And again, Lib. 6. ep. 7. Ego quoque ad Apostolatus tui noticiam
accedo
I come to the knowledge of your Apostleship. Chrysostom de laudibus Paul hom. 8.
and in Gal. 2. Erat Paulus Princeps Apostolorum, honor par Petro, ne quid
dicam amplius.
Saint Chrysostom called Saint Paul, Prince of the Apostles. Ruffin. histor.
lib. 2. cap. 1. Iacobus Apostolorum princeps.
Ruffinus gave Saint James the same title. Greg in 1 Reg. lib. 4. cap 4. Paulus
ad Christum conuersus, caput effectus est nationum, qui obtinuit Ecclesiae
totius principatum. See D. Field. Church, book 5. chap. 41.
Saint Gregory gave Saint Paul the title of Head of the Nations, and that he
obtained the government of the whole Church. What titles do the Fathers give
unto Saint Peter beyond these? If these do not prove any general Jurisdiction
in others: how do they prove it in Saint Peter?

. 12.
But what need we stand upon Titles which the ancient Fathers gave to Saint
Peter or the Pope, when the whole course of their actions were against the
Supremacy now challenged? Remember what I have said See before book 1. chap.
1. 2.
before of the Fathers misliking and dissuading the Popes assumed authority in
the smallest matters (as Polycarpus dissuading Anicetus; Polycrates and the
Bishops of the East, and Irenaeus with his French Bishops in the West,
dissuading Victor, from new, unusual, unjustifiable courses. ibid.. 3.
) Other Fathers afterward plainly resisting and rejecting the Popes judgment
and authority, as the holy Martyr Cyprian, with many whole Councels of the
African Bishops, Saint Basil the Great, and the whole Greek Church.

I showed you also, how three Popes in succession, Zozimus, Boniface, and
Celestine (above 400. years after Christ) claymed their superiority and
privileges, (not by the Scriptures, but) by a Canon of the Council of Nice,
which Canon, the holy learned Bishops in the Council of Carthage rejected,
finding no such thing in any of the Copies of the Council of Nice, which their
Church kept, or the Church of Alexandria, or the Church of Constantinople. So
that finally (condemning that Canon to be countefet, and the claymed authority
of the Church of Rome to be new and unlawful) they made Decrees against the
Popes claim, conformable to their own Decrees and Customs of former times.
Ibid. sect. 4.
I showed you further, by the Contention betwixt John Bishop of Constantinople,
and Gregory the Great, Bishop of Rome, that your own Gregory condemned the
titles and supremacy which John then labored for, and which your Popes now
take unto them: he, I say, condemned them for Antichristian, and said, none of
his ancestors did ever claym them. Ibid. sect. 5.
I showed you also, how the Bishops of France, Germany, and Brittany, with many
Councels, one at Constantinople, another at Frankfurt, another at Paris, with
whom also joined Charles the Great, and Ludouicus Pius (beside many learned men
in their books at that time) opposed the Pope and his Councels, and his
authority, in imposing the worship of Images upon the Church. Of these, and of
the succeeding times, I have spoken See ibid. sect. 9. 10. etc.
(in mine opinion) sufficient to satisfy any moderate man: and upon occasion.
I have much more to say. But read advisedly at your leisure, B. Jewel, B.
Morton, D. Field, and our other learned Protestants: or our most judicious King
James his books; or read only B. Bilsons book B. Bilson. The true
difference between Christian subjection and unchristian rebellion, specially
the first part, p. 94. and seq in 8.
(who writes fully enough and punctually of these matters) and if you be not
prejudicate and obstinate beyond all reason, you will be satisfied.

Only I will add here for the present, one thing of the African Church, about
Saint Cyprians time and after: The Contention betwixt the Bishops of Africa and
the Bishop of Rome was so great, that on the one side, (as Cassander Cassander
consultation, ar^ic. 7. page 54.
observes) Pope Steven repelled Saint Cyprian (a communione sua) from
Communion with him; See ^efo^^ ch^p. 2^^^.
admitted not to his speech the Bishops of Africa coming from Saint Cyprian as
Legates: yea, and fo^bade all his fraternity to receive them into their houses:
denying them not only peace and communion, but also, tectum and hospitium,
house-room and lodging: calling Cyprian (Pseudo, hristum, and dolosum
operari^m) a false Christ, and deceitful worker.

And on the other side, Saint Cyprian and the Africans stood out, thinking the
Pope and the Italians, in the wrong; neither sued they, neither cared they for
the Communion of the Pope and the Church of Rome. Doctor Harding says,
Hardings answer to Jewels challenge, page 290.
The whole Church of Africa withdrew it self from the Church of Rome, by
reason of this difference of Appeals, and so continued in Schism an hundred
years, and in that time were brought into miserable captivity by the Vandales.
(Harding might remember that Rome it self, about the same season, in the space
of 140. years, was brought to miserable calamities, being six times taken by
the wild and barbarous enemies B. Jewel. ib.
) after which time of 100. years, Eulabius B. of Carthage, condemning his
predecessors disobedience, and seeking reconciliation to the Pope, did by
public instrument (or writing) submit and reioyne the African Church to the
Roman. And Boniface the Pope writes thereof to the Bishop of Alexandria,
exciting him to rejoice and give thanks to God for this reconciliation:
saying, that Aurelius Bishop of Carthage and his fellows (whereof Saint
Augustine was one) being set on by the Devil had borne themselves proudly
against the Church of Rome, etc. So were Saint Austen with 216. other Bishops,
with four general Councels, of Africa, Carthage, Milleuis and Hippo,
condemned and cursed by Eulabius, and declared by Boniface the Pope, to be
pricked forwards by the Devil, and wilfully to live out of the Church of God,
and die in Schism.

This History, reported by Mr Harding, yields a great inconvenience that such
good men, as Saint Augustine, Cyprian, Fulgentius, and many others, should
willingly live and dye out of the Community of the Roman Church, as
Schismatiks, and excommunicated by the Pope: and yet think themselves safe
enough, and generally accounted by the world to be good Catholics, and many of
them Saints: And therefore Bellarmine has reason to discredit this story of
the reconciliation, and labors to prove it counterfeit either in whole or in
part Bellar. de Romans Pontif. l. 2. c. 25.
. And thus Mr D. Harding is not only proved often by our B. Jewel, but here
confessed by his fellow Bellarmine to be an errant Catholic, an abuser of the
world by fables; and yet lately again Coster. enchir. cap. De summo Pont.
obiectio decima solet. and Sanders de visib. monarch. lib. 7. page, 3^9. as
Lindan before Panopl. lib. 4. cap. 48.
Costerus the Jesuit mentions the same story as true. Such is their unity among
themselves, and the certainty of their both histories and doctrines. If this
history be true; then in those times, holy men, Saints, and Martyrs, made no
great conscience to resist the Pope, to reject his sovereignty, to live and dye
out of the communion of the Church of Rome: if the story be false, then
condemn your great D. Harding, and the Authors which he follows, as abusers
of the world by falsities.

By all this, it appears that whatsoever titles the Ancient Fathers gave to
Saint Peter: they denied the supremacy now challenged to the Bishops of Rome
his pretended successors.

. 13.
For indeed, the things wherein Saint Peter excelled the other Apostles, were
personal, proper to his person only, and not communicable to his successors.
To be the eldest, first chosen, of greatest estimation, fullest of grace, etc.
were not things descending to his successors, but proper to himself.

Antiq. Neither do the Bishops of Rome challenge these properties: but his
Universality of commission over the whole world, and his Infallibility of
Judgment.

Antiquis. But in these two things the other Apostles were his equals. Proved
before 6, and 11.
Saint Paul had care over all Churches 2 Cor. 11. so had the rest: and all of
them were guided by the holy Ghost from error, both in teaching and writing.

Antiq. True, but they could not leave these to their successors, as Saint
Peter might.

Antiquis. So says Bellarmine indeed: De pont. lib. 1. cap. 9. Respondeo
Pontificatum.
Iurisdictio vniuersalis Petro data est vt ordinario pastori, cui perpetuo
succederetur: alijs vero tanquam delegatis, quibus non succederetur.

What should be the reason of this? Forsooth, they say that Christ made Saint
Peter supreme Pastor and Bishop of the whole world, and so likewise his
successors for ever: See Doctor Field. Church, Book 5. cap. 23. page 114.
but afterward he gave the same authority to the rest of the Apostles for
their lives only: A strange conceit, Christ first gave him a Monarchy, and
afterward took it away again; avoiding his first grant to one, by his second
grant to eleven more: for by making all the twelve of equal authority in all
parts of the world and toward all persons, so that no one of them could limit
or restrain another, he took away the Monarchy from one which he had first
given him, and made it an Aristocracy of twelve equals in power: and at their
deaths, taking away succ^ssion from eleven, and giving it to one, made a
Monarchy of the Aristocracy again, and raised Saint Peter's successor to be
greater then Peter himself had been without any peers, honoring the Pope
more then he honored Peter. For Peter was only one of the Duodecem viri, but
his successor a sole and absolute Monarch, and all the other Apostles
successors were underlings, receiving all their calling, mission, and
commission from him, and not to be restrained, limited, governed by him alone.
Who would not take this for a strange Paradoxe, unworthy of wise and learned
men? and yet this they are compelled to hold, for two reasons: first, because
it is most clear that the Apostles were all equal in power and commission,
and received it immediately from Christ and not from Peter, which they cannot,
they do not deny. Secondly, because if all the Apostles should leave their
power to their successors, then their successors should not depend upon Saint
Peter's, but should derive their power from Christ himself, by a line of
succession as well as Peter's did; and consequently all the Bishops ordained by
the other Apostles and by their successors to the worlds end (whereof there
were and are innumerable) should have no dependence of Saint Peter, neither
could be limited or ordered by his successors, as Bellarmine saw well enough
Lib. 4 cap. 24.. At contra: and lib. 2. cap. 23.. and secunda ratio.
. Therefore, where Saint Cyprian says, The rest of the Apostles had equal
power with Peter: Their note says, This must be understood of the equality of
the Apostleship, which ceased when the Apostles dyed: and passed not over unto
Bishops In the annotation to Cyprian, printed at Rome by Paulus Manutius, at
the Popes command, Raynolds and Heart, p. 221.
.

Bellarmine Bellar. de pont lib. 1. c. 23. vig^sima prima.
saw that this shift would not serve the Popes turn (because the world is full
of the Apostles successors, lineally coming from them, which no way should
depend upon Saint Peter) therefore he has another conceit more strange than
the former; That the rest were made also Apostles by Christ, and so continued
for their life: but they were consecrated Bishops not by Christ, but by Saint
Peter: and so consequently (the Apostolic office ceasing) all the Bishops
authority was derived from Saint Peter; A fine conceit, were it true; but
himself says presently after Ib.. Respondeo in Apostolatu contineri
Episcopatum.
that the Bishops office is contained in the Apostles office, so that in being
Apostles they were Bishops also without any further or new ordination; for what
Ecclesiastical acts can any Bishop do, which the Apostles could not? Christ
gave to the Apostles power to preach and baptize, Mat. 28.19. power to minister
the holy Communion, Luke 22.19. power of the keys, of binding and loosing, of
remitting and retayning sins, of planting Churches, ordayning Bishops and
Ministers. For the Apostleship is the highest office in the Church of God, and
contains the power of all the rest in it. Bellar de pont. lib. 4. cap. 23..
Addit Cyril.
Christ by saying Ioh. 20.
Sicut misit me Pater, and ego mitto vos, gave them his own office and
authority, and made them his Vicars, as the Fathers Chrysostom, and
Theophylact speak, and Bellarmine allows Ib. initio capitis.
.

And whereas Saint James the younger was ordained Bishop of Jerusalem by the
other Apostles (as the Ancients show;) that ordination was not a new power
given him, but a special application of his old power to that particular
diocese Wherein Bellar. troubles himself idly, de pont l. 1. c. 23.
praetereaquod
; as also the translation of a Bishop to another Sea, is not the making of a
new Bishop, but a mere application of the old to a new place D Field, ib. page
116, 117.
.

. 14.
Thus you see sufficiently (I hope) that though the Church Section 3, 4, 5.
attributed much to Saint Peter, yet Sect. 10, 11, 12
not such supreme jurisdiction over the whole Church, as now is claymed; Sect.
13.
neither could the prerogatives due to him, descend to his successors; no such
thing can be proved either by the Sect. 6, 7, 8, 9.
Scriptures, or the Sect. 11.
Fathers, but plainly the Sect 10, 12.
contrary. Cyprian epist. 67. D. Field, Church, book 5. c. 42. p. 288.
Saint Cyprian says wisely, that Almighty God wisely foreseeing what evils
might follow such universality of power and jurisdiction in one man; ordained,
that there should be a great number of Bishops joined in equal commission,
that so, if some fell, the rest might stand and keep the people from a
general downfall, as it was in the time of the Arians, wherein many Bishops
were corrupted, and amongst them the Sea the next chapter, sect. 4. Liberius:
and before, c. 1. sect. 1. subsect. 2.. 5.
Bishop of Rome: others remaining sound, and preuayling to save the Church from
general corruption.

To conclude this great point, we account this claymed jurisdiction to be one
of the great corruptions of the Church of Rome: a politic device to set up an
earthly Kingdom. We know there was a Church of God upon earth perfect and
pure, before there was a Church at Rome: and that the Churches in other
Nations, of Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Philippy, etc. had no dependence upon
the Church of Rome: they were her sisters, not her daughters: equally branches
of the Olive tree, Romans 11. Rome was not the Root, and they the Sprigs. And the
Church of Rome was more perfect and pure before this great jurisdiction was
ever claymed and practiced, then ever it was after; and salvation therein more
easily attained. We know that in the smallest Churches, even those in
Philemons, and in Aquila and Priscillaes houses, Philem. 2. 1 Cor. 16.19.
salvation was to be had, without subjection to Rome; For wheresoever two or
three are gathered together in Christ's name, Mat. 18.20.
he is amongst them. They that hear his voice and follow him, John. 10 27.
are his Sheep and Church, whethee they be under the Pope or no. And they that
are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 2.19, 20.
Christ himself being the chief corner stone; are not strangers and aliens,
but of the household of God, and fellow Citizens with the Saints. The condition
of being under the Pope is no where required in Scripture, but salvation
promised (wheresoever it is promised), without it. If nothing be necessary to
be believed to salvation, but what is delivered in plain words in Scripture,
or else thence deducted by evident consequence of reason (as Bellarmine
teaches) then this point is not necessary to be believed, then salvation may
be had without it. The ancient Christians indeed reverenced the Church of Rome,
and thought fit to keep in the Community of so famous a Church: but they never
acknowledged the Prerogative of the Bishop thereof to be such, that it was
damnable to be from under him, or separate from community with him, or feared
his excommunication as damnable. For the Greek Church (which was a long time a
principal part of the Christian world) was never subject to the Roman Bishop,
See B. Morton. Causa Regia cap, 1.. 4 page 4.
but (as Bellarmine confesses Bellarmine in Praefat. ad libros de Romans Pont.
page 15.
) divided from the Roman 800. years. And Bellar. li. 3. de verbo Dei c. 6.
secundo
All the Churches of Asia were excommunicated by Pope Victor, unjustly, and
contrary to the course of all his predecessors, as both Irenaeus with his
Western Bishops, and all the Eastern Bishops manifested it unto him, and
therefore they little regarded it, though (as Bellarmine says Bellar de Romans
pont. li. 2. c. 19.. At objicit.
) we never read it was recalled, or they absolved.

Binius Annot. in Council. 1. Carthag.
Pope Steven threatened the African Bishops with excommunication, which they,
joining with Saint Cyprian the famous Bishop of Carthage, made none account of
See before,.12.
. Saint Cyprian was notwithstanding always accounted in the number of
Catholics, Bellar. lib. 2. deconcil. c. 5.. 1
and afterward crowned with Martyrdom. In Saint Augustines time the African
Fathers Card. Cusan concord cath. lib. 1. cap. 20.
continued to withstand Pope Celestine and his successors, and stood willingly
excommunicated an hundred years, as appears by the Epistle of Boniface See
before,. 12.
, whereof I spoke before. Bellar de Romans pont. lib. 2. c. 25.
Bellarmine and Salmeron. rom 12. tractat. 58. p. 498 col. 1.
Baronius that deny the story thereof, and would discredit that Epistle, know
very well that many learned men of their side allow, applaude and allege it,
(as Lindan, Sanders, Harding, Coster, etc.) and so either are blindely
deceived, or wilfully deceive the world: they know also that the African
Bishops (and among them Saint Augustine the Chief) did very sharply withstand
the Roman Bishops claim for Appeals to Rome: and Salmeron. rom 12. tractat.
58. p. 498 col. 1.
they know also that from the time of Saint Cyprian the Church of Africa began
to be separated from the Church of Rome. Baronius tom^ 5. anno 4^9. ^u. 93.
In which time there were innumerable troops of Martyrs that dyed for the
Catholic Faith, as Baronius confesses. Baron. tom^ 8. anno 604. nu. 55 and 58.
Baronius describes also out of Beda, how the Churches of great Britain
(England and Scotland) were divided a long time from the Roman Church, and
subjection to her rites, which were commanded under pain of excommunication,
and stood out in Gregory the Greats time, above 600. years after Christ, and
would not yield the desired subjection for all that Augustine could do, and
yet they were accounted Catholic Christians: and on one day, twelve hundred of
them were crowned with Martyrdom, dying for the Faith of Christ, contra
Northumbrot infideles, as your histories tell us Galfrid Monum. hist. lib. 1.
cap. 12, 13.
. In these latter times, our Adversaries reckon examples enough Azorius Iesuita
Institut. moral. part. 1. lib. 8. cap. 20.. Decimo quar.
of Greeks, Armenians, Ruthenians, Egyptians, Aethiopians, and other remote
parts of the world, which do not acknowledge the Pope to be their superior,
no more than the Protestants do. And yet your Azorius (a choice man,
delivering the doctrine of the Roman Church) dare not affirm them to be
heretics, but excuses their opinions different from the Romists, and calls
them only Schismatikes, because they refuse the Roman superiority. To say
nothing of the Protestants, whereof there are innumerable in Germany, France,
Britain, Pelonia, David, Bohemia, Hungaria, Heluetia, Sueti^, Silesia, Morana,
Transiluania, and other parts, which in this age make the greater part of
Christendom; which all reject the Roman Hierarchy, as contrary to the Apostles
doctrine, and the Primitive Church for many ages.

It may seem strange that any man that has any dram of Christian Charity, or
come of Christian salt in his heart, should persuade himself, or force his
heart to think, that so many learned Bishops of old time, and Christians
suffering Martyrdom for Christ's sake; and such infinite store of people of all
nations in these latter ages, professing Jesus Christ's religion, holding all
points necessary to salvation; and for them suffering loss of goods,
imprisonment, banishment, death and depri^ation of all earthly comforts besides
it, should cease to be Christians, and become damned creatures only because
they will not become subjects to the Pope of Rome, as to their superior; who
(as they are verily persuaded) sits as Anrichrist in the Church of God,
abrogating many of Gods Laws, and establishing his own.

Or shall they that in tenderness of Conscience have reformed many gross
abuses in life, and errors in doctrine, which had crept into the Latin Church,
be condemn^d for reforming them, and not communicating with him in his
continued abuses, though they hold all good things with him, and refuse nothing
which the Scriptures and pure Antiquity has delivered? No (my friend.) Be you
Antiquus, if you will and stick to Hildebrands dictates, broached eleven
hundred years after Christ (when Satan was newly loosed) or to Boniface the
eights decree 200. years after Hildebrand (for that is your greatest
Antiquity:) I will be Antiquissimus and hold the old Religion which the
Apostles taught, which the first Churches held, the East, the South, the West,
the middle Churches, yea all Churches (even the Roman Church it self) for many
hundred years next after Christ; according to which patterns the Protestants
have reformed their Churches in these latter ages as near as was possible for
them: and make no more doubt of salvation therein, then of the holy Fathers,
Saints, and Martyrs of former times, which rejected the Popes superiority and
sovereignty, as we do.

CHAP. 7. Of the Popes infallible judgment in guiding the Church by true
doctrine.
. 1. It cannot be proved by Scriptures, or Fathers, or by the Analogy to the
chief Priests of the old Testament.

. 2. Neither is such infallibility now necessary in any man.

. 3. But if in any man, most improbably in the Popes, whereof some have been
children, and many most wicked men, and monsters of men.

. 4. And many Popes have erred (De facto) in Judgment.

. 5. Which the Romists distinctions and euasions cannot avoid.

. 6. The manifold and manifest Judgment of Antiquity overthrown this supposed
infallibility. For

. I. The Ancients ever accounted the Pope, fallible:

. II. And never in their writings mentioned their Infallibility.

. III. But rejected often both their jurisdiction and Judgment:

. IIII. Which if they had been established and believed, the Fathers studies,
and commentaries upon the Scriptures, had been in vain.

. V. And Councels had been called to no purpose.

. 1.
Antiquus.

SVppose the Popes claymed-supreme-gouernment over the whole Church cannot be
proved by Scriptures nor Fathers, yet if he have infallibility of judgment in
all points of heavenly doctrine, we are bound to submit unto him.

Antiquissimus. Prove that he has such infallibility, and we wiil submit to
his judgment.

Antiq. It is proved by the text Be lar. de Rom Pont. lib. 4 cap. 3.
Luke 22.31, 32. Simon, Simon, Behold Satan has desired to winnow you like
wheat, but I have prayed for thee that thy Faith should not fail, and when
thou art converted, Strengthen thy brethren.

Antiquis. These words are no way appliable to Peter's successors, except you
will have them first deny Christ outwardly (though faith fail not in their
heart) and secondly convert, and afterward strengthen their brethren. Else
these things are proper to Peter, who indeed was so grievously tempted by
Satan, that in that trial, through the extremity of fear, he denied Christ,
and that with bitter imprecations: but yet by virtue of Christ's prayer, he
denied him not by infidelity, the persuasion of his heart remained the same it
was before; then repenting bitterly for his outward Apostasy, and receiving the
sweetness of Gods mercy in forgiving, converting, and strengthening him, he
was able and fit to strengthen his brethren, to prevent their like falls, or
restore them after their falls by hope of the like mercy. Thus your Jesuit Sa
Iesuita schol. in Luke 22 id est, sicut ego orando te prote i (inquit
interlinearis glassa) ne deficeres, sictu infi^miores sratres exemplo tuae
poenitentiae consorta, ne de ve^ia desperent. Se^ Ar as Mortanus, and Aquinas
Catena, on this place.
Sa interprets this place, truly alleging the interlineall gloss for it.
And thus does Theophylact. upon Luke 22.
Theophylact also, attributing the confirmation of his brethren, not to Peter's
constancy in the true Faith, but to his sense of Gods tender mercy recalling
and recovering him: by which he was able to strengthen the wea^e, to comfort
the sorrowful, to confirm the doubtful, and to raise them unto assured hope
of finding mercy, that otherwise were ready to despair. For who will not be
confirmed (says the same Theophylact) by Peter, in the comfortable persuasion
of Gods gracious mercy to repentant sinners, that sees him (whom Christ had so
much ho^oured) after so shameful and execrable fault of Abnegation of his
loving Master, the Lord of life, not only received to mercy, but restored to
the dignity of the prime and chief Apostle? Bellarmine brings some reasons
and allegations to prove those words of Luke 22, to make for Saint Peter's (and
his successors) infallibility, but all far too weak to prove his purpose.
See them fully examined and answered by D. Field, D. Field, Church, book 5
chap. 42.
who answers also the other allegations of Mat. 16.18. Upon this Rock I will
build my Church: and of John 21.15, 16, 17. Feed my sheep, seed my lambs.
Upon which, the infallibility of the Pope cannot possibly be grounded, neither
do the Fathers come near to prove it, which are alleged for it, as he
shows.

Antiq. For the places of Saint Matthew 16. and St. John 21. Upon this Rock,
and Feed my sheep, since you have proved by the Fathers judgment Before chap.
6 section 6, 7.
that they belong as well to the other Apostles as to Saint Peter, I rely not
upon them, nor upon the Fathers, who by ib. sect. 12.
refusing the Popes supreme government, seem thereby also to deny his
infallibility.

But there is another thing, urged by Bellar. de pont. lib. 4. cap. 3.. quarto
probatur
many, and seems to be of great force to prove this questioned infallibility:
That the high Priest of the old Testament had in his brest-place the Vrim and
Thummim, Exodus 28. and 30. that is, Doctrine and Verity, which is expounded in
the 17. and 9. of Deuteronomy, where the Lord commands them that doubt of the
sense of the divine Law, to repair to the Chief Priest, and enquire of him,
adding That he shall tell them the truth of judgment. Therefore both by
signs, and by words the Lord has promised that in the breast of the Chief
Priest shall reside Doctrine and Verity; and therefore that he cannot err,
when he teaches the people. And if this was fit for the Aaronicall chief
Priest, much more for the Christian. Conformable whereunto Ioh. 11.51. and
Rhemists thereupon.
Caiphas, the Jews high Priest, in a Council, prophesied (truly) that Christ
should dye for the Nation. Upon which Text, the Rhemists do note, That the
gifts of the holy Ghost follow the Order and Office, not the merits and persons
of men; as Caiphas a man many ways wicked, and in part an usurper, in the time
when the Priesthood began to decline and give place to the new ordinance of
Christ, had yet some assistance of God for utterance of truth, which Caiphas
himself meant not: therefore we should not marvel that Christ delivers his
truth by Prelates, his officers, though wicked and unworthy of their office, as
also Canus loc. theol. lib. 5. cap. vlt.. Ad id.
Canus says, alleging the same text, and Bishop Fisher also Roffensis contra
Assert. Lutheri. veritat. 3. page 12.
.

Antiquis. The high Priests, by their education, office, reading, study, and
conference, must in all reason, have knowledge far beyond ordinary people,
for sign whereof, they might wear the Vrim and Thummim: and the people were
to repair to them for direction in their doubts, (as now to their learned
Ministers, whose lips must preserve knowledge.) But the people were not to take
all for infallible which they said. B Morton Appeal l. 3 c. 15 sect. 3. and D.
Field, Church, book 5. c. 42.
The Jews had a gloss upon that text [If the Judge shall tell thee that the
right hand is the left, and affirm ^he left to be the right, thou must believe
him] But this is absurd (says their Lyranus) for no judgment that is
manifestly false must be believed from any man of what authority soever he be.
But the people are appointed only to do all things which the high Priests
shall teach according to the Law, Deuteronomy. 17.11

Whereupon Christ says, Mat. 23.2.
The Scribes and Pharisees sit upon Moses Chair, and therefore are to be
harkened unto (not in all things generally, whatsoever they say, but (only
when they utter and deliver pertinentia ad Cathedram things agreeable to Moses
doctrine: as the author of the ordinary gloss notes Glossa in ^undem locum.
See. Raynolds, Heart.
.

This therefore proves no infallibility in the high Priest, nor in the Pope, no
more does that of Ioh. 11.49, etc.
Caiphas (to whom we wonder that you in earnest parallel your Pope:) For he
spoke once in the Council, truly, and prophetically (God directing him, and
the event) confirming it:) but he spoke also in the Council most untruly and
blasphemously, when he said that Christ blasphemed Mat 26.65.
: as Bellarmine says well Bellar. lib. 2. de conciliis cap. 8. alii dicunt.
. Therefore to establish an opinion of an infallible Judge by an example of a
Judge blasphemously erroneous in judgment, is little better then to erect a
Roman Caiphas.

. 2.
You see therefore by the insufficiency of your proofs, first, that you have
no probability of your Popes infallibility.

Now I tell you secondly, there is no necessity of any such thing in any one
man in the Church of God, because Bellar. de Verbo Dei li. 4. c. 11.. hic
notatis Costerus Enchir ca. 1.. caetorum.
we have all the points of Christian doctrine necessary to salvation, Coster.
ib. Aug. Doctr. Christiana l 2. c. 9. Bellar. de iustif. lib 3. cap. 8. primara.
plainly and infallibly delivered in the Scriptures. Saint Peter was Mat.
16.17.
infallibly guided by the holy Ghost, and freed from all error in doctrine
either by teaching then presently, or delivered by writing to posterity; so
were all the other Apostles. And Bellar. de verbo. Dei l. 4. c. 11. his notatis.
what they taught necessary for all men to believe unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3.16.
Gal. 1.12. 2 Pet. 1.21. 1 These. 1.13.
what they wrote and left for the instruction of the Church in succeeding ages
to the end of the world, whereupon all true Christians may and must stay
themselves for all points touching the foundation of Religion, and necessary to
salvation. If it were possible Gal. 1.8, 9.
for an Angel from heaven to come and teach otherwise, St. Paul does
confidently and doubly pronounce him Anathema. As long as any men or Churches
hold fast what the Apostles have delivered, they do Bellar de verbo Dei, lib.
1. c. 2. quare ca^. Faber Stapulensis praefatione in Euangeistas.
infallibly hold the truth: when they swerve from that, they swerve from the
Rule of truth, and may quickly lose themselves in inextricable errors. The
latitude of this infallible necessary saving knowledge, I have described before
In the 6. chapter next before.
, and it is that we must earnestly contend for, as Saint Jude says, Earnestly
contend for the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints Jude verse. 3.
; once delivered, that is, first, and once for all delivered by the Apostles to
the first Church, and never after to be altered; for that contend earnestly,
and for other profitable doctrines that are thence deducted by manifest
consequence of Reason, contend also, but more moderately. For things obscurely
thence deducted, and not profitable at all, contend not.

Let every man's judgment submit to the rule (of the absolutely necessary
points sufficient for salvation) once and first given: and we shall need no
more nor further infallibility in any man.

. 3.
But if this (so much spoken of) infallibility of judgment for teaching and
governing the Church, should be given to any one rank of men, it is very
unlikely the Popes should be the men. Is it reasonable to think that children
in years and understanding, or men of corrupt and filthy lives, monsters of
men (such as many of your Popes were) should be Gods chief infallible
governors of his Church? Benedict the 9. was made Pope at 12. or 10. years
old (as Baronius confesses Baronius anno.
) and ruled that Church 20. years. A likely Sheephards boy in Saint Peter's
place, to feed his sheep (the flocks, they say, of all Christendom) by
doctrine and example! more likely to be a plague to the flock: as God,
threatening a plague to the Common wealth, Esaias 3.4.
said, Children should reign over them. Aristotle judged a Youth not a fit
hearer of Moral Philosophy, and yet must this child be thought a fit teacher
of heavenly doctrine, yea, to be the Universal Oracle of the world, that has
neither possibility to err himself, nor misleade others. Such a virtue has
the Popes Chair to infuse learning and all habilities into a Schoole-boy, that
knows not his Grammar, to serve the Roman turn well enough; to interpret the
Scriptures, assoyle all questions, resolve all doubts, sit at the sterue and
guide the ship of the Church, call Councels, and judge of all their decrees,
ratify some, nullify others (as one of far greater judgment than all the
learned of the world) yea, to determine all causes, depose Kings, command
Angels, open and shut both heaven and hell, and do every thing as well as
Saint Peter himself. How think you? is it reason for any man to think so?

Antiq. Many defects may be supplied by learned Cardinals, grave and wise
Counselors.

Antiquis. A miserable head that has his wit to seek in another man's brains;
but you Greg Val. Anlys. fidei l. 8. c. 10.. Ex quo. This were to give
infallibility not to the Pope, but to the Pope with his Cardinals.
place not infallibility in the Counselors, but only in the Pope himself;
his faylings are not to be amended by theirs, but theirs by him: and indeed, if
he be infallible, they are superfluous, and so are all Councels and learned
men. See another Pope somewhat elder, but a great deal worse; John 12.
Banonius anno 955.
He was made Pope at 18. years of age: the Romish Church thought it a less
evil to endure one head, though monstrous ( Monstruosum quantum libet caput
far, says Baronius Banonius anno 955.
) than to be infamed with two heads, and one body to be cut in two. Upon Saint
Dunstans coming to him to receive his Pall to be Archbishop of Canterbury, at
last, Baronius adds, Vidisti extrema duo, Episcopum sanctissimum, pontificem
vero moribus perditissimum: Thou have seen two extreme contraries, A most holy
Bishop (Dunstan) and a most wicked living Pope ( John the twelfth.) Baron. anno
963 n. 17.
Baronius says, this John was accused of many most notorious crimes, of
adultery with Rainerius his widow, and with Stephana ^is Fathers concubine,
and the widow Anna, and with his (or her) niece, and that he made the holy
palace a stews and brothell house, that he put out the eyes of his ghostly
Father Bened, who died upon it: that he cut off the stones of John the
Cardinal subdeacon, and so killed him: that he drank to the love of the
Devil in wine: that in playing at dice, he would invoke the aid of Jupiter,
Venus, and other heathen gods: that the whole Council of the Bishops of Italy
wrote unto him that he was accused of murder, perjury, sacrilege, yea, and
incest with his own kindred and his two sisters, etc. they required him to come
and answer for himself, promising him to do nothing but according to the
Canons. He wrote again thus ridiculously and childishly, Ionnes episcopus,
seruus seruorum Dei, omnibus episcopis: Nos audiuimus dicere, quod vos vultis
alium papam facere: si haec feceritis, excommunico vos de Deo omnipotenti, vt
non habeatis licentiam vllum ordinare and missam celebrare.

Platina in Joan. 13.
Platina in his life (reckoning him John 13.) calls him sceleratissimum hominem,
vel monstrum potius, a most wicked man, or rather a monster: and again, Virum
omnium, qui vnquam ante se in pontificatu fere perniciosissimum and
sceleratissimum: A man of all that ever were before him in the Popedom, the
most pernicious and wicked. When this John fled, the Emperor Otho made Leo Pope
in his room; but as soon as the Emperor was gone, John by the help of his
kindred and clients, put down Leo, and reigned again; shortly after,
committing adultery with another man's wife, he was thrust through and slain: or
as Baron. anno 964. n. 17.
Baronius thinks, he was in his adultery stricken in the Temples by the
devils, and so dyed. Was this a man likely to be the infallible mouth and organ
of the holy Ghost? If Baronius and Platina be not witnesses sufficient, read
^he same story in your own Sigonius l. 7. de regno Italioe.
Sigonius (the Popes hired reader in one of his Universities) who writes it
somewhat fully, following Luitprandus, Martinus Polanus, Trit^mius, Platina,
Krantzius, all your own Catholic Historians.

I omit a number of wicked Popes, fellows and equals to these; for I should
both weary and stink you out, if I should rake long in the dunghill of these
Popes lives: whereof there were fifty in one plumpe (as your own Genebrard. l.
4. Chronologiae, se^ulo 10 anno 90 page 546.
Genebrard writes) rather Apostaticall than Apostolical in the space of an
150. years. I will only show you a brief of the story of a few Popes in a
short time, and their strange Unity, Infallibility, and Holiness.

These things ye may read in Platina, Luit prandus, and Bellarmine also lib.
4. de Romans pont. cap. 12.. vigesimus septimus. and in Baronius anno 897. Who
only differs in attributing to Stephanus that which others do to Sergius.
Formosus a Cardinal and Bishop was cursed, deposed, and degraded by Pope John
the 8, (whom Platina reckons John the ninth) who driving him out of Rome,
caused him to swear never to return either to the City, or to his
Bishopric. But John being dead, his successor Martin 2, absolved Formosus
from his oath, and restored him to his former dignity. Not long after, the same
Formosus obtained the Popedom, wherein he lived five years. After him,
succeeded Bonifacius 6, living Pope but twenty six days: then Stephanus 6. Who
abrogated Formosus his decrees, disanulled his acts in a Council, took up his
body, dispoyled it of the pontifical habit, as unjustly made Pope after
perjury; cut off two of his fingers wherewith he had consecrated, cast them
into Tyber, and buried him in laymens garments. This Steven reigned but one
year and three months. After him succeeded Romanus 1. Who abrogated the
decrees and acts of Steven, and reigned but three months: then came Theodorus
2. who restored also Formosus his acts and followers, living Pope but twenty
days. Then succeeded John 9. ( Platina calls him John the tenth) who fully
restored the acts of Formosus, and abrogated Steuens, confirming all by a
Council. Notwithstanding all this, Sergius 3. restored Steven, and condemned
Formosus again, admitted them to priesthood again, whom Formosus had deposed:
and whom Formosus had ordered, he again degraded, and caused them to take new
Orders: and again took up Formosus his body, out of the sepulcher, beheaded
it, and cast the body into Tyber, as unworthy the honor of burial. Whereupon
(says Baronius Baron. anno 908.
) one Auxilius then wrote a dialogue betwixt Infensor and Defensor, against
this inbred discord of the Romish Church, and of the Popes ordinations,
exordinations, and supe^-ordinations, etc.

Nauclerus generat, 31. initio.
Thus were Saint Peter's successors whirled about (not with the spirit of
godliness, but) with the spirit of giddiness. Vertigo rotabat Petri
successores (says Krantzius Krantzius Metrepolis l. 2 c. 22. Martin. Polon.
Nanclerus ib. says there were 8. Popes in one King Lodowicks time, who reigned
not above 12 years.
) and the head of the Church was long without a brain. Where was then the
infallibility of these Popes judgment in the government of the greatest
affairs of the Church? where was their charity and holiness? nay, where was
ordinary honesty, ciuility, or humanity? Here was indeed a most bestiall rage,
reaching not only to the deathbed, but to the grave, with digging up bones,
dismembring dead carcasses, derogating from their persons, abrogating their
acts, disanulling their ordinations, disgracing their Favorites, degrading the
Prelates by their predecessors preferred, Pope against Pope, one head of the
Church against another, and Counsels against Counsels, setting the world in
amaze, dissoluing religion and government, that men knew not what to think,
nor what to do. Where was the unity of mind and peace among inferiors, when
the heads were so brainsicke, or so hare-braind, or rather wolfe-braind?

Antiq. Enough enough, you have wearied and stuncke me out indeed, with these
filthy stories: which I would never have believed, had you not turned me to
their own authors, to read them with mine own eyes. But it is most
admirable that God did yet preserve his Church by such wicked instruments, for
you know the doctrine and sacraments delivered by Judas were good and
profitable, though he was wicked.

Antiquiss. Genebrard. quo supra. ^ tanto numero pontificu^ quinque modo and
satis tenuiter landatur.
Our Savior in choosing Judas had a purpose to save us, by working good out of
his treason; but had he chosen ten Iudasses for one or two good Apostles, the
world would have muttered at him as improuident. Your Genebrard reports of 50
Popes Apostaticall together, and scarce five of them any whit Apostolical; and
doubtless he speaks the best for his own side: and the after times grew
worse rather than better. Also, though the ministerial acts being ordinary and
received of the Apostles (you will say) might be effectual, though wicked men
perform them, (which to deny is contrafidem, and so condemns them that
abrogated Form^sus his ordinations Bellar. de Romans pont. l. 4 cap. 2. vigesimus
sept and. sed obiicies.
) yet their infallibility (being an extraordinay privilege) in things not
ordered by the Apostles, has no probability at all, but rather, the crossing
one of another in their Decrees, and in their Counsels (called and confirmed
by themselves) utterly confutes it.

. 4.
Antiq. These things you draw in (a latere) sidelings: show me some Popes that
have directly, and (facto) indeed erred in the Faith: and then I shall think
them fallible. See D. Field, Church, book 5. cap. 43. Bellar. de Rom pont. lib
4.


Antiquis. Bellarmine himself yields you enough, though he labor with all his
art and wit to excuse all, for some have erred too grossly to be excused, too
manifestly to be denied.

1 Pope Gregory 3. Ex ignorantia lapsus est (says Bellarmine Bellar. ib c 12..
sed contra hoc est, etc.
) when he permitted a man to take a second wife, his first yet living, but
unable to pay her debt unto him: and taught, that in some case a man might with
the license of his wife, marry another, and so have two at once, which indeed
is false doctrine, and so defined by the Council of Trent, sels. 24. can. 2.

2 ib cap. 8.. Decimus est Marcellinus.
2 Pope Marcellinus (beyond decreeing, proceeded to fact) sacrificed to Idols:
teaching Idolatry and Hetheamsme by fact and example. But it was for fear of
death says Bellarmine. And

3 ib. cap. 9.
3 Pope Liberius subscribed to the Arrian heresy, set his hand against
Athanasius, wrote wicked Epistles: but (says Bellarmine) it was for fear of
death or torments. A man may by the same reason excuse Peter's denial of
Christ, and say, it was no sin, if this was no error.

Pope Vigillus wrote to the Empress, 4 ib. cap. 10.
and to the heretics confirming their heresy, and cursing the Catholic
teachers that confessed two natures in Christ: wicked letters, unworthy a
Christian man. But (says Bellarmine) he did it for desire of the Papacy, and
in great strayts, into which his ambition had cast him. As though wicked
affections could excuse men's errors.

Pope Honorius was condemned for an heretic, 5 ib. cap. 11.
by the sixth general Council, and again by the seventh: and in an Epistle of
Pope Leo: but all these were corrupted (says Bellarmine) or misinformed. See,
this man living but yesterday, knows better than whole Councels, Popes, and
authors living in that age, and is bold to accuse whole general Councels of
corruption, to keep one Pope from corruption.

Pope Celestine 3. 6 ib. cap. 14. cricesimus tertius.
cannot be excused from heresy (says their Alphonsus de Castro) for teaching
that by heresy Matrimony is so far dissolved, that the innocent party may
marry again: the contrary whereof is defined by the Council of Trent, Sess.
24. Cannon 5. and by Innocent 3. Bellarmine says, This was indeed Celestines
opinion, but not any decree: a poor excuse. 7 ib. cap. 14. See many Popes
crossing one another in judgment, ex diam etro, noted by Erasmus annot. in 1
Cor. 7. page 373, 374. Basilea 1522 cited by B. Morto^ Appeal l. 3. c 15, 1. p
403.


Pope John 22. held opinion that the souls departed came not to see God till
after the resurrection. Bellarmine answers, he might so hold without danger,
because yet there had been no definition of the Church in this point; also, he
purposed to define the question, but was by death prevented. A slender answer,
leaving him still infallibly faulty.

. 5.
Antiq. Sir, you know, the Catholics have many distinctions: The Pope may err
in manners, but not in doctrine: in matters of fact, but not in Faith: in
person, but not in office: before he be fully settled (as Vigilius) but not
confirmed in his seat: in the premises, but not in the conclusion: by way of
conference, but not in determining: in a private letter, but not in a Decretall
Epistle: in his chamber, but not in his Consistory: in his palace, but not in
the Pulpit. In a word, he may err as a man, but not as Pope.

Antiquis. Your men (like the Fox) being hunted out of one hold, fly to
another; their distinctions are but mere euasions, and illusions to gull the
world withal. Their first hold was, that the Pope could not err at all,
neither ought to be judged by any man; but being driven from that hold, they
fly to another: He may err in manners, or in matter of fact, but not in
matters of doctrine or faith: Well, we drive them from that also, for Gregory
3. Liberius, Vigilius, Honorius, Celestine, and John, erred in points of Faith.
Then they fly to another hold, they erred in Faith indeed, but yet as men
only, not as Popes. I think our learned King James hunts them from this hold
also; King James Remonstrance to Card. Peron. page 99.
in demanding wherefore then does not the Pope instruct and inform the man? or
wherefore does not that man require the Popes instruction? shall we say that
Esaias and Daniel might sink into heresy as men, but not as Prophets? would not
the man Esaias consult with the Prophet Esaias, to be free from error? if he cannot
assure himself, how shall he assure us of his freedom from error? I add
that the world by such distinction is gulled and abused: Bellar. de Pont. Romans
l. 4 c. 2.. Deinde catholici pontificem solum, sieve errare posset. sieve non,
esse ab omnibus fideli^s obedienter audien^um.
for the Romists laboring to prove their Pope infallible only in some few
things, would have the world obey him in all things. Some of them draw his
infallibility into a narrow scantling: first, he must enter canonically, else
he is not a true Pope, and so wants the privilege: secondly, he is free from
error only when he sets himself (as Pope) to decree matters of Faith: and
thirdly, to the end to teach or guide the whole Church: and fourthly, See Greg.
Val. Analysis fidei, lib. 8. totum. Specially ca 4. 10. and Bellar. de Pont.
Romans l. 4. c. 2. ^. quarta opinio, etc.
proceeds advisedly, and maturely, using all due means to find out the
truth. Into these narrow limits and straits some are compelled, all are
compellable, to bound the Popes infallibility, by the manifest histories of
their errors both in fact and Doctrine, both as men and as Popes in every degree.

But observe (I pray you) whether it be likely that the Pope using all these
means be infallible: for would he not then use them, and quickly cut off all
contentions? would he suffer troublesome controversies among his own people
to be endless? The Dominicans following Thomas teach that the Virgin Mary was
conceived in original sin, Archb. Abbot. against Hill. page 110. Bedels
letters page 52. Council. Basi. sess. 36.
the Franciscans following Scotus teach the contrary and these two families
(like the Guelfes and Gibelines) are at mortal feood for the point: the
Council of Basil was troubled with it, and decreed on the Franciscans side;
the Dominicans excepted against it, as a Council not lawfully called: and the
dissension continued still so great, that to quiet all, Pope Sixtus was feign
to make a decree and command, that the question should not be disputed of
afterward, and yet they are still hot in it upon any occasion, and Bellarmine
Bellarmine.
himself has lately disputed it, and leaves it with a pie creditur on the
Franciscans side. Why did not the Pope decide this; and give perfect unity to
his Church, whereof there are so great brags? and that other also of Grace and
Free will betwixt Dominicans and Jesuits? and all other controversies, whereof
their books are full? so that their exactest writers ( Suarez and others) spend
more leaves in confuting their own men, then us? May it not be suspected, they
know well enough that this infallibility of the Pope is but a mere fiction and
shadow, so that the Pope dare not trust himself, to determine such matters
wherein witty and learned men are engaged, lest they fall to quarrel and deny
not only his infallibility, but authority? and therefore it is observed, he
seldom proceeds to determine such questions.

Observe again, that if the Pope be only infallible when he uses such
means, it argues there is no divine inspiration extraordinary from the holy
Ghost proper to the Pope, but only Gods ordinary assistance, upon the use of
the means, promised to all Gods servants: And so is he no more infallible
than another man,

Observe thirdly, that the world has no sufficient means to be assured, that
such was the Popes entrance, and such means used by him, that all men may
without hesitation obey him.

Pighius lib. 4. hierarch. eccl. c. 8 Valentia Ana^ysis fidei part. 8. cap. 10.
Bellar. de Pont. Rom l. 4 c. 10.
To avoid all inconveniences, Bellarmine and Gregoririus de Valentia teach that
whether the Pope in defining use diligence or no, he shall define infallibly.
Well, but yet how shall we know whether he be a true Pope or no? Entering
canonically, without simony, violence, or other evil means: for Vigilius
erred most heretically (says Bellarmine) because he was not yet true Pope
(truly settled) though he carried himself as Pope; and many Popes were rather
Apostaticall, than Apostolical (says your Genebrard) because the Emperors
put them in (vncanonically it seems) and there have been often two, and
sometimes three Popes together, when the world could not know, which was the
true Pope. Anno a Christonato 13^. a Christo passo. 1000. Greg. Heymburgensis,
in Confutat. Primat. Papae. part 2. citatus a Iacabo Vsserio. De Christianaru^
Ecclesiarum successione and statu. c. 4.. 19.
Three Popes sat all at once in several places in Rome, Benedict 9. Syluester
and Gregory 6. of whom an Heremite wrote thus to the Emp^rour: Imperator
Henrice (Omnipotentis vice) Vna Sunamitis, Nupsit tribus maritis: Dissol^e
connubium, Et triforme dubium.

But to let this pass, miserable is the state of that people that is
ouer-ruled by your distinctions to obey the Pope without distinction. For
example, Suppose there comes a Brief, Bull, or Decree from the Pope, enioyning
his Catholics to refuse the oath of allegiance to their natural Prince, (as
from Paul the fifth to the English) by which refusal they shall be suspected
to be Traitors in heart, and all the Kingdom shall be jealous of them, that
upon any occasion they will be ready to cleave unto the Pope, or to any that
he shall appoint (open or secret enemies to the State) against their King, and
to take arms against him, and by wars, insurrections, or treaso^s, to throw
the Land on heaps, and bring in a Chaos of miserable confusion: Or, suppose
the Bull goes so far (as Pius V. his Bull against our right gracious and
famous Queen Elizabeth,) to pronounce the King to be no King, to discharge
the subjects from their allegiance to him, to command them to take arms
against him, and by any means to depose or bring him to ruin: Now the Kings
life, and the spoil of the Kingdom, and the damnable sin of the people must
depend upon this Brief or Bull; for it must be executed, whether it come from
the Pope as a man, or as Pope. Poor blinded people must be led with a Pie
credendum, and neither have the means or any mind to know whether this Bull
came from the Pope canonically entering, or maturely deliberating, or wisely and
orderly proceeding (if any such thing can be imagined in such mischievous
practices) or whether it come from a Non-Pope, or misinformed, or unjust,
Bellar. de Romans pent l. 4. c. 2. Deinde Catholici conueniunt, Pontificem sieve
errare possit, sieve non, esse omnibus fidelibus obedienter audiendum.
rash, or ill advised; howsoever it is, No man must judge Christ's Vicar, but
for conscience sake, and under pain of damnation, all must obey. Alas, that
Christ's pretended Vicar should do the works of Antichrist! Alas, that men
piously minded, should be so impiously bewitched to become the instruments of
Antichrist, thinking to do service to Christ himself! Alas, that learned men
should abuse Gods gifts of wit, learning, and other talents, bending all their
forces to maintain such doctrine!

Antiq. Sir, keep your passion for other company, Reason shall prevail with
me more than passion.

Antiquis. Dear friend, it is not passion, but compassion to poor deceived
souls, brought into such damnable courses by such efficacy of delusion, though
I know not how in such causes a good man should not be passionate.

. 6.
. I.
But to return to Reason (from which your Reasonlesse distinctions drew me) In
our former examples of Popes errings, do you not see that although the Papists
of this age excuse Honorius of all heresy, and count him a Saint, yet the
Catholics of former ages accounted him an heretic; for the sixth general
Council condemned him, Bellar. de Romans Pontif. l. 4. c. 11.
and if that Council were misinformed, or corrupted (as Bellarmine imagines)
and thereby induced also the seventh Council, and Pope Leo also to curse and
condemn him: yet it appears thereby that they thought it possible for a Pope
to be an heretic; and surely neither Liberius, nor Honorius, nor any other
Pope had ever been taxed of heresy, if the world had then thought the Popes
to be infallible.

. II.
This also gives us another argument against the assertion of the now-Church of
Rome; that none of the Ancients ever knew or acknowledged any infallible Judge
in the Church, Mr Bedels letters to Wadsworth. p. 53. 59, ^0.
though (we may imagine) such an one would have been a wonderful benefit in
securing all men from error, with great tranquillity of the Church; in easing
leatned men of much unnecessary contention, and of great labor and study; and
choking all heresies both easily and quickly; and thereby Divinity should have
had the honor above all other professions to reduce all doubts to
certaineties. If any such thing had been, it were most strange that the
Ancients (writing of all other points of Christian doctrine) should never
speak word of it, being a thing of such excellent and necessary use, (as is
imagined) therefore their very silence thereof proves there was no such thing.
But their contentions with the Pope show it more fully.

For no man that believes the Pope to be the infallible Judge of the Church,
and so appointed by God,. III
will refuse his opinion or government. But we find the ancient, wise, and holy
Bishops, made no bones ordinarily to reject them both. In the very infancy of
this affected Supremacy, See this story in Eusebius. hist. l. 5. c. 24, 25, 26.
when Pope Victor took upon him to excommunicate the East Church for not
concurring with him in the Celebration of Easter day: not only Polycrates and
the Eastern Bishops rejected his decision; but most of the Western (as
Irenaeus with his French Clergy) gravely reproved him of too much presumption.
See Cyprians Epistles.
Afterward when the Pope took upon him to hear Appeals of men pretending to
be wronged by their own country officers (which is the smallest portion of
Supremacy) yet Cyprian (an holy Martyr) resisted him; Bellar. de pontif. Rom l.
4 cap 7.
and the whole Nation of Africa, refused his judgment and government; yea,
Saint Cyprian with a Council of fourscore Bishops, decreed directly against
the Pope. Council. ^arthag. de Haeret. b^ptiz. inter opera Cypriani.
And when Cornelius Bishop of Rome (with a National Council of the Bishops of
Italy) had decreed (Non debere Haereticos rebaptizari) that heretics should
not be rebaptized: yet Cyprian thought and taught the contrary. Constat
Cyprian^m contrariu^ sensisse, and mordicus defendisse, says Bellarmine
Bellar. l. 2. d^ concilijs c. 5. See Eusebius. hist. li 7 cap. 2, 3, 4. See these
and many more the like histories in B. ^ilson True ^iff^^e^ce part. 1. p. 96.
etc
. The Fathers of the Council of Africa, and Saint Augustine among them,
resisted three Popes in succession, Sosimus, Bonifacius, and Celestine, about
Appeals to Rome. These things are notorious, and histories have many more the
like: and though some of these were in the wrong, yet they always thought the
Pope in the wrong, and would never have opposed him had they thought him their
infallible Judge. By their doings therefore and writings, they showed the
general opinion of men in their times, that the Pope was not general
governor over them, and that he was as fallible in judgment as other Bishops.

Bedel letters, page 61.
Consider also, If the Pope were the infallible interpreter of Scripture, and
could not err in his interpretations; why did Pope Damasus consult with Ierom
about the sense of many places of the Scripture? and not rather set down the
sense thereof himself, and declare with his own pen what the whole world
should hold without danger, or possibility of error? Or why have our fond
Fathers macerated their bodies and beaten their brains to write Commentaries
upon the Scripture, and not rather registered the Popes Expositions? which had
been a work worth all the Fathers books, and indeed equal to the Canonical
Scriptures, or better, and more useful for the Church: whereas now many
condemn that of the Canon Law for blasphemy, where it says (by a shameful
corruption of Saint Augustine) that the Decretals of Popes are enrolled amongst
the Canonical Scriptures. Decret. c. in Canonicis. did. 19. V. Thus Erasmus
argues, Annot. in 1 Cor. 7. B. Mort Appeal. l. 2. c. 20. sect. 5. and l 3. c.
15.. 4.


Consider lastly, what need had there been of any Councels? to what end was so
much labor and cost bestowed? to what purpose to trouble so many Universities?
to call together so many learned Divines? to turn over so many books? to
beat their heads in the finding out of the truth, in discussing of hard
questions, and satisfying of doubts? if all this might be so quickly, easily,
and sweetly done by the only judgment and determination of the Pope?

CHAP. 8. Of the good which the Popes Supremacy might do to the Church.
. 1. That is urged: but 2. answered, that policies agreeable to Gods word and
the Primitive Church, only are sufficient, and blessed by God.

. 3. But this policy might be set up by any sect.

. 4. It is unprofitable, and intolerable, 5. showed by examples of Hildebrand:
6. The voiages against the Turk proved profitable to the Pope, not to
Christian Princes, 7. as appeared by the Story of Gregory 9. and Frederik 2.
Emperor: and 8. many other most wicked Popes.

. 9. The Emperor Phocas erred much in government, in making the Pope so great,
so far from him. For Popes shortly after, proved Masters of mis-rule,
eiecting the Emperors out of Italy.

. 10. Their turbulent proceeding to dethrone Princes.

. 11. Their troubles wrought in England in King Henry 1. his time, by Anselme:
In King Henry 2. time, by Becket: In King John's reygne, by Pope Innocent.

. 12. In these latter times, of Queen Elizabeth, by the Bull of Pius Quintus,
and the erecting of Seminaries at Rome and Rhemes, Schools of Traitors. The
reasons briefly touched, 1. Of the Rebellion in the North: 2. Of Ormonds
brethren: 3. and 4. Of other petty conspiracies: 5. Stukely: 6. Sanders: 7.
Someruile: 8. Motives to the Ladies of Honor: 9. Of Throgmorton: 10. Mendoza:
11. Creighton the Jesuit: 12. Parry: 13. Percy: 14. Savage: 15. Balard with
his accomplices: 16. Aubespineus: 17. Stanley and York: 18. The Spanish Armado:
19. Lopez: 20. Squire: 21. Tyrone. And in the time of King James, 22. Watson,
Clarke and others, 23. The Powder treason.

Some observations out of these.

. 13. A good Christian abhors these treasons, and rejects the doctrine
that teaches them:

. 14. And thereby is (by reason) forced to renounce to be an absolute Papist:
and to think the doctrines grounded only upon the Popes authority without
Scripture, to be unnecessary: and consequently to acknowledge, that it is not
necessary to be a Roman-Catholike. The conclusion, with a brief recapitulation
of the whole precedent conference.

. 1.
Antiquus.

ALthough the supreme government of the Church by the Pope, and the
infallibility of his judgment, could not be proved by divine proofs: yet is
the good thereof so great, for the preservation of peace and unity, and much
other happiness both in the Church and Commonwealth, that even in good reason
and policy, the very shadows of proofs should be admitted as sufficient to
establish it. And if such power and infallible judgment may be given to any,
it is most fit it be given to him that has from all Antiquity been accounted
the principal Patriarch, and the high Bishop of the principal City of the
world.

Antiquissimus. Indeed (Antiquus) now I think you hit the nail on the head:
for the Popes Supremacy and infallibility has no other ground, but mere
humane policy, shadowed by the Scripture cunningly wrested, devised by their
learned Politicians for their own wealth and greatness; and taught by their
Agents, as most necessary for peace, unity, and much other good. Bellar de Romans
Pont. l. 4. c. 6. quarta proposit o. Probabile est, p^eque credi potest,
pontificem vt pontificem errare non posse, etc.
Bellarmine seems to confess thus much, when he says, It is probable and may
piously be thought that the Pope as Pope cannot err, nor as a particular
person be an heretic. Had he had better arguments, is it probable he would
have come in with Probabile est, pieque credi potest? But your Costerus Enchir.
page 123. Si nullum caput visibile in ecclesia a Christo constitutum foret,
vehementer optari ab omnibus oporteret.
Costerus the Jesuit is a little more plain. If there were no visible head
(says he) appointed by Christ, in the Church: yet such an one ought to be
wished for of all men: and your D. Alablaster, Motive 6.
Alablaster yet more plainly, Where (says he) there is not an infallible
authority, which does judge and decide controversies, by removing all occasions
of doubt and reply; and unto which absolute obedience is tied: there must needs
be variety of judgments and opinions, which cannot be tied in one knot. And
therefore the Protestants have done very unwisely to disgrace and reject this
profitable policy of the Church, the fountain of unity. Mr Alablaster calls it
policy.

. 2.
But alas (Dear friend) In Gods business I look only for Truth and
Sincerity, which God may bless and prosper, not for shadows and policy
without them, which God does ordinarily infatuate and confound. Happy had it
been for the Angels, if they had continued in the excellency of their first
estate; but when they strove to be higher, their policy failed them, they fell
lower, and of Angels became devils. Gods ordinance for Ephesians. 4. verse. 12, 13,
15.
gathering of his Saints, verse 14.
preserving true and vncorrupt doctrine, and verse. 16.
effectual perfecting of the Church in every part, was (says Saint Paul)
verse. 11.
He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and
Teachers. If one visible Head had been necessary to these purposes, here was
the place he should be spoken of: wherein, since he is not mentioned,
doubtless Saint Paul knew no such ordinance of God. See the like Catalogue of
Church Officers in 1 Cor. 12.28, 29. etc. this one visible head is never
mentioned nor here, nor in any other place of Scripture, but left out as
supernumerarius and superfluous. And we find, whilst Gods ordinance was
observed, the Church did wonderfully prosper: when it was shouldered out out by
humane policies, all things grew worse, and went to wrack. It was an evident
work of Gods Spirit, B. Usher Sermon at Wansted page 20.
that the first planters of Religion, and their successors, spreading
themselves through the whole world, laid the foundations of the ^ame Faith,
every where in great unity and uniformity: and yet were kept only by the Unity
of the Spirit, in that bond of peace without setting up any one man on earth
over them all, to keep peace and unity.

The true bond, which contained the Doctors and Fathers of the Primitive Church
in the unity of Faith, and wrought the conversion of Nations, continues in our
Church also: Sacra Scriptura est Regula credend^ certissima, tutissimaque says
Bellarmine Bellar. de verbo Dei l. 1. c. 2. quare cu^.
: The Scripture is the most certain and safe rule of Faith; and Spiritus
dominatur in conscientijs fidelium, The holy Spirit rules in the faithfuls
consciences, making them all to submit to the word of God: and though disioyned
in Nations, Laws, and Languages, yet still to consent in the substantial
points of reformed Religion, and constantly to suffer for them in persecution;
which unity is not wrought by any Kingdom inter nos among us (such as the Pope
assumeth) but by Christ's Kingdom intra nos, within us, ruling our hearts by
his Word and Spirit: which Kingdom (he says) is not of this world, but
merely spiritual and divine.

. 3.
But now, as if Gods truth stood need of our shadowed lies to maintain it, or
that humane policy could devise better means for the government of Gods Church,
then either he by his own providence has prescribed, or the Ancient Primitive
Church practiced: or else (which is the truth) because there are some newer
doctrines and practices to be maintained, neither imposed by God, nor able to
stand of themselves: we (forsooth) must devise, to set up a man as blind and
corrupt as our selves, and attribute unto him infallibility in judgment, and
unbounded jurisdiction in government (which neither Scripture, Fathers, nor any
reason does give him) and by him we must suffer our selves to be led
blindefold, in a conceit of greater peace and unity, than the Truth and Gods
Spirit at first afforded; which is a mere dream, and not only a carnal, but
a most deceiuable policy, and no better than the Priests of Antichrist may
plot, in being content to yield themselves to the whole guiding of their wicked
Master, and attribute unto him infallibility of judgment, without ground or
reason.

. 4.
That the Popes infallibility and jurisdiction have no ground in the Scriptures
or Fathers, I have showed before, with many reasons against them both: Now
(since you urge the profit thereof) I will show you the unprofitableness, and
the intolerable inconvenience thereof to the Church, Princes, and
Commonwealthes.

Ant^q. If you can do so, you shall go beyond my expectation.

Antiquis. I have done it in part already, See before book 1. cap. 5.. 3, 5,
etc.
when I showed you how the Popes earthly kingdom, erected and maintained by
many unjustifiable practices and polices, spoyleth Christ's heavenly Kingdom,
and robs earthly kingdoms of wealth, peace, comfort, and many other
blessings; as by exempting all the Clergy both their persons, goods and lands
from the government, right, or maintenance of secular Princes and Magistrates.

By making the Pope superior to Emperors and Kings, to depose them and
dispose of their Kingdoms to others, if he think it good for the Church: and
to that end freeing subjects from their sworn fidelity, and arming them
against their Sovereigns. A doctrine fruitful of treasons and rebellions.

Ib. sect. 7.
By dispensing and dissoluing oaths, covenants, and leagues, and all other
bonds and sinews of humane society, peace, and security.

Ib. sect 8, 9.
By dispensing with Gods Laws in matrimonial causes: and in other matters of
great moment.

Ib. cap. 6. per totum.
As also by many hurtful policies to maintain this power, depriving Gods
people of Gods word, and authorizing Monks and Friars to preach where they list
without control of Bishops, corrupting divinity by Schoolmens subtilties,
Jesuits, Statists, and Incendiaries; and many other devices to draw to their
faction the Wealth and Sovereignty of the word.

Meditate and consider well of that which then I declared, and you will be
satisfied that a number of things in the Papacy practiced are most unprofitable
to the Church, and intolerable to Princes and Commonwealths.

. 5.
But to satisfy the more thoroughly, I will show you some examples.

Hildebrand (who, as Onuphrius says, first set up the Popes princedome) made
himself Pope by help of the Devil (so he was accused by a Synod Trithem.
chro^. Hirsaugiens. an. 1081. Auentin. annal. Boior. l. 5. and Marian chro^. l.
3. an. 1081, etc
of 30. Bishops of Italy, France, and Germany,) and by the aid of armed men
with some few of the Clergy, and furthered by the great riches of Maud a
powerful Gentlewoman of Italy, his familiar friend: without either the Carlt.
iurisd. cap. 7.. 103. Benno. Naucler. generat. 36. This story I collect out of
those histories and our learned men, K. James, BB Jewel, Morton, Carlton
Bilson, Vsh^^ etc.
Emperors consent, or the Cardinals, he called his name Gregory the seventh.
Being now warm in the Popes Chair, he cites the Emperor Henry the fourth (
anno 1076.) to appear and answer in a Synod at Rome, to crimes objected
against him, upon pain of present deposition. Henry calls a Synod at Worms,
where all the Teutonick Bishops (except the Saxons) renounce Hildebrand from
being Pope: and to their decree, the German and French Bishops, and most of the
Italian Bishops (assembling at Papia) subscribed, taking their oaths never to
obey him more as Pope. With this decree, Caesar sends his letters to
Hildebrand, renouncing him, and pronouncing him deposed from the Popedom. The
letters and deposition were delivered in a Synod at Rome, whereupon Ioannes
Portuensis episcopus rushed up, and cried out Capiatur (let him be taken:) at
which word the Prefect of the City and soldiers were at point to take and slay
him in the Church. But he stoutly catching up a sword, and calling upon the
name of Peter, Prince of the Apostles, with solemn words cursed the Emperor,
deprived him of his Empire, absolved all Christians from their oath of fidelity
made unto him, and forbade them to obey him as King. And this was the first
time, that ever any Emperor or King, was pronounced deposed by the Pope, and
subjects set free from their Alleagiance, as See Onuphrius cited before Book
1. cap. 4.. 9, and 10. and Vrspergens fol. 226. B. Carlton. Iurisd. c. 7.. 105.
Malmsburiensis hist. in Willm. primo Angl. Reg. Otho Frising. in vita Henrici
4. l. 4. c. 31. B. Usher De Eccles succes. cap. 5.. 6.
Onuphrius and many other historians say. This Emperor Henry (says
Vrspergensis) was valiant, and fought 62. set battles, in number surpassing M.
Marcellus, and Julius Caesar, of whom the one fought 30. the other 50. This
fact of Hildebrand opened all men's mouths with outcries against him, calling
him Antichrist, and that by devising fables, corrupting histories, abusing
Scriptures, through his headlong ambition, he sought the rule of the world
under the title of Christ, and played the ravening wolf in sheep clothing,
spoiling all religious piety, raising wars, seditions, rapes, murders,
periuries, and all evils. Thus cried the world, says Auentine. Mean season
Hildebrand prosecuting the deposition of Henry, stirred up the Saxons against
him, offering to make them Kings of the whole West; besides many great men and
Bb. were alienated from him, which bred so great troubles in the Empire, and
proceeded so far, that the Princes of Germany meant to create another
Emperor, if Henry were not absolved by the Pope from his curse. Whereupon he
was compelled sore against his will to go and submit himself to the Pope, and
finding the Pope at Canusium, put off his kingly robes, and waited three days
barefoot in very cold weather at the Popes gate, craving pardon for his deeds:
a spectacle to men and Angels, and a mocking stock to his proud enemies. At
last, by mediation of the Empress his mother, and Matildis his kinswoman, and
at the earnest entreaty of all his people crying for pity, with much
difficulty he obtained absolution from his Anathema.

This storm thus blown over, raised another; for many condemned Henry for
baseness in himself, and wrong to them, whom he had brought into trouble, and
now made his peace with their enemy so bad a man, an enemy to all religion and
goodness, when he should have been a protector of his friends and followers,
and a revenger of Ecclesiastical laws violated. Thus the Princes and Bishops
of Italy raised hatred to the Emperor, with purpose to choose Henry's son,
though young, and to go with him to Rome, and to set up another Pope who
should presently consecrate the Emperor, and nullify all the acts of this
apostate Pope. This, Caesar hearing of, sent to appease their minds, excusing
all by necessity, and promising henceforward to right all things amiss. But
Caesar's enemies chose Rodulph Duke of Sueuia to be King of Romans, taking
order that the Empire should thenceforward go by election and not succession.
Whereupon grew mighty troubles, Nation against Nation, Bishops against Bishops,
every one thinking they were in the right: Henry's side, as Emperor by birth
and long continuance: Rodulphs side, as autorized to kill the excommunicate and
all his favorers. For the Pope had again (upon new discontentments)
excommunicated Henry and all his favorers, and sent a Crown to Rodulph with
this inscription, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rodulpho. This Rodulphus
after some bloody battles with Henry, at last lost his right hand; and being
brought to Mersburge, said to the Bishops and great men present, that this was
a just punishment due to his perjury, because with that hand he had sworn,
feaulty to his Lord, and at their persuasion had broken it. Henry then hastens
toward Rome with his army to regaine the Popes favor, but being denied it,
except he would resign his Crown and Empire into the Popes hands; he
besieged the City, and did much harm to it and to the Country about for two
years: at last, the good Pope that had brought them all into misery and
danger, left them wrapped therein, and fled: and the people repenting their
rebellion, with much money purchased that the City should not be destroyed.
Henry enters, shows openly the injuries of the Pope, causes a new Pope
Clemens to be elected, by whom, Henry was consecrated Emprrour, with the good
liking of all; and having established all things well, departed into Germany.
Anno 1085. B. Car^ton iurisd c. 7.. 105. Sigebert anno 1085. Florent.
Wigorniens. anno 1084. Math. Paris. anno 1086 Specul. historial. lib. 25. cap.
82.
And Hildebrand wandering like a vagabond without comfort, without help, without
hope, though brought to a most pitiful estate, yet pitied of no man,
traveling under the unsupportable burden of a restless conscience, he died
for grief at Salernu^, confessing that he had greatly sinned in the Pastoral
charge committed unto him; and by the Devils persuasion had stirred up hatred
and wrath against mankind.

This was the end of Hildebrand, whom the Germans alluding both to his name and
conditions called Hellbrand (the Dutch tongue and the English sounding much
alike) as if he were a firebrand fetched from Hell to kindle a fire in the
Church to consume temporal estates, which is not yet quenched.

Antiq. The evil lives of some few Popes, is a Theme that you Protestants
take great pleasure in speaking of, and we Catholics exercise our patience in
unwilling hearing of it: I assure you, I have suffered much in holding out to
hear this your discourse.

Antiquis. Good friend, we should not only patiently, but diligently and
gladly hear, try, and examine out the truth in matters of such weight.

Antiq. But I make a question, whether your relation be the truth or no, for
learned Baronius, and many other Catholics do much praise Pope Gregory 7. and
account him a Saint.

Antiquis. For the truth of my relation, I cite your own Authors, who lived
and wrote in those times, or near unto the times wherein the things were done,
who set down the whole substance of the story: and it is not reasonable, to
think that late writers, men of yesterday (such as Baronius) knew the truth of
these things better then they: But that the Italians and modern Catholics do
much commend Gregory, I marvel not; It behoues them to say with Demetrius and
the craftsmen of Ephesus (Acts 19.) Sirs, you know that by this means (by the
Popes Supremacy and the mainetayners thereof) we have our living, our wealth,
and honor: let us cry down this Paul, and all that speak against it, and
still persuade the world that Great is Diana of the Romans.

. 6.
Antiq. Well, I let pass your mirth, and will suppose that some of the Popes
lives have been very faulty; but the faults of the person must not take away
the good use of the office. This height of Supremacy might be of excellent use,
to knit all Christian Princes in perfect unity and amity, not only to live
happily among the^ selves, but to join all their forces together against the
common enemy, the Turk. And while the Pope was in reverend esteem and
authority with Christian Princes, many worthy matters were performed, and much
more might have been done, had it not been thwarted.

Antiquis. You speak by imagination and fancy, what might be done; but read
the histories of the Emperors, Princes, and Popes lives, and see what was
do^e; and you shall find all contrary to your imagination.

Our late learned and judicious King James shows (by the issue and event) that
the expeditions to Jerusalem were a device and invention of the Pope, K. James
his Remonstrance to Peron. p. 61.
whereby he might come to be infeoffed in the kingdoms of Christian Princes;
for then all such of the French, English, or Germans, that undertook the
Croisado, became the Popes mere vassals: all robbers, adulterers, and
bankrupts, once crossed on their Cassoks or Coat-armors, were exempted from the
secular or civil power, and their causes sped in consistorian courts: whole
Countries were emptied of their Nobles, and common soldiers: the Nobles were
driven to sell their goodly Manors and ancient demeanes, to the Church men at
under prices (the very means of Church and Church-mens revenues growing to so
great height) And then his bountiful holiness would give to any of that
rif-raffe rank, that would undertake this expedition into the holy Land, a free
and full pardon of all his sins, besides a degree of glory above the vulgar
in the celestial paradise. This our deep sighted King observes. And if the
Emperor or Kings went in person, the Pope had the cunning to make use of their
absence: to which purpose let me tell you one story (among many other) of your
Popes doings, out of Cuspinia^ a man of your own religion, whose larger
relation I will contract as briefly as I can.

. 7.
The Emperor Frederick the second, was valiant, learned, liberal,
magnificall, and gave great gifts and lands to the Church to procure the Popes
favor; yet he found that the Pope received his enemies, public rebels, and
fostered them flying unto him; wherewith he was much offended, yea the Pope (
to wit, Gregory the ninth) excommunicated and anathematized him. for no other
cause, but that he went not yet to Jerusalem to fight against Gods enemies, as
he had promised, and for which he had taken the Cross upon him. Which journey,
the Emperor answered, was only deferred, till he had settled the Imperial
business, and should find a fit time, and that he was providing all things
necessary for that journey. Mean season, the Pope mightily vexed him, and
wrought much evil to the Empire: and when the Emperor called an assembly of
Princes at Rauenna, they of Verena and Millan intercepted the Princes way, and
preyed upon them that had taken the Croisado for the holy Land, robbing them of
their provision, and that by the Popes commandment (who had procured the
voyage, and written to all Christian Princes to make it, and thrust the
Emperor and all men into it.) Yet the Emperor went forwards, and while he was
absent from his Country, in this holy voyage, laboring to defend by his sword
Christ's sheep from the Wolf, the Pope himself did sheare, slay, and devour
them. While Frederick took Jerusalem, Nazareth, Ioppe, and other Towns from
the Babylonian Sultan, and made ten years peace with him, reedified the holy
City and diverse others and was crowned King there with great joy upon Easter
day, and wrote to the Pope of his happy success, that all Christendom might
rejoice: That proud vicar of Christ, in his absence had, with a great army,
entered Apulia, taken it, and made it subject to himself, forbidden them that
had taken the Cross to pass the seas, and drove them out of Apulia and
Lombardy, and did many monstrous things unworthy a Pope or Bishop. And now
receiving the Emperors letters, contemned them, cast them away, and spread a
rumor that the Emperor was dead, that he might the better thereby draw some
Cities of Apulia to yield to him, which hitherto kept their faith to the
Emperor. And when the Almain^ and French, and other Soldiers returned, he
caused them most cruelly to be slain, lest they should tell the truth.

When the Emperor knew this falsehood, he returns with a great army into
Apulia, drives out the Popes army, and easily recouers his lands. The Pope
making league with the Lombards and Tuscians, curses the Emperor again,
because he had made that peace with the Turk: for the gentle Vicar of Christ
could find no other cause. Yet the valiant Emperor enduring all for Christ's
sake (though he had also intercepted the Popes Nuncios with letters to the
Turk, desiring him not to restore the holy land to Caesar, as by ^umors be
heard he would) seemed not to take knowledge of any wrongs, but desired
absolution from the Pope, if in any thing he had offended: and though he
employed many Princes and Bishops in that business, yet could he obtain
nothing that year: yet at last, after much entreaty, and chiefly by the
mediation of Leopold Duke of Austria (who died presently after) the Emperor
was absolved and feasted by the Pope, and (the Italian writers say) he paid an
hundred and twenty thousand ounces (of gold) for his absolution. A dear price
for one turning of the keys, which the Pope had of Christ for nothing. A dear
purchase of unsure favor, the Popes excommunications stand in blood, cruelty,
ambition: his absolutions in covetousness. Shortly after, upon some small
stirs, and also because the Pope doubted, the Emperor (passing into Germany)
would find out all his devices: he strikes the Emperor again with Anathema:
Who, finding himself so mocked by the Pope, grew enraged, joined with the
Popes enemies, entered and subdued many Cities in Italy, many in Vmbria, many in
Etruria, quieted the Lombards rebels, recovered Verona, burned two Towns of
Mantua, threatening to besiege the City it self; took Vincentia by force, and
roasted it with fire, forraged the territories of Padua, and spoiled almost all
Lombardy, afflicting Millan with many slaughters: conquered Viterbium,
Fauentia, Perusium, Cr^mona, and did much other harm, for which the Pope
excommunicates him again; and then were first heard in the world the names of
the Guelfes and Gibelines (mighty factions) the Gibelines favoring the
Emperor, the Guelfes the Pope, from which factions many evils followed for
many ages. Now, when the greatest part of the Cities of Italy, and almost all
the Romans claue to the Emperor: the Pope ordained supplications to God for
aid, and caused the heads of the Apostles to be carried about to procure help
from heaven, and to encourage the people; and made an Oration to them in the
palace of Saint Peter, and signed them with the Cross as if they should fight
against Infidels, and so brought them out against Frederick who led a great
army before the walls of the City. The Emperor seeing Christians come crossed
against him (who had used to fight for the Cross of Christ against Infidels)
moved with indignation, commanded the heads of them that were so crossed (whom
he took with great slaughter) to be cut into four parts. And at last
leaving the City, he took Beneuentum, and thence leading his army to the
Picentes, wasted the Aesculans fields: then he every where seized on the
Templars goods, and did other much hurt. Then Pope Gregory 9. (for very grief)
departing this life, Celelestine succeeded and sat only 18. days: and the
Popes sea remained void one and twenty months, for that the Cardinals could
not come safely to the City for election of a new Pope. Then Frederick spoiled
Fauentia, oppressed first with famine: deprived Bononia of the University, and
translated it to Padua, and besieged Parma. Mean season Innocent III. was made
Pope who formerly had been a friend to Frederick, but now placed in the
Papal dignity, became his deadly enemy, as Gregory had been before. He,
calling a Council at Lions, caused Frederick to be cited, and making an
Oration, cited him himself, and cursed him with Anathema, and feigned many
things as spoken by him against Christ; which the Emperor plainly confuted as
mere fictions in an Epistle (yet extant) to all the Prelates. There this Pope
again depriues the Emperor of his dignity, absolues the Princes from their
oaths of fidelity, and vrges them to set up another in his room. Frederick
hearing this, hastens toward Lions with gowned men equal to an Army: but
hearing of stirs at Par^a, turned his course thither, continued long there,
and used great cruelty toward the reuolting Citizens. Afterward he overthrew
Placentia, and took all Etruria. By this you may see, what a blessing the
Popes greatness was to the world: what safety, peace, prosperity and unity it
wrought among Christians, what a Bulwark against the Turk. Alas, all was
contrary to your fancy. There could not be a greater means devised by Satan
to scourge the Empire, to weaken Christendom to make way for the Turk, to
plague Italy, and to undo the Pope himself, than the Pope himself devised
and practiced. The woeful conclusion was; When the Pope had thus far
provoked the Emperor, procured much evil to many Cities and Countries, and so
fired the world, that by the light and waste thereof, the Turk might see an
easy entrance into Christendom: then he studied night and day how to destroy
the Emperor: some conspiracies were discovered: but finally, poisoned he was
effectually, wherein his bastard son Manfredus was thought to be an Agent, by
the Popes procuring. All this, and much more writes your own Cuspinian,
reproving the Italian Writers, who flattering the Pope, impute many vices to
the Emperor; and preferring the German Writers, who knew him and his acts far
better. Now Crimine abvno, disce omnes. Judge of other Popes by this, or these,
and see what great benefits their Supremacy brings to Christendom, and what
hinderance to the Turks infidels.

. 8.
Antiq. Sir, One Swallow makes not Summer, nor one Woodcock Winter. Among so
many Popes as have been since Saint Peter's days (near 250.) happily you may
pick out some few, that have abused their place and power, which ought no more
to disgrace the other good Popes and their offices, than Judas the other
Apostles.

Antiquis. Some few do you say? then take more. Your own Platina (Recorder or
Historian to some Popes, Tortura Torti. page 219.
and by Sixtus 4. appointed to write the lives of Popes) writes horrible and
monstrous things of them. 40 Articles and more proved against John 24. in the
Council of Constance, containing many grievous crimes, for which he was
deposed. Paul 2. pronounced them Heretics that did but name the name Academy
(that is, an University, or great School of learning) either in earnest, See
also B. Bilson, part. 1. page 154. and seq. and D. Rainolds with Heart.
or in jest. Boniface 7. getting the Popedom by ill means, robbed St. Peter's
Church of all the Jewels and precious things, and ran his ways: and
returning not long after, caught one of his Cardinals and put out his eyes.
Boniface 9. simoniacally sold all things against right and equity, and openly
kept Fayres or Markets of indulgences. He shows the Rusticity of Urban. 6.
the Stupidity of Celestine 5. the Stolidity of John 22. the fraud, ambition,
arrogance of Boniface 8. at the end of whose life, he adds this Caveat: Let
all Princes learn, by this man's example, to govern not by pride and
contumely, but seek rather to be loved than feared, whereby destruction comes
upon Tyrants, etc.

He records the troublesome broils for fifty years together, betwixt the
Popes, and Senate, and people of Rome (though also there was no firm peace for
four hundred years betwixt them) how often were those holy Fathers, Christ's
Vicars, driven out of Rome and worse used by them (no doubt) not for any great
holiness or virtue found in them?

Benedict 9. Siluester 3. and Gregory 6. occupied the seat all at once; which
three, Platina calls Tria teterrima monstra (in vita Gregorij sexti:) and not
only those three, but most of the others also he fears not to call Porte^ta
(in Benedict. 4.) and monstra (in Christopher 1.) He tells how Boniface 8.
deluded Celestine by imposture: how Christopher 1. thrust out Leo 5. by force:
how Damasus 2. took away Clement 2. by poison: he records Syluester 2. a
Magician: John 13. incestuous: Boniface 7. sacrilegious: John 8. an adulterous
woman: he recites 30. Schisms of the holy Church of Rome, in which, sometimes
the Church had two heads, sometimes three, for fifty years together. See
before ca. 7. sect. 3.
I have told you before of a troop of Popes, troubling the world about Formosus
his body and his acts, John 8. Martin 2. Boniface 6. Stephanus 6. Romanus 1.
Theodorus 2. John 9. and Sergius 3. and of 50. Popes (or at least 49.)
succeeding one another, whereof scarce one was found worthy the name of a
^ishop, not six (says Genebrard) in 150. years, but were Apo^acticall or
Apostaticall rather than Apostolical.

I could tell you also, how Piu^ 4. Onuphrius in vita Pij 4. page 378.
Pandulph. Collen. hist. Neapol. l. 5. ad an. 1385.
caused Cardinal Caraffa to be strangled, and other Earls and Cardinals
slaughtered in prison, to the great amazement of the people: and how Urban 6.
misused seven Cardinals, putting five into sacks and drowning them in the Sea;
and killing the other two, dried them in a Furnace or Oven, and carried them
(in triumph) upon Mules in bags or trusses.

Antiquis. These things strike a horror into my soul, but yet these reached
not to State-matters, and depositions of Princes, as your former tale
insinuated.

. 9.
Antiquis. Let me search this mystery of iniquity a little nearer the bottom,
and reveal the carriage thereof unto you.

St. John Hayward, Supremacy, page 55.
It was a great error in the Emperor Phocas (as our Sir John Hayward well
observed) and contrary to precedent policies, to settle so great a dignity in
the Popes at Rome, so far from Constantinople the seat of the Empire, See
before cap. 6. sect. 4.
when he made them Heads of Christendom (as I told you before,) for that gave
the Popes power (if they list to be so wicked) greatly to trouble the affairs
of the Empire, and to endanger the state thereof. And so it came to pass, for
by this means the politic Bishops of Rome found opportunity to steal into
such strength with the common people (in the Emperors long and far absence)
that they were able to make them shake off the Emperors yoke; first, at Rome,
and after further off, for the good of the Church, as they pretended, watching
therefore all occasions. When the Emperor Philippicus Bardanes (about the year
713. K. James Remonstrance, p. 29. Example 5.
) finding the worshipping of Images vntollerably to increase, to the foul
misleading and distracting of Christian people, and also to the great offense
of the Saracens the^ growing great in the East, who took occasion thereby to
make Christians odious, and much to annoy them: caused the scandalous Images to
be taken out of Churches according to primitive times, partly to unite the
people in Gods purer worship, and partly to take away offense from the
Saracens: Pope Constantine, instead of joining with the Emperor and Eastern
Christians against the Saracens, directly took occasion to disable them
against the Saracens, and to increase the scandal for his own private ends,
to the great ruin of the Empire, and hurt to all Christendom. Now he saw the
Empire decayed in the West, and by the Saracens sore shaken in the East, and
encombred also with a civil war, and the greatest part of Italy seized upon
by the Lombards, the Exarchate of Rauenna, and the Duchy of Rome only left to
the Emperor, and those but weakly guarded, now (he thought) was the time for
him to play his prizes, he gripes the occasion, calls a Council, declares the
Emperor heretic for defacing holy Images, forbids his Rescripts or Coin to
be received, or to go current in Rome, and his Statue or Arms to stand in the
Temple. The tumult grows to height, promoted principally by the Pope, and the
Exarch of Rauenna loses his life. But this tumult at last being appeased, and
Rome (for ought the Pope could do) remaining firm to the Emperor: about
twelve years after, Palmerius ebr^ anno 726.
when the Emperor Leo Isauricus began sharply to prosecute Image-worshippers,
Pope Gregory the second seeing him have his hands full elsewhere, and Rome
weakly guarded with men and munition, found means by help of the Lombards to
make the people rebel, and so the Pope quickly became master thereof. And
(says Nauclerus) Such authority then had the Popes decrees, that first the
Rauennates, Naucler. 2. genesis 25. B. ^ar^ton, jurisdiction. c. 6.. 7.
after that the Venetians did raise an open rebellion against the Emperor, and
this rebellion proceeded so far, that every City and Town put down the
Emperors Exarches, and created proper Magistrates to themselves whom they
called Dukes: and thus, as at a great shipwreck every man catches a piece, so
every City made her own Duke, and the Pope was careful that his part should
not be the least.

Not long after this, Ado Viennensis in Chronico and Trithemius Annals.
when the Cities of Italy began to prey one upon another, the stronger upon the
weaker; and the Pope and the Lombards (being the strongest of all) who had
agreed in conspiring against the Emperor, now fell out about dividing of the
spoil: the Pope having made use of the Lombards to oppress the Emperor;
uses still the same Art to call in Pepin the Constable of France into Italy to
suppress the Lombards, and settle the Pope in that which both had gotten from
the Emperor; Anno 742.
which was done. And shortly after, the States and Peers of France (by the
counsel of Zachary the Pope) put down King Childerike as a man too weak to
govern, and made Pepin King of France.

Thus the power which the BB. of Rome had received of the Emperor and other
Christian Kings, they now turned against them, as the Iuy that is supported and
rises aloft by the Oak, in the end decays and spoils the Oak it self.

This was a great step to the Popes Supremacy, but yet it was not come to the
height. Emperors were not yet deposed by Popes, not cut down, but some of
their branches cut and pruned off. B. Carlton. ib. cap. 6.. 13.
And Charles the son of Pepin (who still further subdued the Lombards)
enjoyed the power (by the Popes kind grant) which ancient Emperors held
before him, to choose Popes and inuest Archbishops and Bishops in all the
provinces of his government.

Sanders l.^ de clauib David.
But of this strange purchase of Rome by the Popes from the Emperors D. Sanders
writes, that it is to be accounted one of the greatest wonders of the world:
that the Roman Bishops, without any power, or armies, have removed the Roman
Emperors from the Tower of the Empire, and made themselves Lords of the
Palaces of Caesar's, and turned the whole City into their own power.

Indeed it is a wonder, that men pretending holiness, peace, comfort, and
blessings to the world, should use such wicked, detestable, rebellious,
treasonous courses, to deprive their Sovereigns of their Rights, Cities,
Lands, and Honors, by such audacious fraud, and damnable policies.

. 10.
Of Gregory 7. that first attempted absolutely to depose Kings, I have spoken
before. It seems he took heart at the success of his Predecessors, to go
beyond them; seeing Leo Iconomachus (as they called him, the warrior against
Images) cast down; and Childerike of France cast down, and K. Pepin set in
his place. From these and such like facts, other Popes (and especially Gregory
7.) derived a Ius, a right, and from these works of darkness took light,
making them the rules of their unruly government, and therefore after this, the
world could never take rest for the Popes. Then the Kings set up in place of
the deposed, must needs be firm to the Pope, and so must others that hoped by
the Popes authority to enlarge their dominions, and encroach upon others; and
they again must be honored by the Pope, and one mutually support another, how
bad soever the lives either of Popes or Princes were: and thus the best minded,
quiet and best were beaten down, and one Tyrant strengthened another.

Sir John Hayward reckons up a number of Popes, Sr. John Hay^. Supremacy p. 56.
and seq.
that raised other Princes, or Subjects against their own Emperors or
Sovereigns. John the 3. raised Berengar and Adalbar against Otho the Great.
John 18. raised Crescentius against Otho 3. Benedict 9. stirred Peter K. of
Hungary against Henry the black. Gregory 7. Rodulph against Henry 4. Gelasius
12. raised many against Henry 5. Innocent 2. set Roger the Norman against
Lothaire 12. The same Innocent raised Guelphus of Bauier against Conrade 3.
Hadrian 4. raised Millan and the other Lombards against Frederike Barbarossa.
Alexander 3. stirred the Dukes of Saxony and Austria to disquiet Almaine.
Innocent 3. thrust Otho D. of Saxony into bloody war against Philip brother
to Henry 6. Pope Honorius 3. raised the Lombards against Frederike 2. Clemens
5. opposed Robert King of Sicilie against Henry 7. John 22. opposed Frederike
of Austrich, and Jews of Ba^ier to fight for the Empire. Clemens 6. opposed
Charles 4. King of Bohemia against the said Jews. Eugenius 4. raised tragedies
against Sigismond, specially to impeach the Council of Basil. Paul 2. raised
stirs against Frederick 3. to chase him out of Italy.

When eight Emperors had been scorched with excommunications of the Popes,
and their dominions set on fire, and potent enemies enflamed against them, and
many of them consumed: the rest afterward grew cool, and were content with
what holy water the Popes vouchsafed to sprinckle upon them: those eight were
Frederik 1. Frederik 2. Philip, Conrade, Otho the fourth, Jews of Bauaria,
Henry 4, and Henry 5.

. 11.
Antiq. I am glad yet, that these troubles reached not to our English Kings.

Antiquis. If you think they did not, you are much deceived. Read our
histories, and inform your self better; you shall find troubles enough from
the Papacy, even in these remote parts, far from Rome: after the thousandth
year of Christ (that is, after the loosing of Satan, Revel. cap. 20.7, 8.) and
after that, the Pope came to his height.

Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury did somewhat trouble King Henry the first,
for whereas in former times, the Bishops and Abbots of England used to receive
their Inuestitures from the King, by receiving a Pastoral Staff and Ring at
his hand (as Saint Wulstan had done from St. Edward the King, professing
thereby he would resign it only to him) now Anselme refused to consecrate
certain Bishops whom the King advanced and gave them their Inuestitures, so
that the King was compelled to send an Embassage to the Pope Paschalis, and
before him to plead his cause, as Anselme also did his in like manner. But
this matter was indifferently quietly ended, for the Pope (by the mediation of
white and red, says a Monk, the historian) was content to confirm the
Bishops, but ordained withal that the King should do so no more; that is,
that the King should lose the privilege of his Ancestors. This was done Anno
dom. 1104. Anselme died Henry's primi anno 11. Speed. Chron. page 457.
But Thomas Becket being made first Lord Chancellor, and afterward Archbishop
by the favor of King Henry 2. troubled the King much more; for the King being
informed of much misdemeanour of Clergy men (who besides other offenses, had
committed an hundred murders in his reign) and that they were not punished nor
degraded by the Bishops, but shifted away into Abbeyes or otherwise defended;
so that the wronged had no remedy, the wrong-doers no punishment, true innocent
men no safety, and none of them were in condition of subjects: the King
required such to be punished by his Laws, and to have the customs of his
Ancestors observed: whereunto all the Bishops assented, but only Becket; who
not only resisted, but complained of the King to Pope Alexander: and Alexander
at first, desiring to hold the Kings love, willed Becket to yield, and Becket
so promised to the King absolutely. But when the King assembled his States at
Clarendon in Wiltshire, Becket relapsed, and said he had grievously sinned in
promising, but would not sin in performing, yet at the instance and tears of
many Noble persons and others privately entreating him for the good of the
whole land, he yielded again and promised in verbo sacerdotali to observe all;
and all the Earls, Bishops, Abbots, and Clergy did swear and promise the
like: but when he should set his hand and seal to a writing thereof, he
refused again. Of all this the King by Embassage informed the Pope, desiring a
legantiue power to be sent to the B. of York: which the Pope unwillingly
granted, and withal made it so slight, that the King in disdain sent the Bull
back again to the Pope. Then was Becket required to give an account of his
Chancelorship, which he refused to do, and to come unto the King: and being
told, he would be condemned of perjury and treason for not yielding temporal
alleagiance to his temporal Sovereign (as he had sworn) and that the
Prelates would disclayme all obedience unto him as their Archbishop: he caused
to be sung before him at the Altar, The Princes sit and speak against me,
and the ungodly persecute me: And forthwith taking his silver Crosier in his
hands, went armed into the Kings presence. Whereat, the King enraged, caused
his Peers to proceed in judgment against him; they condemn him to prison for
treason and perjury; he appeals to Rome, and away gets him into France,
procures the French Kings favor, and by him, the Popes. To the Pope the King
sends a Noble Embassage desiring to have two Cardinals sent into England to
end the matter. The Pope denies it, reserving the judgment to himself. The
King by his Sherifs, Sequesters all Beckets profits in England; Becket in
France excommunicates all in England that maintained the Auitall (or ancient)
customs, naming some great men. The King fearing his own excommunication,
gathers a great Army, pretending to subdue Wales. Mean season the Pope is
persuaded to send two Cardinals; but they cannot persuade Becket to yield any
thing, and so that design for peace was frustrate. At length the two Kings of
France and England being reconciled, met in France: before whom, Becket being
called, and earnestly dealt withal, would not yield any thing, so that all men
blamed him. The Pope willed Gilbert B. of London to admonish the King to give
over: he did so, but excused the King to the Pope. The Pope excommunicates
Gilbert, and went so far, that the King had scarce one left to read divine
Service in his Chapel. The King prays the Pope to send two Cardinals to
absolve his subjects, and to make peace: Two come into Normandy, but return
without possibility of doing any good, because Becket would not yield a jot. At
last, by the Popes mediation the two Kings met at Paris, where King Henry
offered to stand to the judgment of the Divines of Paris, but no peace would
be had. After all this the King crowned his son, the Archbishop of York
supplying Canterburies absence. And in the beginning of the seventh year of
the banishment of Becket, the two Kings met again in France, and the King
(fearing the whole Realms interdiction by the Pope,) received Becket into
favor, yielding him his Bishopric with all the profits and arrearages, and
signified it to his son in England. Now Becket Archbishop in England, shortly
after published the Popes letters suspending the Archbishop of York, (for
crowning the young King, which was Canterburies office) with all his adiuuants,
and would not absolve them but upon conditions at the earnest request of the
young King: which the Father King hearing in Normandy, was sore displeased; and
showed it by some words: which, four Knights Courtiers, hearing, and thinking
to do a great pleasure to the King, and to ease the Kingdom of much trouble,
posted into England; and at Canterbury, the next day after Innocents day killed
the Archbishop at the high Altar, and fled into the North. The old King was
exceeding sorrowful at the news of this murder, and sent to the Pope desiring
him to send Cardinals to enquire of the murder, to whose wills he would submit
himself, if he could be found consenting.

Here observe 1. What these customs were, which Becket withstood. (1) That
without the Kings license none should appeal from the Courts of England to the
Court of Rome: (2) That no Bishop, nor Archbishop, should leave their Flock
and go to Rome without the Kings license: (3) That they should not interdict
nor excommunicate any officer, or such as held on the King in chief, without
the Kings license: (4) That Clerks accused for secular offenses should be
tried before secular Judges.

2. Observe, that these Customs, besides profitable and necessary, were also
ancient, and so termed; but now shortly after Hildebrands time, must be
altered, Kings and States depressed, and the Pope above all former times
exalted.

3. Observe, If Becket had stood for the substance of Religion, or any
necessary point thereof, it had been a worthy (which now was a wicked) part:
but his standing for matters against the good and peace of the Church and
Commonwealth; and them ancient, and well established; and that with obstin^cy,
against the judgment not only of the King, Bishops, and Nobles at home: but
even of the Pope himself at the first, the Cardinals, the King of France, the
University of Parts, and (as I may say) all the world; argued his exceeding
folly, pride, and peevishness.

4 Observe, that even the best sort of Popes, against their own knowledge and
inclination, may be drawn by their Counselors and flatterers; and by the
tickling desire of wealth and greatness, to take part, countenance, and back
most obstinate rebels, perjured persons, and intolerable troublers of Church
and Common wealth: yea, to defend them while they live, and Saint them after
their death.

Thus King Henry was troubled much by the Romish Hierarchy: but King John much
more. It appears by this which has been said, Flores historiarum Matthaei
West monast. l. 2. p 81 anno 1205
that there had been troubles about the ancient customs and liberty of
Princes in the English Church, which the Kings strove still to maintain, and
the Popes to infringe: whereof, one was, that no Bishop should be elected and
invested without the Kings consent in his own dominions: which King John
maintained as his predecessors had done. It happened in the seventh year of his
reign, that Hubert the Archbishop of Canterbury dyed; and the Monks of
Canterbury secretly in the night chose Reginald their Sub-prior, and brought
him in with Te Deum, first to the high Altar, and then to the Archbishops
chair: and presently causing him to swear secrecy, sent him with some of
their company to the Pope, to see how it would be taken: but the Pope (seeing
no letters commendatory from the King) made some stay, and took time to
deliberate. In the mean season the Monks at home hearing of this delay, and
finding that Reginald in his way toward Rome had carried himself as
Archbishop elected, and so published their secrets: now repenting their evil
choice and bad success, sent to the King and craved license to choose a new
Archbishop, whom the King would commend. The King (winking at their former
injury) took this kindly, and commended unto their choice John Gray, Bishop of
Norwich, and brought him to Canterbury himself: and the Monks in the Kings
presence very solemnly chose him, put him into the Archbishops seat; and the
King put him into all the Archbishops possessions, writing to the Pope, to
accept him. Had the Pope been a pious Father of the Church (as you describe
him) given to seek peace and ensue it, Romans 12.
as much as in him lay; he might have been well pleased with this peaceable
course: but he was led by the spirit of Hildebrand, not of Peter and Paul; and
took a course that there might be no peace, and that the people might not
under their natural Kings lead a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness
and honesty. 1 Timothy 2.
For he would neither accept of Reginald nor John, but urged the Monks that
were sent unto him, to choose a third, one Steven Langton, and against all
excuses commanded them upon their obedience, and under pain of Anathema, to
do it presently. Whereupon they all yielded, except only one Elias de
Brantfield, who still stuck to the King and to the election of the Bishop of
Norwich, a man worthy of honorable memory, for his constant standing (though
standing alone, in danger, and to the Popes face) to the right, to his Prince,
to the good and liberty of the Church. The rest, with the Hymn brought Langton
to the Altar, and the Pope wrote to the King to receive him.

B. Caritou. iuris. c. 7.. 124.
The King was herewith much moved, because Steven Langton (though an Englishman
born) was brought up under the French King, promoted by him, and tied to be at
his command: And therefore King John wrote to the Pope, that he had no reason
to admit such a one as Langton to such a great place in his kingdom. And
withal he banished the Monks that had chosen Langton, as traitors, and
confiscated their goods. This was done upon Saint Swithens day. Mat. Westmonast
vbi supra.
The Innocent Pope (Pope Innocent the third, who about the same time
excommunicated Otho 4. Emperor, and discharged the States of Almaine and of
the Empire from their allegiance unto him) being set on fire with this news,
sent to the Bishops of England commanding them to put the King and his land
under the sentence of interdiction, which was executed the 24. of March by the
Bishops of London, Ely, and Wigorne, who now turned plainly subjects to the
Pope, and leaving England, fled to Rome. The King for this cause of Interdict
(whereby himself and his whole land stood accursed) commanded all the goods of
the Clerks to be confiscate, and the^ drew as many as he could of his people
to an oath of allegiance. The Pope proceeds to excommunicate the King by name:
and finally to pronounce sentence of deposition against him; discharging all
his subjects of their oath of alleagiance unto him; sending also Pandulph his
Legate first into England, and then to Philip Augustus King of France, to
bestow upon him the kingdom of England, so that he would expel King John and
take it by force. By this means King John was strangely and suddenly weakened,
and utterly disabled to hold his kingdom, seeing strong invasions from
without, and daily reuolting within to open insurrections, and every man now
counted a Saint and Martyr that would fight or suffer in wars against him;
considering that the Popes Bulls, like Magike spelles, had let loose many
turbulent spirits, not easy to be laid again, but by him that raised them.
After much struggling he was finally compelled to deliver up his Crown to
Pandolph, that he might receive it again from him, as from the Popes hands,
and be protected hy him. And this was done in the 15. year of King John's
reygne, anno dom. 1213. And Steven Langton made Archbishop.

Thus the King became the Popes vassal: and the King of France forbidden by
the Popes Nuncio to meddle any further against him, K. James Remonstrance page
256.
being now the Popes liege man, whom he would protect. And now John held his
Crown of the Pope, as a man holds his land of another in Knights service, or
by homage and fealty: and did fair homage to the Popes Legate, laying down at
his feet a great mass of the purest gold in coin; which the reverend Legate
in token of his Masters Sovereignty kicked and spurned with his feet and at
solemn feasts was easily entreated to take the Kings Chair of estate.

Observe here first, The progress of the Hildebrandine Religion in deposing of
Kings, and discharging their subjects of their alleagiance, fidelity and
obedience, dissoluing government, and filling kingdoms with wars and
miseries, begun by Hildebrand, and still continued by his successors.

Observe secondly, out of the story of King John; Mat. Westmonast Flores: loco
quo supra page 95. K. Iam^s Remonstr. p. 58.
That this successor of Peter fished not for souls, but for kingdoms, even
with the destruction of millions of souls (if your own doctrine be true,) for
he caused the whole land to be interdicted, and so to continue six years,
fourteen weeks, and two days: plaguing all this while the whole body of the
land for the head, the Kings offense (a point of injustice) with a heavy
spiritual plague, for a light temporal offense (a point of impiety.) For all
this while the Church-dores, through the whole kingdom were shut up, no belles
stirred, no prayers, preaching, Sacraments, permitted; Children kept
unbaptized, bodies unburied, all people accursed, living like heathens, dying
like dogs; without instruction, exhortation, consolation: and all that dye thus
under the curse of the Interdict (without some special indulgence or
privilege) are thought for ever damned and adjudged to eternal punishments,
as dying out of the communion of the Church. Alas, how many millions of souls
did this Innocent the Pope wilfully send to hell in this large kingdom of
England and Wales, in this large time of above six years, for another
offense: for what could they do? or what offended they, poor people! if the
King would not be ruled by the Pope? Nay, they offended the King also, and
incurred much danger and damage, by falling from their obedience for the Popes
sake: and yet are thus recompensed by him. Are these the actions of the Vicar
of Christ, to save souls? or rather of Antichrist, to destroy them? Is this
the kind Father of the Church?

K. James ib. p. 257.
But observe further, thirdly, how these pretended successors of Saint Peter,
change their spiritual power into temporal, for their worldly gain and
greatness: and change Christ's Kingdom, which was not of this world, into the
winning and disposing of the kingdoms of this world; and make the penance of
sinners the forfeiture of their estates. Is this the satisfaction to be imposed
upon a sinner, that of a Sovereign and free Prince, he must become vassal to
his Ghostly Father? and make himself and all his subjects tributary to a
Bishop? that shall rifle the whole Nation of their coin, and make them do him
homage? Shall not a sinner be quitted of his faults, except he be turned out of
all his goods, possessions, inheritance, and his Pastor be infeoffed in his
whole estate? Is this holiness? or is it not plain tyranny and robbery? It is
plainly to heap robbery upon fraud, and tyranny upon robbery; and to change
the sinners repentance into a snare or pitf^ll of coozening deceit. And as the
end is naught, so the means is worse to bring it to pass by such subtle
pranks and wicked devices, as not to stick at setting a whole flourishing
kingdom on fire by wars, and seditions: not to care what becomes of men's
estates, of their bodies, lives, or souls, but bring them all to ruin: so
that the kingdom may be weakened, and the King brought to so low a degree of
misery, that he may be easily lifted out of his estate, and the kingdom
seized upon.

Of King Henry the thirds reygne, See before, book 1. cap. 6. sect. 14. Read
also Math Paris, and Math. Westminster. in Henr. 3. and B. Carlton of
Jurisdiction.
exhausted of treasure, and scourged of his subjects by the Popes most
intolerable exactions; which caused the people to wish rather to dye, than to
live to endure them; I have spoken something already, and can say much more.

. 12.
Antiq. This is enough for me, and for this matter more than enough. But it may
be in these latter times of greater light, and opposition, the Popes have been
more moderate, and become more like to their first Ancestors.

Antiquis. Never a whit: See before, Book 1. cap. 5.. 3. consider. 6.
have I not told you before of K. Henry 8. who though he continued the Popes
religion entire, yet for rejecting his jurisdiction, was condemned by the Pope,
excomm^nicated, pronounced no King, his subjects commanded to deny subjection
to him, and all men to take arms against him? etc. The like course the Pope
has run against our late most excellent Princes, Queen Elizabeth, and King
James. For I will pass by the mischiefs done in other Countries, and the
murders of the two last Kings of France: the troubles of our own kingdom will
hold me long enough.

Camden. Annal. Elizab. p. 27.
By the happy abolishing of the Popes authority by Queen Elizabeth, England
became the most free of all Countries in the world; the Scepter being (as it
were) manumitted from foreign servitude, and a great mass of money kept at
home, which formerly was exhausted, and yearly, and daily, carried to Rome,
for first fruits, Indulgences, Appeals, Dispensations, Palles, and such other
things; so that the land grew much more rich than in former ages. The Popes
could not be insensible of their loss this way besides all other, and
conceiving some hopes of recovery by encouraging persons discontented with this
mutation, B. Car ton, thankful remembrance page 13 See the Bull of Pius 5. in
Camdens Annals page 183.
in the eleventh year of her reign Pope Pius the fifth excommunicated her,
deposed her by his Bull, dated anno 1569. quinto Calend. Mart. thereby also
absoluing her subjects from their oath of alleagiance, and from all other
offices and duties, accursing all that did obey her. This was done, to procure
a strong party in England to join with the Pope and Spaniard in their design
for the invasion and conquering of England when their forces should be ready.
Camden ib. page
For the Papists in the Land were so strangely persuaded and bewitched, as to
admire with astonishment a certain omnipotency in the Pope, and that his
Bulls were dictated by the holy Ghost, and that they in executing them, and in
murdering their Princes, should do meritorious acts, very acceptable to God,
and dying therein should become glorious Martyrs, and have higher places in
heaven, than other men.

See Camden Annals Elizabethae, p. 315. and p. 348. in fine anni 1581.
To gain more people of all sorts, Noble, Gentle, inferiors, to their faction,
and to gull them with such false opinions, the Pope out of his Seminaries at
Rome and Rhemes sent out yearly a number of Priests disguised into England to
grope and pervert the hearts of men, secretly and wickedly telling them, that
the Pope had supreme power over the whole world, yea, even in politic
affairs: that such as were not of the Roman Religion were to be deprived of
all regal power and dignity: that it was lawful, yea, and a meritorious work
to depose Princes excommunicated by the Pope: that the Pope had actually
pronounced and published by his Bull, Elizabeth to be excommunicated and
deposed, that since that publication, all her actions were by the Law of God
disanulled, and to be held for naught: her Magistrates were no Magistrates, her
Laws no Laws. Yea, some of them denied not in public hearing, that they were
sent for no other cause into England, than to absolve every one particularly
from their obedience to the Qu. as the Bull had absolved all in general: and
this they did in taking confessions of their Reconclliation to their Church
privately, and promising absolution from all mortal sin, so doing, most
safely and secretly.

These Seminaries were not erected to teach true Religion, and points of
doctrine necessary to salvation (for those might be taught and learned in all
places without such cost) but principally to fit young wits, and fiery spirits
to become instruments to uphold the Papacy with the dominion, greatness, Camd.
ib p. 844. and alibi passim.
and wealth thereof, and to regaine those that were fallen from it; though it
were with the destruction of Kings, dissipation of kindomes, bloodshed,
murders, insurrections, treasons, poysonings, massakers, and many other evils:
as the histories following will declare most plainly; and by their own
confessions may appear.

1. This story and the rest of the treaso^s against Q Elizabeth are set out at
large by B. Carlton in his book entitled A thankful remembrance, whose
chapters I here note in the margent.
To come therefore to the Plots and Treasons practiced against Queen
Elizabeth, effects of the Popes excommunication: The first was, The rebellion
in the North, stirred up by one Nicholas Morton a Popish Priest; the chief
leaders within the land were the Earls of Westmerland and Northumberland, who
were to join with the Duke of Norfolk, entending a marriage betwixt him and
the Scottish Queen, thereby to make claim to the Crown of England (Queen
Elizabeth being deposed by the Popes Bull.) With them also was to join, the
Duke of Alua, with his power from the Low Countries; the Earl of Ormond at the
same time raising tumults in Ireland, and all procured by Pope Pius 5. who also
secretly wrought the minds of many English, by one Ridolph a Gentleman of
Florence, Camden. Annal. an. 1568. p. 146. and an. 1572. p. 227. and an. 1569.
p. 158, 166 --
under color of Merchandise, by whom the Popes Bulls, letters, and money, (to
wit, an hundred and fifty thousand crowns) were conueighed, for the managing
of this business. The Pope further promising to the King of Spain, to engage
all the goods of the Sea Apostolic, Chalices, Crosses, and holy vestiments, to
further it. But God prevented this mischief: for the Northern Earls
preparations being discovered, and rising before the other associats were
ready, were dispersed; the Duke of Norfolk taken and put to death, and the
whole plot defeated, to the great grief of the Pope and the Spaniard. The King
of Spain said before the Cardinal of Alexandria, the Popes Nephew, that never
any conspiracy was more advisedly begun, more constantly concealed, nor more
likely to prosper than this. For that an Army might be sent out of the
Low Countries in 24. hours space, which might suddenly have taken the Queen
and the City of London unprovided, restored the Popes authority, and set the
Queen of Scots in the Throne, especially having so mighty a faction within
land and Stukely an English fugitive (made Marquess of Ireland by the Pope)
undertaking at the same time with the help of 3000. Spaniards, to bring all
Ireland to the Kings of Spaines obedience, and with one or two ships to burn
all the English Navy. This story is written at large by Hieronymus Catena in
the life of Pius the 5. and printed at Rome anno 1588. by the same Popes
authority and privilege, by which we come to the knowledge of the whole plot.

B. Carlton ib. c. 3. Camden. ib. page 72.
2. I pass by the treasonous leagues made by the Earl of Ormonds Brethren with
James Fitzmorice of Desmonds Family, and others to serve the Pope and Spaniards
designs against Queen Elizabeth. And the Earl of Darbies sons with Gerard,
Hall, Rolston and other Darbishire men's conspiracy, to set up the Queen of
Scots. And other conspiracies of B. Rosse, Henry Percy, etc. and of Powel and
Owen, for the Queen of Scots. Also of don John of Austria his plotting to
marry the Q. of Scots, and put down Elizabeth with the favor of the Pope and
Guises: for these plots miscarried in their Infancy.

Thomas Stukely having rioted out his State in England, Ibid. cap. 4. Camden.
Annal. part. 2. page 193. 229.
passed to Rome, and made Pius 5. believe, that with 3000. Italians he would
drive the English out of Ireland and burn the Queens Navy. Pius dying,
Gregory 13. employed Stukely to get Ireland for his bastard son, creating the
said Stukeley, Marquess of Lagen, Earl of Wexford and Caterlogh, Vicount of
Morough, and Baron of Rosse, (famous places in Ireland) and made him General
of 800. Italian soldiers. But Stukeley coming by Portugal joined with the
King in a war in Africa, that the King afterward might go against England
with Arms, as he against Ireland: but in Africa they were both slain, and two
other Kings died also at the same battle, 1572. Whereupon the Spanish King
turned his forces (prepared for England) to subdue Portugal. Note here the
Popes zeal, not to win souls to Christ, but Kingdoms to their Bastards. Note
also, two Popes proceed in malice and malediction against Queen Elizabeth, and
one English fugitive makes them both fools. And note thirdly, how God can
divert the great preparations of puissant Princes; and turn their wise
policies into foo^ishnesse.

Nicholas Sanders D. of Divinity, Ibid. cap. 5. Rea^e Camd. A^nal. par^t 3.
page 371, 372.
having written a witty and wicked book, to maintain the Roman visible
Ecclesiastical Monarchy, comes into Ireland (1579) with the Popes legantiue
authority, and a consecrated banner, with three ships to join with the
rebels against Queen Elizabeth; where much mischief was done, supplies sent of
men, money, and armor from the Pope and Spaniard: but after diverse years,
diverse fortunes, the Earl of Desmond (chief of the rebels) wandering, and
poor, was killed by a common Soldier, and D. Sanders for grief ran mad, and
finally died miserably being hunger-starued.

Ibid. cap. 6. See Camdens Annals p. 315. etc.
Anno 1568. began the Seminaries, devised by Cardinal Allen (an Englishman as
Sanders was) first, at Doway for English fugitives, but removed to Rhemes by
the Guises, and another erected at Rome by Gregory 13. In them were trained up
many fit instruments for Rome and Spain, traitors to England, issuing out
thence when they were fitted, as Campian, Parson, Sherwin, Kirby, Briant, and
multitudes of others, not in the habits of Priests, but of Gallants,
Seruingmen, Summoners, or any other, the better to insinuate into company, and
pervert men without danger of discovery.

Cap. 7. 1583. Camden. Annal, part. 3. p 370.
7. Someruile bewitched by the wicked seditious books of the Jesuits, sought to
come into the Queens presence to kill her, and by the way set upon one or two
with his drawn sword: but was taken and hanged, as was also Ardern his father
in Law.

8. Among other mischievous books, one exhorted the Ladies and maids of honor
to do as Judith did to Holofernes.

1584 See Camd. Annal. ib. p. 398.
9. Francis Throgmorton practiced to deliver the Q. of Scots: Upon discovery
whereof, Thomas L. Paget, and Charles Arundell fled into France, the Earls of
Northumberland and Arundell commanded to keep their houses, and 70. Priests
(whereof some were condemned to dye) were sent out of England, whereof the
chief were Gasper Heywod, James Bosgrate, John Heart, Edward Bishton, etc.

10. Bernardine Mendoza Ambassador from the K. of Spain, was commanded to
avoid England for treasonable practices with Thr^gmorton and others, to bring
strangers into England and depose the Queen. This Mendoza had made two
Catalogues, One of the Havens of England, fit to land forces in; the other of
all the Noble men that favored the Romish Religion.

11. Cap. 8.
Queen Elizabeth purposed to set the Queen of Scots at liberty, and sent Sir
William Wade to her, to confer of the means, and was ready also to send
other Commissioners to effect it, but a strange accident hindered it.

One Creighton a Scottish Jesuit, being taken by Dutch Pirates, tore certain
papers and cast them into the Sea, but they were blown back into the ship,
gathered, brought to Sir William Wade, who peeced them again, and they
discovered new practices of the Pope, Spaniards, and Guises, to depose Queen
Elizabeth and King James, and set up the Queen of Scots, and marry her to some
English Lord, to be chosen by the Catholics, and confirmed by the Pope; their
children to succeed them: to this purpose were to be employed Cardinal Allen
for the English Ecclesiastikes, Sir Francis Inglefield for the Laikes, and the
Bishop of Rosse for the Queen of Scots.

12. William Parry a Welshman, 1585. Read the whole story in Camden. Annal.
part. 3. p. 391.
Doctor of the Civil Law, sought occasion to kill the Queen, insinuating into
her favor by telling her that he had found out treasonable intents in Morgan
and other fugitives, who practiced her destruction: and that he had conferred
with them closely to find their purposes, and keep her safe, desiring her
leave to do so still, and to have access unto her to discover what he found.

But Parry himself in good time being suspected, accused, taken, imprisoned,
and examined by grave Counselors, at last freely confessed, that in France,
and from Rome by Cardinal Como, he was confirmed, that it was lawful and
meritorious to kill the Queen: and especially by D. Allens book written
against the Justice of England, and that he was employed to that purpose; for
which he was executed.

Cap. 9. Camd ib. part. 3 page 399.
13. Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland (though pardoned for his rebellion 16.
years before, restored and made Earl by the Queens mercy, yet) practiced
with Mendoza and Throgmorton to put down Elizabeth and set up the Queen of
Scots, and being imprisoned, killed himself with a Pistol, was found dead,
the door bolted on the inside: oh mischievous Popishnesse, the ruin of many
Noble houses!

Camd. ib. p 431. and seq. Read it there at large.
14. Savage also vowed to kill the Queen, as did also George G^fford a
pentioner, hired by the Guise for a great sum of money, and persuaded by
Doctor Gifford, Gilbert Gifford and Hodgeson Priests, that it was lawful and
meritorious.

15. And Ballard a Priest, walking in a soldiers habit, and calling himself
Captain Foscue, promised an invasion by the Pope, Spaniard, Guise, and D. of
Parma: he told Babington of the Queens death to be acted by Savage, persuaded
him to see the Queen of Scots favor, and drew more heroik Actors (as they
called them) into the conspiracy, Tilney, Tichburne, Abington, Barnewell,
Charnocke, besides others for other purposes, Windsor, Salisbury, Gage,
Trauerse, Jones, Dun. And they practiced how to stir Ireland, to draw
Arundell and his brethren, and Northumberland to their side, and call
Westmerland, Paget, and others home. But Sir Francis Walsingham found out all
the plot, by means of one Gifford a brother false to them, but true to the
State, so that when the project was ripe, and the Queen made acquainted, the
Traitors (though fled and dispersed) were taken, convicted, and executed.

Cap. 10. Camd. ib. p. 483.
16. Anno 1587. Many discontented persons still continually haunted the Queen
of Scots like evil spirits tempting her. L'Aubespineus the French Ambassador
lieger, went about by treason to free her, moving William Stafford (whose
mother was of the Queens Bedchamber) to kill the Queen, by poison,
Gunpowder, or rather sword. Trappius the Ambassadors Secretary persuaded
Stafford and Moody, but Stafford revealed all to the Queens Council: Trappius
was intercepted going into France. The Ambassador being called before the
Council, denied all: but Stafford affirmed it to his face. The Lord Burleigh
told him, though he were not punished, yet he was not justified.

17. Shortly after, Camd. ib. part. 4. page 843.
William Stanley and Rowland York became Traitors: York being made Captain
of a Sconse near Zutphen, betrayed it to the Spanyard: and Stanley betrayed to
them the rich fenced Town of Deuenter; and sent for Priests to teach his
English and Irish the Popish Religion; being in number 1300. calling them The
Seminary legion (as the Seminary Priests) ordained to defend the Romish
Religion. Not long after, York was poisoned: Stanley tossed from place to
place ignominiously; and his fellows some died for hunger, some stole away,
himself was never trusted: for the Spaniards used to say, Some honor might
be given to a traitor, but no trust: and he found too late, he had most of
all betrayed himself.

18. The marvelous, climactericall, Cap. 11. and. 72. See the whole history
hereof in Camdens Annals, part. 3. page 513. and seq. and Meteranus. and
Hakluits voyages, and Speeds chron.
and fatal year (as some called it) 1588. whereupon the superstitious built
great hopes, brought forth the Spanish Armado a Navy by them termed invincible,
furnished with the best experienced and famous Captains and soldiers from
Spain, Italy, Sicily, America, and all other places, to be gotten, to conquer
England by huge force, which had before been vainly attempted by false
treachery. It consisted of 130. ships, 19290. soldiers: Mariners 8350.
chayned rowers 2080. Great Ordnance 2630. Unto which, the Prince of Parma in
Flanders was to adioyne his forces, building ships and broad vessels to
transport 30. horses a piece with twenty thousand vessels, with 103. companies
on foot, and 4000. horsemen, and among these were 700. English fugitives. These
were blessed by the Pope, and with the Catholics prayers and intercessions to
Saints: and for greater terror to the English, a book was set out of all the
preparation in particulars, which was so great through Spain, Italy, Sicily,
and the Low Countries, that the Spaniards themselves were in admiration of
their own forces. Pope Sixtus Quintus sent Cardinal Allen, (who wrote a
pestilent book to discourage the English, and encourage their own side) by
him renewing the Bulls of Pius 5. and Gregory 13. and excommunicating the
Queen again, deposing her, absoluing her subjects from all alleagiance: and
setting forth a printed Cruciata of full pardons, to all that joined against
England. Whereupon the Marquess a Burgaw of the house of Austria, the Duke of
Pastrana, Amady Duke of Sauoy, Vespasian Gonzaga, John Medices, and diverse
other Noblemen were drawn into these wars. And yet in the mean season, to
gull the English, and make them more negligent, the Prince of Parma sent to the
Queen to entreat of peace: so that Commissioners were sent into the
Low Countries about that entreaty, but the business was cunningly protracted
with promises and delays, until the Spanish Fleet was come near the English
shore, and their Gunnes heard from the Sea, and Parmas forces brought to the
shore.

Yet God so blessed our English forces, that they got the wind, played upon
them, took many of their ships, sunk many, drove the rest out of the
Channel, and in a months space so dispersed them, that they durst not
return; but fled about beyond Scotland and Ireland, losing many by the way,
and returned to Spain with sorrow, loss, and shame: the English having lost
only one ship, and scarce an hundred men in beating and chasing them. For
which our safety and victory, our Gracious Queen Elizabeth with her Nobles and
Citizens of London in their colors, resorted to the Cathedral Church of Saint
Paul's and gave God humble and hearty thanks, and showed the banners taken from
the enemies, with public joy. Many both at home and abroad wrote Poems and
Epigrams, of this great enterprise so happily defeated, and I, this one
Numerall verse, noting the year, and the business, Est DeVs Ang LorV M pVgnaX
qVI strauIt Iberos.

19. Cap. 13. Comd Annal. part. 4 page 6^3.
The King of Spain practiced both to do away Don Antonio King of Portugal,
and also to poison Queen Elizabeth, by means of D. Lopez a Jew, her
Physician, for fifty thousand crowns, which was discovered by letters
intercepted, and he committed to the Tower, yet he denied it with vehement
oaths and execrations; and though the knot of this treason was most closely
carried, yet by diligent examination it was confessed by Pedro Ferrera, Steven
Ferrera, and Manoel Lowis Tinoco, and at the last by Lopez himself, saying,
Indeed he had so couenanted with the Spaniard, with a purpose to get the money,
and bring it to the Queen, and then to reveal the whole matter unto her: and
that to that end he had spoken to Ferrera, Andreda, Ibarra, Count Fuentes, etc.
by mouth, messengers, and letters; but never intending to do it. This under
his hand, Febr. 25. 1593. Roger Lopez. It was confessed also, that Lopez should
have the money brought to Antwerp: that the King of Spain should be informed
of the very day, when the act should be done, that he might cause the Queens
ships to be burned, and the I Will of Wight to be surprised.

20. Edward Squire, Cap. 14. See Camd. ib. p. 725. and 843.
having been a Scriuener at Greenewich, and afterward one of the Queens
Stable; going in a voyage to the Indies with Sir Francis Drake, was taken and
brought into Spain; and there in prison was wrought upon by Walpoole the
Jesuit, and the Inquisition, and finally by pain and poverty became perfectly
Iesuited, and persuaded to kill the Queen of England by impoysoning her
saddles pummell, with poison which they delivered him in a bladder, teaching
him how to use it. He performed all accordingly, but it took none effect, but
only brought the traitor to his untimely end: for Walpool grieuing that it was
not performed, spoke of it to some, by whom it came to light, and he being
examined, confessed the whole matter.

Cap. 15. Comd. ib. p. 573. and 617. 635. 655. and seq and 701.
21. Tyrone a bastard (having had such favor of Q. Elizabeth as to be made
Earl, and twice pardoned, once for murder, and again for usurping the title
of O-neal) being a banished fugitive, lurked in Spain, and promised to do some
service to the Pope and Spaniard: and being set on by them anno 1597. he
assailed the Fort of Blackwater, but being crossed by the English forces, and
proclaimed traitor, he fell down before the Queens picture and craved
pardon, and yet at the same present dealt for aid out of Spain. But a
cessation of Arms being granted, he still harried and wasted the Country and
made many revolt, still suing dissemblingly for pardon. Thomas L. Burrugh,
Deputy defeated the rebels, took the Fort of Blackwater. But Tyrone beleagured
it: the Deputy dying 1598. Henry Bagnal, came with 14. Ensigns against him,
and there lost his life, with 15. other Captains slain, and 1500. soldiers
put to flight, so that Tyrone took the Fort of Blackwater, furnished with
armor and munition, which was the greatest loss that ever the English received
since their first footing in Ireland. And thus the rebellion was increased, and
became so dangerous, that the Queen sent the Earl of Essex with an army of
20000. against them, to wit, 16000. foot, and 4000. horse; who not going
directly against Tyrone, but laboring to clear other parts, and affording
parley with Tyrone a rebel, and granting a cessation of war for some time,
Cap. 16.
much offended the Queen, so that she wrote somewhat sharply to Essex,
because the Spring, Summer, and Autumn were spent without service against the
arch-rebell, many men lost, much money spent, the rebels were encouraged, and
Ireland hazarded whereupon Essex posted home to pacify the Queen, but was
presently confined to his own house, and after to the custody of the Lord
Keeper. Mean while, Tyrone revolted, and stirred, receiving money from Spain,
and indulgences from Rome, with a plume of Phoenix feathers for an especial
favor. Anno 1600. Clarls Blunt Lord Monicy came Lieuetenant General, and with
great celerity and felicity slew and chased many of the rebels, and removed
Tyrone from the Fort of Blackewater. Now the Spaniard sent Don John D' Aquila
General of his forces into Ireland, and the Pope elected a Spaniard to be
Archbishop of Dublin, employing also the Bishop of Clowfort, the Bishop of
Killalo, and Archer a Jesuit.

Aquila with 2000. old trained Spaniards, and some Irish fugitives, landed at
Kinsale the last of October 1600. and drew many to him. Our Deputy encamped
near, and Sir Richard Leuison with two ships enclosed the haven, and our
Canons played on the Town. News of 2000. more Spaniards arrived at
Bear-hauen, Baltimer, and Castle-hauen, drew Leuison thither, who sunk five of
their ships. To their leader Alfonso O Campo, came Odonel, and shortly after
Tyrone, with Oroik, Raymund, Burk, Mac Mahim, Randal, Mac Surly, Tarrel the
Baron of Lixnaw with the choice Nobles, making 6000. foot, and 500 horse,
confident of victory, being more and in better plight, then the traveled,
wearied English, which were also pinched of victuals. I tell you this thus
largely, to show the greatness of the danger, and our men's valor. Tyrone now
went about to put 300. Irish and other supplies of Spaniards into Kinsale: but
our Deputy prevented him, gave him a great overthrow, and slew many. Tyrone,
Odonel, and the rest, flung away their weapons and fled. Alfonso O Campo, and
six Ensign bearers were taken prisoners: nine Ensigns were borne away by the
English, and 1200. Spaniards slain.

Don D' Aquila sought peace, confessed the Deputy to be an honorable person;
the Irish, uncivil, and perfidious; Peace was granted, for the Spaniards to be
gone, to have victuals and ships for money at reasonable prices: the ships to
pass and return safely, hostages given, and so they departed.

The Deputed pursued the rebels from hole to hole, building ramparts still as
he went, and receiving many Fortts. Tyrone finally came in, submitted, and when
he was to be sent into England, Queen E^izabeth a Conqueror of all her foes,
dyed. King James entering, pardoned Tyrone. But he afterward stirring again
and fearing deserved punishment, fled out of Ireland, and left it to b^ planted
with more civil people.

Cap 17 Read this story in Speeds Chronicle.
22. In King James his time, Watson and Clarke Papist Priests entered a strange
conspiracy to surprise the King (ere he was crowned) and Prince Henry, to keep
them in the Tower, or convey them to Dover Castle, and seize upon their
treasures til they had obtained their purpose, to wit, to get their pardons,
alteration of Religion, remouall of some Counselors, and some other proiects
executed. In this practice were inuolued Henry Brook L. Cobham, Thomas L. Gray
of Wilton, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir Griffin Markham, Sir Edward Parham, George
Brook, B^rtholomew Brooksby, and Anthony Copley: who were all apprehended,
committed, and condemned, save Sir Edward Parham who only was acquitted by the
Jury Watson, Clark, and Brook executed; the rest pardoned their lives. A
foolish conspiracy, having neither strength to act the business, nor heads to
carry it.

Cap. 18. Speeds Chronicle.
23. The vpshot of all the Romish irreligious practices was the powder treason
anno 1605. contrived by Henry Garnet the Archpriest or chief governor of all
the Jesuits and Priests in England, or with his knowledge and allowance, by
Catesby, Robert Winter, Thomas Winter, Thomas Percy, John Wright, Christopher
Wright, Guy Fauks, Francis Tressam, John Grant, Bates Catesbies man, Robert
Keys, St Euerard Digby, Ambrose Rookwood. Some of these wrought in a secret
mine beginning in Percies hired house, to be continued through a strong wall
under the Parliament house, with very great labor and difficulty. But ere that
mine was made through the wall, they found means to hire the room just under
the Parliament house, to lay in provision of wood and coals. In which room
they couched secretly at one time twenty barrels of gun-pouder, and afterward
more, covering them with Faggots and Billets, which they purposed (when the
King, Prince, Nobles and all Parliament Men were assembled above) to set on
fire with a train of gunpowder, to blow up the house, and murder all therein
in one instant. And at the same time they appointed a great hunting to be at
Dunnesmore heath, to draw multitudes of people, get certain great horses into
their hands, and to seize on the Lady Elizabeth the Kings daughter lying near
that place, to proclayme her Queen (upon news of her Fathers and Brethrens
death) serving her a while, till they had made themselves strong enough to sway
the State, and to set up another fitter for their purpose; crying out
continually of the Puritans as authors of the Kings death, and of blowing up
the house.

This most mischievous plot came to light by occasion of a letter sent from an
unknown person to the Lord Mount Eagle, warning him to absent himself from
the Parliament, for that there should a great blow be given which might
endanger him, and the danger might be past as soon as he had burned the
letter. With this letter the Lords being acquainted, showed it to the King, who
presently conceived some treason by Gunpowder, and appointed the rooms under
the Parliament to be searched. The search was made secretly in the dead of the
night, and Fanks was found and taken with his matches and powder, laid hold of,
and upon the remouall of the Billets and Faggots, 36. barrels of Gunpowder
found: all which when Fauks saw disco^ered, he confessed what he meant to
have done. Winter and the two Wrights hasted from London to carry the news of
the discovery of their plot to their fellow hunters near Couentry: where
Gra^rt with help of other violent Papists had broken one Benoks stable, and
taken out some great horses (sent thither by some Noble men to be managed) for
which the Country rose to pursue them. But upon this news, they rose into
open rebellion, hoping to draw multitudes unto them. But the Sherifs of the
Counties preventing the swiftness of proclamations, raising the Countries
pursued them, so that finally the chifest of them entered into Steven Littletons
house at Holbeach in Staffordshire to shroud themselves, and the house being
assaulted by the Sheriff, as they were drying some Gunpowder in the house,
the fire took it, blasted and disabled the faces of some of the chiefest
rebels, and discouraged them (that God by such powder as they meant to destroy
others themselves were scourged) so that they fell on their knees and cried God
mercy for their bloody intents: and presently opened the gates, and desperately
sought their own destruction. Catesby, Percy and Winter joining back to
back, the two first were slain with one shot, the third taken alive: the
other whole, or lightly hurt, carried away prisoners, and sent to London: where
with the rest of their fellows (as they had formerly lived blindly, and
practiced desperately, so) they by the just doom of the Law, died miserably,
leaving their memory to be cursed throughout all generations.

First, by all this, you may see how vain your conceit is, that the Popes in
these latter times have been more moderate, and become more like to their
first Ancestors; nay you see, the abuse of their Supremacy has increased and
grown more intolerable. In these last times they have set up Schools at Rome
and Rhemes to train men up to the defense and practice of Idolatry and
treasons: See before Book 1 c. 6.. 4. Camd. Anna^. page 315. 348. and a libi
passim.
out of which (as out of the Trojan Horse) have proceeded innumerable wicked
instruments, troublers of the Church and Commonwealth, Incendiaries, homicides
(for Kings are men) parricides (for Kings are Fathers of the Commonwealth) yea
Christicides (for Kings are the Lords Anointed) yea Deicides (for Kings are
callled gods) and regnicides (the quellers of the Commonwealth.) Never was any
Doctrine so fruitful of Treasons and Rebellions. The desire to mainetaine it,
the hunger to plant it again, has been the only cause to the superstitious,
and pretense to the covetous and ambitious, of all late treasons. The traitors
ever confirmed by the Doctrine of their books, the exhortations of their
tongues, and the Sacrament delivered by their hands, and many of their Priests
partakers and actors of their crimes. The knowledge and experience of the
intolerable mischief of this doctrine does justify our Laws that were
sharpened against the practisers of it, See Cambd. Annals 4. pa t. 842, 843.
as many of your own Priests have confessed.

Secondly, you may note, that never any Nation was so often, so strangely, so
strongly, so diuellishly assaulted and endangered with treasons, as this our
land: and on the other side, never any Nation so strangely and mightily
defended, and the traitors confounded.

Thirdly, consider whether these actions be not manifest tokens of a false
religion. If we must judge the tree by his fruits (as Christ teaches us) how
can the tree be good that brings forth such fruits? Mat. 12.33.
Are those true Prophets (howsoever they come in sheep clothing) that do the
acts of Wolves? No, you shall know them by their fruits, to be false Prophets.
Mat. 7.15.16.
Beware of them. Your Bellarmine gives it for one note of the true Church,
Sanctity of life and doctrine. If these things so taught and practiced taste of
sanctity: what is villainy? Your Gospel is not the Gospel of peace, but of
confusion and mischief, in stead of building the Church, it ruins
Commonwealths and kingdoms.

Fourthly, look well, Bellarm. ^e notis Ecclesiae, Nota 15.
if Gods protection and blessings be notes of the true Church (as your
Bellarmine teaches) what think you of ours, which God has so mightily
defended and blessed, even when Balaam most cursed? Though you never ceased
heauing at our foundations, Church, and Princes, in these two last Princes
times, Queen Elizabeth and King James, yet they have both lived to see all
your wicked practices overthrown; the practisers ruined, their peoples
defended, Gods truth maintained; they lived happily, dyed in their beds
peaceably, and left a blessed memorial behind them. Our one Queen brought
more happiness to us, then nine Popes did to Reme, who all lived in her time;
Paul 4. Pius 4. Pius 5. Gregory 13. Sixtus 5. Vrbanus 7. Gregory 14. Innocent
9. Clemens 8. They wrastled against her and cursed her in vain; and their
curses fell upon their own heads: and King James wounded the learned of
their leaders with his pen.

Lastly, consider well, whether they that persuade you to be absolute Roman
Catholics, do not in deed and effect persuade you to be traitors, troublers
of the world, cursed and deuilish people! for perfect and absolute Papists are
no better, as you may see by these manifold examples of these treasons: and
therefore it is a wonder, that Princes do not concur to root out this wicked
Sect, that make wickedness godliness, yea that make a traffik of Kings sacred
lives, to set up an Idol of man's invention at Rome above them all.

. 13.
Antiq. Good Sir, I do not hold that the Pope has any such power over Kings
to depose them and set up others, or to dispense with subjects oaths of
alleagiance, or to raise wars or other troubles against civil Magistrates. I
find many good Catholics do reject and condemn such doctrine and practices:
they take the oath of alleagiance willingly; and write in defense of it. I
hold (with all my heart Conference of D. Rainolds and M. Heart. in Hart^
preface to the Reader.
) that the Pope has only a fatherhood of the Church, not a princehood of the
world, or dominion over Princes temporal states, to depose or dispose any way
of them. For Christ said, His kingdom was not of this world Ioh. 18.36.
: he paid ribute to secular Magistrates Mat. 17.27.
: meddled not with temporal matters, no not with division of inheritance
amongst brethren Luke 12.14.
: he acknowledged Pilate to have power to crucify him, and power to release
him, even lawful power given him from above Ioh. 19.10 1^
: Saint Paul acknowledged Caesar to be his lawful Judge Acts 25.10.
: and Saint Peter (the first Bishop of Rome) taught thus, 1 Pet. 2.13.
Subiecti estote omni humanae creaturae propter Deum, sieve regi, etc. Be
s^^iect to every humane creature for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King,
as excelling: or to rulers as sent by him to the revenge of malefactors, but to
the praise of the good. Saint Paul taught every soul to be subject to the
higher powers Rom 13 1.
. By those higher powers, meaning secular and civil Magistrates As the Jesuits
Pererius and Tolet (in locum) observe out of the Fathers.
, that bear the sword: be subject to them, not only for fear of wrath, but
for conscience sake Romans 13.5.
. And who must be subject to them? all sorts of people, both Ecclesiastical
and secular, even Apostles, Evangelists and Prophets, says Saint Chrysostom
Chrysostom. in locum. Ista Imperantur omnibus, and sacerdotibus, and mona^his,
no^ solum secularibus Omnis anima etiamsi Apostolus sis, si Euangelista, si
Propheta, sieve quisquis tandem fueris.
, And Saint Bernard Bernard. epist. ad Episcopum Senonensem. Omnio anima; tum
vestra: quis vo^ excipit? qui tentat excipere, tentat decipere.
writing to a Bishop, tells him he is not excepted from temporal subjection
to Princes, he that excepts him, deceiues him. Our late gracious Sovereign
King James King James Apology for the oath of Alleagiance. p^g 23. and deinceps.
alleges many Fathers, Saint Augustine, Tertullian, Iustine Martyr, Ambrose,
Optatus, Gregory Bishop of Rome, for subjection even of Bishops and Popes to
the secular Emperors and Princes. He alleges many Councels, six under
Charles the Great, to wit, of Frankford, Arles, Towers, Chalons, Me^tz, and
Rhemes: yea all the General Counce^s, that of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus,
Chalcedon, and the rest, who submitted themselves to the Emperors wisdom and
piety in all things, and desired from him power and validity to their decrees:
and for the oath of Alleagiance he alleges diverse Counsels.

These Scriptures, Fathers, Councels are so plain, so plentiful, so powerful
with me, for giving dominion to Princes, and subiecting all, both Clergy and
Laity unto them in all civil things: that all the world shall never draw me to
deny my Alleagiance and subjection to my Sovereign: but I will readily take
Arms in his defense, as Gods Lieutenant and Deputy, though the Pope should
excommunicate him.

Antiquis. I joy to hear your good resolution, built upon so good grounds: I
hope then you justify us Protestants for departing from the Popish Religion in
this point.

Antiq. I must needs do so; and I do not think them true Catholics that
hold and practice this point of Supremacy. Papists they may be (as you term
them) for so holding with the Pope: but Catholics they cannot be, for this
Doctrine is not Catholic.

. 14.
Antiquis. Do you not see also how greatly you shake the Popes authority by
this means, and ouerturne the foundation of his Supremacy? for your Popes have
both claymed and practiced this full authority as well in civil and temporal
things as in Ecclesiastical, and upon the same grounds. And your learned
Doctors think their grounds as firm for the one as for the other. Your Great
Bellarmine (upon whom you so much rely) says, Bellarm. de Pont. Rom l. 5. cap.
6. initio.
Although the Pope as Pope, has not any more temporal power (which other
Doctors say he has) yet so far as it may make for the spiritual good, he
has supreme power to dispose of the temporal things of all Christians. And
Ib. cap. 7.
he labors to prove that the Pope may depose Princes and dispose of their
kingdoms, if he find it good for the Church: as a sheephard may deal with
Wolves and unruly Rams, and other sheep. And many of your Doctors have the
like, as Eudaemon, Ioannes Sidonius, Suarez, Becanus, Mariana, Grotzerus,
Costerus, Baronius, Sanders, Allen, and thousands more.

Antiq. I am very sorrowful that so great learned men should hold such an
opinion, I hold them erroneous and evil.

Antiquis. Then you must confess that the Church of Rome may err, and that in
a maine point both of doctrine and practice, to the great hurt of the Catholic
Church, and many men's destruction both of body and soul, in being traitors and
rebels against their Sovereigns, and murderers of people, of which crimes your
Popes and Doctors are guilty.

Antiq. I must needs grant that some have erred in the Church, but not the
whole Church, neither (I hope) has any Pope taught this Ex Cathedra.

Antiquis. This some is a large some, the greatest part of your Church, and I
think the Pope teaches it Ex Cathedra, when he decrees it out of his
Pontifical judgment and authority, and sends out his judicial
excommunications under seal against Princes to depose them (as Pius 5. did
against our Queen Elizabeth) and Breefes to forbid his Catholics to take the
oath of civil Alleagiance (as Paulus 5. did to our English.)

Now consider well what you grant: in effect, that the greatest part of the
Church, yea, the most conspicuous and eminent men in the Church, and the Pope
also, may err in some great and dangerous point; and yet because some few
inferior and obscure persons hold the truth, the true Church is still
sufficiently visible and illustrious.

This you had not wont to yield to the Protestants. See card. Perons oration in
the third inconvenience. In K Iam^s his Remonstrance p. 183. 187. etc.
Cardinal Perone dare not grant it, but says, this would prove the Church of
Rome to be Antichristian and heretical, and to have ceased to be the Spouse of
Christ for a long time, and to have taught many points without authority, as
Transubstantiation, auricular confession, etc. (for these he ranketh with the
Popes power to depose Kings: and if the Scriptures yield no ground for the one,
no more do they for the other.) These and diverse other points (which they
hold different from us) have no other ground, but the authority of that Church,
which is found to err in great and dangerous matters.

See this in B. Whites answer alleged p. 87
Your own learned Jesuit Mr Fisher, upon whose judgment your English Roman
Catholics do much rely, says, That if the Church could deliver, by consent
of Ancestors, together with truth, some errors: her Traditions, even about the
truth, were questionable, and could not be believed upon the warrant of her
Tradition: and this he proves substantially. Neither do we receive doctines
upon the Churches warrant, only (as Doctor White there largely and learnedly
shows) but upon their agreeing with the holy Scriptures.

Now we may assume; The Church of Rome does deliver by consent of many
Ancestors (from Gregory 7. time to our times) some errors (as this concerning
her power to depose Kings, and dissolve oaths of Alleagiance, etc.)

Ergo her traditions (or teaching) are questionable, and cannot be believed
upon the account of her Tradition,

Consequently, all other her doctrines not grounded upon Scripture, are
questionable, and our subjection to her judgment unnecessary.

Antiq. Truly, if I grant the former doctrine of her power to depose Kings etc.
to be erroneous (as I must needs grant) I know not how to avoid this reason.

1 Book 1. cap 1.
And therefore not to trouble you longer at this time: Since you have showed me,
1. that your Chuch differs nothing from the Romish Church in the old true
doctrine which it continues, but only in some corruptions which it has
added: and that 2. corruptions may in time come into any particular Church (the
Roman not excepted, 2 cap. 2.
but warned thereof by the Scriptures) 3. 3 cap. 3.
showing also the time when they grew obseruable and notorious in the Roman
Church: 4 cap. 4.
and 4, that they were opposed from time so time, and reformation called for: 5
cap. 5.
showing also 5. the principal points wherein the difference consists, and
that you hold all necessary doctrines: 6 cap. 6.
6. misliking many policies by them used to maintain their new corruptions.
And further have showed me, Book 2.
that this your Church for the substance of the doctrine thereof, has always
been visible, 7. as all one with the Primitive Church, 7 cap. 1.
and the Greek and Eastern Churches, and the Waldenses that separated from
the corruptions of the Papacy, yea and with the Roman Church it self,
excepting the Papacy and the maintainers thereof: although in some 8, 8 cap. 2.
ceremonies and private opinions both you and the Romish have departed from
foam Fathers (wherein 9. 9 cap. 3
also there was difference among themselves as there is also still among the
Roman Doctors.)

And further you have showed me 10. 10. cap 4.
a Rule to judge all Churches and Christians by: By which Rule (judged right by
the Roman Doctors) you approve your selves to hold all things necessary to
salvation, and thereby to be the true Church of God, and agreeing therein with
all true Churches that are or ever were in the world: yea and that 11. 11 cap,
5.
your Bishops and Ministers have as good succession from the Apostles, as any
other in the world: although 12. 12 cap. 6. 13. cap. 7.
you admit not the B. of Romes Supremacy over al Churches and Christians in the
world: neither 13. his Infallibility: both which you prove to be unknown, and
vnreceiued of the Ancients, and 14. 14 cap. 8.
both unprofitable and intolerable in the Church of God: Since all this you
have delivered with such plentiful and pregnant proofs, as I have nothing
(for the present) to say against them: I must needs thankfully confess that
they sway much with me; yet will I not be rash to resolve upon a sudden,
without further meditation, and consultation with men of better judgment than
my self: but I promise you, if you (at our next meeting) can as well satisfy
me in the particular points of Doctrine, as you have now presently in these
general objections, I shall be very inclinable with all due reverence to
return unto your Church.

Antiquis. Dear friend, I pray God bless your meditations and consultations.
I have told you the truth from my heart, so far as my reading and judgment
could direct me. Quaere doctiores. Inuenies praesumptiores. Seek more learned,
you shall happily find them that will presume more of their learning (as Saint
Augustine said) such as will seek rather the victory than the Truth. I am old,
past my climactericall year (as they call the year 63.) other men may have
death at their backs, I have him always before my face. I was never
dissembler, and least of all now, having one foot in the grave. Meditate upon
that I have said; and especially read the holy Scriptures, the Cloud and
Pillar to guide you to the land of Promise, the Light and Lantern to your
feet: quick and lively in operation to move your heart. And when you are
either to read, meditate, or confer first, shut your self in your Closet,
or private Chamber, there fall down humbly upon your knees, and pray the most
gracious God, to illuminate your mind, and make pliable your heart, for true
divine faith: For all your reading and conference, study and meditation can
work no more than humane faith, builded upon humane testimonies, which may
prepare good entrance and introduction to divine faith, which must afterward
be fully wrought, confirmed, and sealed by the holy Ghost; all our planting
and watring is nothing without this. The testimony of the Church, of histories,
of former ages (which yet only the Romish pretend to rely upon, and call us
thereunto* and wherein we prove our selves superiors, and, which are the
greatest assurances that man's wit or humane means can afford, yet) are far
short of begetting the Faith that assures of the Truth, and saves either them
or us, without the divine working and assurance of the holy Ghost: whose
guidance and heavenly influence seek for by seruent and diligent prayer. And
so I commend you to Gods grace.

FINIS.
An Appendix.
Christian Reader, after J had sent this book to the Printer, there came to my
hands, a worthy learned book of Doctor Morton, Bishop of Couentry and
Liechfield, entitled, The grand Imposture of the (now) Church of Rome: which J
commend unto thy diligent reading, for thy yet-fuller satisfaction in that main
point. There thou shall see many of those Histories, which I have alleged
briefly (especially in my later Chapters) more largely discoursed, and thoroughly
urged, against all possibility of contradiction. And now, for a peroration or
conclusion, beside my former proofs, J offer unto thee these three weighty
considerations, to meditate upon. I. Of the excellent benefit of pure Primitive
Religion. II. Of the evils of false or corrupted Religion. III. Of the great
blessings of the Reformation thereof.
Think not thy time lost, nor thy labor long in reading them.

CHristian Religion, I. Of the excellent benefit of pure Primitive Religion.
when the excellency of it was once known, was embraced as the greatest
benefit that ever came unto Mankind: because it not only brought men out of
darkness into light, to the knowledge of the true God, and of themselves and
of the most comfortable means of their salvation; but also because it trained
up men in all things profitable for this present life and made a second heaven
upon earth. That City Country, and Nation, was found to prosper in wealth,
peace, honesty, diligence in every Calling, faithfulness among men, sobriety
in themselves, obedience to Magistrates, and all kind of goodness, where it
was received, and where both people and Governors feared God, and served him
as he had prescribed. ^^^y 11.6.
For it wrought a wonderful blessed change in all true believers hearts, far
beyond all Laws and Ordinances of Man. Of Wolves they became Lambs; of
Vultures, Doves; of Leopards, Kids; of Aspes and Cockatrices, Innocents and
Children; of Barbarous, Savage, and rude people, they became civil, devout,
just clean, peaceable, and holy. All vices rooted out all virtues planted in
their hearts, and practiced in their lives. Whereupon followed peace, love,
unity, prosperity, and felicity in the Christian world.

Pliny lib. 10. Epist. 97. citat. a Baronio anno 1^4. number. 3.
Pliny certified the Emperor, that upon his thorow-search and full knowledge
of Christians, he found them strongly bound together by Sacraments (or oaths)
not to do any wicked thing; But, not to commit these, robberies murders,
deceit, or deny any things committed to their trust or keeping, etc.

Baron. tom. 2. an. 195. nu. 21. Eusebius. Praeparat. Evangel. lib. 6. cap. ^.
Baronius cites Bardezanus Syrus giving this testimony to the Christians, that
in whatsoever City or Country they lived ( Persia, Media, Parthia, Egypt, or
other barbarous Nations) they quite changed the nature and qualities of men, to
forsake and abandon theit old, wild, unjust, beastly customs, and become
just, chaste, honest, charitable, suffering people.

And although some Emperors and Princes for a time persecuted Christians, upon
misinformation that they were enemies to their state and dignity, and a
rebellious kind of people: yet in time they found the contrary and favored
them above all others. Tertul. ad Scapulam liber. page 162, 163.
Tertullian writing to Scapula the President tells him, A Christian is no man's
enemy, much less enemy to the Emperor, whom Christians know to be ordained by
their God; and they are compelled by their Religion, to love, reverence, and
honor him, and to seek his safety with the safety of the whole Empire. And
therefore they profess and say, Colimus Jmperatorem sic, quomodo and nobis
licet, and ipsi expedit, vt homine^ a deo secundum, and quicquid est, a deo
consequutum, solo deo minorem. We honor and obey the Emperor so far as is
lawful for us, and needful for him, that is, as a man next under God, and
having obtained of God, whatsoever he is, being inferior to God alone.

Origin testifies that the Church of God was ever calm and quiet at Athens
though the Athenians were turbulent and seditious. So also at Corinth.
Alexandria, Origin contra Celsum lib. 3. Baron. tom. 2. an. 1^5. n. 2.
and every where, the Church was far more excellent then the best composed
Commonwealth.

Gregory the great, Bishop of Rome, Greg lib. 7. epist. 8 cited by King James
Remonstr. page 137. and Apolog. for the oath of Allegiance, page 94.
600 years after Christ's birth, professes that he had power to ruin the
Lombards, his sworn enemies, and to bring them to extreme confusion: yet for
the fear of God settled in his heart, he never had any such intent. And he
writes to Mauritius the Emperor, that although a certain Law (which the
Emperor commaded to be proclaimed) was in his judgment, unjust; Greg. lib 2.
Indict. 11. ep 61. cited also by King James. Apol. page 24.
yet he as a dutiful subject, and unworthy servant of his godliness, had
caused it to be sent into diverse parts of his dominions: paying to both parties
what he ought to wit, obedience to the Emperor, and speaking what he thought
for God. Espencaeus in Tit. digress. 10. aedit. Paris. 1568.
Whereupon B. Espenceus says Gregorius primus, idem and magnus lib. 2. epist.
64. Gregory the first, called also the Great, ingenuously acknowledged that God
had granted the Emperors a dom nion over Priests. This Gregory I, and his
predecessors were plain contrary to Gregory VII and his successors.

Bozius makes it one of the signs of the Church of God that it yielded so many
Martyrs, Bozius de signis Eccles tom^ 1. lib. 7. cap. 5.. 5.
suffering patiently under cruel Emperors and Princes, seven and twenty Roman
Bishops, for their only cleaving to the doctrine and honor of Christ. Greg
Tolossan. 1. V. Doctor lib. 26. de Repub. cap. vlt. (...). 10.
And Gregorius Tolossanus, Doctor of the Laws says, That for 300 years after
Christ's Passion, though Christians suffered most cruel torments and death, --
yet we never read they rebelled against their Princes, nor moved against the
Commonwealth, though they had number and power sufficient But by that argument
they showed that they and their Religion were to be preferred before all other,
because their p^^us doctrine taught the^ to obey Magistrates Whiles therefore
the Church continued such a school of good life among Christians, and of
faithful loyalty and true subiect^on to Princes, Romans 13.5.
whom they obeyed not only for fear of punishment but especially because they
were boun^ in conscience and so taught by their holy Relig on: B. King. Sermon
at York on the Queens day, 1595.
Religion was ^he joy, glory, and happiness of the world. It was the glor^ of
Princes and Emperors to maintain it and it was the glory of the Church to
maintain them. Constantius, the father of Constantine the Great, made more
reckoning (he said) of those that professed Christianity, then o^ great
treasures. Jouianus after Julian, refused to be Emperor (albeit elected and
sought to the Emp re) except he might govern Christ^ans. Great Constantine,
and Charles the Great had their surnames of greatness not so much for
authority, Aug. de ciuit. Dei lib. 5. 6. 24.
as for godliness Saint Au^ustine says Emperors were not therefore happy,
because they reigned long, or left sons to reign after them, or tamed
enemies, or quieted rebelling subjects etc. but because they ruled justly
remembered they were men, when men almost made them Go^s; used their power to
promote Gods honor, loved feared, worshipped God; loved that kingdom best,
wherein they feared not to have partakers sl^wly revenged, easily pardoned;
pun^shed for necessity to preserve the Commonwealth, not to serve their private
hatred; pardoned, not to impunity of evil but for hope of amendment: and if
compelled to deal more sharply, recompensed it with mercy, lenity, and larges
of benefits: ^f their lu^ury was so much the more restrained, as it might be
more free: if they had rather rule their evil lusts, then any Nations: and all
these, not for desire of vain glory, but for the love of heavenly felicity, --
Such a happy Emperor was Great Constantine, Ibid. cap. 25, 26. Constantine was
celebrated in the old Marbles, with these titles, Vrbis liberator, quietis
fundator, reipubilicae instautator publicae, libertatis auctor, restitutor
vrbis Romae, atque orbis. Magnus, maximus, invictus. And in the laws, Qui
veneranda Christianorum fide Romanum munivit imperium. Divus. Diuae memoriae.
Divinae memoriae, etc. Camden Britannia in Yorkshire, describing York City.
II. Of the evils of false or corrupted Religion. Esaias 1.21. Rome Revel. 17.9,
18. becante Babylon, v 5, 2, 4. 6. Nauel generat. 39 H Mulius Chron. German.
lib 18. Usher De eccl. succes. c. 7.. 17.
whom the Lord blessed also with all other happiness; and such an one was
Theodosius, who desired rather to be a member of the Church, then a King over
Peoples.

Then was the world happy, when the Church bred and trained up the best people
and subjects in the world: and Emperors, Kings, and Princes were the nu^sing
Fathers of the Church: and so the one vpheld the other, and the one was happy
in the other.

But, alas for grief, that ever so excellent a blessing should be corrupted,
and turned to a curse and scourge to mankind! that Jerusalem the whilome
faithful City should become an Harlot! And Rome, the Imperial City (whose
faith was spoken of through the whole world, Romans 1.8.) should be turned into
Babylon, the seat of Antichrist, and inebriate the Kings and Inhabiters of the
earth, with the wine of her fornications, her self becoming drunken with the
blood of the Saints, and Martyrs of Jesus! that Emperors and Princes should
shut the Cardinals out of their Churches and Cities, and write to the Pope
their reason, because they found them nor Predicatores, sed Predatores, Non
pacis corroboratores, sed Pecuniae raptores; non orbis Reparatores, sed auri
Insatiabiles corrasores -- denique superbiae detestabilem bestiam vsque ad
sedem Petri reptasse. So wrote the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa to the Pope,
to wit, your Cardinals come not to preach unto us, but to pray upon us: not to
strengthen our peace, but to ransacke our purses: not to repair the decayed
world, but unsatiably to rauine after gold. -- Finally, we see the detestable
beast of Pride has crept even into Saint Peter's seat.

The Hierarchy of Rome is here charged with insatiable covetousness, (the
root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.10.) and Amb^tion or Pride, (the cause of the fall
of Angels in heaven, and men in Paradise) from which two evils proceeded many
mischiefs, and corruptions into the Church.

Sabellicus observes that the fear and reverence of Potent Princes,
Sabellicus Ennead 9. lib. 1. Genebrard. Chronol. lib 4. in 10. saculi initio.
Baron. tomo 10. anno 900.. 1. Matthew. 8.24, 25
kept the Popes of Rome a long time in some good moderation: but when they were
out of fear of such Princes, they rushed into all impudency and wickedness.

And Genebrard speaking of the tenth Age says, Then was the world exhausted
both of learned men, and potent Princes, and good popes: and confesses that in
150 years, there were about 50 popes, utterly swaruing from the virtue of
their predecessors, and were rather Apotactici, Apostaticive, quam Apostolici;
debosht Apostataes, rather then Apostol^cke.

Bellarmine and Baronius complain of the ninth and tenth Ages, wherein
powerful and sordid Whores ruled at Rome, and at their pleasure changed the
Seas, gave Bishoprics, and brought their lovers or Harlots (Amasios suos)
into Saint Peter's seat, as false popes: that in those times Christ slept in the
ship which was overwhelmed with the waves, and there was none to awaken him.
For bad popes set up bad Cardinals, bad Bishops, bad Priests, as nothing is
more common, then for like to beget his like. And for the lives of the Romish
Religious in general, Gerbertus said. The Gerbert. epist. 40. Romanorum mores
mundus perhorrescit. citat. ab Vsserio cap. 2. 32, 33.
Romans manners are abhorred of the world. Werner. fasc. temp aetat. 6. circa
an. 944. Sanctitatem. Papas dimisisse, and ad Jmperatores accessisse.
Wernerus, that holiness had forsaken the popes, and betook it self to the
Emperors: Cameracensis, Petrus de Alliaco Cardinal s Cameracensis. De Reform.
Eccle. Ad hunc statum venit Ecclesia, vt non esset digna Regi, nisi per
Reprobot. Usher c. 7.. 7.
The Church of Rome is come to this state, that it is not worthy to be
governed but by Reprobates. Na^ele. vol. 3. ge^cra. 39. page 220.
Nauclerus reports out of Joannes Flatzboricosis, that pope Adrian 4 said, No
man was more wretched then the pope of Rome: and Onuph de Vitis Pontif^n vita
Marcell. 2. addit. ad Pla inam pa 359.
Onuphrius testifies that Marcellus sitting one day at dinner, after long
silence, remembering the words of Adrian 4 speaking of the troublesome bitter,
and miserable lives of the popes, and the difficulties of managing their
estates: at last, striking his hand upon the table, said, Non vidio quomodo qui
hunc locumallissimum tenont, salvari possunt.
I see not how those that hold this high place of the popedom, can be saved.
As if there were a necessity imposed upon the pope to be a wicked man, that his
place required it, and that otherwise, he could not maintain his estate. This
Genebrard. chrono. lib. 4. page 753.
Marcellus lived, anno 1555. In our Queen Mary's time, and dyed the 22 day of
his popedom, not without suspicion of poison (as Genebrard says) because some
doubted he would prove too good Quod nimbum rectus quibusdam futurus videretur.
. Guicci ardin. lib. 16. page 586. lat edit. Basil. 1567. Tunc in Pontifice
probitas laudatur, cum caeterorum hominum nequitiam non excedit.
Guicciardine, describing the dissembling and vnpriestly prankes of pope Leo
the tenth (who began his reign, anno 1513,) says, he was counted a good
Prince; for then honesty is praised in a pope, when he exceeds not all other
men in wickedness. Sarith. in Policratic. lib. 6. cap. 24. Usher. de statu and
suc. Eccl. cap. 7. 6.
Joannes Sarisburiensis says, The Church of Rome shows her self Not a
Mother, but a stepmother. There sit the Scribes and Pharisees, laying heavy
burdens on men's shoulders, but touch them not with their least finger. There
Justice, Piety, and Verity are set to sale. They hurt most commonly: and herein
they imitate the devils, which then are thought to do well, when they cease to
do no hurt: except a few which perform the name and office of Pastors. Yea,
even the Roman Bishop himself, is grievous to all, and almost intolerable.
Thus write their own Authors.

Pope Gregory the 7. So says Onuphrius in vita Greg 7. Aventine. Otto
Frisingensis. Gotfridus Viturbiensis, Trithemius. Sigebert, and many other
Catholic historians. See their allegations and words at large in B. Vshers
book. De Eccles. successione and statu. cap. 5.
(alias Hildebrand) who lived in the tenth Age, (and began his reign, anno
1073.) when Satan was let loose, Reu. 20.7. was the first that set up the
popes earthly kingdom, (instead of Christ's Heavenly) and raised it in wealth
Majesty, and authority above all secular Princes and Emperors: which their
successors have continually increased, mauger the world, mauger the Emperors,
and have brought into subjection both hie and low, terrifying all with their
thunders: and embroyling the Christian world, with insurrections, wars, and
miserable vexations, setting the subjects against their Princes, sons against
their fathers, and making the Christian world, worse then the Heathen, a very
Shambles of Christian blood. Very many (says Aventine Plerique) cried out
against Hildebrand, and cursed him, saying, That under the Title of Christ, he
acted the business of Antichrist, and overthrew Peace and Piety; and to hide
his execrable ambition, devised Fables, corrupted Histories, and adulterated
the very Scriptures, interpreting them falsely to serve his own affections; Sir
John Hayward of Supremacy. page 61.
he made blind people believe that it was not sufficient to know and embrace
the Catholic faith unless it were with subjection to the Pope: and that all
that fought against the Pope, drew their swords against heaven, and ma^e offer
(like those Giants, of whom the Poets write) to scale the skies, and to pull
God out of his throne. And that to fight for the Pope even against their own
governors and natural Princes (whom the pope judged to be his enemies) was to
fight for the Church and for God, was a meritorious work, and the most sure
undoubted way to heaven. When this opinion was once planted in every state, by
that opinion any state might be supplanted. Hist. of the Council of Trent. lib
5. page 437.
It was well observed by the Chancellor in an Assembly of the States of France,
at Orleance: that Religion is the potent weapon, overcomes affections and
charity, and is the surest bond of humane society: that Kingdoms are more
bounded, and more divided by Religion, then by the Confines themselves: that he
that is moved with Religion, contemns wife, children, and kindred. This he
said of Religion, whether it be true or false. The more potent weapon Religion
is, the greater care is to be had that people be instructed in right and true
opinions. For where people have been rightly instructed, they have for
conscience sake, obeyed their Princes ( Romans 13 5.) and princes have prevailed
against many popes. Sigebert anno 1088. Haec sola nouitas, redicam haresis, nec
dum in mundo emerserat etc. Usher ib. c. 5. 3
But when the popes had settled that strange nou^ty (or rather intolerable
heresy) in the hearts of men, that subjects owe no subjection to evil princes
(to wit, whom the popes account eu ll) and though they have sworn fidelity
unto them, yet they owe none; neither are perjured that fight against the King,
but they must be taken for Excommunicants that do not sight against him at the
popes command: and doing so are absolved from all sin of injustice and
perjury, and do highly merit at Gods hand: when this (I say) is settled in
men's hearts, the popes may unsettle and overthrow what prince and state they
list.

They neen no other Armies not treasure, while they have men's consciences at
their commands: let them but thunder out their threats and Excommunications of
such as disobey them, and set their Agents to publish them and stir up the
people, and then all subjects will forsake their princes, and serve the pope
against them, all Religious persons will be their Trump^ters, Captains and
Leaders, all Cloisters, Abbeyes, and Colleges will be as good as Castles unto
them; the promise of heaven, a sufficient pay, and the threatening of death, not
only temporal (which happily might be contemned, or avoided) but eternal
(which by disobeying the pope is thought to be unavoidable) is terror enough
and all these give courage enough to do their b^st for the pope against all
princes of the world. Sir John Hayward of Supremacy, page 62.
By this means eight Emperors (besides other Kings and princes) have been
excommunicate by the pope namely, Frederick the first, Frederick the second,
Philip, Conrade, Otho the fourth, Lewis of Bauaria, Henry the fourth and fifth,
(which was occasion enough for their subjects to revolt, and for other Princes
to invade) The succeeding Emperors, partly unwilling, but principally unable
to sustain so sad and heavy blows submitted themselves to the papal power,
and renounced the right, which by long custom they claimed and held.

I omit the troubles of other princes and Nations, and of our own also in
form^r times of our Kings Henry's and John. Our late troubles in the times, of
our most gracious Sovereigns Elizabeth and James are fresh in memory, to the
detestation of the Authors thereof: and they are published to the world in
their own books.

See the book entitled, Important Considerations set forth by the Secular
Romish Priests in England, anno 1601. with Watson the Priests Preface or
Epistle before it.
The secular Priests stick not to relate to the world, what they cannot hide,
the treasons, insurrections, invasions, and other troubles (which I have
reckoned up before and more also) plotted by the Pope and his Agents, to bring
Queen Elizabeth and her Kingdoms, to confusion. Pius Quintus his plot
(joining with the King of Spain) to depose her by his Bull and execute it by
the Northern Rebellion, 1569. And after, anno 1572. by D. Sanders book, De
visibili Monarchia, justifying that course, and showing the world how the pope
had sent Morton and Webb, Priests, to stir up the Nobles and Gentlemen, to
take Arms against the Queen. Then how Stukeley was made a great Lord and
Marquess of Ireland by the pope, to take Jreland from the English, but
miscarried by the way: After how Doctor Sanders came furnished by the Pope to
take Ireland by Invasion and Rebellion, and there dyed miserable and mad: After
this, how Gregory 13, renewed the pestilent Bull of Pius 5, cursing and
disabling the Queen to reign: and anno 1580. sent into England, Campian,
Parsons, and other Jesuits, to persuade the subjects to execute it, assuring
them of a mighty invasion from Spain to join with them: and how these wicked
practices justly enforced straiter laws to be made against such Vipers. For
what Prince or state of any force or Metal could endure their own ruin to
be wrought, with their eyes open, and their hands unbound? Then followed his
Holiness displaying his banner as a temporal Prince in Ireland, to
dispossess the Queen; and afterward the Duke of Guises practices to
transfer the English Crown to the Q. of Scotland, employing therein Mendoza
the Spanish Leager Ambassador, Throgmorton and others. And anno 1583. Arden
and Somerviles treason. Then Doctor Parries to murder the Queen. Again,
Babington and his fellows treason, discovered anno, 1586. And sir William
Stanlies, 1567. and the great Spanish Armado, 1588. Then the Bull of Sixtus
Quintus against the Queen. And new Seminaries errected in Spain by the
procurement of Parsons the Jesuit, whence issued 13 accomplished Priests, to
infuse Treasons into Englishmens brains, anno 1591. to prepare them for a new
Invasion. And anno 1592. Heskot was sent by the Jesuits to stir the Earl of
Darby to Rebellion. After this, Father Holt a Jesuit, persuaded Patricke Colen
to murder her Majesty. And anno 1593. Doctor Lopus his poisoning plot was
discovered: also Holt the Jesuit, animated York and Williams to shed her
blood: and Walpool the Jesuit, set on Edward Squire to poison her saddle
Pommell. After this, for the other intended Invasion, the Spanish Fleet put
twice to Sea, and both times were sea beaten, torn, and dispersed.
Meane-season, Father Parsons in printed books, entitled, The Jnfanta of
Spain to the Crown of England, and used all possible means to make it take
place. All these vncatholicke, unchristian, inhumane courses the secular
Priests confess, condemn and lament, laying all the fault thereof from
themselves and other Roman Cathol^ckes, upon the Jesuits.

We do all acknowledge (say they) that by our learning, Ecclesiastical
persons by virtue of their Calling, Important consid page 37.
are only to meddle with Praying Preach ng and administering the Sacraments,
and such other like spiritual functions: and not to study how to murder
Princes, nor to licitate Kingdoms, Jb. page 38.
nor to intrude themselves into matter of state-Priests of what order soever
ought not by force of Arms to plant or water the Catholic Faith, but In
spiritu lenitatis and mansuetudinis, to propagate and defend it. So it was in
the Primitive Church over all the world. The ancient Christians, though they
had sufficient forces, did not oppose themselves in arms against their Lords,
Ib. page 39. See the Epistle Dedicatory of B. Carlton, before his book of
Jurisdiction.
the Emperors, though of another Religion. -- The Catholic Faith for her
stability and continuance has no need of any treachery or Rebellion it is more
dishonored with treasons and wicked policies of carnal men, then any way
furthered or advanced. Thus the Priests giving us a good hint, what to judge of
their Religion that has evermore been thus planted and propagated. It is not
the Catholic Faith and Religion of the Ancients. But erroneous superstition is
always more violent then true Religion. They give us an Item also, what our
English Roman Catholics may look for, if the Spaniard should prevail. Watson
in his Epistle to the Important Considerations, says: The old King of Spain
aimed at the Crown of England, with the death of her Majesty, and subversion
of the State, and the utter ruin of the whole I Will, and the ancient Inhabitants
thereof; and never once showed any care or respect that he had to the restoring
of the Catholic Romish Faith amongst the English. Nay his direct course was
taken quite contrary, still to extirpate the name of all Catholics (that were
English) out from the face of the earth. Therefore he would not aid Stukeley to
get Ireland for the pope: and also charged the Duke of Medina (his general in
88) rather to spare Protestants then Catholics. And the Book of important
Considerations written by themselves page 25. says: It is well known, that
the Duke of Medina Sidonia had given it out directly, that if once he might
land in England, both Catholics and Heretics that came in his way should be
all one to him: his sword could not discern them, so he might make way for his
Master, all was one to him.

How unlike are the Romish Religions of this age to the Ancients! As the pure
Primitive vncorrupt Religion was the greatest blessing both to Prince and
subjects: so this corrupt, ambitious and turbulent visor of Religion has been
an intolerable scourge and Plague unto them, means more likely to make
Religion stink in the nostrils of men, then to make it sweet and comfortable
unto them.

All these vn^atholike courses, (I grant) the secular Priests lay upon the
Jesuits as if all other Papist were clear of them. Which is nor so. 1 For who
were in the fault ^n the troubl^s of the German Emperors and other Kings
before there were any Jesuits in the worl^? (whose first beginning was little
ab^ue an hundred years agone, and their plot^ing Statizations within half
that time.)

2 Secondly, all Papists in common (seculars not excepted) hold the Apostolic
power, and nec^ssity of obeying it. Quodli^et, 8. art 9 ^ag. 277.

3 The secu^ars often bewray it in their writings, though somewhat covertly,
because the times fit not so well to utter their minds plainly. See Watsons
Quodlib. i^ 9 art. 3. page 293 and art. 5 page 306. and quodl. 8. art. 6. page
243.

4 They also submit themselves and all their writings yea every word and t^ttle
to the censure of the Roman Church: as Quodl 8. art. 8. page 267, and 361. and
362. and Important Considerations page ^3 in the Postscript.

5 The seculars sometimes plainly conf^sse it Jmp Con. p^g. 15 (having spoken
of diverse attempts of the pope and Sp^niard in England and Ireland, to deprive
Queen Elizabeth of her Crown) they say plainly, in all these plots none were
more forward then many of us that were priests; adding that if they the pri^sts
had opposed those designments, the Laity would have been ouer-rul^d by them.

6 Beyond all this, Watson himself, a secular priest, (who had set forth the
said Important Considerations, with a flourishing Epistle before as also the
Q^odlibets, etc. to clear the secular priests from all treasons and evil
practices) became himself a Traitor, and a Ringleader of diverse others in the
beginning of King James his reign: for which he and Clarke his fellow were
executed, and the Traitor Ballard 1586, was a secular priest. And many secular
priests were in the Spanish army against England, anno 88 as says the
Quodlibet 8. art. 7. Doctor Sanders, Morton and Webb, were secular priests.

So that howsoever they would excuse themselves, and lay all upon the Jesuits:
it i^ certain that all perfect papists are conscious or guilty in heart, and
many of them in action of these courses intolerable to the Church and State.

Isaacus Cosaubonus. pist. dedic. ad ^bum Regem. praefix. Excercitat^n Baronium.
But concerning the corruptions of the Church, both in doctrine and practices,
and our happy Reformation thereof; I present the Reader with the substance of a
worthy discourse of learned Casaubon. Who, after he has showed that neither
Truth nor Christians. nor Christ himself (the Way, the Truth, and the Life)
ever wanted enemies: and that amongst those enemies, two troops have ever
been most infest and most infectious, Nonatores and Veteratores, the
Introducers of new Doctrines, and they that under color of (forged) antiquity,
oppugn the true antiquity (as some oppugned the most ancient true worship of
the true God, to maintain old Gentilisme, the worship of Idols:) he proceeds
to show the old enemy of mankind, seeing himself shut out of the gates, crept
in at the back^ore, into the Christian Church, and not being able to hinder the
sowing of good seed he secretly sowed Tares amongst it: as in our Europe (the
Western part of the world) the worship due to God alone, to be many ways
given to creatures; Ceremonies, (under whose burden the Church groaned in Saint
Augustines time,) wonderfully increased, drawing men from the substance of
Religion to place all their hope of salvation in observing them: from whence
grow the worship of sacred Relics beyond custom and due measure: the trust
in the aid of Saints, and the careful invocation of them: the worship and
adoration of Images, (which we see at this day increased) which nouelty, when
it was first brought in, set the East and West at jarres and wars, and drove
the Emperor out of Italy. Thence came also new idle worships devised by man's
brain, and new rites of new superstition: and the better to keep the world
from mistrusting or misliking such Innouations the holy Scriptures were (by the
incredible fraud of Satan) withheld not only from the Laity, but from the
greatest part of the Clergy.

And to top up all these evils was introduced a terrible domination of one man.
The seat of Rome, which before thought it sufficient to be accounted the first
among the Patriarchs seats; now would be the Lady and Mistress of the whole
Church. And when her Bishop had lifted up her power in spiritual things to the
highest top: not content with that height, set his heart also to bring all
temporal power under him: and would never be quiet, till he saw himself
lifted above Emperors, Kings and princes, and looked upon them as persons
far beneath him, upon whom he might tread with his feet, as often as he list,
or judged expedient for his affairs. Thus the light of the Gospel was turned
into darkness; the golden simplicity of true piety into innumerable
superstitions; Christian liberty into horrible servitude; the Rights of the
Church, together with the Crowns of Emperors and Kings made subject to that
Monarchs Miter, who challenged to himself alone the power to give and take
away Empires and Kingdoms. Which he practiced by bringing in all kind of
calamities, wars and vexations; wherewith Europe was so often and mightily
shaken wh le the truth lay hid, every where neglected, and deeply overwhelmed,
drowned and buried.

Thus Gasaubon of the former times: III.
Then he proceeds to the times of Reformation. The great blessings of the
Reformation of Religion.
After a long suffering (says he) of unspeakable evils: after long sighings
and gronings of Emperors, Princes, Clergy, and Laity: after much expectation
of many Ages for reformation in the head and members, often promised, never
performed: At last there were some found, which brake the patience; and showed
themselves leaders to them that sought the truth from their hearts. What they
were, or what infirmities they had, it mattereth not to argue. (Malice never
speaks well of the best and most innocent.) This is certain by the very
event, that they (as men stirred up by God) awaked and rowzed up the world to
look into the corruptions of Christian Religion (which long-time had brought
in) and to think of the grieuances and complaints, which both Princes and
people throughout Europe had showed.

And if then the Bishop of Rome had carried the mind to suffer himself to be
overcome with the entreaties and prayers publ^ke or private of the Emperors,
Kings, Princes, and Nations, and of the whole Church: their hopes should not
have been so often deluded, who sought and promised to themselves at least
some tolerable reformation from him: neither should there have been such a
Rent among the Churches of Europe, when every Nation (seeing Rome would do
nothing) was constrained to look to it self, and make, if not a perfect
reformation yet as good as it could: and as near to the Word of God, and the
custom of the Primitive Church, as time and means would afford. For, if it be
objected, that the intended Reformation is not perfect, as appears by the
differences of some Reformed Churches: yet surely first the Reformers minds
were good, who with all their hearts and endeavors sought it: and secondly, the
conjunction of all Nations, Wits, Learning, and other means, by a free
general Council (which might overrule the Pope, and all other particulars)
was only hindered by the Pope and his Faction. But 3 surely, the Reformation
was most laudable and necessary, if it had effected no more but this (as one of
them wrote in answer to Cardinalll Sadolet) that they freed themselves from
the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome; and had constituted in their Countries
somewhat better form of the Church, which before was most intolerable both to
Princes, and People. Such a Reformation as many former Ages had with grievous
sighs and groans, wished and desired, hungered and thirsted after: but all in
vain, because the truth in Europe had not yet shined out of darkness; of
which our Savior had said, ye shall know the truth, Ioh. 8.32
and the truth shall set you free -- Therefore 1 Our late Princes, 2 all the
orders of the Kingdom, and 3 all the people, have seen and felt the goodness
of God, and are, bound to be most thankful to him (except they be of all men
the most insensible and ungrateful) for their great blessing following the
Reformation of Religion in England. 1 The Princes, that they reign now in
their Precario, at the pleasure of another, as Bayliffes of another man's
inheritance: that they and their Reverend Clergy are at unity, neither fearing
excommunications nor depositions from other: that they divide the care of
placing Ministers with their Bishops, challenging to themselves without fear
that part which is due to them and concerns the temporalls; and leaving that
part of the care to the Bishops, which touches spirituals: and all things
which prove them to be true Kings. For this blessing, Kings are behoulden to
Gods truth, which is a friend to them, which establishes them, and is with all
care and diligence by them to be established.

Alas for those former times, Inas. See Polydor. hist. Angl. lib. 5. page 86.
wherein amongst our Kings glorious Ancestors, one led away with blind
superstition, having zeal, but not according to knowledge, did of his own
accord when no necessity compelled him, make his Kingdom tributary to Gregory
the third, King John.
Bishop of Rome. Another brought into desperation by adverse crosses, yielded
up his Kingdom of England and Ireland to Pope Innocent 3. By whom he had been
miserably embroyled, and was compelled to be content to be the Popes steward or
Baily. O horrid blindness of those times! O sucessors of Peter, egregiously
resembling Peter in their doings! O what a grief surprised not only the
Barons, Nobles, and all subjects of the Realm, but also the Kings and Princes
throughout Europe, as every one was more wise and better then other, to see the
fall so heavy, so foul, of so great a Prince! The speeches which some of them
uttered at the news of so inhumane example, are committed to writing for
perpetual memory, as witnesses also of their most just both indignation and
amazement. Yea the speech of that unfortunate King is extant in the writers of
those times, most worthy to be deeply settled in all Princes hearts: After that
I was reconciled to God (says he) and subjected my self and my Kingdoms
(alas for sorrow) to the Roman Church nothing came to me prosperous. But al
things contrary. Post qua^, ut dixi, Deo reconciliatus, me ac mea regna, proh
dolor; Romana subjeci ecclesiae, nulla mihi prospera, sed contraria omnia
aduenerunt.

England live happily. The Bishops elect need not run beyond the Alps to buy
their confirmation of the Pope for great sums of money; nor purchase their
Palles with the weight of gold; nor run to Rome every 3 years, or as often as
the Pope list, that is, as often as he thirsts after English coin. Now they
have no such care, as in times past the Bishops of England had, to take up the
best benefices for Italians [In which benefices (as Mathy Paris says) neither
laws nor order were kept, nor relief for the poor, nor hospitality, nor
preaching of Gods word, nor necessary ornaments or repair of Churches, nor care
of souls, nor divine or devout prayers, as was fit, and as was accustomed in
the country: but in their buildings the walls and roofes fell down, or were
pitifully rent and torne]

Now the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury fears not new Bulls from the Pope to
suspend him from collating any benefices until 300 Romans be provided for, by
benefices next falling void: as it fell out anno 1239 to Edmund the Archbishop
by Bulls sent from Gregory 9. The Pope having promised it to the Roman citizens,
who at that time little favored him.

3 The Ecclesiastical controversies arising in England, by a very ancient
Canon (whereof S. Cyprian also makes England: The collectors of Peter pence,
and other contributions, the Roman visitors, proctors, and farmers, the
Merchants of Indulgences or pardons to men according to their wealth, the
dispencers of vows, and Institors, of legitimation to make men capable of
orders; the Caursine Usurers, that lived at Rome, but drew thither all the
wealth of England, (lending to English Nobles and others upon morgage of their
lands or other extreme vsuries, money to satisfy the Pope and his Harpies): The
bringers of Bulls for new extortions. The witty Mice-catchers ( Muscipulatores
as the Story calls them) such as Petrus Rubeus and many others, conning
Artificers to drain money from men for the Pope: and six hundred such like
greedy and grievous Arts; by the unutterable benefit of the truth of Religion,
their names are now scarce heard of, and should be utterly unknown, were it
not for the monuments and histories of former ages,

Neither does now any Legate a latere, any messenger from the Popes side,
exercise any Rauin for money in England, as many did heretofore, and some with
execrable hunger of gold, as we read of one of them. Otto, sent by Gregory 9,
who after three years raking together of money, by most detestable Arts, at
last departing hence, left not so much money in the whole Kingdom, as he
either carried with him, or sent to Rome before him. And yet these evils are
small in comparison of others which Englishmen have felt continually for many
Ages from the Court of Rome, as the Historians of those times, with full
consent record. Vere enim hortus deliciarum Papis fuit tum Anglia, and puteus
inexhaustus; As we read it was truly and tr^mly said by Pope Jnnocent 4.
England was a Garden of deliciousness to the Popes, and a fountain inexhaust
or vndrainable.

I speak not now of the true blessings of the soul, for which all men may
thank the Reformation of Religion, which pious Princes make more account of,
then of all the Kingdoms of the earth. The sincere worship of God alone,
without fellows or copartners; The veneration of the B. Virgin, and holy
Saints, without superstition: The peace of conscience with God, by faith in the
merits and death of Christ: not that the faithful should cease from good
works: (fie! away with such madness,) but that when a man has doneall he can
do, yet to acknowledge himself an unprofitable servant, and never place
confidence in his own merits: to gather exceeding great comfort in the daily
and continual reading and meditating of the Scriptures; not interpreting them
after his own sense, but in those things which he finds in them perspicuous and
plain, (for in such sort they afford us, if we believe the Fathers, all things
necessary to salvation) and such as are agreeable to the expositions of the
first Doctors of the Church, he may sortisie his mind against false opinions,
which at this day are obtruded upon the unwary for ancient articles of faith:
The receiving of the holy Communion, according to the institution and
commandment of our Lord, and the continual practice of the Chuch for more
then a thousand years, under both kinde^: Minds confirmed against those
thunders of Excommunication, so terrible in former times; which the Popes cast
abroad oftentimes against innocent Princes, and rather for humane causes then
Divine, as every man knows. As when Innocent 3 kept all the people of this
Land, under a curse most deadly and damnable (as the Popes would have men
believe, and then it was so believed) whole six years, three months, and
fourteen days. In which time all that dyed in the Land, were deprived of
burial, and judged to be damned creatures, all newborn remained unbaptized,
prayers and teaching ceased in all Churches and men lived like Infidels. In so
large a land, so plentiful of people, to continue this curse but for one day
upon so many thousands of Innocents, had been doubtless a most wicked and
damnable thing. But from all these evils, and many other, the blessed
Reformation of that formerly corrupted Religion, has redeemed us. Such things
writes the learned and judicious Casaubon.

And as the Reformation delivered us from many evils, so it has filled us with
many blessings, which we daily feel in full measure, but are not able in any
sufficient measure to express. Take a short view of our blessings enjoyed
under our late Princes. Cambden Annals Elizabethae, initio, and B. Carltons
Thankful Remembrance, initio.
Queen Elizabeth entering her reign, anno 1558, found at first many potent
enemies, few and impotent friends. Philip King of Spain, (who sued to marry
her by a dispensation from the Pope, having buried Mary her sister, his former
wife) now being refused by her, turned his love into hatred. Henry 2, King of
France, with whom she sought peace and amity, brake out into open hostility.
His son Francis having married Mary the Queen of Scotland, professed his
Wife to be the heir of England, assumed the Arms and Title thereof, and
sought to displace Elizabeth, as one also accounted an Heretic. So were the
great neighbour-States of Spain, France and Scotland, her professed enemies.
Her Friends that would have h^^ped her, were weak, and could not, but stood in
need of help from her. The Scots sore troubled with the French Armies procured
by the Guisians: The Low Countries beaten down by the Duke of Alva, Agent for
the King of Spain: The Protestants of Denmark and France, were feign to crave
aid from Her, as also other friends did. The State at home was much troubled;
the treasure exhausted, and oppressed with great debt, contracted by King
Henry's boundless expenses, King Edwards minority, and Queen Mary's foreign
marriage and other troubles: the land without strength, forces, soldiers,
artillery, powder, and treasure: Calis lately lost, and nothing seemed lef^ but
a weak and poor State, destitute of means and friends. So that her great
near Neighbors round about her, made no other account of her, but as one left
to be a prey to the strongest that would invade her. Yet see the mighty hand
and blessing of God upon her, not only to deliver her out of all these
difficulties; but further to enable her to support her friends, and to match
and master her enemies. When she provided Armor at Antwerpe, and King Philip
caused it to be stayed; yet she partly procured Armor and Weapons out of
Germany, but principally God opened new Brass Mines in England, (which had
been long before neglected) sufficient for us, and to vent into other
Countries: and yielded us then first the stone called Lapis calaminaris,
needful for working in Brass. By means whereof, She caused store of Gunnes
to be cast of Brass and Iron at home: and Gunpowder also then first to be made
in England, which before was bought from other Countries.

Camden ibid. page 27.
And further, By the happy abolishing of the Popes Religion, as England became
the most free of all other Countries in the world, the Scepter being (as it
were) manumitted from the former servitude of the Bishop of Rome, so it became
also more rich then in former Ages: a great mass of money being kept at home,
which formerly was exhausted, and yearly and daily carried to Rome, for first
fruits, Indulgences, appeals, dispensations, Palles, and such other things.
Strengthened therefore by all these blessings, She fortified Barwicke against
Scotland; and provided a great Navy to safeguard the Seacoasts. And whereas
former Kings hired ships from foreign places, (Hamburg, Lubecke, Dantiske,
Genua, Venice, etc.) Now She built great store of ships of War Herself; and
all Coast-townes with incredible alacrity, wondering at her wisdom and care of
them, did the like. So that in short time England was able to employ twenty
thousand men in Sea Fight at once. And her enemies began to fear her, more
then she did them. And such was her power and policy, See Speedes Chronicle in
Elizabeth 347. and seq.
and Gods extraordinary blessings upon them, that the great affairs of Europe
mainly depended upon Her directions. She sitting at the helm of the ship, (as
Fronto spoke of Antonius the Emperor) arbitrated and guided their estates both
in peace and war. Spain seeking to ouerflow all, was beaten back, and
scarcely able to maintain her own Barks: In France, the house of Valoys
underpropped by Her counsel; that of Bourbons advanced by her countenance,
forces and treasure; Scotland relieved by her love, Netherlands by her power,
Portugals King by Her bounty; Poland by her commiseration; likewise Germany,
Denmark, Sweueland, often took up and laid down Arms at her beck and
dispose. The great Emperor of the Turks, in honor of so great a Mediatresse,
granted peace unto the Polonians, outworne with wars. Her Kingdom was a
receptacle, and her Court a Sanctuary for the banished Protestants, as was the
Palace of Constantius (the Husband of our Helena) for the persecuted
Christians, when he sat Emperor of the West, in this Island of Britain.
Whereby, as in her lifetime, she attained to be styled by foreign Churches;
so at Her death was she by them generally lamented, as the Nursing Mother of
the French, Beza in ep. prafiu. Comment. in Job.
Dutch, Italian, Exiles for Christ's Name, and the unconquered Defendresse of
the whole Christian Religion.

Thus our Land became as Gods Paradise, his Eden, his blessed Garden,
replenished with all necessaries both for sufficiency and delight. Above all,
the Tree of Knowledge, and the Tree of Life, are planted plentifully in it; and
all men permitted, persuaded, commanded to seed on them, the Knowledge of God,
and the Bread of Life: and all other blessings consequent and appendant unto
them. Whereof our feeling and experience out-strippeth all possible words and
discourses. I will therefore shut up all with the Royal testimony of our late
most Learned and Judicious King James. King James to the Reader of his
^asilicon Doron. toward the end.


First, of Queen Elizabeth he writes thus: She has so long, with so great
wisdom and felicity governed her Kingdoms, as I must in true sincerity
confess, the like has not been read or heard of, either in our time, or
since the days of the Roman Emperor Augustus. And he caused this Epitaph to
be set upon her Tomb. Speeds Chron. quo supra.


Sacred unto memory. Religion to its Primitive sincerity, restored: Peace
thoroughly settled: France near ruin by intestine mischiefs, relieved:
Netherland supported: Spaines Armado vanquished: Ireland with Spaniards
expulsion, and Traitors coertion, quieted: both Universities revenues by a Law
of provision excellently augmented, finally all England enriched; and 45 years
most prudently governed; Elizabeth, a Queen, a Conqueresse, a Triumpher, the
most devoted to Piety, the most Happy, after 70 years of Her life, quietly by
death departing, has left here (in this most famous Collegiat Church, which by
her was established, and refounded) these Remains of her mortality, until at
Christ's call, they shall again rise Immortal. She dyed 24 March, 160^. of her
Reign 45, of her Age 70.

Secondly of himself, his own times, and Kingdoms, he writes thus:

One thing is necessary, King James in his answer to the Oration of Cardinal
Perene. page 243.
namely the fear and knowledge of my God: unto whose Majesty alone I have
devoted my scepter, my sword, my pen, my whole industry, my whole self, with
all that is mine, in whole and in part. I do it, I do it in all humble
acknowledgement of his unspeakable mercy and savor, who has vouchsafed to
deliver me from the erroneous way of this age, to deliver my Kingdom from the
Popes tirannicall yoke, under which it has Fen in times past most grievously
oppressed. My Kingdom, where God is now purely served, and called upon in a
tongue which all the vulgar understand. My Kingdom, where the People may now
read the Scriptures, without any special privilege from the Apostolic sea,
and with no less liberty then the people of Ephesus, of Rome, and of Corinth
did read the holy Epistles written to their Churches by Saint Paul. My
Kingdom, where the people now pay no longer any tribute by the poll for Papal
indulgences, as they did about an hundred years past; and are no longer
compelled to the Mart, for pardons beyond the Seas and mountains: but have
them now freely offered from God by the Doctrine of the Gospel preached at
home, within their own several parishes and Jurisdictions.

And in another place he says thus: Ibid. page 274.
Greater blessings of God, greater outward peace and plenty, greater inward
peace, with spiritual and celestial pleasures were never heaped upon my Great
Britain, then have been since my Great Britain became great in the greatest
and chiefest respect of all; to wit, since my Great Britain has shaken of the
Popes yoke; since she has refused to receive and to entertain the Popes
Legates, employed to collect Saint Peter's tribute, or Peter pence; since the
Kings of England, my Great Britain, have not been the Popes Vassals, to do
him Homage for their Crown, and have no more felt the lashings, the scourgings,
of base, and beggarly Monks.

Of Holland, Zeland, and Friesland, what need I speak? Yet a word and no more.
Were they not a kind of naked and bare people, of small value, before God
lighted the torch of the Gospel, and advanced it in those Nations? were they
not an ill-fed and scragged people, in comparison of the inestimable wealth and
prosperity (both in all military actions, and mechanical trades, in traffic
as Merchants, in marting as men of war, in long navigations for discovery) to
which they are now raised and mounted by the merciful ble^^ing of God, since
the darkness of Popery has been scattered, and the bright Sunshine of the
Gospel has shined in those Countries? Behold the Venetian Republik: has she
now less beauty, less glory, less peace and prosperity, since she has
lately fell to bicker and contend with the Pope? since she has wrung out of
the Popes hand the one of his two swords? since she has plumed and shaken his
temporal dominion?

Upon these considerations, I. Of the excellency of the first primitive
Christian Religion: II. Of the intolerable evils which the corruptions of Rome
brought into the world, with the groans and cries of men for Reformation: and
III. of the great blessings which the Reformation has brought upon the
countries which received it; Me thinks there should need no further
persuasion to men of any reasonable understanding and Judgment, to forsake the
vncatholike corruptions of the Romish Church, and embrace this so blessed a
Reformation, with all due thankfulness to God, for the true doctrine of
Salvation, and peace of Conscience, with the desired peace of their estates,
love of Prince and Country, wealth, joy, and happiness, and all both earthly
and heavenly blessings, that man's heart in this world can desire.

O fortunates nimium, bona si sua norint Angligenas! O happy English, if they
knew their happiness.

But if they will not open their eyes to see, nor their hearts thankfully to
embrace the happiness so graciously offered unto them: if they will still
blind their eyes, harden their obstinate hearts, and strive against all reason
and Religion to return back into the Egyptian darkness and bondage: alas,
what can I do? but with grief of heart say with the Prophet Jeremy, Jeremy
2.12, 13.
Be astonished, O ye heavens at this: My people have committed two evils,
they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed themselves out
Cesternes, broken Cesternes that can hold no water! Or with the Poet Horace,
Eia, Nolint, at qui licet esse beatis. They may, Horace Sermon. lib. 1. Satyra. 1.
but will not be happy. For, be a man never so happy, Non est beatus, esse se
qui non putat He is not happy that thinks himself not so. And then (as Horace
adds) Miseros iubeo esse libenter. I can but bid them wilfully be wretched.
But in hope of better success, I have undertaken this great labor; which I
beseech our gracious God to bless, to the good of every Reader; whose good
acceptance of my love and pains, I crave, with their prayers to God for me.
Glory be to God on high, on earth Peace, and good will amongst men. Luke 2.14.

FINIS.

