THE DVTCH SVRVAY.

Wherein are related and truly discoursed, the chiefest losses and
acquirements, which have past between the Dutch and the Spaniards, in these
last four years Wars of the Netherlands, with a comparatiue ballancing and
estimation of that which the Spaniards have got in the Dutchies of Cleeue and
Iuliers, with that which they have lost unto the Dutch and Persians, in
Brasilia, Lima, and Ormus.

Whereunto are annexed the Mansfeldian motives, directed unto all Colonels,
Lieutenant-Colonels, Sergeant Majors, private Captains, inferior Officers,
and Soldiers, whose service is engaged in this present expedition, under the
conduct and command of the most illustrious Prince ERNESTVS, Earl of
Mansfield.

AT LONDON Printed by Edward All-de, for NATHANIEL BVTTER.

1625.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS Lord Cromwell, Baron of Oukeham in
Rutland-shire, Vicount Lecall in the Kingdom of Ireland, and one of his
Majesty's Honorable Privy Council in that Kingdom: and Colonel of a
Regiment of Foot under the most illustrious Prince ERNESTVS Earl of
Mansfield, W. C. wishes that happiness which he himself desires.
RIght Honorable, I made bold to consecrate unto your most judicious censure,
this Dutch Suruay or balance, which if it prove weight in the Balance of your
estimation, and appear in the trial as free from error as it is from
partiality, the Author shall think his endeavors fortunate. The motives which
invited me to this Dedication, were first of all your known zeal to equity
and religion; for the sacred privileges whereof, the Netherlanders have fought
most resolutely for many years together to the wonder of their friends, to the
terror and astonishment of their mortal Enemies: So that if we shall admire
the greatness of the Heluetian Cantons raised out of the ruins of the house of
Austria, or the fortune of the Venetian Commonwealth, erected out of the
Relics of the Roman Empire declining in Italy, we may justly wonder at the
swelling power of this Estate, ordained by God in this latter age, to check
the greatness of Castile, whose severe and rigorous dealing made them first to
quit the yoke, and vindicate their liberty from Philips tyranny and
oppression. The next motive which imboldned me to this attempt, was your
gracious promise made unto me by the mediation of a noble Gentleman, for
farthering me with a place according to my calling, in this new intended
journey: which if I may enjoy under your Honors favor and command, I hope
that God will so assist me with his grace, that the bent of my mean endeavors
shall wholly tend to the service of God, my Country, and your Honored self.
Unto this discourse is added, besides a brief encouragement unto those, who
are designed for undertakers in this expedition under Count Mansfield; the
which I do not, because I think their resolutions to need the spur, for
ours commonly are so forward, that they need the bridle, but that those
spirits who are either ignorant or jealous of the motives, may rectif^e their
minds by the knowledge and consideration of them. Thus desiring your Honors
favorable acceptance, I leave and rest,

Your most obliged Servant. VV. C.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, thou may behold in this discourse a true Suruay of those more
remarkable losses and acquirements which have past between the Dutch and the
Spaniards, since the expiration of the last truce, which ended with the
beginning of the year 1621. Thou may behold also a true counterpoise or
comparatiue ballancing of the same, wherein it does most plainly appear, that
the Dutch have not only not been loosers in these latter and time nearer
wars of the Netherlands, but for diverse aduantageous respects, have been
victorious against their potent and most redoubted Enemies, who under the
colorable pretense of the Burgonian Title, sought to infringe the liberties of
these Countries, contrary to the ancient customs, freedoms, and privileges
of the same. To this relation is annexed a brief encouragement unto all those,
who either as voluntaries or by way of Impressed, are engage in this expedition
of Count Mansfield. In the censure of both these, let thy judgment be mild
and favorable, and not according to the common Current of the disaffected and
Spaniolized English, whose reports are so far from truth and equity in these
and other traditions, that they wholly incline to partiality and detraction: For
my part I know the candor and integrity of my own thoughts, and how free
they are from any bending inclination or report, being unwilling that any
known truth, though it were in giving the Devil his due, should be wronged by
any fabulous or counterfeit adumbrations. The conscience of this, arms me
against the danger of their malicious aiaculations, and makes me hopeful of
the impartial Readers best construction, which if I may obtain, I shall for
ever rest happy for this their good estimation.

THE DVTCH SVRVAY.
THat Historical faith which proceeds from the irradiation of report, as it
is oftentimes grounded upon the Marble foundation of truth: so is it many times
built upon the sandy base of misprision, error and conjecture: and this does
happen either through the malignity of our own will, which does facilitate the
belief of those things, which we with willing affectation do desire, for qua
volumus facile credimus, or through the vanity of false Intelligence, which
makes us conceive Chimaraes for Idaeas, falsehoods for truths, doubtful
probabilities for manifest and assured demonstrations. A conclusion not only
true in all Histories whatsoever, either ancient or modern, whereas the Ear
but not the Eye gives information, but most especially verifiable in the
present subject of this relation and discourse: for although within the
revolution of these last six years, the sword has been put into the Papal
hand, and by their powerful instruments of Spain and Austria, Bohemia has
been repossest, and contrary to the cucustomes and privileges of the same, of
an elective Kingdom, has bin mad absolute and successiue, although the Paltz
by the politic air of their verbal treaties and illusions, has not only
been taken, but most injuriously kept away from Frederick, the most worthy and
undoubted Palatine thereof; and though the Valtoline besides, has been
spoiled, and despoiled from the Grisons, a people free, and so acknowledged
from the prescription of antiquity: yet let the Spaniolized English say what
they will, and let their rumor blaze what it can to the contrary: the
Spaniards have not only not been victorious, but have suffered many and most
remarkable losses by the Dutch, in these latter and time-neerer Wars of the
Netherlands. In the dilucidation whereof I mean not to instance in the loss
of men, money, munition, and shipping, which like our hair grow out again
upon every new reinforcement and supply, but in those damages, which are most
solid and substantial, as the loss of Towns, Cities, Lands, and Territories,
which like an arm or leg cut off, sildome or never grow out again, to the
use and interest of their first possessors, especially they being seized by the
Dutch or Spaniards, whose talents are of a strong retentiue power, and who know
to keep that, which they have once gotten and acquired, as well as any Nations
in Christendom whatsoever: so that if we shall comparatively balance the
Spanish Acquisitions in the Dutchies of Iuliers and Cleaueland, with their
bleeding detriments, sustained in Brasilia, Lima, and Ormus: we shall see the
former to be exceeded by the latter, beyond the parallel and degrees of all
comparison. For the better light and manifestation whereof, we must understand
thus much, that those parcels which Philip the 4. now holds in Cleeue and
Iuliers, were not plumes aunciently belonging to that new spread Eagles back
of Spain, but fastened on like Icarus wings, upon the halfe-naked skin of that
Austrian Pullet now grown bigger, then the Dam it self, by the sticking wax
of Philip the seconds policies and pretenses.

By these means following your Philippick proiects upon these now and new
inthralled Seigneuries, were brought and wrought almost to the full period, and
non datur vltra of his desires. William the last, Duke of Cleaues, of that name
who deceased at Duisseldorp, in the year of our Lord God 1592. married his
son John William unto Iaqueline, the daughter of the Marquess of Baden, a
woman infamously famous for her dissolute and licentious life; and the censure
of her imprisonment for the same, for bringing in of the Spaniards unto those
Countries, and for making of your Cleuian simplicity, first acquainted with the
snaffle of the Castilian rule and government. But these, both the Father and
the Son dying without heirs male, the inheritance descended to two pretended
heirs female. The one married unto the Marquis of Brandenburge, a reformed
Protestant, the other married unto the Prince of Newenburge, a Roman
Catholic. Both these fight for the bone, whilst a third and fourth take away
the flesh: for notwithstanding diverse admonitions and cautions to the contrary
from some of their fastest friends, who were jealous of their good, and
studious of the common peace and tranquillity of their dominions; The
Newenburger strengthens himself with Partisans of the same faction and
religion, and draws unto his succors: the King of Spain, the Emperor of
Germany, with other Austrian Princes and Potentates. The Brandeburger uses a
draught of the same policy, and inuites the States of the Low Countries, the
Kings of England and France unto his succor and assistance. An experience
which shall prove hurtful both to the one and to the other, as the sequel
shall declare: for the Spaniards having seized upon Weezell, Rhinebercke,
Duisseldorpe, and other places of the Duchy, keep them upon pretense of
their charges, and assurance of their Frontier. The Dutch having surprised
Rees, Embricke, Cleeue, Goffe, and Gulicke, man these Towns with their own
Garrisons, upon the consideration of the same and other pretenses.

Gulicke was a thorn in Albertus foot, and an eyesore in the Castilians
light. Vanderbercke must pluck this out, being General of the Spanish Forces
in their Cleuian expedition, which began under his command in the midst of
August 1622. That year being the next after the expiration of the truce, the
Enemies were very strong, as having three Armies in the field, one in Flaunders
besieging Sluice, under the command of Inigo de Borges, and the Bishop of
Gaunt, another houering about Goffe and Zantom, commanded by the Marquis
Spinola, which attended the motions of our Nassauian Army, lying then as in
our durtie Quarters of Dornicke, and this third which beleguerd Gulicke, under
the conduct of the Earl of Monts, commonly called Henry Vanderberke. This
City is the Metropolis of the Duchy of Iuliers, unto which it gives his name
seated upon the River of Roer, in a fruitful Cuntry, which stretches from
thence unto the banks of the Dent. It was well fortified and defended, for
besides the old fortifications which were found at the first reducement of
this place, there were new Rauelins and half Moons made by the directions of
the Prince of Orange, and for their defense there lay fourteen Companies of
foot, English, Dutch and French within the walls, under their Governor
Signieur Pethan, besides Thomas Villers troop of Horse, which was reputed to
be one of the brauest in all the Netherlands. But although it were well manned,
and strongly fortified, yet for want of victuals it must yield to the power of
the Conqueror: for the provision and store of the Magazine growing tainted, by
Commission from the States Pithan, makes sale of it, unto those Merchants that
would give most for it. Spinola understanding of this by the Nuntioes of his
intelligence, before it could be re-victualed by the States, sends Henry Vander
Bark to besiege it with an Army of sixteen thousand men, both Horse and
Foot, consisting of diverse Nations, as Italians, Spaniards, French, and
Almaines. Upon their first approches, and before all the aduenues and passages
were blockt up, some of the Captains, amongst whom Captain Haydon, and
Captain Aishley, were most forward, presented their service unto the
Governor, and offered him upon his leave to victual the Town abundantly
from the provisions of the Country: the season of the year serving fitly for
it, it being as then about the beginning of Harvest, The counsel was good and
wholesome, and might have wrought the preservation of Gulick, if it had been
apprehended and executed in time. But Pethan obliging himself too strictly to
his Commission, rejects the proffer, pretending that he durst not do it as
having no Warrant for this Design. In the mean time Count Henricke well
husbanding this occasion, sits down before the Town, Intrencheth himself
strongly, and draws his approches close to our utter Works, for the better
planting of his Cannon. Thus Pethan sees his error, and too late seeks to
redress the same. Then he resolves upon a sally which might have wrought
some good effect, if it had been sooner enterprized. In this conflict our men
surpised and slighted one of the Enemies Fortifications, charged them home to
their teeth, and having got some proportion of spoils and victuals, made their
retreat good unto the Ports, with the loss only of Captain Bassenheime, and
six and thirty of their Horsemen: amongst the rest young Captain Haydons
valor was most remarkable; he was Captain of a Foot Company, yet upon that
day he served on Horseback. One of the Enemies aduauncing himself before the
gross of their troops, dares any of our side proudly to the Combat. Haydon
accepts it, and charging him with his Pistol, killed the Challenger upon the
place, and after that being recharg'd by a second, he falls back to the body
of our Troops in safety. The fortune of this skirmish did but tie the squib to
the Bulls tail, increasing our appetite and their anger. Upon this they batter
our Rampires furiously with the Cannon, and salute the defendants with often
vollies of their Musket shot. Our men answer them with Balls of the same
metal. Amongst the midst of these Reuolets, passing with a doubtful success
of fortune between the besiegers and the besieged, there chanced a casual
fire to be kindled in the Spanish Quarters. Our Fire-men plye this place with
their Shot both great and small, and work some remarkable damage upon the
Enemies. But these exploites could not alay the biting smart of our hunger,
which now began to rage and reign in every Quarter: For the Town Provisions
being spent, and the Magazins wasted, things unusual, and unaccustomed to the
palate, were devoured; as Dogs, Cats and the like. This inforcement caused
Pethan to demand a Parlee about the midst of January: notwithstanding his
first promise to Vander Berke, that he would not hearken to the motion of that
accord till Easter.

For this purpose three Captains were sent out of the Ports unto their Camp,
the one an English man, the other two French and Dutch. After some
difficulties, the agreement was consummated upon these conditions following.

First, that the Spaniards should not bring the Inquisition into the Duchy of
Iuliers* nor make any alteration in matters of Religion.

2. That the Captains and Soldiers should depart upon honorable terms, with
their Arms fixed, Colors flying, Drums beating, and their Wives, Children and
Goods.

3. That their Ordnance and Munition should remain in the Town.

4. That their Armourers, Smithes, and Gunners, might have liberty freely to
depart with the Soldiers.

5. That the Governor and Captains might have Horse and Wagons, with a
sufficient conuoy to conduct them to Nimeghen, and that their sick and wounded
might stay until they were recovered, and then to have Wagons to conduct them
to the same place.

6. That the Captains and Soldiers should have a whole years liberty, to
sell their lands if they had any.

7. That the Captains and Soldiers which were in any other place of the
Duchy, should have leave to come thither, and bring their Wives and Children.

8. That the Arms and Commodities belonging to the Town and Castle, should be
left behind.

9. That all Records and ancient Writings in the Town and Castle, should
remain there still.

10. That the Soldiers should not be arrested for debt.

11. That the beds which the Soldiers had brought into the Town, should be
restored to their owners.

12. That the Electour of Brandeburghs Officers and Ministers should execute
their Offices for the space of one whole year then next ensuing.

13. That the Citizens might depart the City, and dispose of their goods
within one year.

14. That there should be two Hostages given on either side, until the
Articles were performed, all which being signed and sealed by the Governor,
he should send a Copy of it to the Prince of Orange, and be bound to yield
the place, if they were not relieved within 12. days, with 300. Wagons at the
least: which time being expired, and no relief coming from Dornicke or
elsewhere. Vanderberke sent 600. Wagons to transport their baggage, wishing
the Governor to hasten his departure: who sending the keys unto the Earl,
departed with all his Goods and Soldiers, leaving two Hostages behind, until
the Wagons were returned.

Pethan upon his coming to the Hague, was arrested by order from the States,
and the Prince of Orange was confined as prisoner to his own house, having a
Guard of Musketeers set over him, and his dignities which he enjoyed in that
Commonwealth, were suspended for a time, until he should clear himself, and
give a just account of his actions.

Thus you see the loss of Gulicke conquered some fifteen years before, by
the valor of the States forces, jointly with the succors of four thousand
English, under the command of that noble and well experienced commander
General Cecill; and now re-conquered by the Spaniards, more by the power of
hunger, then the powerfulnes of their Arms: which loss came not solitary and
alone, but was aggrauated with the society of another, though of less
consequence and importance: and this was the surprise of Lulstorff,
Blankenburge, and Monawe, small Garrisons held by Brandenburge, in the Duchy
of Iuliers, and the taking of Goffe, a little Town in Cleaueland, seated upon
the South side of the Rhine, almost opposite unto Rees, which makes the second
loss of Towns or Territories, sustained by the States, in these last Wars
of the Netherlands.

This place was of no great importance, only it made the Western parts of
Cleeue, pay some small Contribution to the Electour of Brandenburge. It was
meanly fortified, and but weakly manned; and therefore upon the Spinolians
first approches and summons, it yielded to the stronger, the Soldiers of the
Garrison departing upon conditions of honor. Afterward by directions from
their Counsel of War, they fortified it with a Rampire, Counterscarfe, and
some other outer Works, so that it is now become a piece of some reasonable
defense.

His Excellency the Prince of Orange carrying Argus eyes upon all your Spanish
proiects; before their Works were well settled, marched thither in the latter
end of Summer 1623. intending to take the Town by an Onslate. In his Army
there were my Lord of Essex, my Lord Wriotheslie, son to the Earl of
Southampton, with diverse other noble Volunteers from England, France, and
elsewhere. But he dealt with an Enemy, whose eyes were as good as his hands:
for they having notice of his coming, fore-layd the passage, and resolved
prevention to the utmost. The Prince viewing their Forces thus facing of our
Army, and lodged besides in a place of advantage: after a long Alto, wherein
he braued the foes, retired his Troops from the enterprise of Goffe, which
still groans under the yoke of the Castilian government and oppression.

The third loss which the States of the united Provinces have received, and
that since the taking of Gulick and Goffe, has been the surprisall of
Papenmuch, a strong Sconce, built by the Confederates in a certain Island of
the Rhine, between Coleine and Bonne, an Imperial Town, heretofore surprised
by Sir Martin Skencke, in the year 1587. The Spaniards knew what a bridle
Skenks Sconce (a Fort built upon that nooke of Land) where the Rhine deuideth
it self into two branches, making the Peniusula of Graven work, had been to
their projected designs upon Cleeue, Geldres, and Friseland, they could not
suffer a snaffle of the same metal, and making, in the mouth of the Bishop of
Colein, a creature of Spain, and wholly devoted to the house of Austria.
Besides, the possessing of it did concern them much, for the transportation of
their Forces from or into the lower circles of the Empire, and for victualing
of Rhineberke, Weezell, and other places, by the commodity of the River. These
motives incited Spinola to send thither an Army of sufficient strength and
number, for the conquest of this important Citadell. These troops were
commanded by the Prince of Chimay, and one Bree, Lieutenant General unto the
Prince of Newenburge. They raised small Forts, commonly called Redouts upon
every passage, drew their approches within a convenient distance, and brought
some Pieces of the greater size from Iuliers for the battery: and besides, they
built two small Ships of War, not drawing much water upon the Rhine, to this
intent that all the land passages being stopped, and the aduenues by water being
also shut up, time and hunger (two powerful instruments, much made use of by
the Fabian Generals of Spain) might work the conquest and deliverance of this
place. The event answered their expectation: for the Defendants being pressed
with this irresistable difficulty, surrendered up the Sconce about the latter
end of the year 1622. upon condition to depart with bag and baggage.

And thus you see a full suruay of those greater and more substantial losses,
which the States have suffered, since the expiration of the last twelve years
truce, from their ancient and sworn Enemies of Spain. The relation of their
victories follows, suparlatiue to their damages, both for the respect of
honor, and the weight of their importance: and these may be reduced unto two
heads, unto their victories acquired at Rishame and Ormus, Islands seated upon
the coast of Persia, and aunciently belonging to that Kingdom, or to their
Conquests in Brasilia and Peru, Provinces of the new world, discovered by
Americus, from whence it took his name, for the use of Ferdinand and Isabella,
their children, heirs, and successors. For although in the Conquest of the
foresaid Islands, the Dutch as well as our English, were but auxiliaries unto
the Persians, yet because they were pars magna laboris, they had I say a great
share in the labor and danger of this exploit, by way of reducement, and not
improperly, it may be fylde amongst the number of their atchiuements. This
Rishame or Rhisme is a small Island, distant from Ormus some four leagues, and
separated from thence by a small fret of the Sea, commonly called the sound of
Balsora. The Portingals had built a strong Castle in it, manned with three
hundred Christians, and five hundred Negroes, commanded by Rufero their
Governor. Our Fleet upon the 24. of January 162^, came within shot of the
Castle, and plied the Defendants with diverse peales of Ordinance, and by the
favor of our shipping and Cannon, gave means to the Persian, to land ten
thousand of his Soldiers. These Mohammedan Troops were commanded by one of
their Sultans, for so they call their Lords, a man of great valor and conduct,
as the sequel shall make good. Upon their first landing they play the
Terriers, put themselves into the earth, and bring their approches within a
near distance. Rufero terrified with this strait assignement, as being
environed both by land and water, and having no Element to help him, but the
all-common Air, and the fire of his Cannon, demands a parlee: to hinder
farther effusion of blood it was granted. But the conditions proposed were
dislikt by the Assailants: for the Portugal wholly aiming at the preservation
of Ormus, and sleighting that of Rhisme, because he saw no possibility to keep
it, offers presently to surrender the Castle, upon condition that his men, both
Spaniards and Blacks, might have free liberty to pass over unto Ormus. Any man
that had but Poliphemus eye, might see through the mist of this pretense. Our
Captains, Blight, Weddall, and Mr. Monnox, men much honored for this service,
were apprehensiue enough to conceive the advantage of this proposition.
Therefore they reject it, and fall to their battery again, so that waighing
nearer to the Castle, they bestow seven or eight hundred great Shot upon the
Curtin and Bulwarks. The Persians likewise from the land side, draw their
rolling trenches within a stones cast, and ply the Castellans with incessant
vollies of their small Shot, who answered them with the like, and flung diverse
Pots of Wilde-fire and Grenades into their Works, which did them much hurt.
The terror of this caused a second parlee; wherein Rufero offers to surrender
the place upon these cautions following, that he might depart to Ormus with his
Arms and Munition, and race the walls of the Castle down to the ground. This
second motion being rejected like as the former, we saluted them afresh with
the thunder of the same courtesy. But the Defendants seeing themselves thus
distressed on all sides, yield at the last upon these conditions.

That they should depart with bag and baggage, and all other things that they
had, their Arms, Munition, and Ordnance expected, and that the Soldiers, as
well Blackes as others, should be transported unto Muskat, a Town which the
Portingals hold upon the Arabian shore, only some of the Principals were to be
detayned aboard our Ships, and to be disposed of as occasion should require;
so the Castle of Rhisme was surrendered unto the Persians the 30. of January
1621. and all the Articles were performed on both sides, saving that the Sultan
caused some fourscore of the captive Negroes to be murdered, contrary to the
dignity and faith of his promise.

After the Conquest of Rhisme, the Christian Fleet set sail for Ormus, and
the Persian land forces wasted over in 200. Boats, made for that purpose. This
Island was made tributary to the Portugals anno 1606. who taking advantage of
the Persian troubles, and their neglect of maritine affairs, fortified
themselves strongly in this place, which they kept to their great profit and
honor above fourscore years, until after the death of Sebastian, and the
Conquest of Portugal, it was united together with the Terceraes, Ginnie,
Brasilia, and the East Indies, unto the Kingdom of Spain. Although it were
barren, and had little or no fresh water, yet was it reasonable well inhabited,
and paid for their customs yearly to the King, being a Mohammedan 140000.
Seraffs, with whom the Spaniards cried at the least half share. It is seated
in the Persian Gulf, opposite to Combrene, on the maine land of Persia, and in
respect of the commodious situation, it stands fitly for the traffic of
Arabia, Persia, and India. Of this Island the Arabians use to say.

Si terrarum orbis quaqua patet annulus esset,
Illius Ormusium gemma decusque foret.
Which we may English thus:

If the world a ring were, then the precious stone
Of that rich ring were Ormus I Will alone.
The present Sophie being sensible of this thorn, which so long had stuck in
his predecessors foot, resolves upon a remedy befitting the greatness of
his Design. And ever since his acquaintance with Sir Robert Sherlie, resolving
upon the conquest of this Island, now undertakes it with the auxiliarie Forces
of the Dutch and English, and that Land Army which subdued Rhisme, now
reinforced with new supplies from the Continent. The 10. of February 1621. the
Persians landed 3000. of their men, who marched straight unto the Town, which
being a place of no great defense, they took it, without any resistance at
all; The Portugals and the Moors retiring themselves into the Castle with
their goods and treasure. Upon this the Christian Fleet plies the Forte, and
the Enemies Frigates which lay under the Lee thereof with their Ordnance: and
the Mahometans Land their whole Army, plant their Batteries, and mount their
Cannon, which they had borrowed from the Christians. And that they might with
more expedition and facility, make themselves Masters of this piece: they
vndervndermined the wall at least ten foot right in, and placed forty
Barrels of Powder in the Mine, which being sprung upon Sunday, the 17. of the
same month, made a breach of some twentye foot broad at least. Presently upon
this, the Assailants present themselves bravely to the breach, and seeking to
gain their passage to the top of the ruins, are as resolutely repulsed by the
Defendants: Who salute them with Stones, Powderpots, Tarlin, and Musketshot;
and make good the breach from noone to night, against all comers;
notwithstanding the fury of the Artillery, and the continual vollies of
Musket bullets, which fell in as thick as hail amongst them. The Portugals
lost two Cullers displaid one after another, with some of their forwardest men,
and their Battlements and Barricadoes made of Cotton sackes, were much torn
and defaced with the fury of our Ordinance. The Persians lost not forty men
outright, but some three hundred or more were wounded and burnt, part of whom
afterward perished. The 20. day in the morning, there came out of the Castle
two aged men with a youth, and three or four Negroes attending them, who were
presently conveyed by Sea (to the intent that they might not view our works)
to the house of Dabul, whereas the Sultan attended by diverse Cushel Bassaes,
and his Guard of Arabians, went to meet, and treat with these Portugals. But
this taking no effect, they desired leave of him to go over to Combreane to
the Sophie, which was granted them. But when they came over, he would
condescend to nothing without the consent of the Christians. The Spanish
Delegates being thus dismissed, the Persians sink themselves in their Mines
again, and after they had made the vault capacious enough, they lodged 55.
Barrels of powder in it, and ram'd up the hole which gave entrance to this
Mine, with Timber, Stones, and Mortar. It took fire about six of the clock
early in the morning, being the 2. of April, and blew up most of the Western
Bulworke, with such violence and impetuositie, that the stones of this work
were blown at least six hundred paces from the place.

This mine was sprung contrary to the intentions of the Dutch and English in
the time of the parlee, and that by the directions of the Persian General, who
was blemished with treachery for doing of this act. For at that time there
were many Portugals walking upon the wall where the blow was given; four or
five of whom were blown up and slain.

The 14. of April the Persians blew up the 3. Mine, upon the east side of the
Castle, yet would they not as yet enter, because they were working of another
on the west side, which they sprung the 17. of the same month. The Mohammedan
soldiers upon this entered, and possessed themselves of the western Bulworke,
and seeking to force the Portugals Barricadoes, were by them repulst with great
slaughter. The Persian Sultan seeing his men retire, comes to the foot of the
breach, and with his sword in his hand ready drawn, makes them renew the
assault again: In which conflict, the valor of one Portugal was most
remarkable, who with his Sword and Buckler, fought upon the point of the
breach, and forceably repulst the assailants. But mark how Fortune proves a
Step-dame to his valor: He charging freely upon one of them with his Rapier,
thrust it into one of their wooden Bucklers and before he could free the point,
he was charged by three or four of the Persians, and cut in pieces by them.
Within two or three days after this assault, the Sophie passed ouet from
Combreane unto the Island of Ormus, where he showed that magnificence and
munificence (befitting one of Ismaels successors) unto the soldiers and
Officers of the Army.

The besiegded seeing no hope of succors, and that themselves were disabled in
their defenses, by Mines, Batteries, and Assaults, yielded the Castle upon
these conditions.

1 That they might depart with bag and baggage, without any arms, saving
their Swords and Rapiers.

2 That the sick and wounded should be left in the Town, and looked unto by
Chirurgions.

3 That as well these as those that were sound, should be conveyed unto Muskat,
a Mountain town of Arabia, by the Robert and Sherling, two English ships. Thus
this Castle and Island the 24. of April were yielded to the Sophie by the
auxiliary means of the Dutch and English, after it had been possessed by the
Portugals and Spaniards an hundred and eighty years.

The second loss which the Spaniards have suffered since these last wars of
the Netherlands, has been the taking of the town and part of Todos los
Sanctos, in Brasilia. This Country is limited on the South with Riedo la Plate
and Chile, on the North with Guiana, on the East with the Ocean, and on the
West with the Mountains of Peru, called the Audes, which deuideth the Country
of Ieru^aua, as the Apemine does Italy, and as Taurus and Caucasus do Asia.
The people which inhabit these steep and craggie Mountains, are more
barbarous then other Americans, as being taunie all over their bodies, going
altogether naked, and living without houses or bedding: Those of the valley are
more temperate and civil, as partaking the qualities and temperature of the
Climate: The Earth of the valleys, is fat, green, and always flourishing;
abounding with Sugar, Mace, and your Brasilian Wood, used in Europe for your
dying of reddes; the Trees whereof are of exceeding bigness, wherein Nature
proves the Architect, for diverse large families which dwell in the bodies and
branches of them. This land was first discoueted by Pedro Aluari Caprioli, at
the expenses of Emanuel King of Portugal, Anno 1500. afterward it was more
exactly suruayed by Americus Vespucius, next by Giouanni de Empoli a
Florentine, Anno 1503. Afterward by John Stadius a Dutchman, Anno. 1554. And
by the Edict of that Monster of Mankind (Pope Alexander the sixth) it was
appropriated to the Portugals; the rest of America being allotted to the
Castilians.

The chiefest Cities of this Province are,

1 Fernambuco.

2 Ascensio.

3 Todos los Sanstos, otherwise called St. Saluador. This town stands upon a
Bay of the same name, unto which the River of Real discharges it self, and
has Fernambuco an hundred miles to the northward, and it lies from the
Equinoctial fifteen degrees to the southward. It was reasonable strong, and
thought by the Portugals (who are generally ouer-weening in their own
conceits, both of themselves and their own strength) to be tenable against any
forces whatsoever. The journey being resolved on by the West Indian Company of
the Netherlands, they put to Sea the 22. of December 1623. from Texell a Port
of Holland, with a Fleet of thirty ships, well furnished with Arms, Lead,
Powder, Ordinance, and other warlike munition. Jacob Willeks, a man of good
experience in Maritine matters, commanded for the sea, and the Lord of Dorte
commanded all the Landforces. The Lord General having ouer-sayled the
Admiral, had been before the town three days before, being the 6. of May
1624. and having exchanged some shot with the Castle, went to sea again, as
resolved to seek out their Admiral Willekes, and the rest of the company.
This attempt gave an alarm to the Spaniards, who coniecturing as the truth
was, that more numbers followed these, and that for some design upon this
p^^ce, prepared themselves for their defense, with all prevention and provision
possible.

They mounted eight pieces of Ordinance upon a Battery of Freestone, the
Slaves of the town (as well Christians as others) were commanded to the
Rampire, and raised two new batteries by the direction of the Vize-roy, who was
also very careful to see the men mustered and ezercised in their arms
according to the manner of the Castilian Discipline, the number of whom
amounted to some 5500. men, whereof the Intants made 4000. and the soldiers
1500. They of the Land battered our ships furiously from the Castles, and
upon one of the three was the Vize-roy himself, with his son, and the
greatest part of the Gentry.

Our Admiral in the mean time sailed up and down in the Bay, resolving how
he might land his Troops with best advantage; for this respect, he imbarks
1600. of his best and choicest men in four of the tallest ships, and
commanding the rest to follow slowely, he enters the Bay the 9. of May 1624.
Coming near the Enemies Batteries, he caused all their Ordinance to be
discharged on their Castles and Platformes, and landing some hundred men with
their loug-boats, they took the Batteries presently: the Mariners doing very
good service in this assault with their Boate-hookes. Upon this the Defendants
hang out a flagge of truce, and most of them quit the foresaid places. But the
Vize-roy, persists resolute in defense of that Breach, whereupon himself was
engaged, and though hardly pressed by the Dutch, he fights it out to the utmost
with some of the brauest Caualeroes of the town. But when he saw at the last,
himself forsaken of all sides, he fled toward his own Palace: but in the way
our Mariners and soldiers ceazed upon his person; who putting his sword into
his sheath, delivered these words unto the^: I have been faitbfull unto my
King, and if my men had not so basely forsaken me, your forces should not have
taken the Castle so soon. Upon the surrender of the Castle, all the lesser
Forts yielded themselves, and acknowledged the fortune of the Canqueror; the
which was the more happy in this respect, because it was accomplished with
little effusion of Christian blood, there being not slain above forty common
Soldiers, and one Captain.

The tenth day of May, the Netherlanders went to surprise the Town, but when
they approached near the Ports, they perceived that it was abandoned by the
Inhabitants, so that our Soldiers entered without any resistance. The pillage
was great in Coin, Plate, Jewels, and other rich moueables, which the
Soldiers took out of the Houses, Storehouses, and Cellars. Moreover, there
were taken 12000. Chests of Sugar, thirty Ships laden with rich Merchandise,
which lay in the harbor, and eight ships more of the Spaniards, which
arrived there since, not having notice of the Dutchmens fortunes and
proceedings.

The third maine loss which the Spaniards have sustained since the expiration
of the last truce, has been at Lima, a famous Emporian and haven Town in
Peru. This Province was first discovered by Francisco Pisarro, afterward
Marquis of Antillo, and Diego de Almagro, afterward honored with the title of
chief discouerer by the Emperor Charles the fifth; to whose use it was first
conquered by these aduentrous Spaniards from Atapalipa and his brethren, right
pretenders and inheritours of the same. It has on the East the Perunian
mountains, on the West Ma re Pacificum, or del Sur, on the North Castilia
Aurea, and the River of Peru, from whence the Country takes his name, and on
the South it has Chila for his borders. The length of it is from the City of
Pasto, unto the Province of Chili, one thousand eight hundred leagues, as large
as the leagues of Castilia. This Land is the seat of many wonders: thence
grows that odoriferous wood, whose bark being incided, distills a marvelous
sweet liquor, wherewith if any anoint a dead body, the carcass corrupts not.

Near to a cape or point of land, commonly called Destahelena, there are found
certain Springs of Pitch or Tar, serviceable for the calking and trimming of
Ships. Here are Rivers which run all day, but stand still at night, the
reason whereof is, because their current is maintained by the snow, which
melts a day time, but freezeth again at night. It rayneth in the mountains,
but never in the Plains of Peru, the assigned reason whereof is, that in the
Plains, and near the Sea coast, there blows all the year long one only
wind which the Mariners call Siluester, which runs along with such forcible
violence, that the clouds and vapors can have no rest in the middle Region
over the plain Country. Besides other small towns which the Christians have
in the Plains, they have five principle Cities. The first is called Pi^to
Veio, which stands very near the equinoctial: this City is poor, and apt
for diseases, yet has it some Mines of Gold and Emeraulds. Fifteen leagues
within the Maine is another City called St. Michael, which in the Indian
speech they call Pura. This is a pleasant soil and fruitful, but there are no
Mines of Gold nor Plate. Threescore leagues forward along the coast stands
another City in a valley called Trugillio, being distant from the Sea two
leagues. This City is placed in a plain plot near to the Reuers side, and is
abundantly provided of Wheat, Maiz, and Cattle. It is also exceeding well
built, and in it there are three hundred households of Spaniards.

The fourth chief City is, that of Aroquipa, commonly called the fair. The
soil near unto it is healthful, and abundant of all kind of victuals,
standing some 12. leagues from the Sea coast, upon a River that is fair and
Nauigable, so that Ships of good burden may come up to the walls of the City,
by which means it is thought the habitation of this town will increase. It
does not only supply her own necessities, but serves the City of Cusco, and
the Province of Carchas, with all things needful; from which places there is
great resort unto Aroquipa, by reason of the frequent contractation here, t for
the golden metal of Potosi.

The fifth principal City exceeding all the rest in beauty, strength, and
riches, is that of Luma situated in a valley of the same name, some fourscore
leagues from Trugillio. The Country there-about is plentiful of Corn, and
many sorts of fruits and cattle: the building of this place is such, that all
the streets do meet in a fair large place, from the which a man may see
through every street into the fields. The dwelling is marvelous healthful,
because it stands in a temperate climate, not afflicted too much with
extremities of heat and cold: the hottest season of the year being more
temperate then that of Spain. For in the time of their Summer heat, there
falls every day in the morning a sweet and cooling dew, which is not
hurtful, but rather profitable for the health of man. For it being used by way
of Lotion, it is good for the head aches and other diseases. All Spanish fruit
grows and prospers well in this soil, especially Orenges, Lemonds, Figs,
Pomgranates, and Vines, whereof there had been great abundance, if the frequent
broils and tumults between the Spanish Soldiers had not hindered the labor
and Plantation of the Husbandmen.

This City is judged to be the most pleasant dwelling of all the Land, in
respect of the commodity of the harbor, the great contractation of Merchants,
and the general resort of the people of the maine Land, who come thither from
all parts, and buy their furniture and provision. From the Mines of this
Province, is brought great store of gold and silver. The situation of it is
near the midst of the Land as yet discovered, for which cause the Emperor
Charles the fifth, placed there a Chauncerie royal, and Judges to decide his
subjects causes, which also does increase the confluence of the people. It is
seated two leagues from the Road, commonly called Callee de Lima, or the Port
of Lima. Le Hermit General of a Fleet under the States of the united
Provinces, knowing how much the gaining of this place might accommodate the
Hollanders, and incommodate the Spaniards, resolves upon the attempt. And being
furnished with a sufficient number of shipping, and men befitting such an
enterprise, he sets sail from the Netherlands, and after a tedious Navigations
through the Straights of Magellan, arriues at last in the South Sea opposite
unto Lima; where he makes his intention known to the Company, and then
adventures upon the exploit: wherein Fortune showed her self so favorable,
that with little or no loss, he made himself Master of the Callee de Lime, to
the great terror of the City, which as some men report, has since yielded it
self to the mercy of the Hollanders. The Conquerours got a great spoil in
Shipping, Treasure, and other rich commodities, and have since gotten two other
places in the Province of Peruana.

Thus you have seen a true Suruay of those most remarkable losses and
victories, which have happened between the Hollanders and the Spaniards since
the last truce, which ended with the beginning of the year 1621. It follows,
that after their expression we should justly counterpoise, and balance them:
which if we do without national respect or partial inclination, we shall
see the Dutch Acquisitions to exceed the Spanish, and yet their losses to be
far inferior unto the others. For leaving out Ormus out of the balance,
because it is now peculiariz'd unto the Persian, although it were won by the
succors of the Dutch and English: if we counterpoize the Conquest of Saint
Saluador, and the part of Lima (omitting that of the Cities as doubtful) with all the new Acquisitions of Spain, we shall behold these to ouerway all those,
which this Nation has of late acquired in Cleeue and Iuliers; and this
advantage does proceed not from one, but from diverse conditions and respects.
For first of all, the profits of Gulicke, and of the Duchy, with their
extraordinary Fees and Contributions, will not amount to above an hundred
thousand Ducats yearly, and allowing two thousand Soldiers for the Garrison
of that Signeurie, and every man to have five Shillings a week for his pay,
the annual revenue will hardly quit the charges, whereas rating the revenues of
Brasilia at three millions of Ducats, and allowing one third of this accrument
to rise from Fernambuco, and another from Ascensio, Todos los Sanctos, with the
territory thereto adjoining, shall by this account bring a million yearly to
the Cantors of the Netherlands.

2. Papenmuch with the tolage of the Rhine and; Goffe, with the contribution
money drawn from the Boores of West Cleaueland, did hardly pay their own
Garrisons, but the keeping of the Port of Lima, may draw (perhaps) a plentiful
Contribution from the golden Mines of Chili and Potosi, besides those spoils
that Le Hermit has already gotten esteemed to be an inestimable Mass, and
worth many Tuns of gold.

3. The Catholic King pays fourscore thousand Ducats unto the Prince of
Newenburge by Composition, for the resignation of these two Dutchies, but the
States hold those new Acquisitions in America, by the tenure of their Sword,
and by that ius acquisitum, which power and fortune have given to the stronger.

4. The Spanish King has other competitours in Cleave and Iuliers, besides the
Confederates of the seven Provinces, as the house of Brandeburge, and
(perhaps) the posterity of the Newenburger, may rowse themselves out of that
Lethargy, wherein the Spanish Pistolets have put their senseless Father, and
lay claim to that Inheritance, which does belong to them, or the Brandeburger
Iure gentium: but the Hollanders have no other titular pretenders, to their new
purchases in Peruana and Brasilia, but the house of Spain, unto whom they have
seldom lost any thing, which they were once possessed of, and whereas the Sea
could help them for many years together.

5. The loss of Gulicke, Goffe, and Papenmuch, gives no other disadvantage to
the States, they having Rees, Embricke, and Skenkes Sconce, between that and
their nearest frontier; but the possessing of these two places in the West
Indies, the one upon the North, the other upon the South Sea, do even wast in
the intermediate Continent of America, and give an entrance unto those
Provinces, whose gold has battered the walls, and opened the gates of the
strongest Towns of Christendom, for the Spaniards.

6. And lastly, the Inhabitants of Cleave and Iuliers, do not well like the
hard and heavy hand of your Castilian government, no more then do all the
lower circles of the Empire, as well knowing how these Intruders have impaired
the Germane liberty, and spurgall'd Bohemia and the Palatinate almost to death:
but the Brasilians and Peruuians, yea the very Portugals themselves would
willingly receive the law from the Dutchmen, whom they admire as much for
their fair and gentle government, as they hate the others for their rigor,
tyranny, and oppression.

The Mansfeldian Motives, directed unto all Colonels, Liuetenant-Colonels,
Captains, Inferior Officers and other Soldiers, which either as Volunteers,
or by way of Impressed, are engaged to serve in this next Expedition, intended by
the grace of God under the conduct and command of the most Illustrous and
Warlike Prince ERNESTVS, Earl of Mansfield.
Honorable Professors of Arms, you may see in this Dutch Suruay or balance,
the swelling fortune of a triumphant State: You may behold also a handful of
Netherlanders, with some few Mercinary French and English, give the check to
that Kingdom, which so long has strove for the Monarchy, Supreme Paramount
of all Christendom: Let this President serve for our present encouragement;
and withal, let us consider, that if those 7. Provinces (thought to be but a
morsel for the Spaniards mouth, they being not as big as that part of
England whch lies Northward beyond the Trent) could make their party good for
so many years together, against the Catholic King, and his Pack-horse the
Catholic Bishop of Rome: What shall not the united forces of England, France,
Denmark, and the Netherlands do against Pope, or Emperor, Austrian or
Bauarian, or any other Christian Potentate whatsoever; The expected blessings
of God, continual supplies of means, and the undoubted Justice of a good
cause concurring therewithal? In the prosecution whereof, let not the Papal
curses and fulminations, the uncharitable censures of your Iesuitized English,
nor the foolish presages of the Speedewels ill speed, any thing deter us: For
that Royal Ship which should have transported over the Count, was cast away by
the default of the Pilot, a man not well aquainted with those Seas, a stranger
unto Flushing, and possessed (as it is thought) with a malicious resolution
against the person of Count Mansfield. So that leaving any conjecture upon this
event, befitting as well a College of Roman Augurs, as it does a Conclaue of
Ignatius Disciples, let us descend nearer to the purpose, and accommodate our
selves to the expression of these Motives, which may confirm the stronger, and
strengthen the more doubtful and weaker spirits (if there be any such) who are
undertakers in this new designed Mansfeldian Expedition. And first, concerning
those Motives, your worthiness may understand that they may fitly be reduced
unto the number of three.

The first whereof, is the sufficiency and conduct of that General under whom
you are to undertake.

The second is the means of provision and preparation made for the undertakers.

The third motive, is the cause conceived, though not expressed, for which you
are to undertake and undergo this action. And first, concerning the General,
you are to fight under one whom never adversity could deiect, nor ever
prosperity could once erect beyond the temper of true command. You are to fight
under such a Commander, whom Pistolets, promises, nor proscriptions (the
powerful Instruments to subject staggering resolutions) could once divert from
the tenor of his intendments. You are to serve under his Banners, of whom we
may boldly say thus, Qui cum ab omnibus desertus erat, seipsum tamen non
deserit, When he was forsaken by the two Anhalts, Ausberge, and other Princes
of the Union, never forsook himself, nor left the cause of the King of
Bohemia in the suds. Are you to encounter with your Enemies in Campania? under
whose Colors can you sustain the shock of Hostile opposition better then
under his, who beat Leopoldus men in their own Quarters at Hagenawe, killed
Bawer the Duke of Bauariaes General in his lodging at Heseldorff, and fought
that memorable battle of Fleury near Namurs, wherein fifteen thousand of his
men vanquished sixteen thousand of Gonsaluo de Cordabaes troops, and 20000.
Boores of their party besides? Are you to make a retrait from the pursuing
enemy? Is not this that brave Conductor, who made that famous retraite from
Bohemia into the Palatinate, and from thence unto Breda, a tract of six
hundred English miles at least? which considering the valor and advantage of
the pursuers, was not inferior unto that retraite of Zenophons from out of
Persia, nor that of Conons from Aquilia into Britannie. Are you to besiege
Town or Fortress? Consider then how the Count forced Pilsen, a principal
town in Bohemia, which Zischa anuo 1470. could not subdue, nor the Hussites in
their ten months siege, anno 1434. could not conquer; and this he did being
weakly accompanied, and beyond the expectation of humane reason. Consider this
besides, how that after the defeat of Zablatti, he rallied his troops in the
Winter season, won Vodian, Prachalis, and Wintenberg, one after another, and
though detained by Christian of Anhaults letters, he besieged Pisack, a strong
place, and of importance, and won this Town the sixth of December, enforcing
nature as the said Christian wrote unto him. Are you distressed for want of
means and victuals, so that you have nothing but the air and your swords to
live by? remember how ye shall martch under that General, who maintained an
Army consisting of diverse Nations and different humors, like another
Hanniball without mutiny, yet without pay for three years together, filling
their panches and their purses with the plentiful spoils of Alsatia, Metz,
and Triers, and with the abundant provisions of Emden, Munster, and Westphalia?
To be brief, are you to actuate or endure any thing, remember this that you
do it under the fortune, valor, and good conduct of Count Mansfield.

The second motive which may serve to encourage us, is the sufficient provision
of means provided for this journey, as men, munition, victuals, and money: the
sinews, by which War is supported, and all Martial enterprises are brought
to a happy accomplishment. Our men are those Laconian walls of bones, which
must make good this attempt against all opposition: and these are the chiefest
Nations, and flower of all Christendom.

The French have been held the best Cauallerie of the world, seldom or never
beaten, except it were by our English Bills and Bows; of these we shall have
six thousand Carbins, and armed Curaiciers. The Germans were held in the time
of Guichardine, the best foot of the world, and so much redoubted by the
Italians, that they durst not encounter with them, except they had foot
companies of the same Nation: and of these, we shall muster eight or ten
thousand.

Our English in these latter times, have bin reputed the best Battalions of
Pikes in all Christendom, and whom the Spaniards in their ouer-valuing humor,
will acknowledge only to be seconds unto themselves; and of men fit to handle
these Arms, England sends forth twelve thousand. The vnexhausted Mines of
Britanie, will furnish these brave Troops with Lead and Iron for their
Ammunition: our Magazins will supply their wants with Serpentine and
Corn-pouder for Shot and Battery, and our friends of the Continent will
provide Wagons, Horses, and other necessaries fit for the conuoy of such a
Royal Army. Money will not be wanting, nor I hope the mutinous sound of Gelt
will never be heard in our Quarters, nor an Electo chose^ to reform the same;
for besides the liberal Contribution of diverse noblemen of England, forwarder
of this enterprise, and the plentiful provision of our Parliament in that
behalf, France and Sauoy, Germany and Venice, contribute toward the charges
of this intended journey. But is there any man who doubts the want of victuals,
whose courage depends upon his Colon, and who never fights well, but when his
paunch is full? Let this man whose thoughts are so vnsouldierlike, know, that
besides our own provisions, which I hope will be abundant and enough, France is
contracted unto us with a new alliance, and the frontier of that Kingdom,
against the higher and lower Germany, runs a tract of five hundred miles at
least: So that in all reason it cannot be far from the seat of our action.
And can we dream then of want and scarcities, having such a plentiful friend
to our neighbor, who without all peradventure, will furnish us with Grain,
Beefes, Muttons, and all other necessaries, which are fit for the maintenance
and preservation of an Army?

In the third and last place follow the causes, which may move and incite us to
this enterprise, and these are of two sorts, either of policy or of Religion.
Concerning the politic causes, I will enter no farther into their mystery,
then duty and modesty will give me leave: For I know there is a sanctum
sanctorum of policy; there is an inner Court of Royal Counsel, into which no
man ought to enter, except Assuerus put out the golden rod of his admission.
Only I will give this caution to those spirits who are ouer-curious after this
Inquest, and deliberate continually with themselves, whether the recovery of
the Palatinate, or the revenge of the Bauarians and Emperors wrongs be the
causes of this expedition, I will give I say that caution which his Majesty
gave in the last Parliament: That no man should question, whether the Empire,
Bauaria, or any other determinate place, should be the seat of this War,
since the discovery of this particular cannot choose but prejudice the present
service: for an Enemy warned is armed, secrecy is the spirit of action, and
this with an expedite delivery, crowns all warlike exploits, with success and
glory.

But concerning that point of Religion, I will enlarge my speech more freely,
and boldly maintain notwithstanding any opposition to the contrary; that this
journey is not pro focis alone, but pro aris, not for temporal respects only,
but for conscience, Religion, and the propagation of the Gospel concurring
therewithal. And for the vindication of their wrongs, what task can be too
hard? what danger can be too difficult? so that if we were to martch over the
sandy Deserts of Arabia, over the impassable wilds and woulds of Scithia or
the Frozen Slowes of Swethland and Muscouia: if we were to encounter with
famine, fire, and sword, nay with all the terrors of mortality, and that their
fearful consideration should terribilize their nature and condition, we
should consider what Christ suffered for us, and suffer any thing, yea all
things with patience, for his Religion, Truth, and Gospel. Our Enemies have
made Religion their stalking horse, and our backs their pack-horse: by which
means they have imposed a Romish Florentine trick upon our credulous
confidence, and open breasted, meaning.

It remains for us, that we should recollect our strengths and spirits, make
our revenge as sensible as our injuries are provoking, and martch at length
over their bellies, who have rid pack-ridge so long upon our backs. And to
end, that our actions may partake of external glory here, and after this life
of eternal glorification, let the service of God, our Country, and the common
cause, be the general bent and scope of all our enterprises, fighting for
David's cause; let us arm our selves with David's resolution, and let us come
against them, who came against us with shield, sword, and spear, in the name
of the Lord of Hoasts, the God of the Host of Israel; and then he that
teaches our fingers to fight, and our hands to wage the Battle, shall break
the cheeke-bone of our Enemies, and make them become like those Princes which
perished at Endor, even dirt and dung under our feet. Quod faxit Deus.

GEntle Reader, you shall understand that since the Writing and Imprinting of
this relation, Goch has been recovered by the Prince of Oranges Forces; which
makes the Dutch acquirements by so much the greater, and the Spanish losses
since the expiration of the last truce, by so much the more grievous in those
Countries of Cleeue and Juliers.

FINIS.

