AN EPISTLE OF A CHRISTIAN BROTHER Exhorting an other to keep himself
undefiled from the present corruptions brought in to the ministration of the
Lords Supper.

Printed Anno 1624.

My reverend, and dear brother,
The present difficulties dangers.
YOUR doubtful love to your own ancient and well deserved religion, and your
just fear of this uncouth change was after many hard assayes with
threatenings, and terrors strangely enforced, rankles your tender heart weary
of contending with heavy perplexities of wrath, and temporal losses if ye
shall continue to walk, as ye have learned, and are best persuaded; of scandal
and defection, if ye leave your own old profession, which ye have judged, and
judge to be most agreeable to the truth; and of shame, and of gnawing of
conscience, if ye shall pollute your self with practices different from your
faith, and contrary to the best light, and likeing of your own mind. In these
difficulties, your case is the more lamentable, that ye are drawn under the
displeasure of high authority, which, next to God ye would fainest please, and
under the dislike of some Peers, and Judges of the land, having such particular
care to their own charges, giving them small leisure to sound the depth of
ecclesiastical controversies, and only for a matter of conformity, that known
enemy to the unity and peace of the kirks of Christ in all the world, where it
has found credit. And surely your grief must be the greater, that in the day
of your sorrow the wise men of your own mind are silent and slack for your
help, and your great opposites in this distressed cause, your nearest friends,
and old acquaintance, but without equal reason on their part, or just desert
on yours. Who would not be pierced in heart with the pitiful looks of your
wearied countenance, as at the last gasp of your wonted sincerity, and
cheerful constancy. In this again, if you be left to your self, affliction
is added to the afflicted, and our mother the Kirk, and her mother the Truth
are forsaken. And notwithstanding of this strait, if any friends of a willing
mind shall timously contribute to your comfort, some Doeg, or some Amazia is
ever ready with their biting censure, and check of high presumption. But
praised be the Lord, there is no small number of religious and honest men in
the kirk and commonweal, and the hearts of all are in the hands of the Lord,
who may at his pleasure move any that has the tongue of the learned to speak
a word in season to you that are weary, also dispose your friends and brethren
of their old ingenuitie, and tender compassion of your bleeding heart, by their
holy wisdom to remove your doubts, confirm your faith, and help you to be
persuaded in your own mind, and to advise you rather now to hold fast that
which you have heard and received, then afterward with vntimous repentance to
change their tune, and style, as if you were not a brother, but an adversary,
and Apostate, if it shall happen, as God forbid that you be driven from the
bright candle of your known profession to the deep darkness of an unknown
way, and by that unhappy change so much the more blinded, as your light has
been greater, and with the purest Ivorie turned with fire into saddest black,
or shall be misshapen in a new face, stained with the contempt of your first
purity, and blushing at the disparagement of your new form. A vile confusion
that cannot be eschewed if you shall suffer your self to be drawn back
again to the deformities for just causes casten out of the kirk, and from that
beauty of reformation, which you have before held, and with joy so long
professed, and upon no better warrant then a bare example, and very authority
of men's names, although for the time fathers and favorers of your profession,
but after long standing now suddenly moved, and so taken with the novelties of
the time, that for joining with them, they dare not only separate from their
old masters and fellow brethren, but from themselves, in respect of that which
they were. And yet in this maine current some way to be excused by their
embarking like simple men in a war ship, and miserable mistaking of these
base additions, to be laid down again when it should please them like good
scholars to return to their own masters, the standard-bearers in our faith,
with imagined liberty, not only to concur, but to confirm and encourage
their own brethren afresh for the advancement of the interrupted work of the
ministry and edification of the body of Christ, as they are bound in conscience
and calling.

Resolution to suffer required
But howsoever men have been inclined to give place to the stream of the time,
yet from the day that the kirk has been crossed, and many of all sorts
grievously afflicted with the perturbations daily arising about the violent
inbringing of these intrused alterations: nevertheless you have found some
sweet refreshment under the shadow of a heavenly dispensation so ruling the
paths of these proceedings, that you have kept the truth, suffered reproaches
and discredit with patience in standing against these misliked novelties so
long as they remained without the compass of your own practice, esteeming
your particular losses contented gain, and your injuries excusable for keeping
the liberties of Gods service, and the secret joy of your own conscience to be
brooked by your quiet carriage, and sober conversation. But now if the day of
that poor ease be passed, and patient walking can have no further favor, and
if you shall be drawn out to a public stage before the Lord, who would keep
you to be his witness, and in the eyes of men, who would gain you to be their
disciples, you must needs by your own practice either shamefully recant, or
honestly confess the religion wherein you have stood. Choose you this day
whether with humbled Esther you will wisely resolve to prove constant, and glad
the hearts of many people, by cleaving to that way wherein you have found the
Savior with his blessings and benefits of all sorts; or if you will against
your own experience of Gods favor to you, and hard success seen upon these
novations, where they have been most greedily embraced, hazard by your
unseasonable example to give occasion of stumbling to many, and to loose the
patience and labors of your former constancy, and now like Peter overwhelmed
with fear, adventure to seek your comfort, and quietness in the sway of time,
as though the Lord could be syled, as Absalom was with Chusayes policy. If you
dare suffer committing your soul to the will of God, as unto a faithful
Creator, it is his place to temper the cup of all your troubles, and when he
shall be pleased to try and determine your matter before the highest bar. But
if you shall deny before men the Lord, and his truth once received, he will
deny you before his heavenly father, and will not deliver you from the hour of
temptation.

Impediments arising from other men's persons removed.
It may be that you find not such throng in the narrow way of suffering, as in
the broad way of common profession, when religion dwelt in the pleasant land of
peace in Halcyone days like the Spouse of Christ commanding all, and subject
to none. For you must think, that many look well in their own climate, that
have neither head nor health to cross the line, and many go bravely with
gilded swords about their own doors, who fly the camp, and dare not face
the Cannon. To believe in Christ is a great gift, not common to all, but to
suffer for his sake is a greater, and given to few. Perhaps it may be, that
many living by guess, and more ready upon their own respects to profess, then
careful to be informed in a truth, and no small number of silly spirits by
giving credit to others, and misled in the bypath of error, and some
unstable Camelion-like hypocrites inclined to be died with the color of every
occasional profession, when they shall see the world to frown, may take
another way. But pity them, and spare them, praise God for his favor to you,
and increase of faith, and patience, and let no gall, and bitterness of speech,
scarcely becoming the witness of a truth, make any of whatsoever sort less
inclinable to return to you, and your way, who by memory of their former
proceedings, in a different course, may be recalled to love and honor both you
and your way. The Apostles train may suffice you. If Christ be on your side,
who can be against you? You are debtor to him that has guided the steps of
your soul, and all that is within you to praise him, because in these
contentions you have done what you could in defense of the truth, and have kept
it, and never wronged any man in any matter; so that if it be the pleasure of
God you shall suffer, it is because you dare not forsake a known truth,
whereby you have received many rich comforts, and looks for to reap endless
joy, esteeming it your duty to cleave to that which is called in question, as
well as to the rest, which seem to be spared: for your encouragement you have a
worthy cause to honor you, sufficient reasons to defend you, and the experience
of your own conscience to uphold you.

Impediments arising from the quality of the cause removed.
It is true that your large course is so cunningly covered, that nothing is
permitted to appear at this time, but a small point, the gesture of kneeling at
the communion, and receving out of the ministers hand with such as shall be at
table, upon the festival day appointed. Yet you must think of these
particulars, as of members of the gross body of conformity, obscuring the
frame of Reformation delivered unto you by the Fathers, who begat you in the
Lord, to be kept in integrity for your own use, and for the instruction and
comfort of your successors. For you cannot deny, but you have seen your mother
the kirk in her gayest dress, firmly settled upon the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, and strongly fortified with fair confessions, her
badges famous in the world, and most meet for keeping unity among her members
in doctrine, sacraments, kirke-service, discipline, and in the holy ministry,
and for abiuring of all poysonable superstition, and damnable confusion. And
with no small joy have you beheld her watchmen assembled in her sacred meetings
for managing her affairs, according to the will of her Lord, and for that
effect strongly fenced with liberties and privileges, the royal testimonies of
his Majesty's love for strengthening her jurisdiction, and furtherance of all
her causes. How happy were these days, when her painful Shepherds were knit
together in one mind and judgment with mutual encouragements, all feeding
their flocks, and pleasantly marching against all enemies without exception,
as an army with banners. How bright were then the stars, and how beautiful
the candlestickes? But now alas you are forced to behold bold mints to draw her
off the old foundation to the sandy heaps of humane wisdom, her renowned
confessions of faith, the strong bars of her unity aforenamed without just
cause reproved, and laid aside, the doctrine distempered with the unsavory
mixture of man's learning, and presented to the people without relish of the
Word and Spirit, like an egg without salt to a man of a sound taste, yea often
with spleen so misapplied against Christians for furthering of men's
particulars, and worldly projects, that hearing brings no less grief then
edification. By new additions and mutations both the sacraments are made
uncouth, and distasteful to many a poor Christian fearing to offend God by
passing beyond the measure of their own faith, if they should receive any thing
in the sacraments not delivered by the Lord. The necessary discipline, and
necessary use of the same for purging and preservation, as behoveful for the
kirk as physic for a man's body, diseased, weakened, and almost rejected. The
holy ministry transformed, rent, and divided by a swelling humor overrunning
that sometime solid body, and restraining the members thereof from their proper
functions; the kirke-service, prayers, and other exercises, atled to a new
mould, and as far from former edification, as pitifully diseased with the
daily fits of restless change; the prerogative of the Lords day, and due
sanctification thereof miserably brought low by setting up of other days of
extraordinary respect to be observed with festival solemnities, the
jurisdiction, liberties, and privileges of the kirk her comfortable, and
awful assemblies, with the whole precious substance so wounded and made pale,
for setting up of some silly circumstances, and that with great loss of
concord and quietness among all the members of the kirk, and no small gain
to superstition, confusion and prophannesse. And this is the cause moving you
to like the first condition of the kirk, and to refuse the novations
introduced, as they are prejudicial in part or in whole to the religion and
order formerlie established.

The cause in the end will be justified howsoever for the present it be
maligned.
For this your judgment your speeches are racked, and made to speak against
the State, and you are brought in the case of Ziterius, when the Court was
against him, making the Emperor Nebuchadnezar. And when this flame is kindled
against you, if you refuse to follow the drove in any new practice, for to
defend your liberty by any good ancient order or custom, you are summarilie
condemned of Brownish Separation, singularity, Puritanisme, and of blind and
fained zeal. Yet not by all, but by such, as either having forgot, or never
known your prefession in her integrity, take advantage by the advantageous
name of Conformity to please themselves, and grieve them who cleave to the
form of godliness whereunto you were delivered. And even here we must be
patient, and repent our own slacknes in following our duty of good service
toward God, when so many pains have been taken to instruct and strengthen in a
contrary course, hoping that although Constantine being at the first for the
determination of the Council of Nice, whereunto the contrary parties put their
hands, and afterward by oversight, and negligence to possess the minds of them
that were about him with careful remembrance of the truth, he was by the
continual neernesse and pains of them that were contrary minded, changed to
an other course; yet our most high, wise, and gracious Emperor, when his
majesty shall see that we are tied by such affection to our harmles
profession, that we choose rather patiently to suffer then rashly to change,
as his highness royal clemency has refreshed many, and rid others out of
thrall, will be pleased to be our Physician, and with his own hand cure the
distempered body of this poor kirk, restoring to Christ's spouse in the land
of his highness happy birth, her privileges and servants for her Lords
emploiments, that every one of them receiving that favor, may enjoy one
another for edification of the kirk, his majesty's better service, and their
mutual comfort.

The cause is grounded upon sufficient reasons.
For your own confirmation, and the credit of your cause in whole and every
part of it, you have a sufficient store of strong reasons in your own hand; yet
because you have ado with humbled Christians, who as they are taguht of God,
so they would be feign followers of him, and for their use love better the pure
fountains of the scripture, then the dark compositions, and subtle
distinctions of Philosophical Schoolmen, you shall not do amiss to set
before your own eyes for your present use the following Articles of the Lords
Supper, Rules for right administration of the Lords supper.
as straight rules to rectify the uncomely eye-lasts required to be introduced
upon the sound work of this Sacrament.

1 Christ's practice in the first Supper, qualified with his commandment, Do
this in remembrance of me, and with Paul's precept, Be ye followers of me,
even as I am of Christ, together with the common maxim rightly understood,
Every action of Christ is our instruction, should be the perfect pattern of
our practice.

2 The command, Do this, being grounded upon Christ's practice, and having
respect thereto, cannot be understood, but by the understanding of the
particulars practiced by him. For as practice and custom observed in any
matter before a law be made, are the best exponers of the law, and not the
customs and practices that creep in afterward, so in this Sacrament, the
things done by Christ and his Disciples expone the institution better then the
practices and customs in the days of Dionysius Areopagita, of Justinius
Martyr, of Tertullian, and of the practices of kirkes in these, or other ages.

3 The example and institution of Christ are fully set down by Matthew, Mark
and Luke, Evangelists, and by Paul the Apostle conioyntly.

4 In the night that the Lord was betrayed, for the eating of the Lords Supper,
Christ and his Disciples came together in one place, prepared for the eating of
the Paschall Lamb, and that holy banquet.

5 In that place where Christ and his Disciples met, there was a Table prepared
both for the service of the Lamb, and for this Sacrament.

6 For the reverent eating of this Supper, Christ by choice and no otherwise
sat at that Table with his Disciples in the most comely and convenient form
of sitting.

7 For visible Elements he used both bread and wine such as were at hand for
the time, and only these two without any mixture.

8 To the bread by way of preparation Christ did four things: he did take it,
he blessed it, he brake it, he gave it: and for the right using of it, he spoke
three things to the Disciples, a commandment, Take ye, eat ye, a
declaration, This is my body which is given (or broken) for you, a second
commandment, Do this in remembrance of me.

9 When he had supped, for preparation of the cup he did three things; he did
take it, he blessed it, he gave it them; and for right using of it he spoke
three things, a commandment, Drink ye all of it, a declaration, This is my
blood in the new Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins; a
second commandment, Do this as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me.

10 This service is reco^mended to be continued in the kirk, and frequently
used. For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye
show the Lords death till he come.

11 A warning of a fearful danger, Whosoever shall eat this bread and drink
this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the
Lord.

12 A sovereign remedy against this danger, Let every man therefore examine
himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup.

13 This is the truth of this holy sacrament, and in the most favorable times
this kirk sought this truth, and by the testimony and commendation of other
reformed kirkes found it, and not only the mind of Jesus Christ anent this
sacrament, but in all the particular heads of religion above rehearsed.

14 If either the sacrament it self, the ministers and receivers thereof were
privileged from men's corruptions, there were no fear of craft, negligence, or
compulsion to receive this sacrament, neither necessity to examine* what were
agreeable or dissonant to the measure of their faith that received.

15 It is an infallible observation, that whosoever after the truth once found,
seeks farther then truth, shall find errors and lies.

16 Of these Fathers, who in Christ Jesus begot you, and brought you up,
through the Gospel delivered to you, as they received it from the scriptures,
and from this kirk, being reformed, ye received the sound doctrine, and right
use of this sacrament, and other heads of religion, not as a mere doctrine,
and mere rites, but as the anointing of the holy spirit which dwells in
you. If ye shall receive diverse teachers, diverse doctrines and sacraments, you
must quite the spirit that dwells in you, and seek another.

the present differences an impediment to communicate here.
As the Cotinthians by the distemper of their members, and corruptions marked
among them by the Apostle, transgressed against the first article above
written, so if ye come together in a mixture of nicknamed Puritans and
conform people, standing under contention, expressed there by the Apostle, and
vnremoved from among you, your coming together* cannot be with profit, but
with great hurt.

The first difference
The first maine difference, and cause of dissension betwixt you and them,
arises from the fifth article, anent a Table, and the necessary use of it.
For the sacrament, ye holding that it is necessary for the eating and
drinking the sacramental elements, both for the exercise of your faith toward
God, and charity among your selves, is necessarily required in that
sacramental and heavenly banquet, and they thinking it only commodious for
the people to kneel at in reverence of the sacrament, and others neither
necesry nor commodious, but a mere Metaphore. But you do well, that believe,
that there was a Table at Christ's supper, as certainly as the hand of him that
betrayed him was with him at the Table, and as truly for use as the Apostle
Paul terms the sacrament by the name of the Table of the Lord, which Table
by some Fathers is called the Holy Table, and by others the Lords Table, a fit
mean to represent our union and communion with Christ, and among our selves in
this life. Thou do prepare a Table before me in the sight of my adversaries:
and in the life to come, I have appointed to you a kingdom, that ye may eat
and drink at my table in my kingdom; which mystery of spiritual fellowship
can no wise be so well adumbrate, nor so sensibly perceived of any believing
Christian by a common Table in any man's house whosoever.

The second difference.
The second controversy betwixt you and them arises from the sixth Article;
ye holding that Christ and his disciples sat at Table, and they obscuring
that assertion by alleging of a form of sitting used by Christ different from
your form, and by their law of indifferent things rejecting all form of
sitting, and bringing in kneeling as a more humble and convenient gesture for
the sacrament, then Christ used. By virtue of the first Article, binding you to
Christ's pattern, as you are bound by the Prophet to be taught of God, and
consequently not to teach God, so by the Apostles precept, you should be a
follower of Christ, and not a reformer either of his practice, or institution
conform thereto. And, as for the diversity of forms of sitting, neither
kneeling nor standing being opposite gestures to sitting, can have the name of
sitting, and consequently Christ's sitting was no sort of kneeling. As for the
alleged indifferency, it is taken away by Christ's free choice of sitting
expressed in his own practice, when he was neither straited by any occasion,
compulsion, or other inclining cause, but at his liberty might have kneeled,
it pleased him in his own wisdom to choose sitting, as the meetest gesture
for his communicants. As for the humility of kneeling above your humility of
sitting, we have no great warrant in the word: for there, sitting is used in
preaching, in praying, and in the sacrament, but kneeling only in prayer. And
yet Christ in his agony used for a more humble form, falling on the ground
upon his face. Of the three gestures used by the Christian world in religious
worship, sitting, standing, and kneeling, Christ did choose sitting. And if a
choice were to be made of any of the three, kneeling for us is most dangerous,
being the outward badge of their confession, who contrary to our faith believe
Christ to be bodily present, either by transubstantiation, consubstantiation,
or some unknown manner, as also it being the formal adoration of a person, and
not a sign of reverence to be given to the sacramental elements, or any other
thing which moved the Schoolmen to affirm, that if there remained the
substance of bread after the consecration, the people would therefore take
occasion of Idolatry, and in stead of Christ's body would give godly worship to
the bread, and for avoiding of that idolatry, they thought best to remove away
the bread, and bring in transubstantiation.

The third difference.
Thirdly, ye differ from them about the distribution of the bread, you holding
that Christ gave it to them that were next him, and the disciples divided it
among themselves; and they holding that it should be given by the minister his
hand delivering it immediately into the hand of every single person there
present to receive the communion. Your practice, as it is conform to the order
of the sacrament, observed in this kirk since reformation began, so it is most
conform to the necessary order of Christ's actions and form of words, as they
are set down in the eight article. But their assertion and practice anent
distribution, can neither agree with the order of Christ's actions, the form of
his words, nor the practice of this reformed kirk. As for the order of Christ's
actions, for preparation of the bread, he does three things, he took it, he
blessed it, he brake it, which of necessity must be understood to be a mystical
fraction. And being thus prepared, as he took the bread for them, he
exhibiteth, and gives it to them, whereby they may be assured to have good
right to that bread, and being thus prepared, and made theirs, he gives a
general commandment to them all to take it, and for the particular form of
their taking, that they should divide it amo^ng themselves, according to the
direction set down in Luke for the right use of the cup, Divide it among your
selves; which form of distribution for exercise of brotherly love, is as
necessary to be used upon the bread, as upon the cup. And if by the act of
giving the distribuoion of the cup were perfected by Christ, giving sigillatim
to every single person, and their sole receiving of it immediately out of his
hand, what could be the use of the general commandment, Divide it among you?
And to ascribe one sense to the act of giving the Cup, and another of the
bread, and to think that the Apostles could boldly take the one or the other,
not knowing what right they had to it, or what it was, it were amiss to think.
And if the practice of kirkes were a sufficicient rule, in sundry kirkes, in
sundry ages, the Deacon delivered the sacrament to the people.

Consent in heart and articles of religion required in communicants.
Since ye profess, and feign would be (...), and submitting yourselfe to be
(...), a follower of God by your profession, wish, and submission, rather to
follow Christ and his Apostles followers of him, then any other man, or
society of men, and rather the form of our own kirk observed since
reformation, wherein ye have gotten the comfort that ever ye had, or have by
that sacrament, and for their particulars, and other causes of contention
betwixt you and them, that would draw you to a mixture with them in their
form, you must deprecate favor while you be better informed, and advised, and
they both to the effect that before you come to communication at the Table, ye
may be one in faith and articles of religion, and of one consent of heart in
Jerome his sense, calling Augustine of his communion, and of Augustines
meaning, calling a certain woman of his communion.

As these differences betwixt you and them are evil in themselves, so are they
evil in the alleged ground, whereby they are occasioned. The ground of the
alleged differences evil.
The peoples rudensse, and lack of devotion, which should be rather removed by
diligent instruction, then established by a practice founded upon a necessity
that the sacrament must be always celebrated to a sort of rude people, void of
reverence to receive the same in a comely form. By that sort of rusticitie,
and want of devotion, the communion table that in primitive times stood in the
midst of the kirk, was separate from the congregation by a Chancellarie,
since from the midst of the kirk to the east end, which was called the
Quier, then the minister and table both was separate from the people, the table
turned into an altar, the sacrament into a sacrifice, the cup simply removed
from the people, and the bread also by transubstantiation, or some other way.
And so for curing that alleged rudeness, Christ's sacrament was turned into
man's imagination, and so ceased to be Christ's sacrament, and became man's.

No part of the truth is to be forsaken.
Ye know the truth, and if ye sin willingly after that ye have received and
acknowledged it, by forsaking all, or any part thereof, fundamental,
substantial, or accidental, all being copulative not to be changed in the
meanest circumstance, but upon a necessary occasion, good warrants, and to
good ends: you know the danger set down by the Apostle, and what it is to make
your own conscience naked before God, and by your example to give offense to
many. Take heed to your self, and draw near to God, that you may keep your
conscience pure against the great day.

The falls of backsliders to be set before the eyes of the sufferer.
For this purpose set before you the image of man's frailty, and the character
of Christian constancy, that ye may strive to be strengthened, and stand by
grace. In that unhappy division of the Tribes of Israel, Heresy rooted in
Jeroboam, and spreading it self over the people in all the ten tribes, who
were taught in the truth of God before their fall, found no contradiction in
all the ten tribes, notwithstanding of their form of religion, and of the
heavy judgments of God powered out upon that foul defection, but it continued
in force, and they without sense above three hundred years and an half.

The Arrian abomination broched by the envy and stomach of a man prone to
contradiction, possessing the Emperors heart by subtle suggestion, made
Arrius personal quarrels to produce real questions anent the Godhead of
Christ, a filthy blasphemy at the beginning resisted by pastors and people, and
long detested, but by process of time, by authority, and by the subtlety of
few Arrian Apostates, not only the multitude of Bishops, very few excepted,
some sooner, some later, some as leaders, and some as common soldiers, either
yielding through fear, or brought under with penury; or by flattery
ensnared, or else beguiled through simplicity, become subject to the current
of time. Yea Osius the ancientest Bishop of Christendom, the most forward in
defense of the Catholic cause, and on the contrary part most feared, by
whose hand the Nicene creed was set down, and framed for the whole Christian
world to subscribe unto, yielded in the end with the same hand to ratify the
Arrian confession, leaving the catholic faith to be kept and defended against
the force of the world. Whether a fretting cancker enter in the head, as in
Jeroboam, or in the foot, as in Arrius, it is dangerous for the body. Beware,
thou that stand, lest thou fall.

The constancy of others t^ be set before the eyes of the sufferer.
But you have before you a fair table, lively expressing the amiable portraits
of more valorous Worthies, and better deserving in conflicts for religion,
Christ the righteous, his Apostles, the Hebrews, those valorous and worthy
people defenders of the truth against the Arrian heresy, and terrors of
Valence, and Vrsatius, the great patrons of that impurity. Memorable Athanasius
whose motto is his high honor, Athanasius against the world, and the world
against Athanasius, and old Eleazar, who being desired by his old acquaintance
to deliver himself from death by eating of flesh which was lawful for him to
use, and make as if he did eat the flesh taken from the sacrifice, commanded
by the king, answered, that it becomes not our age in any wise to dissemble,
whereby many young persons might think that Eleazar being fourscore year old
and ten, were now gone to a strange religion. Seeing ye are compassed with
such a cloud of witnesses, cast away the turmoyling of the world, and every
thing that presses down, and run with patience the race that is set before
you, looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of your faith, who for the joy
that was set before him, endured the cross, and despised the shame, and is set
at the right hand of the Throne of God.

A good conscience to be regarded in time of trial.
If you would be to your wearied brethren the comfort of their miseries, and the
guide of their difficulties, if ye would live and dye a warrior against
Satan, and an enemy against sin, and unchangeable servant to your own
master; and if in this world ye would have peace, and in the world to come
everlasting joy, take heed to your conscience, for it is Gods Officer, for the
purpose put into you to keep you in awe. You may dye, your conscience cannot
dye. The light of it may be shadowed, because it is not God, but not quite put
out, because it is of God. Howsoever many be afraied for their fame, and few
for their conscience, yet suffer not yourselfe in your whole life to slip the
breadth of your nail from your good conscience. It is a diet book, wherein
the sins of every day are written, and for that cause to the wicked a mother
of fear, but the children of God though the world should never credit them,
require no better witness. Augustine esteems not what Secundinus thinks of
him, so long as his conscience accuses him not before God. It is the
secretary of a man's heart, a sealed book, close now, but to be opened wide
upon the great day. It is the treasure of the liberty of our spirits, which
should be unto us as far above the liberty of the body, and things belonging
thereunto, as the soul is above that dust which must go to the dust. If you
would have this liberty of your spirit, ye must not stand for a name among
men, but you must strive to store up in your conscience, the true testimonies
of your sincere love to your own religion, and to your fellow brethren: for
your conscience shall be for you, if you do well, and as you shall stand
dissemble, or revolt without partiality, it will bear witness. The
reformation of our religion was builded by difficulties, and maintained by
patience, and pains. If our love of ease, and of worldly goods, and if our
fear of temporal losses, shall destroy it, it had been better for us that we
had never sought glory by that fair profession, then by a foul revolt to
stain not only our own name and conscience, but by our hypocrisy to
endanger the people of God. My dear brother, watch ye, stand fast in the
faith, quit you like a man. The son of God sits at the right hand af the
Father, and all power is given unto him: he appoynteth and moderateth all our
wrastlings, he gives victory, and will come shortly, and his reward with
him. As you have happily begun, so go on your whole course, that nothing may
be observed in you, other then such as becomes a wise man to do, and a
righteous man to suffer. Go on happily, and love your own religion. If by his
grace he shall strengthen you to prove a pattern of constancy at this time, he
shall make you an heir of glory for ever. Fear not, put your self, and all
that ye have in the hands of the Lord, ye shall never loose ought at his
hand, he shall liberally return to you your gifts with advantage. Be steadfast
in the Lord, and let God and man see, that ye honor him, and your enemies
shall see, and you shall find that great things shall be done to the man whom
the King of Kings will honor. To him that overcommeth will Christ grant to sit
with him in his throne. Now unto him that is able to keep you that ye fall
not, and to present you faultlesse before the presence of his glory with joy,
that is, to God only wise, our Savior, be glory and majesty, and dominion
and power, both now and for ever. Amen.


