A Sermon preached before the right honorable Earl of Darbie, and diverse
others assembled in his honors Chapel at Newparke in Lankashire, the second
of January. Anno humana Salut, 1577.

GALA. VI. Dum tempus habemus operemur bonum.

While we have time let us do good.

Gala. vi. Imprinted at London by Thomas East: the xiiij. day of March. 1577.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable and his very good Lord Henry Earl of Darbie, Lord
Stanley and Strange, Lord of Man and of the Isles adioyninge, and Knight of the
most noble order of the Garter: continuance of health with prosperity, and
increase of honor.
):(

YOU Know right well (right honorable and my very good Lord) that I
according to my duty giuinge attendau^ce upon your Lordshippe in the time of
Christmas last past, was appointed by your honor to preach before you in your
Chapple, at neweparke, the second of Ienuarie, at which time I entreated of
this text of Saint Paul. Rom 13. [Idque perspecta oportunitate quod videlicet
tempestiuu^ iam sit nos a somno expergisci,] and so forth unto the end of the
chapter: according as it pleased God at that time to minister unto me matter,
and to give unto me the spirit of vtterau^ce. Which Sermon finished, I was
immediately called unto your honor, and by you earnestly requested without
delay to set down in writing, such lessons and instructions as I had in your
presence, and before certain ge^tlemen of worship, uttered with my mouth. And
herewithall it pleased your honor, not only to require a copy of my Sermon,
but also to give me to understand that you would send it up to London to be
Printed, to the end that the things which I had uttered before a few at home
in your house, might be further published abroad to the use and behoof of
many. Which when I perceived, I must needs confess, that I was very loath, and
altogether unwilling to deliver to that end into your Lordshippes hands any
copy of that which I had preched. First because my dooinges are so simple, and
my skill so small, that they deserve not to come abroad into the sight of the
world. Secondly, many are so fine and dainty, that nothing can please and
content the^, unless it flow and swim with store of eloquence. Thirdly, and
last of all, because I fear that when many have read it* I shall by my
playnnesse procure to my self more misliking for publishing of it, then I had
lyking of your honor for preaching of it. Howbeit your honors great goodness
diverse times showed toward me, and your benefits bestowed upon me, which are
yet green and abiding fresh in my remembrance, to my great relief and
comfort, and whereby I live at this present a great deal the better, have
overcome all lettes and impediments, and enforced me to satisfy your godly
desire herein. Chosing rather to be mislyked for my doings of a great many
others, and to be reproved for my want of skill, then to show my self not
dutiful toward your honor in this behalf, or to seem slack to do any thing
that may content your noble mind, especially when it pleases your Lordship so
earnestly to require it of me: who am so much bound to your honor, that I must
needs acknowledge my self to be overmuch unthankful, if mi pore service were not
always redi at your co^ma^dme^t Wherefore seeing that it plesed your ^. to
accept so well of this Sermon, when it was preached, I am thereby emboldned to
crave patronage of you now it is Printed and further published abroad,
especially because it now has more need thereof. Most humbly desiring your
honor to take it in good part now as you did then, and to continue your good
will to the faithful Ministers, and Preachers of the word, and to seek ever
more and more to promote the honor and glory of our good God: so that it may
appear unto al men that you have in utter hatred and detestation, the lying
false doctrine of Antichrist, as well as it is known to me and others that
daily have experience of your honorable disposition herein. The Lord of Lords
evermore inflame and direct your noble heart with his holy and gracious Spirit,
increase all heroical and godly virtues in you, with prosperity and increase
of honor in this life, and grant that in the end you may so dye, that you may
after wards live for ever.

At Moberley the. viii. of February. Your honors most humble and bounden
servant John Caldwell Parson of Winwick

Idque perspecta oportunitate quod videlicet tempestiuum Romans 13. ca, ver. 11.
tam sit nos a somno expergisci. etc. AND that considering the season, that
Romans 13. ca ver. 11. 12. 13. 14.
it is now time that we should arise from sleep: for now is our salvation
nearer, then when we believed it.

The night is past, and the day is at hand, let us therefore cast away the works
of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light.

So that we walk honestly, as in the day: not in gluttony, and drunkenness,
neither in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and enuyinge:

But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought for the flesh, to
fulfill the lusts of it.


RIght honorable, if we way and consider the holy Scriptures, we shall easily
find and soon perceive, that our conuersaiton is then worthy of great praise,
and our life best framed to gods will, and the rule of his law, when it shall be
every way most profitable to our neighbors.

For god requires nothing more earnestly of us the^ love, and he would have
such a band of friendshipe amongst men, y^ they might be knit together as
members of one body. And for this cause has he oftentimes in his word
commanded us with no less cheerefulnes to be as ready to pleasure, and to do
good to our neighbors then to our selves. So that it is not without good
cause that S. Paul in this chapter even in the verse next goinge before this
text* says, that love is the fulfilling of the law. For Paul speaking here
of the duties and debt that we owe one to an other, does give us to understand
that whatsoeuor is contained in y^ second table of gods law is comprehended in
these few words, love thy neighbor as thy self. And true it is that such is
the force of holy and godly love, that it works not evil, but it seeks to
overcome evil with goodness, neither will it permit and suffer a man to hurt
his neighbor. He that loves his father and mother will show himself
obedient and lowly toward them, he will be ready to aid and assist them, and
willinge to do after their commandment, and be affrayde to do any thing that
may displease and offend them. He that loves his neighbor will not inwardly
in mind conceue malice and hatred agynst him, neither will he go about to
offer violence and wrong too any man, but will seek to preserve his life, and
to procure his welfare, yea though it be to his own hinderan^ce. He that
loves his neighbor will not go about to defile his neighbors bed with
fiilthy and execrable whoredom, neither will seek to company with any woman out
of marriage, and being married will have and enjoy his own wife soberly, and
do nothing vnseeminge the honorable estate of matrimony.

He that loves his neighbor will not go about to pluck away from him any
part of his substance by violence, fraud, or any other unlawful means. He
that loves his neighbor, will not backbite him or make or forge lies of him
to his disprofit any manner of way. To be brief, he will so deal with his
neighbor as he would have other men to deal with him. Now after that the
apostle has set down certain godly rules touching the duties of love and
holy life, least peradventure they might sone slide out our minds, he thought
it good and right needful here in the end of the chapter, to persuade us
there unto by certain waightye and grave reasons. By which he goes about to
persuade all men, which believe in Christ, to express their faith by good
works, and holiness of life: which thing in deed is not lightly to be
regarded, but advisedly to be considered, especially seeing that god does
require it every where of us in his holy word. For seeing that god in the
beginning, when as we were nothing but claye, and earth, did of his only grace
and goodness breath into us the spirit of life, placed our first parents in
Paradise, a place full of all pleasurs and goodness, and afterward when as we by
sin and transgression had lost that worthiness, that by creacion we had, and
were become subject to death and eternal damnacion, he did restore us again
to life and confirm us in y^ same by the promise of Chrst to come, who by the
innocence of his manhood, has recovered that for us which we before by
sin, and disobedience had destroyed. These things I say considered, we
shall be not only very much unthankful, but also most wicked, unless we
constantly defend this our dignitye, bought and obtained with y^ price of
Christ his blood, and above al, love that GOD again that loved us first so
derely, and forth with endeavor our selves every day more and more, to live as
it becomes us, walking all the days of our life in holy fear before the
Lord. And truly to the performaunce of these things, the consideracio^ of this
perell of scripture may very much profit us

The which I will divide into three parets.

1 The first part contains an exhortation to live uprightly with certain
great and weighty reasons to persuade us thereunto. 2 The second part sets
down what we must shun and avoid if we will live uprightly and honestly. 3
The third and last part teaches to put on a new garment, and to fight
against our own wicked lusts and crooked affections.
The apostle and chosen vessel of Christ S. Paul did very well way and
consider that such is naughtines and corrupcion of man's nature, yt he is not
easily persuaded to do those things, which the Lord by his word has
commanded, and to leave those things ^ndone, which he has by his word
forbidden. And therefore after yt he has commended unto us charity and given us
to understand how we should live, least we should let these good lessons
slyppe out our minds, he seeks to persuade us thereunto by certain weightye
and grave reasons.

The first reason which the Apostle here in this text uses to persuade us to
live vprighly and to forsake sin, and wickedness, is taken of ye circumstaunce
of the time, the words be these: And that cosidering the season, it is now
time for us to awake out of sleep. In which verse he tells us that it is now
high time for us to amend our lives, and to serve God, especially because good
opportunity serves thereunto, and so much the rather bycasue the clouds of
ignorance, unbelief, and wicked lusts, are now driven away from us by the
light of the gospel, and knowledge of gods truth, and therefore it behooves us
so to order our lives as they which have y^ light, and which are still
conuersaunt in the open sight and eyes of all men. For they which perceue that
all men's eyes are bent upon them, have a diligent care least they should do
any thing that is not seemelye and honest, because they know by experience,
that if they step never s^^ little aside out of the right way, then they
shall be espied and have many witnesses ready to accuse them, of their sin
and iniquity. So in like manner, it behooves us (who live in the sight of God
and his angels, having Christ the true son of righteousness, a vewer, and
beholder of all our doings, co^mau^ding us to walk as before him) to take
advised heed, y^ we do nothing yt may offend his divine majesty, bicase if we
so do, we shall have Christ himself a witness against us, who shall judge in ye
last day, and pronounce sentene upon all flesh, acording to ye tenor of
justice and equitye. But it appears that* the talk that is here used, is not
plain, but Metaphorical. For the Apostle makes mention of sleep, of waking,
of night, of darkness, of light, of day. And therefore before I proceed any
further in the text. I think it meet and convenient to declare unto you, what
is meant, by every one of these words, to the end that, that which I am about
to teach, may be more manifest and plain to you that be my hearers.

Know ye therefore that by sleep, he means sin, and a certain sluggishnes
and drowsines to embrace the gospel, to hear gods word, and to frame and
fashion our lives there after. By awaking out of sleep, he means a certain
desire and readiness to do our duties, and such things as God requires of us
in his word.

Aristole therefore does very well and truly call waking a liberty or freedom of
the senses, and he calls sleep a band or imprysoninge of them. For when a
man is a sleep, he has all his senses, so tied up and imprisoned, that he
has neither eyes to see, ears to hear, nose to smell, hands to touch,
feet to go, nor heart to conceive, but is like unto a dead corpse that lies
rottinge in the grave: But when a man is a wake, then is he ready enough to
see, to hear, to speak, to run, to go, or to do any thing belonging to a
reasonable creature. Therefore the Apostle says it is now time for us to awake
out of sleep, as though he should have said before our regeneration, before
god had given us eyes te se, and hearts to believe ye truth, we were fast a
sleep in sin, and did lie in the shadow of death, and there was nothing in
us but horrible blindness, so that we could not see ye majesty of god, we did
not feel and fast ye mercies of god offered to us in Christ his dear and
well-beloved son, neither had we learned how sweet ye Lord is. Our ears were
so stopped y^ we could not harken unto the sweet voice of God, and glad
tidinges of salvation, we perceived nothing at all of the goodness of God
toward us, neither yet were we moved to any work of charity toward our
neighbor but were utterly unapt and altogether unable to do any good work,
yea not so much, so much as to think a good thought. But now saying it has
pleased the lord to pittye our misery, to awake us out of this deadlye and
dangerous sleep of sin, to send his word amongst us, and by it through
the working of his spirit to create faith in us, it is very meet and also
right needful that we sleep no more in sine, but rise up with all speed unto
newnes of life. For seeing we have now the light of the Gospel amongst us, it
is now no time for us, to ^lugge and sleep any more, and to follow ye lusts
and pleasures of the flesh, as though Christ had never been preched unto us,
and we never called by the voice of God to repentance and amendment of life.
Let us therefore not neclect this good occasion, considering y^ the apostle
does here fell us that it is now high time for us to awake out of sleep: but
let every man be ready to do his duty, seeing that good opportunitye serves
thereunto, and we ought in no wise to defer the reformation of things that be
amiss, from day, to day, and year, to year, and to be idle at such a time as
this is, because god perchance will not always grant us ye like occasion to
do good. And therefore it behooves us to strain our selus the more whilst
occasion ^^steth, and while god grau^teth us leave to do well. The Smith
stricketh his iron (...) it is hot. The husband man (...) his corn to be
already ripe, provides in d^^ sea^on reaper^, and sicles, to cut it do^^^, and
in the har^est time you shall hear him say to his servants when the weather
is fair, plie it ^^irs, plye it, for we cannot tell whether it will rain or
no, and how long this fair weather will last. Likewise the Marchantman if he
have a voyage to make, he will take ship while tide an^ w^^de serves. For
he knows that time and tide will ^arye for no man. The prophet Esaias therefore
gives good counsel, and wills all men to receive Christ, when as he offers
himself into them by the preaching of his word. Saying, Qu^^^te dominum dum
inue^^^ potest, invoke Esaias 55.
eum dum prope est, sieke the Lord whilst he may be found, call you upon him,
whilst he is near. Christ in the gospel, does show that many through their
own slownes, and negligence, shall be that out of the kingdom of heaven, and
he deprived of eternal Luck 13.
life. Here upon he says, Contendite intrare per angu^^am porta^, quia dico
vobis multi quaerent intrare, et non poterunt. St^^ue to enter in at ye strait
gate, for many I say will seek to enter in and shall not be able. When ye good
man of ye house is risen up, and has shut to y^ door, and ye begin to stand
without and knock, at ye door, saying, Lord Lord open unto us, and he shall
answer and say unto you, I know you not whence you are. In ye xxv. of Math.
Mat 2^ ^*
we read y^ the sieve wise virgins, which were ready went in with the Bridegrom
unto the weddinge: but ye five folishe virgins, because they were not ready in
time, had ye gate of heaven shut against them. For whilst they went to bye
oil for their la^ps, y^ bridegroom came and the ga^^ was shut. Paul therefore,
in the Gal. wills us to do good Gal. 6 ^
to all men while we have time. And here in this place he tells us y^ it is
now time for us to awake out of sleep Wherefore seeinge y^ good occasion of
well doing beings (...) ^et ^lipe cannot be called back agane, and f^r^^much
as it has plesed god of his infinite mercy to se^d his word amongst us to give
us understanding of his good will and pleasure, and to awake^ us which were
before fast a sleep in Idolatry, and utterly unable to do any good work, let
us I say, not neclect this good occasion, but with an earnest desire endeavor to
do our duties whilst god grants us leisure, and whilst good opportunity
serves thereunto. An other reason which ought to persuade us to do our duty
without delay, is because our life is short and passes away swyftly, and good
occasions of well doing slip away apace, and therefore great cause have we
to do good whilst God gives us respite, and whilst opportunity serves. For
we are taught by the prophet ye we cannot be counted for good and fruitful
trees, unless Psalm. 1.
we bring footh fruit in dwe season. A good tree does not only bring forth
good fruit: but also it brings it forth in due and convenient time. So if we
will be counted good Christians we must do good whilst opportunitye serves.
The good Samaritane mentioned of in ye Luck. 10.
Gospel, did good while opportunity did serve, and when occasion was offered.
For so sone as he saw the man that was fallen into ye hands of thieves, lying
by the way side sore beaten and wounded, he was straight way moved with
compassion on him, in so much yt he went unto him, bound up his wounds, powered
wine and oil into them, laid him upon his beast, carried him to his Inn, and
made prousion for him. But the Priest and ye Leuite had ye same occasion
offered them to do good and to exercise their charity toward their
neighbor, but they passed by and would not do good when occasion served
thereunto. So likewise when poor Lazarus lay at ye gate of Dives, with a naked
body and an Luc. 16.
empty belly, crauinge to be refreshed with the small cru^mes that fell from his
table, there was occasion offered unto him to do good, but he would not do good
when he might, and bring forth fruit in dwe season, therefore he was cut
down as an unfruitful tree, and cast into the fire, and his end was
everlasting myserye without all hope of mercy. Therefore let us learn to do
good whilst we have time, and when we may. But alas although we are here told
that it is time to awake out of sleep, to arise out of, the bed of carnal
security, and to go about our business, yet for all this we lie still, we are
none of the hastinges, yea, we defer our doing well from one day to
another, yea from one year to another, that is to say, from henceforth for ever
more. Such is our negligence and slownes in this behalf. For we are in such a
dead sleep that we awake not, for all the noise and callinges that is made
and used every day. The preachers cry out and cease not, they exalt their
voices like trumpetes, and call unto us every day for amendment of life:
saying with S. Paul, arise thou that sleep and (...). 5.
stand up from death, and the Lord* shall give thee light: and yet for all
this we sleep still. And therefore I fear me that many of us shall dye in our
sins without repentance, and have our souls buried in hell, to everlasting
pain, which if we would awake and arise from sin, should dwell in heaven
to everlasting life. And truly we that be hear in this country, be of all
others, I fear me, fruthest of from salvation. For although the trumpet of
gods word do daily sound in our ears, and although we have ye black clouds
of darkness and ignorance driven away from us by ye shininge light of the
gospel, yet for all this we walk not as the childr^e of light, but are to well
acquainted, and over much occupied, in the unfruitful works of darkness: for
how can we be said to be the childrne of light, when as no fruit of godly
life appears in all our doings, and when our deeds be such toward our
neighbors that they show and declare there is nothing but doung and poison
in our hearts? And how can we be said to be awake, when as we lie still
buried in sin, drowned in vice, and seeinge that we daily commit such deeds,
as sti^cke both before she face of god and all good men? We say that a man is
awake, when as he can do the office of a man, as talk, write, go, run, and
such like. So in like manner a man is said to be a waked out of the sleep of
sin, when as he believes truly in Christ, loves his neighbor, and walks
in the ways and commandments of the ^. Sam 12
Lord GOD. King David awaked out of this sleep of sin (wherein he had
lain above a year) when as Nathan the Prophet came unto him, and reproved him
therefore. For after that Natha^ had rebuked him for his whoredom, he began to
mislike him self earnestly for his sin committed, humbled himself before
God, and cried out I have sinned against the Lord saying, Miserere mei deus
secundum Psalm 51.
magnum miserecordiam tuam etc.

Have mercy on me O God, according to thy great mercy, and according to y^
multitude of thy compassions, wype away my offenses. Wash me thoroughly from my
wickedness and cleanse me from my sin. The Prodigal son awaked out of the
sleep of sin, when he forsook his fylthy strompets, and returned home to
his father, from whom he had rashly departed, submittinge him self unto him
and saying, Father, I have sinned against heaven Luc. 15.
and against thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son.

The wicked Jews which had crucified Christ, harkeninge to the sermon of
Peter, began to awake out of this deadly sleep of sin, when as they began to
be pricked in the heart, and to say unto Peter and the other apostles: Act. ^.
Men and brethren what shall we do: which examples do teach us, y^ men are
then said to be awake, and to arise out of the sleep of sin, when as they
are heartily sorry, for the sin committed, and bring forth the fruit of
repentance. Thus you see what is meant by sleep and arising from sleep. And
truly it should seem that the apostle does use this Metaphor, of sleepinge
and wakinge, and of night and day, that we might have good occasions, to muse
and think of these things, as often as we see the son ^o arise, and as often as
we awake out of sleep, and rise out of our beds.

For even as it is the part of a good husband not to slugge and sleep in his
bed, when as the day appearinge offers unto him good occasion to arise and
to go about his business, but to get up with all convenient speed, and to go
about such things as are needeful to be done: So christian men, which have any
care of their own salvation ought not to let slip the good opportunity to do
good, offered to them of god: but they ought to show them selves ready and
diligent to do those things yt God has commanded by his word. An other
reason which he uses to persuade us to arise now out of this deadly sleep,
is because our salvation is nearer, then when we believed it. By which reason he
shows that it had have to small purpose, to tell us of these things and to
have exhorted us to holiness of life, before we did believe in Christ, and had
the knowledge of the truth.

But seeing that our salvation is now nearer then it was in time past, we
ought in no wise to neglect this occasion.

By salvation he means that full and perfect salvation, and blessedness,
which we shall be parsakers after this life.

So that the sense and meaning of Paul is that our fall and perfect
salutation, is now nearer then it was long ag^e, and when we did syrst begin
to believe. For as without says, and belief in Christ there is no hope of
salvation, no remission of sins, no eternal life to be looked for: so heaven
and eternal life begin then to appear, when ^^yrst God gives a heart to
believe, and eyes to see the way to most blessed immortalytie. And the more
that our faith increases, and the more that we profit in the knowledge of God,
the nearer, and nearer, do we draw toward heaven, and most blessed
salvation. When as a man diggeth in a gold mine, the deeper he diggeth the
nearer he comes to gold. The further that the trauayling man goes on his
way, the nearer he comes to his iournies end. So the most happy and perfect
saluasion, that we shall enjoy after this mortal life, is nearer unto us the^
when we first believed. For when as we began first to believe, then did we begin
to set forward in our rate and iourneye, and to goo toward heaven, but now we
have gone a great way in our journey, and every day draws nearer and nearer ye
day of our death. At which time our souls shall be carried up into heaven. Again
we are now nearer to ye day of judgment, and ye world is nearer an end the^ it
was mani a year ago. At which time christ shall raise up our bodies out of ye
dust, and make us partakers of that kingdom whereof his blessed body is
pertaker 1. Cor. 15.
of all ready. For then shall mortalyty, put on immortality, and corrupcion,
incorrupcio^, and then may we be bold to say, O death where is thy stynge? O
hell where is thy victory? And truly the consideracion of this full and
perfect salvation, which is now nearer, then when we first believed, ought to
move us to lead a holy and Godly life, least yt through our slouthe and
necligence, we lose it and give testimony to the world, that it does not
appertain unto us.

For our necligence must needs be accounted horrible, and shameful, if we now
leave of to serve GOD, when as we have but a short time to live, and be at the
very point to take possession of heaven.

The longer we live, and the nearer that we approach to death, the more earnest
we ought to be to serve God, and the longer that we have hard the Gospel, and
believed in Christ, so much the more earnest we ought to be to obey the
Gospel. And therefore seeinge that we have hard the Gospel many years in
this Realm of England, the more deligent we ought to be to serve God, and to
live uprightly, and to show forth by our life, and conversation, that we be
dooers of ye word and not hearers only, deceauinge our Ia. 1.
own selves.

A prentice in seven years will learn his occupation, and be able to do his
master good service, and he will be more shylful the second year then the
first, and so every year better than another.

The little chyldrne that go to the Schole go forward in learning, and in
three or four years will not only be able to read, but also to write and to
speak lattine.

But alas we have gonne to schole not seven years, but eighttene years, we
have had many notable Scholemasters and teachers, and yet for all this we be
little amended, but like very blockheades we tarry still in our old lessons,
and will not take forth into good manners and new conditions. Yea we are more
slow to hear Gods word, and to frame our lives thereafter, then we were when
it was first preached. And we go rather backward then forward.

And what a reproach, and shame is it for us, to be more slow, to serve God
then we were in the beginning, considering we have tasted of his mercy and
grace, so long, and so many years together, and that in such sort, that we
may justly say, Non taliter fecit omni nationi: He has not dealt so with any
nation, as he has dealt Psalm. 147.
with us.

You know that they which run for a wager, that the nearer they draw to the
mark, the faster they run, and they make the more speed.

So, the longer that we have hard the Gospel, and the longer that we have
believed, so much the holier we ought to be in life and conversation.

And truly if there were no other reason to persuade us, yet consideringe (as I
have said already) that our life is short, and death knocks at the doors,
and the day of Judgment comes on so fast, that we may look for it every
hour, we ought to be persuaded to live uprightly, and to walk as it be comes
us.

But (alas) many at the first hearing of the Gospel, showed them selves
zealous, and ready to follow it. But after a while they gave over even in the
midst of their race, and waxed weary of well doing. And truly it appears
that there has been many of these slydebackes in all ages, but yet I think
never more than at this day. King Asa in the beginning of his reign was
zealous in 2. Chro 16.
abolishing of Idolatry and in restoring of sound religion, but at the length
he began to wax cold in the zeal of the Lord, imprisoned Hananie the Sear
for telli^g him of his fault, therefore from that time forward he felt the
smart and bitterness of war, was stricken by the hand of God with an extreme
disease in the feet; and at length taken away by death. Ioas likewise 2. Chro
24
was a good King in the beginning of his reign, and he lived uprightly all
the days of Iehoida the Priest, who was unto him a faithful counselor, and
governed him by the word of God, but when Iehoida was dead, he falls to
Idolatry, and forgettinge the kindenes which Iehoida had done unto him, slew
and s^oned to death his son Zacharia ye Prophet of ye Lord. For which it
came to pass by the just judgment of God, that he was slyan by the hands of
his own servant. The fi^e folyshe virgins went forth with their lamps to
meet the Bridgroume, as well as the fi^e wise, but because they faynted in the
myddest of their race, therefore they were shut out from the marriage and
everlasting life. Let these horrible examples move us to take heed, and to
beware that we be not weary of well doing, least we in the end perish as they
did. But let us every day, morning, and evening, risinge and goinge to bed,
consider that our salutation, is now nearer then it was in times past, and that
therefore we ought with a good courage to go forward to do our duties
thoroughly, and to the end, quietly to suffer that little trouble, that is
behind. And every day more and more to increase in faith, and to be more holy
in life.

It follows in the text, the night is passed and the day is at hand. Here
is an other reason to move us to live uprightly, and it differs not much from
that which he used before. For the night he calls the ignorance of God and
Christ, ye time of blindness, and unbelief. By day he means ye light of gods
truth, by which truth Jesus Christ the true son of righteousness does appear
unto us. And therefore in saying the night is passed, and the day is come on,
he means that seeinge we are not now overwhelmed with ye thick mistes and
clouds of ignorance as the infidels, and vnbeleeuinge be, and as we our
selves were in times past, we ought to behave our selves, as the childrne of
the day and light, and not to sleep still in sin with the wicked and
vnbeleeuinge. And here by the way we have diligently to note and consider,
that Paul calls the ignorance of Christ, and his gospel, night and darkness,
and co^pareth the unbelievers to such as be fast a sleep. And very aptly and
not without good cause, is the ignorance of Christ compared to night. For as
in the night time, all things are covered with darkness, and as we cannot for
want of light, know what is what, and discern black from blew^, and read
from russet, yea sometimes in ye night season we think a bushe to be a man,
and a dead thing a living creature, for then as ye Poet says, Est color
omnibus vnus, all things seem to be of one hue and coulor: so when we were
altogether ignorant in gods word and knew not Christ, we did mistake things
and through igoraunce, we did so err y^ we accounted superstision to be good
devotion, and thought our selves highly in gods favor, when as we were fast
tied in ye devils setters, and almost plunged into the pit of endless
damnacio^. For without ye knowledge of gods word, we are so blind, that we
cannot discern between justice and injury, protection and opression, religion
and superstition, Christ and Antichrist, good and evil. Paul himself being
ignorant of Christ, did with great rage and Act. 9.
cruelty persecute his disciples and thirsted after innocent blood, and he
himself confesses y^ he was sometimes utterly parswaded, that he ought to do
many things against ye name of Christ being led thereunto, by a rash and blind
zeal and as yet wantinge the true knowledge of God.

The Saduces being ignorant of the scriptures denied the res^rrection of ye
Mar. 12.
flesh, therefore said Christ unto them. You err because you know not the
scriptures, neither the power of God. The wicked Jews through ignorance put
Christ to death, for Christ praying to his father for them says, Pater remitte
Luke 23.
eis nesciunt enim quid faciunt. Father forgive them, for they know not what
they do. And S Paul says if they had known, they would never have killed
the king of glory. But I will let pass them, and come nearer to our selves.
When we were ignorant in gods word, and hard nothing but the sound of a
ti^^klinge Cimball, did we not think supersticion, to be religion, deceauers
true teachers, vanity to be verity, the gospel to be heresy, to gad abroad
on pilgramage, from this saint, to y^ saint, to be a part of gods service,
men's traditions the commandments of god, Antichriste Christ's vicar, the man
of Rome who is a creature overwhelmed with all wickedness, and the beast that did
rise out of the bottemles pit, Ap^. 1^.
a most holy father? Yea, we thought that God was delited with incense,
perfume, waxcandles, golden copes, and vestmentes, and we worshipped those
things which our own consciences gave us to understand were no gods, we made
no difference almost betwixt Christ and his creatures, we confounded the sign
with the thing signified, and worshipped a wafer cake which is a creture
corruptible, in steed of the maker of heaven and earth, and believed it was the
very body of Christ, that was borne of the virgin Marye, and slain for our
sins upon the Cross.

The cause of all which gross errors, was the ignorance of Christ and his
word. For although some of the Papists say, that ignorance is the mother of
devotion, yet it appears that it is the mother of all error and supersticion.

And therefore very aptly it is compared to the night and to sleep. For even
as one when as he is in ye night time fast a sleep in his bed, has all his
senses so tied up, and bound, that he cannot do any thing, and yet
nevertheless he dreameth sometimes, and verily thinks, yt he is doing this
and yt, so they which are ignorant of Christ, and his word, have all the powers
of their souls, so let and hindered, yt they cannot move toward heaven, or
do any thing yt can please God: although oftentimes they think they do god
most noble service, when as they commit most horriable and grievous crimes.

But forasmuch as it is now not night with us, but day, let us do those
things that are seemly for them that have the light, and follow the counsel
of Paul, who wylleth us to cast away the works of darkness, and to put on the
armoure of light.

By ye works of darkness is signified sins and naughtye vices, and they are
so called chiefly for two causes. The first cause is, because they proceed of
the ignorance of gods word, and because we are moved to do them by the
motion and instinct of Satan, who is the prince of darkness. Secondly
because they that commit naughti^sse, flee the light, and covet rather for the
night then for the day, according to the saying of our Savior Christ, Qui
male agit odit John. ^*
lucem, he that does evil hates the light. For whoremongers, thieves,
murderers, and wicked persons commonly do their feats in the dark, and in
the night season, and therefore says Paul, Quae ab illis clam fiunt turpe est
vell dicere, It is a shame even ones to name those things that are done of
them in secret.

The darkness of the night does make them bold to commit sin, for they fear
only the eyes of men, and consider not that the eyes of the Lord are upon
every man's ways, and that with him there is no darkness at al, but yt the night
is with him as the noone day. And therefore although men commit sin never so
closely, yet does god see them, and at length will reauele and bring it to
light, as he did the whoredom of David, and there is no wall so thick, that
can hide them that work wickedness, from the sight of god. Let us therefore
cast away the works of darkness, and put on the armoure of light. By the
armoure of light he understands good works, because they proceed of faith,
and of ye true knowledge of god, and shine before men to the honor and praise
of our good god, who works them in us by his holy spirit. But here it may be
demanded why Paul does call vices and sins the works of darkness, and
good works the armoure of light. Truly, you know that our flesh is prone
enough and inclined of it self to follow naughtiness, and in committing sin
we take great pleasure, and think it no pain at all to do wickedly.

But if we begin ones to serve God, and to frame our lives according to ye rule
of his word, then must we strive and take great pains, and there is a battle
set before us, full of great labor and peril: In which battle we must fight
against Satan, the inticem^n^es of the world, and y^ sinful lusts of the
flesh. For the devil is chief captayn in this battle, and gives us every
day terrible assaults, and rangeth about like a rearing Lion, seeking whom he
may deueure. Besides this great and mighty enimye, look how many wicked
thoughts and ^u^l affections there be in us, so many enemies we have yt fight
against our salvation, and which seek to bring us to destruction. And therefore
if we will live uprightly, we must continually maintain war against Satan,
the world, and the flesh. Christ himself does admonish us hereof in the
Gospel, when as he tells us y^ the way to heaven is strayt and narrow, and
the crown of life cannot be obtained without pains taking. And we see daily
by experience, that they which give themselves to serve God, to be subject to
sclaunders and reproaches, to be beset on every side with All which places do
sufficiently prove that it is not enough for us to abstain from evil, but
also we must do good. And therefore here we may see that they use unseemly
speeches, which say, what should we give our selves to holiness? Or why should
not we follow our pleasures, if we be of the elect and chosen of GOD, we
shall be saved, howsoever we live? if we be reprobates and cast awaies we
shall be damned whatsoever we do? As though ye election of god did give leave
unto men to do wickedlye, when as it is plain by the testimonye of S. Paul
that we are chosen in Christ not to live loselye, but that we should Epl^^ 1.
be holy and without blame before him in love. For it is certain and out of
doubt, that holiness of life cannot be separate from the grace of election. And
therefore although good works be not the causes of our salvation, yet seeinge
that the end of our election is that we should live uprightly and lead a
godly life, let us not only abstain from evil, but also do good works that
they may serve as witnesses to confirm our election, and that we may in so
dooinge show our selves to be the sheep (...) Christ who do not only hear
his John 10.
voice but also follow him. For S. Paul here in this place does plainly tell
us, that we cannot be reckened for gods servants, unless we walk honestly
as in yt day. In which words I have to note unto you, and to say some thing of
this word walkinge, because it is very life both in the old, and new
testament: and the Lord does use it often times to give us to understand,
how we should order and frame our life. For then are we said to walk
honestly as it becomes us, when as we live uprightly and withdraw our selves
from evil.

Hereupon the Prophet often times in his book of Psalms goinge about to live
uprightly does use this word walk. In ye first Psalm. he says, Blessed is
that man that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly. etc.

And in the. 119. Psalm. he says, Blessed are they that are sound in the way,
and walk in the law of the Lord, by which two places it appears that to
live uprightly, and honestly, is nothing else but to walk in the law of the
Lord. For if a man live after his own swing he shall do nothing else but
wander out of the right way, and do those things which are neither seemly
nor honest. Paul settinge down certain precepts concerning manners, and
christian life, says I pray you walk worthy of the vocation Ephe. 4. Col. 1.
whereunto you are called. And Collo. i. he wills us to walk worthy of the
Lord, to please him in all things, and to be fruitful in all good works. So
it appears that it is not enough for a man to walk unless he walk
honestly as in the day. For though all men do walk, yet do not all men walk
nonestly, and in the law of GOD, or day light as they should do. Some there
be that walk not in the day, but in the night, and such walkers be thieves
and robbers which commit wickedness in the night, and when true men are at rest
and in their beds. Some other there be that walk in darkness for they have
not the true knowledge of Christ, and of his word, but are utterly ignorant in
matters pertaininge to GOD, and to their salvation.

Such walkers were the filthye and polluted Gentiles when as they lay drowned in
all kind of filthiness and superstition, in which they continued until Christ,
sent his servants to Mat. 22.
call them to be partakers of the heavenly marriage. Such walkers be the
Turks, which slatly deny Christ, and the gospel seekinge for life and
salvation by the Alcoran.

Such be the Jews which seek for salvation by the law and deny Christ which
was borne of the virgin Mary, to be the son of God, and the true Messiah.

Such walkers also be the papists for they make ye paineful passion of Jesus
Christ the high ransom of our souls and the only means which god has used
to work our salvation by, to be void and of none effect, by bearinge
themselves in hand, that they are able to purchase the realm of Paradise, by
their own merits. For they walk after their own fancies, and trangresse the
law of God for their own traditions. Some other there be yt walk, but they
walk not honestly as in the day, for they walk after the flesh, and not
after the spirit. Such walkers as these, are they which delight in nothing but
in sin, and wickedness, and which take leave to do naughtily, never
stryuing against their own lusts and wicked affections, but suffering satan
(the enemy of our salvation and welfare) to hale them from one vice to
another, even to their own destruction. Such a fleshly walker was Absolon,
whose lust was so outrageous, that he defiled his fathers wives in the sight of
all Israel.

And surely as long as men walk after the flesh, and after the manner of this
world, which is altogether set upon mischief, they shall every day become
worse and worse, and their desire will be nothing else but to draw others into
the same sink of sin, whereinto they themselves are already fallen. And these
that walk after this fashion, walk disorderly, and they walk in horrible
confusion, and in that broad way that leads to hell and endless damnation.

An other kind of walkers there be, which walk honestly as in the day, and
these be they which live not after their own swinge, and let lose y^ bridle to
vices, but suffer them selves to be governed by the word of GOD, and walk
according to his law. And these because they walk according to the pure
word of God, they do those things that are comely and honest. They spend
their lives wholly in gods service, and withdraw themselves as much as is
possible from all evil. For they do not walk as the wordlinges do, which
every day become worse and wofe, but they set GOD always before their eyes,
and have a respect to his precepts because they know they cannot do any thing
that can escape his sight.

Of this walkinge speaks god himself in Gene. Whereas he commands Gene. 17.
Adraham to walk before him and to live uprightly, and truly we shall never
walk hnoestlye as we should do unless we set the Lord before our eyes, and
think that we live still in his sight.

Many do glory of the multitude and boast thmselues to be holy and religious
men, because they live as the most do, and walk after the manners and
coustomes if their forefathers, but yet the holy ghost does here tell them,
that they shall never walk honestlye unless they separate them selves from
men, and frame their lives according to the law of GOD.

Here upon it is said that Enoch walked with GOD because he was not perverted
by the evil example of others, and although the world, when as he lived, was
as corrupt as might be, yet he continued uncorrupted, and considered that it
behooued him to walk honestly as in the presence of GOD.

Such a walker was Job for he gave himself to the service of God, lived
amongst his neighbors without hurtinge of any person, guile, deceit, and
naughtiness was far from him, neither went he about as many d^y in these
days, to increase his substance by vndooinge of poor men. And therefore the
Scripture does rep^^t him to be a sound and Job. 1^
upright man, and such a one as feared GOD, and withdrewe himself from evil.

Joseph also walked honestly, for although he was allured by his mais^res to
do wickedness with her, yet could not he be drawn to destle his Masters
bed. And although no creature was present when as his maisteres did entice
him to folly, yet he walked honestly as in the day, and the fear of GOD
preserved him, against her continual temptations. And therefore he said, how
can I d^^ Gene. 39.
this great wickedness and so sin against god.

Susanna walked also honestly when as ye wicked Judges would have de flowred
her. For she would not by any Dani. 13.
means consent unto the^, but being in great distres she sighed and said, I am
in trouble on every side, for if I do this thing it is death unto me, if I do
it not I cannot escape your hands, Sed melius est mihi absque opere incidere in
manus hominum, quam peccare in co^spectu domini, it is better for me to fall
into ye hands of men, and not do it, than to sin in ye sight of the Lord.
Zacharias the Priest, and Elizabeth his Luke 1.
wife walked honestly, for they were both just before god, and walked in all
the commandments of the Lord. All which examples teach us that if we will
walk honestly, we must endeavor to keep ye commandments of God, and
although we see great store of corruptions raigninge every where, yet must not
we suffer our selves to be defy^ed with them, neither must we say as men
commonly are wont to do, tush we must needs do as other men do, but we must
follow ye advise that Paul gives us in this place, that is, to walk honestly
as in the day, and not suffer the world the flesh and the devil to have rule
over us.

The second part sets down what 2. Parts.
we must shun and avoid if we will live uprightly and walk honestly. The
things that we must shun, be gluttony and drunkenness, chambering and
wantonness, strife and envying. For whosoever they be that are infected with
these vices, walk disorderly, and their life is odious and hateful in the
sight of God. And although many men do think these to be no vices, or at
leastwise small faults, yet the Apostle does condemn them for horrible and
grievous sins, and does plainly tell us that there is no honesty nor any fear
of God in them, that spend their lives in these vices. But let us examine these
vices, and speak of them orderly as they lie in the text, and then shall we
better judge whether they be sins or no.

The first, is gluttony and drunkenness, the which two vices, are to common at
this day in this realm, and for the most part, they are committed at prodigal
fastes, and banquetes, and at such time as this is (I mean Christmas). For in
Christmas time and at great feasts, gluttons and dronkerdes think they may
eat and drink as much as they will, and that it is lawful for them to speak
and do whatsoever they think good. Behold them therefore, and you shall see
them to pass the bands of all measure, and to commit such disorders as though
there were no judge in Heaven, nor hell to swallowe up wicked men after this
mortal life.

Fr^t, they sit down to their meat like brute beasts, without any calling or
thincking upon the name of God* never destryng god to bless their meats. They
eat and drink more then is meet and convenient for the^, and oftentimes so
much as they cannot digest: You shall see them to play ye gluttons egregiously,
and to ^ramme themselves like swine, and they never leave liftinge of the
pottes, and caroussinge one to another till they be out of their wits like
beasts.

And when they have thus armed themselves, they regard neither friend nor foe,
but dare speak and do what so ever comes to mind.

Again these dronkerdes drive GOD from their table, and company, they cannot
abide to hear the name of God spoken of, unless it be to take it in vain,
and to blaspheme it, with horrible and cursed swearinge.

Their talk and communication is nothing else, but of ribaldrye, and
wantonness, of backbytynge their neighbors, and of practisinge mischeyfe
against this man and that man.

Lo, what evils dronkennes brings with it. But yet you shall here more
abominations then these, strong drink they esteem of more price and value,
the^ their own souls, their god is their belly, and Philip. 3.
therefore they make not have to come to the church to hear gods word, but as
the prophet says, they rise up early Esaias. 5.
to go to the wine and tavern, whereas they spend the whole day, and many
times, a great part of the night, in swallowinge and devouring gods benefits
without order or measure. If any man yet think that dronke^nes is no sin,
then give me leave, to tell you in few words what mischiefs and
inconveniences proceed thereof. A tree is known by the fruit, so judge of
dronke^nes by the fruits that spring. threof. First it hurts the body it
marreth the mind, and consumes the substance, for by it many men fall into
horrible disceases, and soundrye times into grievous mischau^ces, sometimes
being slain with suddayne death as it appears by the miserable* end of
dronken Holiphernes, whose head was cut of in his dronkennes by the hand of
Iudeth.

The body with all the parts thereof are so distempered, that the earth the^
the which there is nothing more stable, and sure, is to dronken men unstable,
in so much that they think it moves and goes round, and ye plain way is
unto them like a cave and diche, the head is brought into that case, that it
cannot rule and govern ye feet, the eyes are made dim, and fiery, they
mar their faces, and put out ye true pi^tor y^ god has made, they heat their
lyuers and set them all on fire. What causes the head to ache, the hands to
trimble, the tongue to stammer and that no member of the body can discharge and
do his duty? dronknes.

Therefore truly says Solomon, to Pro. 24.
whom is woe, to whom is sorrow, to whom is strife, to whom is murmering, to
whom are wounds without cause, to whom is rednes of the eyes? even to them
that tarry long at the wine.

It also brings me^ unto whordome, and into great danger. For ye eyes of
dronkerdes shall look upon strange women, and their heart shall speak proud
things, and they shall be as they that sleep in the top of a mast of a ship

Though the Lord speak unto them and say, awake oh ye dro^kerdes, weep and
houle, all ye that drink wine vnmeasurably, yet are they nothing moved there
with, for it were almost as good to speak to a dead man as to a dronkerde.

Secondly, the mind is marred, and sore hurt by it, for dronkerdes commonly
are stricken with the spirit of blockishenes, and they are like unto
madbedlomes, and men that have lost their wits. It makes them like unto
bruit beasts taking away from them all their wit, reason and understanding.

Verily it would be a pitious sight to see a man to take his knife to cut of
his own fingers and to cast them from him.

But a dronkerde takes away from himself his own wit, reason, yea, Eccle
19.
and the very mind it self. Herevppon says the wise man that wine takes
away the heart of man, and leads wisemen out of the way.

Thirdly and last of all, it consumes the substance, and bring men oftentimes
to pitiful calamity Pro. 24. Eccle 19.


Hereupon says Solomon, a laboring man that is given to drink, shall never be
rich, and for this cause he wills us not to company with them, for if we
do, we shall go with patched and ragged coats.

And truly we see this confirmed daily by many examples.

These men are no great purchacers of lands, nor men of great revenues, and
many which have been left very welthye by their fathers wills, have consumed
all that has been left them, and died very beggars. For they spend much
abroad with shame, upon their own bellies, which they might spare by varying
at home, with honesty. Many there be that seek to spoil and rob their
enemies, and some there be that will steal from their friends, but dronkerdes,
rob their own wives and childrne, and are moved with little pity and
compassion toward them. Here I know that these alehouse knights will reply
and say, that they spend nothing but their own. But to them that use such
speech, I make this answer, that their money is not their own, but as the
Prophet says, it is the Lords. Thou art but Hag. 2.
his steward, and he has lent thee wealth and riches, not to mispende one
farthing or mite vnthriftely, and upon things not necessary.

God has made the earth to bring forth fruit, and has made man lord and
king of all his creatures, but yet to use them, not to abuse them. If God have
given us riches, and sent us wealth he has not given it us to spend all upon
our own carkases, but to help our wives and childrne withal, to releaue the
want of the poor, to bestow some part of it upon them which cry at our
gates for relief and comfort, and therefore if thou play the dronkerd, bestow
all upon thy self, thou playest the part of a strong thief, and robbest thy
wife, thy childrne, and the poor needy neighbors, of yt which they ought to
have to comfort them withal.

We must consider also that GOD has in his word set down how men should use
their riches, to whom one day we must give account.

For to every one of us it shall be Luke 16.
said give account of thy stewardshippe.

If you send your servant to the market you will have him to bestow your
money, in such sort as you do command him, and not at his own pleasure.

So GOD has given to men money and wealth, but yet therewithal he has given
us a rule how to bestow it.

The evil steward because he had Luke 16.
wasted his masters goods was thrust out of his stewardshippe. So all they
which have spent their goods vnthri^tily, at the alehouse, except they repent,
shall be excluded out of the kingdom of heaven, and after this life* they shall
suffer honger and thrist for evermore.

Thus you see our money is not our own, to do with it what our list, or to
mispend it in ryote and wantonness, neither is it lawful to eat and drink to
much, but so much as is meet and convenient for us. True it is y^ GOD is not
offended, with eatinge and drinking, but he is offended with us, when as we
abuse eatinge and drinkinge and when as we deuour^ his benefits without
measure.

But, alas, if ever eatinge and drinkinge were abused it is abused at this
day, and I think there was never such super ^^uitie of meats, and that the
cheer which they made in ye days of Noah, was not once comparable to our
feastinge, that we use at this day.

But perchance here some men will say, would you never have us to make good
cheer, and to be merry one neighbor with an other, is God offended think
you, that we should use any mirth and feastinge?

Truly I know right well that we may use feasting, one neighbor with
another to maintain mutual love and friendship, and I know that GOD would
not always have us to be sad, but that he would have us to be merry and gives
us wherewith to be merry.

David says, he gives us wine to Psalm 104.
cheer our hearts, and oil to make us cheerful countenaunces, and sometime
sends abundance and plentye of things to cheer us up withal. And when GOD
sends plenty of riches and other good things, it is not evil to use these
things to our comfort, and to be glad of them, so that I deny not but that we
may rejoice and be merye if God send us any good cheer or any good success,
notwythstandinge we ought so to be provided always that we rejoice and be
merry as it were in y^ presence of GOD.

But alas the mirth that we commonly use at such times as this is, is that
mirth which GOD condemns. For it is full of vanity, and we cannot keep good
cheer, sport, play, and be merry, unless we offend God.

In our mirth we use excess, in playinge we regard not our ability, and we
have in our pastimes no stay of our selves, and we do all things with out
order and measure, neither can we be merye in Christmas time, unless we shut
God out of our houses and company, turn our backs upon him, and quite and
clean forget him. Truly there be some that will stoutly enough say that they
be christians, and they will bear men in hand that they love GOD and his
word, they will not stick to come to the church to hear Sermons, and yet when
they intend to be merry, they drive away al thought of GOD and of his
judgments, and they are not content to do so only, but they will not stick
to offend GOD of set purpose, and they cannot be merye, unless they
disguise themselves and commit evil.

This is the cause why the myrthe Luke ^*
of this world, is cursed by the mouth of gods own son, who says in the
Gospel, woe be unto you that laughe for you shall mourn, and he pr^ouncethe
that the dronken joy, of the wicked, shall be turned into mourning and grinting
of teeth. Therefore take heed to your selves, eat, and drink soberly, and
give god thanks, and hereafter beware ye use not any such mirth, as is
accursed of God, and which at length will bring nothing but sorrow and
heaviness that never shall have end.

And in any wise in your feasts take heed of drunkenness, for if ye ons fall
into this vice, you shall not be able to rule your selves, although ye be
never so wise, never so holy, never so mighty and valyant.

Who was more holy then Noah? and yet he being drunk was so far beside
himself that he forgot the destruction of ye world for sin, which he saw with
his own eyes, he regarded not his own honestye, but lay naked and Gene. 9.
uncovered in his Tent, in so much yt he became a laughingstock to his wicked
son Cham.

Lot a holy man being drunk, lay with his own daughters, committed
abominable incest, got them both with child, never calling to mind how
almighty god, had a little before destroyed Sodom and Gomor, and the Gene. 19.
Cities adjoining, for abominable and stinking whoredom.

Now, if Noah, and Lot, being such excellent men, did fall into such
wickedness, being drunk, what shall they do which have no fear of god
before their eyes, and which are daily given to this vice. Doubtless they will
not stick to commit all kind of villainy.

King Herod as it should seem being Mat. 14.
cupshoten, and drunk with wine, commanded the holy man John Baptist, to be
slain. Who was more mighty and valyant then Alexander, yet he being drunk,
commanded his faithful friend Citus to be put to death, which he repented
sore when he was sober.

Therefore, all that will live uprightly, must flee this vice of dronkennes. But
what? though we eat and drink soberly, yet for all this, we cannot be
counted, good christians, and to live uprightly if we commit fornication or
whordom. And therefore Paul wills us to flee also chambring and wa^^onnes:
Heb 13.
by which he means not ye bed of matrimony, which S. Paul says is honorable
amongst all men, and the bed undefiled. For marriage is gods ordinance, Genesis ^*
it was instituted in Paradise, in the time of man's innocensie, when as yet
there was no sin: And god himself says, that it is not good for man to live
Gene. ^*
alone without a help.

And Paul says, he that does marry does not sin in so dooinge, and he 1.
Cor. ^^
commands al men, which have not the gift of contynencie, to marry, and to
keep themselves undefiled members of Christ's body. Abraham, Job, David, were
married, and yet their wives were no impedimentes unto them, to talk with GOD.

Therefore no doubt the Apostle does here command us to keep the seventh
precept, and that we suffer not ourselves to be defiled, with any uncleanness,
and lustful intemperance of the flesh, but that we chastely, and co^tinently
order all the parts of our life, that we run not forth into any unbridled
lust, and company with any woman out of marriage.

And seeinge Paul does here name chamberinge and wantonness, under these
terms, no doubt he comprehends all things, whereby man or woman is moved,
and enticed to fornication and whoredom: as filthye and unclean talk,
whorishe and garishe attire, amorous songs and sonites, love letters, wanton
daunsinge and kissing, and all such like, whereby the flesh of man is provoked
to lust and concupiscence.

If the^ we will walk honestly, we must not let our minds burn inwardly with
lust, nor look wantonly upon women, to lust after them, nor suffer our bodies
to be trymmed up in pride and bravery, our tongues must not talk filthilye,
neither we harken unto such speech as is not seemly.

It is a dangerous thing to stand gasinge after women, or to be alone with
them in corners, to behold their beauty, when as they have on their garishe
attier, and begin to look with wanton eyes.

Rubin the son of Jacob, seeinge his fathers wife Billa bathinge her self in
a well, had his mind so set upon her, yt he could not sleep and take rest till
he had committed abomination, for he seeinge her lyinge a sleep in her
chamber uncovered, went in unto her and committed wickedness.

But Joseph his brother walked not in the ignorance of youthfulnes and
fornication, neither could he be brought by his maistris the Egiptian woman, to
defile his masters bed although she used (as I said before) many means to
allure him thereunto.

And therefore GOD so blessed him, that he found favor both in the sight of
God and men. But, alas, few Iosephes there be at this day, but we find
many like unto Rubin, which burning with the flame of lust and concupicence,
do nothing else, but lie in wait and watch how they may defile other men's
beds.

And because this vice, is not restraned by sharpnes of laws, many think
that there is no office at al in whorehuntinge, supposinge it to be a sport,
to rob virgins and wives of their honessye, which ought to be esteemed of
more price and valewe then any gold.

But if we will judge uprightly of whoredom, we must not judge of it as many
do, which with brazen faces and impudent mouths will say, tush, what is
whoredom? it is but a trick of youth, a pastime, a dalliaunce, a venial
sin, and a light fault.

Alas, alas, these words will go for no payment, and these excuses will not
excuse them, when as the law of god and their own guilty consciences shall
accuse them in the day of judgment. At which time the Lord will reward them
according to their deeds. Then shall they know that it is some thing to
break the law and commandment of GOD, who says thou shall not commite
whoredom, then shall they know how vile a thing it is to defile their bodies,
which ought to be houses and temples for the holy ghost to dwell in.

S. Paul says, that all other sins are without the body, but he that
commits whordome sins against his own body, and yet men will have it to
be no sin.

If one man rob another of his goods, he is straight way punished, and meet
it is he should so be.

But whoredom is more then a simple robbery, for by it men are spoiled not
only of their substance, but also of their honor, honesty, and sometimes of
their lives.

If a tenant keep not the couenauntes that are agreed upon betwixt himself
and his Landlord, he shall be sure to smart for it. But marriage is a holy
leage and covenant, and the man does promise to the woman and likewise the
woman to the man that they will be true and faithful each to other, and this
promise is made before God and his Church, and yet the breakinge of it is
thought to be nothing.

But if men would consider how they do by whoredom transgress the law of
god, vnhalow ye temple of god, and his holy spirit, break their promise made
in the presens of god, and his angles, make shipwreck of their honesty, set
fire to their own bodies, and bring destruction to their souls, they would
shun whoredom more then they do.

If these reasons will not persuade you that whoredom is a horrible sin in
the sigh of God, then ^all to mind what has been the end of all them in all
ages which have spent their lives in this filthy vice.

The people that lived in the first age which spente their time in whoredom,
were suddenly caught with the vengeance of God, and drowened.

For the whole universal world Genesis 7.
was ouerflowede with water for whoredom.

The Sodomites being given to this Genesis 19.
vice were consumed with* heavenly fire. We read that four and twenty
thousand perished for whordome, the Judges were hanged up against the sun.
What happened for rauishing of Dina the daughter of Jacob, and Gene. 34.
how that fact was revenged the 34. chapter of Genesis does playnelye declare.
Saint Paul says that whoremongers and adulterers the Lord Heb. 13.
will judge.

In the revelation of John we read Ap. 22.
that they that keep the commandments of God, shall go to heaven, and there
reign eternally with Christ, but whoremongers shall be shut out, and be cast into
ye lake which flameth with fire and brimstone.

Now if god spared not ye whole world, if he showered down fire and brimstone
from heaven, upon Sodom and Gomorra, if four and twentye thousand were
destroyed and all for whordome, let us not think that he will spare this
realm of England, if we continue still from one year to another in
whoredom, never finding any time to repent. Wherefore as many as will live
uprightly and walk honestly, must detest and abhor this vice.

And to the end that we be not defiled therewith, we must bannishe queanes and
harlottes and not suffer them to eat our bread, and to lodge within our gates.

A serpent is a dangerous thing to be kept in a man's bosom, and we cannot
daily keep company with evil persens without great danger, he that touches
piche shall be defiled.

Therefore he that will live uprightly must shun whordom and all things that
are prouocations thereunto.

The third thing that we must shun, is strife and enuyinge, under which two
names is comprehended al things that strive against brotherly love, and godly
peace and quietness.

For out of al doubt, good agreement and freindshippe amongst men, is as
pleasant a thing unto God as can be. Therefore says the psalm. Ecce qua^
bonum et quam iucundum habitare Psalm 13^.
fratres in vnum. Behold how good and joyful a thing it is, brethrne to
dwell together in unity, it is like the dew that fell down from heaven upon
the ground to give norishment unto it, and like unto ye oil that dropped
down from Aarons bearde, so as the sent of it was shed over all his raiment.

Whereby it plainly appears that god loves peace and amity amongst men,
and is well pleased when one embraces an other with hearty love. S. Paul
therefore here does exhort us to love, and tells us that we can not live
uprightly if we be ready to snatch at one another like cattes and dogs, and
to cut one another throat. And yet nevertheless there are some so given to
dissension and quarrelinge, that they care not what mischeife they commit, so
that they may satisfy their cruel hearts and lusts of reuenginge.

And whereas we are commanded to overcome evil with goodness, and if our enemy
honger to feed him, if he thirst to give him drink.

Yet are we so far from performing of it, that at every little and small
trifle we are ready to go to the law, to draw out our swords, and to fight
it out one with an other.

But if we would a little consider, the fruits that spring out of envy,
contencion, brawlinge, chidinge, and such like, or if we could now open our
eyes and look upon the wars, that are inflamed throughout al christendom,
the bodies that have been slain, the blood that has been spilt, and the
Cities, Towns, and Kingdoms, that have been rent and torn in sunder, through
envy and contencion, it were enough to move us, to hate and detest this vice
above all others. Let us the^ a little consider the fruits that spring out of
this tree.

First if a man be envious, or at debate with his neighbor he cannot eat and
drink in rest, he is always ready to hurt and harm the party whom he
enuieth, he rejoices at his fall, and pyneth away at his prosperity. Again,
we see how diuelishe men become when they are once chased.

For they are then ready in furious wise, to run headlonge into destruction,
then they suffer their naughty affections to have the bridle and to ouermaister
all wit and reason.

Yea and though they be never so wise, yet in their anger they will beehaue
them selves like very fools.

For is not he a very fool which will go about to make the fire to burn
better which is kindled to much already.

If a man see his house on fire he will cry out straight way for water: but if
he feel him self set all on fire with envy he seeks not to quench it, but
puts more matter unto it to make it to burn the more.

Wherefore Paul does tell us that we cannot please GOD unless we shake of
all ill will, and tread all strife and contencion under foot.

And here we have to note, that although he sets down strife before envy,
yet in order is envy first and the spring head as it were from whence strife
and contencion sloweth. What is the cause yt one seeks the overthrow of
another?

Marry the envy and spite that one bears toward a another.

Satan enuyinge that good and happy estayte of our first parents was Gene 3.
never content until he had brought them out of felicity into great myserye.

Caine enuyinge his innocent brother Abell sought means to take away his
life, and because there was no body Gene 4.
to stay him, he brought his wicked purposse to pass.

The sons of Jacob being moved with envy sold Joseph, and went about to
destroy him. Saul envied David, and would have killed him unless that GOD had
delivered him out of his bloody hands.

Herodias envied John Baptiste, and Mar. 6^
therefore she sought his death.

For they being the childrne of the devil could not abide the childrne of
GOD.

Therefore, let us take heed of envy and embrace one another with brotherly
love, and let there be such a band of friendshipe amongst us that we may be
knit and tied together as members of one body, let us detest drunkenness and
wantonness with all other vices, and now at the length after so many
admonytions, threatninges, and warnynges, learn to walk honestly as in the
day, and to do those things that beccommeth the true servants of GOD and
disciples of Christ.

Last of al, after y^ the Apostle has exhorted 3. Parts
us to cast away the works of darkness, and put of the old man, he sets
before us a new garment, and wylleth us to take no thought for the flesh, to
fulfill the lusts of it.

Wherein first we have to consider how that the apostle calls Christ a
garment.

This similitude of clothinge and allegory of garments is often used in the
holy scriptures

The garments given to our first parents, Gene 3.
had these properties, to cover their shame and nakedness, to defend them from
could and weather, and so sorth.

Even so Jesus Christ is here compared to a garment, and we are wylled Man. 22.
to put him on, because he is the weddinge garment spoken of in the gospel, ^.
John 1.
whose righteousness does couey our unrighteous, whose innocensie does hide
our filthiness, whose blood does wash away our sins, and by whom we are
defended from death, hell and everlasting damnation.

For Christ is the white raiment and apparel spoken of in the Apoca. which
does hide and cloth our filthy nakednsse, that it does not appear. And he is
y^ apparel which we are commanded to keep, least we walk naked, and men see
our filthynes.

He that has put on this garment, needs not to seek for any other thing to
cover and hyde his sins: and whosoever he be that has not put on Christ, is
odious and hateful in the sight of God. And the kings which made a marriage
for his son, at the last day when as he shall come to vi^e and see his
ghestes, will says unto him, friend how came thou hither not having on a
wedding garment, and command him to be cast into utter darkness.

This garment have all they put on which beeleue truly and sincerely in Jesus
Christ, which express their faith by well doing, endeuoringe every day, more
and more to restrain the lusts and pleasures of the flesh.

And truly it is meet and convenient (...)t we which have* given our selves
to Christ in Baptism, should re(...)ce the affections of the flesh; (...)
be content to be governed by his holy and gracious spirit, which has shed
his most precious blood for us.

And very needful it is to consider th^se last words, wherein we are willed
to take no thought for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it. For Paul does
not say that Satan shall not tempt us, and that we shall not have store of
prouocations, because he knew right well that Satan and our own wicked
lusts, would (...) ready every day to persuade us, to that which is evil.

Therefore we must always wra^h (...)e against them; and take (...) that we
suffer them not to overcome us and get ye victory of us.

And although we be by nature so corrupt, and of our selves are so inclyned
to all evil, that we cannot choose but sin daily: yet if we fulfill not the
lusts of the flesh, but still seek to tame and keep them under, he will
not impute our sins unto us.

True it is that wicked lusts and sinful affections, will always dwell in
us, so long as we live in this world, and therefore it beehooueth us,
always to keep good watch and ward, and to be in a readynesse to fight
against them, and in any wise to take heed that we suffer them not to have the
maistery over us.

Whereas he wills us to take no thought for the flesh, he teaches us
nothing else, but that we should not live after the flesh.

Otherwise you know we are bound to cloth our bodies, to feed the^, and to
make provision not only for our selves, but also for our families and ned^
brethren and we must have some care of them. Therefore he does not say take no
thought to prouid any thing for the flesh, labor not, sow not, reap not,
etc. But he saitht, ache no thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it.

Whereby it appears that he entreats not here of the substance of the
flesh, but only of the corruptions thereof, by which we are drawn to sin,
and so from God.

We must have a care, to provide rayemente for our bodies, but we must not
have a care to cloth them wantonlie, and to praunce up and down in pride and
bravery, we must provide for our selves meat and drink, and also for our
families, but yet we must eat and drink soberlie, and do it in such sort as
we ought to do, otherwise we fulfill the lusts of the flesh. But how is this
counsel of Paul followed at this day? truly nothing at all.

There is no vice, no wickedness but it is daily committed amongst us. The
great men of the world whom God has blessed with lands, rentes, and
revenues, swallow up poor men in such sort, that it may worthilye amase both
men and Angels, and all men of all ages and of all degrees, are so poisoned
with the ve(...)e of covetousness, that they seek by hook and crook to come
by living, and it is apparent, that they prefer frail and vain riches,
before the treasure of eternal life.

Besides this vice of covetousness, whoredom so much abounds that all men
may easily see, that marriage love decays, and whoredoms love increases. We
are so lofty, that we have forgotten our selves to be mortal men.

And it is to bad to see how we swell like toades, with the poison of pride.
Again, eatinge and drinkinge was never so much abused, for we make our bellyes
our God, and our kitchens our religyon, and so that we be crammed with dainty
meats, we care not though our souls perish and starve for honger.

To be brief, men are not ashamed of sin, neither do they care for
honesty. For we live and behave our selves, as though Christ did not sit Judge
in heaven.

Yea, such is the ungraciousness of this time, that unless, the Lord
shorten these wicked days, iniquity will have the upper hand, and no flesh
shall be saved, and therefore unless we repent in time, for sake all naughty
and filthy vices, and hereafter walk honestly as in the day, we shall feel
and taste of judgment without mercy, and after this life be cast into the fire
of dampnation, from the which place of torment almighty GOD, for his son
Christ sake defend us all, to whom with the holy ghost be all praise, honor,
and glory, world with out end Amen.

FINIS.

