SAINT PAVLES AGONY.

A SERMON PREACHED at LEICESTER, at the Ordinary Monthly Lecture:

Specially touching the Motions of Sin, remaining in the Regenerate.

BY A. CADE, BACHELER in Divinity, and of Bilsdon in Leycester-shire.

GAL. 5.17. The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
Flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other: so that ye cannot do the
things that ye would. LONDON, Imprinted by Bernard Alsop, and are to be sold
at his house by Saint Annes Church near Aldersgate. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE Lord Marquess of Buckingham.
Right Honorable,
YOur goodness continually practiced in your greatness, to the benefit of
many, binds all highly to honor you, and account you as a Conduit ordained of
God to conueigh many benefits from his Royal Majesty upon inferiors. Among
which, your Honorable kindness to me, in providing for me, without my suit or
knowledge, a right famous and noble place, to raise my fortunes, and exercise
my Ministry in, (the like whereof many have sought with great suit, cost, and
labor, and have not found) deserves all thankfulness that can be imagined,
much more then can be performed. But feeling my self too weak for the
greatness of that place (not for my doctrine, the soundness and wholesomnesse
whereof I am ready to testify and justify, if need require, with my blood)
but by the weakness of my voice, not able to reach the half of that spacious
Church and numerous people. I humbly pray your Honor to take without offense
my Refusal, and my hearty desire that that great and worthy Congregation may be
furnished with a man of a stronger voice and better sides, who may do there
much more good then my self: who in my declining years must rather affect a
more retired life, and a charge more possible to be performed with better
satisfaction to my self and to Gods people. I shall evermore honor your
goodness and your Greatness for this favor, which I publicly protest by the
Dedication of this Sermon, in Style simple, but in matter sound and
substantial: which having lately preached, I thought good to publish, at the
request of many my good friends of religious hearts: the rather to oppose the
spreading of those opinionate and fansifull younglings, who drawing bad juice
from Arminius and Vorstius, begin to bud and blossom in our Academie, whence
nothing but good and wholesome food should be brought into the Country. To show
how firmly our doctrine in these points is founded upon the Scriptures, and
consenting with the Fathers of the Primitive, and all succeeding ages, and what
exceeding good use and profit it yields, and how far these men swerue from
it, and from al true experience of Gods Saints in the state of Grace and
Regeneration: I have penned and published this Sermon, and wish all good men to
put to their hands to repress all such hurtful growing innouations,
disquieting, distracting, and disgracing the peace and beauty of our Church, to
the offense and hazarding of many Souls. And so I cease to trouble your
Honor, but shall never cease praying for you, and honoring you as fitteth.

Your Honors most humble and thankful Chaplen, Anthony Cade.

An admonition to the Reader.
CHristian Reader, the Concourse of many learned Ministers at our Ordinary
Monthly Lecture (lately before intermitted) whereunto now also resorted (by
occasion) many learned Iuditious Gentlemen; required matter of more then
ordinary worth and learning. To satisfy whom, If I have laid the grounds of my
Sermon more Schoole-like then thou think fit for the Country, bear with
me, now thou know the occasion.

Know also, that I have more enlarged those points to ground men more strongly
against Innouators: for that I hope this little Book may come, and be read,
where greater will not. The other points thence deducted are plain enough for
the simplest Hearers, and applied to their profit. Paul may plant, Apollo
water. The Lord give a blessed increase.

A. C

SAINT PAVLES AGONY.
ROMANS VII.XXIIII. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body
of this death?
THese words are the shutting up of the discourse of that troublous Combat
(which Saint Paul describes from the 13. Verse) betwixt the Flesh and the
Spirit: that is, betwixt our natural corruption lusting one way, and Gods
holy Spirit moving us another way. For as in this life our understanding is
enlightened, but in part (now we see but as through a Glass darkely 1 Cor.
13.12
): So our Wills and Affections are reformed but in part, very weakly to follow
that little which we see (We cannot do the things that we would Gal. 5.17.
). Our corruptions though abated, yet are not extinguished by Regeneration: but
our Mind and Will continue still partly flesh, and partly spirit, that is,
partly grace, and partly corruption, A reformation begun, but not finished,
like the Air in the dawning of the day, Sanctificatio inchoata, non consummata.
neither wholly yet enlightened, nor wholly remaining dark Yet shines more and
more until the perfect day. Pro. 4.1 8,
or water blood-warme, neither perfectly hoar, nor perfectly cold: but the
light and darkness of the mind, the heat and cold of the Will, so mixed and
intermedled together throughout, that there is a continual strise betwixt
them, which shall overcome the other, and ouerrunne the Soul. This Combat the
Apostle describes most mouingly and feelingly in his own person, finding his
own soul (as it were) distracted into two contrary factions, and subject to
two contrary Rulers, and guided by two contrary laws (as a ship tossed by
two contrary winds or tides.) The inner man, (or part Regenerate) ever eying
the law of God, and striving for perfection; but hindered by another Law in his
Members (the part unregenerate) rebelling against the Law of his mind, and
striving both against his will (Verse. 15,) and against his knowledge (Verse
16.) to carry him away to sin (Verse, 17) so hindering the good which he would
do, (verse 18.) and drawing him to the evil which he would not do (ver. 19.)
which again he repeateth in the verses following, as a thing never enough
observed, at the last, as one amazed, and much astonished to find in himself
so much imperfection, he breaks out into this passionate exclamation, O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?

In the words I observe five things.

1 The Matter that Saint Paul here complains of, Sin, which he calls the body
of Death.

2 The Subject or party that he finds it in. In himself. Wretched man that I
am: Who shall deliver me?

3 That he is exceeding sensible of it, feels the moving and stirring of it,
as appears by the discourse: and here it drives him into a passion.

4 It is the only thing that grieves him. He accounts himself wretched by
it, O wretched man that I am.

5 The sight and feeling of his sin makes him earnestly seek for a remedy, Who
shall deliver me?

Or to ascend from the Hypothesis to the Thesis, from Saint Paul's particular
to the general of all Gods children, we shall find.

1 The irregular motions of lust in Man, to be sin.

2 This sin, or those motions to remain in the Regenerate.

3 The Regenerate above other men to be exceeding sensible of them.

4 That the sight and feeling of them is the thing that specially grieves them.

5 And lastly, that this makes them earnestly seek for comfort and deliverance.

These are great points, worthy our handling, worthy your attention.

1 For the first: In the whole Discourse of this evil, note two things: First,
that it is a thing Inuoluntary, verse. 15. I allow not that which I do; for
what I would do, that do I not, but what I hate that do I, and verse 16. If
then I do that which I would not, I consent to the law, that it is good, and
ver. 18. to will is present with me, and 22. I delight in the law concerning
the inner man.

Note secondly, that still he calls it Evil and Sin, and here The body of
Death, by a Metonomya Effecti, the very matter and cause of death, which Chap.
6.6. He calls The body of Sin.

Now join these two together, that it is Inuoluntary, and that it is Sin,
and you raise this Doctrine.

The irregular motions of Lust, though not yeeded unto, are Sin.

Regula iusticitiae) for what is sin, but (...) (1. John. 3.4.) an
Irregularity, discrepance, and vnconformity to Gods Law.

Deuteronomy. 6, 5. Mat. 22.37.
2 Again, God reequires Love with all the heart, mind, soul and strength, that
is, with all the parts, and faculties of body and soul, and all the power of
them: therefore, as to love any thing besides him, not for him, is sin: so
not to love him withal thy power, is a sin: the one turning aside from thy
duty, the other coming short of thy duty: both faulty, both sins.

See S. August. lib. 3. de peccatorum meritis and remissione cap. 6. and 7.
Augustine was the first that wrote of Original sin, test Bellarmino. lib.
1. de pec. orig. cap. 1.
It is still corruption, uncleanness, imperfection, and is indeed the
stirring and moving of that corruption of Nature, which in S. Augustines time
began to be called Original Sin, which is not only Languor Naturae, (as
many have called it) nor only Carentia iustitiae debitae inesse (according to
that famous definition of Anselm) a want of that righteousness which ought to
be in man; nor only Difformitas (as Doctor Stapleton calls it) an vnconformity,
or diverse form, different from the Image of God, first imprinted upon Man,
(which yet is enough to make it sin) but deformitas (which is more) a
deformity, mishappe, and corrupt form. For we shall find here in S. Paul's
discourse of it, not only a Privation of Original Justice, or a Languor
Naturae, unapt to do good: but further, a Position of sinful corruption, a
stirring and rebelling of Lust, provoking to Evil. For that languor it had
been enough to say, I know that in me, that is in my flesh dwells no good
thing, verse ^8. but he proceeds, and adds, verse 23. I see another law in
my members, warring against the Law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity
unto the Law of Sin, which is in my members.

Understand we then, that we are all shapen in iniquity, and in sin has our
mother conceived us. Psalm. 51.5, For Adam sinning in person, has corrupted our
whole nature, so that together with our substance is mixed a matte^ of
corruption, which in the framing and growing of our members, grows, and is
nourished by the natural heat of our mothers: a corruption in the body which
in time will bring diseases and natural death: and a corruption cleaving to
the soul, which in time will bring forth actual sins, and eternal death:
so that being conceived and borne man, we are conceived and borne sinful
men, Bern. meditat. cap, 2. initio.
according to that of S. Bernard, Parents ante fecerunt damnatum quam natum:
so are we all by Nature the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. This corruption is
called The old man Romans 6.6. and here The Body of Death, which we must labor
to mortify, crucify, and destroy: for this without yielding unto, is
Original sin, but with yielding and delight grows into Actual sin.
Hieron. in cap. 5 Mathaei. (...), Hi^ron. in cap. 1. Amos. Pri^u^ peccatum est
cogitasse quae mala sunt: secundu^, cogitationibus adquicuisse peruersis:
tertius, quod mente decreueris, op re co^pless^: quartu^, post peccatum non
agere poenitentiam.
Saint Hierom distinguishes betwixt Pathos and Propatheia, passion and
fore-passion. Pathos is passion with consent. Propatheia is a tickling of lust
without consent, both are sins though in several degrees. The same Father
thus distinguishes sin. The first sin is to think evil things: the
second, to rest upon, or yield to the evil thoughts: the third to perform in
deed what thou have purposed in mind: the fourth, not to repent after thy
sin.

First therefore Saint Paul speaks of these motions as Inuoluntary, without
yielding to them, and against his mind, as Saint Ambrose says, Nobis
reluctantibus multa in nobis operatur peccatum, Sin works many things in us
while we strive against it.

Secondly, he calls it in plain terms* Sin, yea it is observed by Chemnicius
(a worthy judicious Divine) that in the 6. Chapter he calls it five times sin,
Chemnic'j examen part. 1. de relliq. pec. orig. page 224. Editionis 1590. in 8.
Aug. co^tra Iulianu^. lib. 5. cap. 3 Tolet in ep: ad Romans cap. 7 and 8.

Bellarm. de amiss. great. and stat. pecc. lib. 5. cap. 10.


in this 7. Chapter 6. times, in the 8. thrice. And Saint Augustine grounding
on this place, calls it plainly Sin, Coucupiscentia carnis, aduersus quam
bonus concupiscit Spiritus. and peccatum est, and poena peccati, and causa
peccati. The lust of the flesh, against which the good Spirit lusts, is both
sin, and the punishment of sin, and the cause of sin.

Well may I then wonder at the Jesuits, Cardinal Tolet, Bellarmine and
others, that will needs confute both Saint Paul's Greek, and Saint Augustines
Latin, and say they speak both improperly, calling that Peccatum, which is
but fomes peccati, the matter and tinder of sin, where Tolet yet confesses
plainly two things: First, that it is not only Saint Austens word, but his
perpetual doctrine: and Secondly, that the Papists now wholly depart from it.
Doctrina est frequentissima in Augustino, Tolet. ibid.
a qua tamen pro nunc recedimus. These are they that so magnify the Fathers in
show, but reject them in deed, both for Interpretations and Dogmata, for the
sense of places and points of Doctrine. These Children will teach their Fathers
to speak: These Schoolmen will set Christ and his Apostles to School:
surely, these new Jesuits, Decet vbique vt sermones nostros and scripturis,
and Sanctoru^ Petrum verbis, attemperemus says Vega les.
both in speaking and doing are far unlike the old Christians. But let us
learn to speak of that great Father Saint Augustine, and of his great Father
Saint Paul: rather then of Tolet or Bellarmine, or any other Cardinal or
Jesuit.

3 Yet further Saint Paul calls it not only Sin, but Deadly sin, (...)
Stipendiu^ peccati mors. P^o. 6. verse. vlt.
the Body of Death, as he speaks elsewhere generally of all sin without
distinction: The wages of sin is death. All sins with him are mortal, he
knew not these venial, triuiall, peccadilia, little trifling sins, not
worthy to be called sins, which Papists so mince, and make nothing of: but
even for these, the least of all other, he cries out, as at deadly wounds of
his soul, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
Death?

The distinction which the Romanists now teach, neither Paul knew, nor the Sea
D. Field of the Church. Book 3. chap. 7. and D. Norton.
Church many ages after: neither are themselves yet agreede upon it. As they
are cited by Azor. Instit. moral. part 1. lib. 4. cap. 8. dicendum.
Vega the Jesuit, and with him Durandus and Catetanus, think all sin to be
against the Law: Bellarmin. de amissione gratiae. l^b. 1. cap. 11. verbis vlt.
and passim in eo libro vbi Azorius haec habet: Non sunt peccata venial^^
proprie contra lege^, neque perfect simpliciterque peccat^.
Bellarmine beats them down, and teaches that mortal sin is against the
Law, and Venial sin only besides the law.

Azorius ibid.
Azorius beats him down, and says, Venial is also against the Law. And
Greg. de Val. De differentia veteris and novae legis, part. 2, c. 2. Denique ne
intelligi quide^ peccatu^ potest quod non sit legis alicuius transgressio.
Valentianus confesses that no man can conceive of sin but as a
transgression of the Law. Here is Jesuit against Jesuit, like Cadmus his
serpentine teeth, ever as they spring up, one brother beats down another.
Ovid. Metamorph: lib: 3. fab. 1.


The truth is, All sin legally considered is mortal, but Evangelically is
venial, except the sin against the Holy Ghost. By his own merit, mortal,
by Christ's mercy, venial: Mortal is the natural fleshly, unregenerate man
(for he that believes not is condemned already, John. 3.18. For Magist. sent
lib. 2 did. 25. g. non potest non peccare etiam damnabiliter.
he can not but sin damnably) But Venial to the Regenerate, though still
sin, Romans 8.1, There is no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus.
Quibus (says Austen) remissus est reatus culpae and peccati, quamuis maneat
actus Aug: Contra duas ep. Pelagiani, lib: 1. cap: 13. D. Morton, Appeal: lib:
5. ca: 22. sectio^ 4. D. White Digress. 38. D. Morton appeal: lib: 5, cap: 11,
sect: 5
. The distinction is not in the sin, but in the covenants, and in the
persons: for in the Regenerate, and by the Covenant of Grace, it dissolueth not
the league and love betwixt God and Man, and so is Venial: in others also is
mortal, and so is all sin in all men, by his own nature. In which regard S.
Paul calls the least sin here, the body of Death.

And yet we make not all sins equal, as the Stoiks among the Philosophers,
and the Iouinians among the Heretics. Happily they may be aeque peccata.
equally sins by their form, as breaches of the law, and deserving wrath:
though not aequalia peccata.
equal sins in their matter, as if all were heinous alike. To be angry with
thy brother without cause, is a sin (formally): to revile him, Matthew: 5, 22,
a worse sin: to kill him, worst of all: but the least deserves judgment,
that is death (says Maldonatus Iesuita. Comment. in Matt: 5, 21, 22,
Maldonate) So among the Jews were four capital punishments, strangling,
heading, stoning, and burning: Maldonat: ibid: in verse: 22, in fine,
all deaths, yet different in grieuousnesse and shame: arguing the sins so
punished, to be all deadly, and yet unequal in the heinousness.

The Conclusion is, even for these sins, the least of al other. The irregular
motions of corrupt nature, even without consent, Saint Paul cries out as at
deadly sins: O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
Death?

Abraham much to remember that he was but dust and ashes Gen: 18, 27,
: much more should it humble us to know that we are much worse, lumps of sin
and corruption. A grievous thing for good Job Job. 2.7.8
to be all ouerrunne with filthy ouzing sores and ulcers, to sit scraping them
with a potshard upon the ashes, Greg. Morals upon Job.
sterquilinium super sterquilinio, sitting like one dunghill upon another, no
better then a living and a walking dunghill: but we are much worse in respect
of sin in our whole nature, all corrupt, leprous, lazers, like a cloth defiled
with menstrous blood, which corruption if it break not out into monstrous
sins, (as it does in many) yet the being of it in us should much abash us, and
cause us to walk before the Lord in fear and trembling. As we carry in our
bodies the seeds of mortality, and the matter of all diseases, tending to
dissolution, or the first death: so in our souls and whole nature, the seeds
and matter of destruction, or the second death, and as our diseases grieve and
humble us, so much more should our sinful corruption: as the first death
terrifies, so much more should the second affright us.

actual sin, by getting consent, gaining delight, and so coming to reign
in us: As when we feel the pricking of an old disease, we are wary of our
diet, of cold, heat, surfeiting, intemperancy, or any thing that may increase
it.

A hard matter it is to deny our selves, to mortify our flattring lusts, to be
at continual war with our own pleasing nature: but so we must be, if we
will be Christians. And the more familiar and pleasing this enemy is, that was
borne and bred and brought up with us, and the fayrer her pretenses, tickling
our ears to favor our selves, to please our desires, The great Enchauntresse
of. the world,
to satisfy our own lusts: the more it is to be suspected, the more dangerous
to be accounted, and the more careful and heedfull we must be, to keep it
under, that it get no power over us. But of this more hereafter. The second
point is,

This sin remains in the Regenerate.

For here Saint Paul speaks in his own person. Valent: de Missa, contra
Herbrandum. Tolet: Comment in Rom: 7, 22, As if Paul spoke in his own person,
by a figure only.
O wretched man, that I AM, who shall deliver ME? But Gregorius de Valentia a
famous Jesuit, and Cardinal Tolet, and many other of their fellows (though
not all) understand all this Combat to be described in the person of a man
unregenerate, still under the Law, not under Grace, and to be betwixt Reason
and Appetite or Sensuality, like that of the Poet, Video meliora, proboque,
Deteriora sequor. Indeed Saint Augustine (in his younger years) took it, and
taught it so: Tolet: ibid: annot: 22,
but when his diligence was more awaked to search, and his judgment ripened to
discern, by his often conflicts with the Heretics of his time, he retracted
that opinion and interpretation, and afterward expounded the whole discourse of
this Combat, as spoken properly in the person of S. Paul, Aug: contra duas
Epistolas Pelagiani, lib: 1, cap: 10, Vim mihi fec^iunt illa verba, Condelector
legi Dei secundum intetiore^ homine^ Aug. li. 6. contra Pelagianu^, cap: 11.
Ego cu^ aliter intellexcram, vel potius non intellexera^, sed postea melioribus
and intelligentioribus cessi, vel potius ipsi (quod fatendu^ est) veritati, vt
viderem in illis Apostoli vocibus gemiu^ esse Sanctorum co^tra carnales
concupiscentias dimicantiu^. Sic Intellexit Hilarious, Gregorius, Ambrosius, and
caeteri ecclesiae Sanctj, notique Doctores, etc. Aug. lib. 2. Retract. cap. 1.
and lib. de praedest. sanctoru^ cap. 4. and lib. co^tra ep: Pelag: cap. 10. and
cap: 11: and lib. 6. contra Iulianum Pelag: cap, 11 Tolet: in To: 7. annot: 10.
Tolet: tractat: secu^do in loca quaedam epist: ad Rom: cap: 7 Vora (inquit)
etiam est doctrina, qua homo iustus in hoc seculo no^ valet bonu^ sacere absque
pugna carnis, and vellet bonu^ sine co^tradictione operari, at non valet in hoc
mortali cotpore donec per gratiam resurrectionis liberetur, and omnino Radix
peccati evellatur. Aug: lib: 1. cont: 2. epist: Pelag: cap: 13.
a man excellently regenerate, yet natural corruption remaining in him (not
wholly abolished) moving and drawing him one way, and the spirit of God
another way. To which sense Saint Augustine was induced by two Arguments: one
from the substance of the Text, the other from the consent of the Fathers
before him. In the Text, these words (says he) enforced me, verse. 22. I
delight in the Law of God according to tho inner man, which cannot agree to any
but the Regenerate: as also those words the last ver. Then I my self in my
mind serve the Law of God: and those, To will is present with me: for the
unregenerate has no such will.

And for the consent of former Fathers he says: Heretofore I understood this
(combat) otherwise, or rather I understood it not: but afterward I yielded to
better, and more intelligent Divines, or rather (as I must confess) to the
truth it self, that I might see in these words of the Apostle, The Groves of
Gods Saints, striving against fleshly lusts. Thus have Hilary, Gregory, Ambrose
understood the place, and other holy and famous Doctors of the Church, etc. And
this was afterward Saint Austens perpetual and constant interpretation of this
text, as may appear by five several places in his later works, where he had
occasion to speak of it.

But though these Jesuits reject Saint Augustine, and all the uniform consent
of Doctors and Fathers by him alleged, and take up strangely an
Interpretation by him retracted (such is often their following of the Fathers)
yet they grant the point I speak of, that Concupiscence still remains in
the Regenerate, (though they are loath to call it sin, as Saint Paul does
here) and that the Regenerate must labor to repress it by the Spirit, as much
as may be.

This doctrine is true also says Tolet, that a just man cannot in this world
do good without the fight of his flesh: and he would do good without
contradiction, but in this mortal body he cannot, until by the grace of the
Resurrection he be freed, and the root of sin wholly plucked out.

For this was the perpetual doctrine of the ancient Church. Augustine
interpreting the first words of Romans 8. teaches that lusts rebelling against
the law of the mind, are Original sin, which in the unregenerate is damnable,
but in the regenerate Ratione^ culpae non habe^t, quia remissus est reatus
culpae and peccata quamvis maneat actus.
are not accounted sins, because the guilt of the fault and sin is forgiuin,
though the act remain.

And S. Gregory interpreting this place of S. Paul, of the regenerate man
says, The most perfect men grieve at the simple motions of the flesh sustained
against their wills: and that sin inhabiting in them, moves them against
themselves.

And if any other Fathers count it not sin, their meaning is that which S.
Austen expresses (Remissus est reatus culpae, quamuis maneat actus) It is not
imputed as sin to the person, though it remain in the nature, the guilt being
remitted to the regenerate by the indulgence of God. Gregor. lib: 5. in lib: 1.
Reg: cap: 1. Quid est, quod deplorat legem inesse me^bris legi mentis
repugnantem, si extinctis alijs, alij in fugam versi sunt: nisi quia perfecti
viri hoc ipsum quod simplices motus carnis contra voluntatem sustinent,
vehementer dolent? vellent quippe sic manner in carne, vt contra mentis
voluntatem, de carne nulla sustinerent, quod quide^ quia impossible est,
praemisit, dicens: velle adjacet mihi, posse non inuenio: non enim quod volo
bonum hoc ago, sed quod odi malu^, illud facio, quasi dicat, vellem esse in
carne, non ea perfectione, qua perfectus in carne perfectus est, sed sicut
Angeli Dej in Coelo, sed hoc posse non invenio, quia quamdiu mors peccati
absorpta, in futura resurrectione non fuerit, illud quod in me peccatum
inhabitat, mouet me contra me. Fran. White. Obser. 2. Sect: 2. Augustine, vt
supra.


The Reasons why God loves these irregular motions still in the Regenerate, we
may learn out of the Fathers also.

1 For our spiritual exercise of our Faith, Patience, Ambros. Apopologia David
cap. 2 in fine: See Greg. Moral. Lib. 33. ca. 11, and Hieron. aduers. Pelag.
lib. 2. and Austen. lib. de Cor. and gra. cap. 9. in sine. Aug. de bapt. Parv.
cap. 39. Judge. 3, 1.
and what need we have of Christ: to keep us waking, to shake off security and
drowsinesse, to gather our wits and forces together, to stand upon our guard,
to depend upon God, to call upon him for aid, to fly and cleave fast unto
him; knowing that if his Grace do not continually supporte us, we are not able
to stand. These are (says S. Augustine) the Nations left in Canaan (which
their Joshua, our Jesus cast not out) Quas dereliquit Dominus vt erudiret in eis
Jerusalem: which God left to teach, and exercise his people withal; and which
(if they grew careless) should be as pricks and goades in their sides, and
thorns in their eyes, and that they should not think they were come yet to
their final rest, but should still look for a better.

Patience if there were no afflictions? where Grace if no temptations? where
Mortification if no lusts to mortify? where Temperance, Sobriety, Purity, if
no opposition, no motions to sin? where were the battle, the victory, the
crown, if no adversary to strive withal?

3 Again, lest men should become religious only to be freed from this
disquietnesse of the soul, and diseases of the body, and other griefs and
penalties of this life: which were to make them molliores, not meliores, more
tender to themselves then tendering their duties, to seek to build a Heaven
upon Earth, without desire of a better. But here God will have us still
provoked with these, still militant, and in the Combat, to fight the Lords
battles, as against other enemies, so against our own lusts, to strive for
the victory, to obtain the Crown, to be wayned from the love of this world,
and long for the perfection and glory of the world to come.

Symptoms and passions of the best men, left still in them by the dispensation
of Gods wisdom to good purpose. That we should not think them of higher
nature then our selves, Amb. apol. David. c. 2.
but subject to the like passions: to which end they are sometimes suffered to
fall, and their falls recorded, and as ill may we spare the knowledge of
their falls for consolation, as the examples of their virtues for imitation.
S. Paul confesses he felt these motions, and Gods blessed Saints on earth,
were never free from them. It is observed in S. Hierom (which he bewrayes in
many places of his works) that his whole life was a continual war with his own
lusts.

This is not the difference betwixt the Regenerate and unregenerate, that the
one is free from evil lusts, the other feels him: but this, The one labors to
mortify them, Epiphanius here is. 64. Sicut quando caprificus agit radices in
muro, leu aedificio, quantum cunoue scindatur, manet radix, opus est murum
destruere, and tunc reaedificabitur sine radice: sic in corpore isto mortali
fit, in quo radix manet peccati, concupiscentia nempe rebellis, donec moriatur,
and iteru^ reaedificetur per resurrectionem. This Similitude is alleged and
allowed by both sides, by Tolet, the Jesuit, Tractat. 2. in loca Ep. ad Romans
cap. 7. And by D. Field that learned Protestant. Lib. 3. of the church. c. 26.
the other gives the reign unto them. If thou do then mislike them, labor
to suppress and mortify them, and so show the power of Gods grace working in
thee. Thou art a happy man, and in the case of Gods blessed children: the
greater thy temptations are, the more noble is thy resistance, the more
exemplary thy life and virtues, and the greater shall be thy Crown and glory.
S. Paul cries out to the Lord (2. Cor. 12.8, 9.) to be delivered from this
prick of the flesh, this Messenger of Satan, sent to buffet him, but the Lord
answered, My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in
thy weakness. Gods grace is sufficient to enable us to repress them, though
it be not his pleasure to free us from them.

Paul does here, and though he daily labor that his righteousness may exceed
the Pharisees, yet his opinion of it will always come short of Aug. Lib: 3. de
Doctr. Christiana, c. 23. speaking of David's and other Saints sins, teaches
that no man can brag of his justice, or contemno others. Cum videat tantorum
virorum, and cavendas tempestates, and slenda naufragia.
theyrs. He will learn to know that the law is straight, and requires totum
hominem the whole man, with all the parts and powers of body and soul: to
keep totam lege^ the whole law, with every branch and particle thereof, and
that totaliter, and toto vitae tempore, his whole life throughout, without,
omitting any minute or moment thereof: for ( James. 2.10.) Whosoever shall
keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all. And as
the Law is strait, so the Curse is large. Gal. 3, 10. Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law to do
them. And therefore with S. Paul he shall find no perfection in himself to
justify him. ( Philip. 3.12.) but rather sin to condemn him (as here) and
consequently will be driven out of himself to seek for aid, even to Jesus
Christ, who is made unto us Wisdom and righteousness, and Sanctification and
Redemption, 1. Cor. 1.30. And ever when he looks advisedly into himself,
he will be so far from thinking himself just, that he will rather cry out
of his imperfections with S. Paul here, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death?

superogatory merits of Gods Saints, they are so unable to help thee, that
they were not sufficient to save themselves, their works still needing Gods
mercy to forgive, and still sauouring of some imperfections of right and
infection of sin. Saint Paul here disableth himself, and Romans 3.19.23.
concludes all men within sin, that God might have mercy upon all. It is a
fine Dream of the Papists, that the superaboundant merits and sufferings of
holy men, more then needed for themselves, are to be dispensed and disposed of,
by the great husband of the Church the Pope, and imputed to other men that will
give well for them, whereupon is grounded that Great trading of Pardons, whereby
the merits of Saints are often sold (but never delivered) to men that need,
and these merits are called the Treasures of the Church, and so they are indeed
(as our excellent King notes in his Preface to Christian Princes) for they
bring great treasures to the Popes coffers. I can but wonder that waking men
will be deluded by such dreams.

Lot, Noah, David, Peter; as sometimes a word may escape, even a wiseman, which
he wishes were unspoken: so sometimes sin may escape a wary man, which he is
sorry for, and surely temptations are so great, and our natural power so
little, that without Gods grace continually supporting us, we cannot stand, but
should doubtless often fall into many sins. Praise we God for giving such
measure of grace unto frail men, and fear we him for withdrawing it
sometimes, to let them see their weakness: pity them and pray for them, and
use Saint Paul's counsel, Gal. 6.1. If any fall by occasion into any fault,
you that are spiritual, restore such a one with the Spirit of Meekness,
considering thy self, least thou also be tempted.

all imperfection shall cease, and be abolished, when this corruptible shall
put on incorruption, and this mortal shall put on immortality, this Natural
body shall become spiritual, and this body of death shall be done away, when
we shall dwell in the Land of promise, without these Cananites pricks, and
goades in our sides, and thorns in our eyes, and when we shall not cry out, O
wretched men who shall deliver us? but joyfully sing, O happy men that are so
graciously delivered from this body of death!

So much for the second point, the third follows.

The Regenerate do see and feel their sins, more then other men.

So it appears S. Paul did, when so feelingly and mouingly he spoke of this
Law in his members, rebelling, and so passionately cried out, O Wretched man
that I am!

for seeing.


The reason is twofold, First their true judging what sin is. 2. Their due
and impartial looking into themselves; for they are always reading on 2,
Books, the Book of Gods Law (teaching what they should do) and the book of
their own conscience (registring what they do.) They attend and hearken to
the Law of God, and by it frame their judgment of sin, not like vain men,
judging only that good that agrees to their corrupt and misshapen reason: that
only evil, that dislikes their fancy, and so make themselves Judges of the
law; Iam. 4.11.
but humbly Dictates of the Law (which is the perfect rule of righteousness)
they come to the true knowledge of sin (as Saint Paul says here, I had not
known that Concupiscence was sin, but that the Law says, Thou shall not
lust, Romans 7.7.
) So they have Lumen internum and externum, External of the Word, which is a
light and a lantherne, Internal of the Spirit, which enlightneth the eyes of
their understanding, Psalm. 119.105. Ioh. 16.13.
and leads them into all Truth: And by this Spirit also, their self-love is
diminished and swalowed up in their love of God, so that they look into
themselves more impartially, as a man therefore walking in darkness, or never
looking upon himself, sees no spots, dirt, deformities upon him, but thinks
all is well: but coming to the light, and viewing himself well, he sees many
things unthought of before, and is much abashed: so it is with the Natural
man, he perceyueth nothing, but thinks all is well, (for he walks in
darkness) and wants light or list to look into himself, but the
Regenerate man spies all, and whatsoever he finds, comparing it with the Rule,
he judges rightly of it. The Spiritual man discerns all things. 1. Cor.
2.15.


for Feeling.
so he has life and quickness of the Spirit to feel, the skin of his
conscience is tender, and easily offended, which in others is hard and brawny,
and has lost his feeling. And therefore whereas others, at horrible,
abominable, and odious sins are nothing moved (as being dead in sin, 1. Tim.
4.2.
their consciences feared and past feeling:) S. Paul at the smallest sins that
can be felt, even at the first motions of sin, which stir within him, is
offended and grieved, and cries out as at deadly wounds of his soul: O
wretched man that I am, etc.



Austen) is not best to be liked, that feels least pain, (for that may
proceed of dead flesh within it) but rather that which is quick of sense, and
feels the least touch: so for the soul, for corruption is not felt by
corruption, but by grace, and the more grace a man has, the tenderer is his
conscience, and the more he feels his own corruption. But (to proceed) where
this true feeling of sin is, there will follow true greeuing for it, which is
my fourth point. The doctrine is.

Sin is the only thing that grieves the Regenerate. We never find in the
history of the Acts, nor in all Saint Paul's Epistles, that ever any thing
draws him into such a pang, as sin does here, to cry out, O wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me? All the evils in the world are sorted into two
ranks, Malum culpae, and Malum paenae: sin and pain: as Tertullian calls
them, Malum delicti, and Malum supplicii, as Austen, Peccatum and paena
peccati: Malum quod facit homo, and malum quod patitur homo: Now the evil that
man commits against God, grieves the child of God much more, then the evil
or punishment which God inflicts upon man.

contra, evil of pain is not always cause of sin: Surely, we had never
known nor felt this evil of pain, if sin had not brought it into the world.



not the author. Sin is exceeding offensive to him, affliction is not: being
but either a punishment for sin committed, by his justice, or a good means
to prevent it, by his mercy; so sin is our sickness, pain is our physic,
and though the physic be bitter, (as much wholesome physic is) yet every
wise man will endure it rather then the disease.

These are Zanchius his reasons, to which I add, Hieron. Zanc. Tom, 4. Lib 1.
De Malo. cap. 2. Thesi. 9.
that though there were no pain nor punishment for sin, yet would Gods
children hate and abhor it: because it offends their good Father, whom
they heartily love, and would ever please: and because it spotteth and defiles
their souls with filthiness, which they would keep clean as the Temples of
the holy Ghost.

And therefore S. Augustine concludes with me: The wicked men hate pain more
then sin, but the godly hate sin more then pain. Aug. lib. 3. de Civitate
Dei cap. 1. Mala paenae magis odio haberi a malis, quam* mala culpae: contra
mala culpae magis odisse bonos, quam mala paenae. Saint Paul's righteousness.
A true difference betwixt godly and profaine men; the ungodly will adventure
upon any sin to enjoy pleasure, and avoid pain: the godly will adventure
upon any pain, even death it self to avoid sin, as we see in many blessed
Martyrs, and all godly men, that will take up their Cross to follow Christ.

Surely Saint Paul's sin was little, and his pain much, yet he never
complains of his afflictions, but eryes out most bitterly of his sin, O
wretched man that I am who shall deliver me?

Philip. 3.6. He says touching the righteousness of the Law, he lived
vnrebukeably, even before he was converted, man's eye could spy no fault in
him, and 1. Cor. 4.4. he says, he knew nothing by himself: And Act. 24.14.
avoweth to the face of his most quick sighted adversaries, that he truly
worshipped the God of his Fathers, believing all things in the law and the
Prophets, had hope in the resurrection of the dead, and labored to have a
clear conscience toward God and man. Act. 20. he protests to the Elders of
Ephesus, whom he had sent for to Miletum, and takes them to witness after
what manner he had lived with them at all seasons, serving the Lord with all
humility, and with many tears and tentations, and how he passed not for bonds
and afflictions, neither was his life dear unto him, so that he might fulfill
his course with joy, and the ministration which he had received of the Lord
Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God.

2. Tim. 4.6. When he was now ready to be offered, and the time of his
departing was at hand, his conscience could give him this testimony, I have
fought a good fight, and have finished my course, I have kept the faith: From
henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord that
righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto them
also that love his appearing: such was his righteousness: and will you view
his afflictions?

Saint Paul's afflictions.
To omit all those slanders, raylings, imprisonments and scourges in other
Chapters before, of the Acts of the Apostles: we have eight whole chapters at
the end, of nothing but his troubles and persecutions, how he was violently
taken by his own nation out of the holy Temple, what an uproar was there about
him, that he hardly escaped tearing in pieces of them: how more then forty of
the Jews swear his death, and lay in wait for him: how hec was posted from
one prison to another, from one ruler to another, kept in bands and ward like
an evil doer: and when the magistrate had openly pronounced him guiltless,
yet could he have no right, but was still kept in bands, either for favor of
the Jews, or in hope to wring some money out of him for his deliverance: and
therefore he was examined, and reexamined, and for all his Innocence, must
either be delivered into the hands of his bloody enemies, under pretense to be
judged at Jerusalem, but indeed to be murdered by the way, or else must appeal
unto Caesar the highest monarch of the world to defend him, and so prefer a
troublesome and a dangerous journey before a traiterous and a murderous death.
And this journey to Rome is described through the dangerous seas, amongst the
Islands, in the depth of winter, where the winds, tempests, seas, and soldiers
strove which should be the cruellest: so that when the ship brake by the fury
of the winds and tempests, the soldiers would have killed the prisoners, least
they might escape by swimming, more barbarous then the So the Italian calls the
sea.
barbarous Element. Which of us should not have cried out in such extremity of
our great dangers, rather then at our sins: O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of death?

Yet all these troubles are easy to that great throng of evils, which he
reckons up of himself, 2. Cor. 11.23. In Labors abundant, in stripes above
measure, in prisons frequent, in death often: 24. of the Jews 5. times
received I40. stripes save one. 25. Thrice was I beaten with rods, Once was I
stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day have I bin in the
deep, 26. In iourneying often, in perils of waters, in perils of Robbers, in
perils by my own Countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the City,
in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the Sea, in perils amongst false
brethren: 27. In weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger
and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness, 28. beside those things
that are without, that which comes upon me daily, the care of all Churches.
29 Who is offended and I burn not: 31. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which is blessed for evermore, knows that I lie not.

What natural man in the world, would not these troubles deeply amaze, and
drive into a desperate sense, and set him at his wits end, to cry out of his
wretchedness and miserable mishappes, that fall so thick upon him, especially
falling so vndeseruingly, as they did upon Saint Paul. But what says S. Paul
himself unto them? Behold the pattern of a true Regenerate man. I count
(says he) that the afflictions of this present time are not worthy of the
glory, which shall be showed unto us, Romans 8.18. and 2. Cor. 4, 17. Our light
affliction which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far more excellent,
and an eternal weight of glory, and therefore he says, 2. Cor. 12.10. I take
pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions for
Christ's sake. And Act. 21, 13. He protests that he is not only ready to be
bound, but also to die for the name of the Lord Jesus. His troubles though
great and manifold seem nothing in his eyes, but when he looks upon the
least sin that is possible to be in man, even the least motion of the flesh
that stirs against the Spirit, it does so grieve him, and seem so odious in
his eyes, that he cries out in the agony of his soul. O wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me from this body of death?

A comparison of our State with S. Paul's, In malis eulpae and in malis paenae.
how far do thou out-goe us, on the one side in all holiness and
righteousness, and on the other side in crosses and afflictions, and yet
passing over thy afflictions with joy that are so great and many, only cryest
out of thy sins that are so few and small: and we at every light affliction are
ready to murmur and rage with impaciency, but for our sins (whose magnitude and
multitude cannot be esteemed) we grieve not at all, but remain insensible. O
well were we (think the most men) if we could live in wealth and ease, and
pleasure in this world, without any cross or affliction, to disquiet our
minds, or hinder our delights, how well could we fat our selves with pleasure,
and never think of our sins, to move us to sorrow and melancholy! But alas
(dear brethren) we should make this use of Saint Paul's example (to omit
other) to search our own hearts and courses, and come to the knowledge of our
sins, and of our wretchedness by them, and be heartily sorry for offending our
God, defiling our selves, 1. Pet. 4.13. The ouerflowing of wickedness in the
world.
and drawing heavy plagues and punishments upon us, knowing, that if the
Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the wicked and ungodly appear.
Alas, who can look into the World, but he shall find in all Estates, and in
all degrees, in all their courses, that there is no whole party, no found part,
but from head to foot, all ouerrunne with this soul Leprosy of sin. Tit. 4.
last.
They profess that they know GOD, but by Works they deny him, are become
abominable and disobedient, and to every good Work reprobate: Just like the
Cretians, Tit. 1.12.
liars to the Truth, Evil beasts, slow bellyes, slow to do good, but to
any evil quick and forward.

Who can go into the streets but he shall hear store of wicked blasphemous
oaths, ungodly raylinges, filthy, talking, rotten speeches in every corner:
their mouths are as open Sepulchers, breathing out corrupt and filthy stinkes
from the rotten carrion of their hearts, as if the sound of the Gospel had
never rung in their, ears, never suncke into their hearts to season them.

What just Lot would not continually vex his righteous Soul by dwelling
amongst them, and seeing their wicked conversation? 2 Pet. 2, 7.8.
What good David's eyes would not gush out with tears to see Gods laws so
contemned, Psalm. 119.53.158. Ierem. 9.1. and Lament.
what good Jeremy would not melt away in Lamentations to see the wickedness,
and to foresee the miseries of his people, yea What good Christian can temper
himself from crying out in their behalf: O Wretched men that we are, who
shall deliver us from this body of death?

Alas wretched men whether shall we turn us? Little mortification.
whose lives are nothing but a continual practice of sin? who very weakly
and coldly resist these motions of sin that stir in our natures, but suffer
them to get the upper hand over us.

What shall become of them that resist not at all, Or none at all, but rather
fostering of sin full motions. Job. 20.12.
but gladly and willingly entertain them, and like a man that has gotten a
sweet morsel in his mouth, turns it with his tongue, and delights in the
chewing it (as Job says) that take pleasure and delight to think and muse,
and feed their corrupt fancies with ruminating and studying of their sin, and
wish time and opportunity to execute them, and put them in practice, so far
from resisting and mortifying, that they are sorry for nothing so much, as that
they have not strength enough by nature, or liberty, enough by law to glut
their desires with the full fruition of them; the drunkard in his swinishnesse,
the Lecher in his gotishnesse, the covetous in his rauenousnesse, the malicious
in his poysonousnesse, and others in their several wickedness, that labor
not to bridle their lusts, but more to kindle and inflame them, to the
uttermost of their power, and if their own weakness did not restrain them,
or the fear of humane Laws and punishments curb them, they would be yet more
outragiously wicked, and damnably sinful. Alas, wretched men, who shall
deliver them from the body of this death? whom could it not justly astonish in
this light of the Gospel, Sinning contumaciously, and ^^th a hie band.
to see such a stupid carelessness of sin, possessing all men, such a
deadness and vnmoueablenesse to any goodness, notwithstanding, all that ever
can be said or done? Nay, to behold a very carfulness, a desire, and a
forwardness to offend God, and oppose our selves against his precepts, that
men account it their only glory and valor to live irregularly, with contempt
of all good fashions, order, government, yea, with contempt of God and Man? as
(for example) when the Lord pronounces a woe to them that are mighty to drink
Wine, and strong to pour in strong drink (Esaias 5.22.) some (that are not
ashamed still to call themselves Christians) count it a gallant matter and a
great glory to drink down one another, and be able to carry it away, as if
they would purposely oppose themselves against God and his laws, and stand at
defiance with him, and not content with old sins, known to former ages, will
needs be the inventers of new sins, new arts of drinking, whoring, cheating,
and other villainies, their wits, tongues, health, wealth and strength given
them for Gods service, they turn all to serve sin strongly, fight against God
with his own weapons, and horribly rush against his commandments and curses,
with sport and pastime.

So when Christ says, Swear not at all, for whatsoever is more then yea and
nay, proceeds of evil: they hold it a point of valor and stoutnesse, Mat.
5.34.
to rap out oaths courageously, and fill up their imperfect speeches with
damnable swearing. Colos. 4.6.
When the Lord commands that all our talk be sauoury and tend to
edification: they delight in unsavory, idle, 8. Cor. 15.33.
filthy talk, and such words as are fittest to corrupt good manners, and make
themselves sport with sin: And yet (wretched men) what profit is there in these
sins? what great pleasure, what benefit to draw them?

The Prophet speaks in the Lords name, as wondering that men will rush into
sin, and endaunger their souls for small matters, for a handful of barley
and a piece of bread, (Ezech. 13.19.) but our people swear, blaspheme, use all
beastly talk and filthy behavior, for no profit at all, for no credit, but
only for a custom in sinning, a deuelish desire to do that they are
forbidden, or in the folly of their conceits, and the currish rage of their
pride, or to show courage that they care neither for God nor man.

But in those sins that are joined with profit (if you look upon
worldlings) what villainy do they stick at? to rake to themselves, to oppress
the poor, Specially where Mammon reigns.
to betray the innocent, to defraude their next kindred, to cosen their dearest
and nearest friends, to rack poor Tenants, to tear it out of their maws, to
grind their faces, nay worse, to turn them out of doors, to pull down towns
and houses, and like Canibals to devour one another? The greater sort, as
tyrants preying upon the inferiors, without pity or love at all, but treading
upon them to stand the higher, the inferior as slaves again without any love
or reverence to the higher, but grudging at them, as at an unsupportable lode,
which if they had strength, they would shake off.

The height and commonnesse of Sin.
Generally, what is the skill and cunning of a man, but to entrappe one another,
without being intrapped, their wisdom but a fine clean conueyance of
villainy, their profession but a cloak of hypocrisy: all their outward virtue,
but a false color to hide their inward vices? and how are the finest wits
bestowed, but in smoothing over foul actions with fair glosses, and
varnishing over their crackes and flawes, that they be not spyed: and in
contriuing wicked practices cunningly, to bring them to pass effectually, with
their best advantage, and least clamor of the world, or penalty of Laws, all
without any regard of God and his commandments, or any sense of Religion, as
if thou (O God) wast not the Judge of the world, but some dead Idol, which had
no care of what we do here below, or heard not, or saw not those things that
ate done in the world. Alas, Wretched men that we are, who shall deliver us
from this body of death?

Reverend men and Brethren, I would be sorry that these words should be
without all exception verefied of all (God forbid) I speak of many, A
revocation and preparation to the last Doctrine.
not of all: of the general course of the world, out of which God has reserved
some that abhor such wickedness: yea (blessed be his name) there are some
(and that a good some) even in this place, that shine as lights in the midst
of this crooked and wicked generation, Phil. 2.15. Acts 24.16.
that labor with Saint Paul to keep a clear conscience toward God and men,
to be a holy Nation, 1. Pet. 2.9. Tit. 2.14.
a royal Priesthood, a peculiar people, zealous of good works, and show forth
the virtues of him, that has called them out of darkness into his marvelous
light. Blessed be God for them, and God increase the number of them: but the
greater sort are carried away with the stream of the world, and go the broad
way of destruction, and even the best, while they are in this flesh, are not
without imperfections, and this moving of the body of sin within them (as
Saint Paul was,) and had need to cry out as S. Paul did: O wretched men that
we are, who shall deliver us from this body of Death? As for the other, that
drink down sin like water, and deny nothing to their hearts lusts that
they stand unto; what hope can they have to be delivered? most wretched men
that we are, who shall deliver us from this body of death, and the plagues
thereto belonging? Yes, there is a mean yet to be delivered, if they would
seek it, if they would consider Gods laws, and search their own consciences,
and so come to the feeling, the acknowledging, and sorrowing for their sins,
and think themselves wretched for them, (as S. Paul did here) then should they
go forwards with him, to that which I propounded to speak of in the last
place: To seek and find a Remedy to deliver them: For he that seeks
finds, he that asks receives, and he that knocks at the door of Gods
mercy, shall have it opened: the last doctrine is

The true feeling of our sins, will make us earnestly seek for a remedy. As
Saint Paul did here, finding himself wretched by sin, cries, Who shall
deliver me?

Judas, who when his eyes were opened to see his sin, went to the high
Priests, confessed his sin, and his wrong unto the Innocent, cast down the
Money, but finding no comfort, went and hanged himself.)

But to his Children, God sends a comfort in due season, when it is truly
and faithfully sought: which is to them the welcomest and gladsommest thing in
the world. Therefore the Law was profitably given, vt sit Pedagogus ad
Christum: Gal. 3.24.
to be our Schoolmaster unto CHRIST, non vt sanet, sed vt aegrotum te esse
doceat: not to heal thee, but to show thee thy sickness, and make thee seek to
the Physician; for that makes us find, what need we have of Christ.

A man never knows the worth of Christ, till he see his own unworthiness
and danger, never seeks for ease and comfort, till he feel the load and
burden of his sins, and is grieved at the loathsomnes of his corruptions,
and foresees the misery they bring upon him. But when his eyes are once opened
to see this, doubtless he will seek to be delivered, and the wiser he is,
the sooner.

To stir up men to seek remedy for their sin.
that he that seeks not for delivery from this body of death, either he
feels it not, or is exceedingly besotted in love with his own sickness: either
he is blind, and sees not his estate: or seeing it, is mad, that seeks not
to relieve it, Choose (all you impenitent sinners) in whether of these ranks
you will be placed, amongst blind men, or mad men, that will not see, or seeing
will not seek Deliverance from this body of death.

For it is not possible that a man fallen into a pit, should not desire to be
helped out: that a man dangerously sick should not desire to recover: that a
man grievously wounded should not desire to be cured: that a man in Prison and
durance should not desire liberty: at least if he feel his evil, and the
danger of it, either blindness or madness possesses him, But indeed no man
can be so mad, except he be first blind: blinded with the custom of sin,
that makes us insensible: or with the prince of darkness that luls men a
sleep with the pleasures of sin, 2. Cor. 4 4.
to forget their estate, or blinded with some Pharisaicall opinion of their
own righteousness, like the Laodiceans that said they were rich, and had need
of nothing, and knew not they were wretched and miserable, Rev. 3.17.
and poor and blind, and naked, for if they had the true eye-salue, and that
their eyes were opened to see their woeful estate by sin: this should be the
first thing they would go about, the greatest business they would intend to
seek some delivery, and to com to some comfortable assurance of Gods favor.

Luke 10.42. Matthew: 13.46. Phil. 3.8.
This should be the vnum necessarium: the precious pearl that the Merchant
would sell all that ever he had to purchase: and they would with Saint Paul
count all other things (all honor, wealth, pleasure, and worldly contentments)
but loss and dung in respect of it. Highly to esteem of this Remedy.
So sweet and joyful would it be unto their souls.

Saint Paul seems to insinuate so much, by the very marshalling of his words
and phrases, in delivering this doctrine.

When he looked upon his sins (though they were as small as possibly could
be in any man) they seemed so foul in his eyes, so grievous to his
conscience, so contrary to his clean desires, that he counted himself
wretched for them, and passionately seeks for deliverance, but finding no
means in himself, but a plain impossibility, by reason of his deplored
imperfections, he goes out of himself, and asks, Who shall deliver me? and
upon asking the question, presently gives the solution, not in plain terms
(for the fullness of his heart, and the greatness of his joy would not let him)
but in a dutiful protestation of thankfulness, I thank God through Jesus
Christ our Lord, as if he should say, It is the mercy of God, that has sent
his son Jesus Christ to redeem us, by whom we are delivered from this body
of death* by him we are justified from our sins, and sanctified by his Grace
to repress sin: and though sin still dwell in us, Yet there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1
that walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, that have not the flesh,
but the Spirit for their guide, and though they walk weakly and faintingly
after it, yet still they follow it as their desired guide, as well as the
weakness of their nature will suffer.

This seemed so worthy a benefit in Saint Paul's eyes, upon the thought of his
sinful, uncomfortable estate on the one side, and that most gladdsome
delivery on the other side, that he cannot without an eiaculation of
thankfulness express it, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Which
words I cannot stand upon, only I note, Saint Paul's Phraze teaches us, that
this worthy benefit of our delivery, of our Redemption, and Salvation, is
never to be spoken of without thanksgiving, never to be thought of without a
grateful lifting up of our hearts unto God, never to be named without great
admiration and reverence.

Conclusion, with a recapitulation of the first Doctrine, and uses. And
therefore we thank thee O Lord for this amongst all other benefits: for this
above all other benefits:and we beseech thee to give us grace to look into
our selves, light to see our sins, and life to feel them, that we may be
humbled by them, and seek to mortify them, The second.
that we may know, see and feel what imperfect state we live in here in this
flesh wherein thy dearest children feel these pricks in the flesh,these
Cananites and Iebusites, as pricks and goades in their sides, and thorns in
their eyes, these messengers of Satan to buffet them: that thereby With the
Uses.
we may be out of conceyte with our own righteousness,and all humane merits,
as not able to satisfy thy justice, and

daily in grace and all holy virtues, till we become perfect men in Jesus
Christ, to the glory of thy great name, the assurante of our adoption, the
adorning of our profession, the good and comfort of others, and the eternal
comfort of our own souls.

FINIS.

