THE COUNTESS OF MARRES ARCADIA, OR SANCTVARIE. Containing Morning, and
Evening Meditations, for the whole Week.

By M. Ia. Caldwell sometimes Preacher of GODS Word, at FAWKIRKE.

Enriched with a godly Treatise, Called, An Ascension of the Soul to Heaven,
by Meditation on the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by John Wreittoun, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Nether-Bow. 1620.

Chrysostom. de perfect. Evang.
Thou have no need of Patrones to GOD, or much discourse, that thou should
soothe others: but though thou be alone, and want a Patron, and by thy self
pray unto God, thou shall obtain thy desire.

Terentianus Maurus Books receive their doom according to the Readers
capacity.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS LADY, LADY MARIE STEWART, COUNTESS OF
MAR. Mr. P. Anderson wishes all blessings in this life, and a better
afterward.
MADAM,
ALthough both obligation, and duty should require no less (than the
Dedication of these most matchless Meditations of the Soul) from me to your
Honor: yet very Reason it self, guarded with love, urges me to it: For I
borrowed them from you; I had them only from you, being nothing herein, but
your own: Therefore in testimony of my duty and thankfulness, Reason now
would, I should return that publickelie unto you, which privately you daigned
your self to lend me. Physicians have many approved Recipies for the body,
but these be the very quintessence of heavenly recepies for the Soul. I know
they shall be welcome again, because you have a special care to that health;
I am persuaded, that as ^itherto I have offered some wholesome Physic for the
body, So now, I hope, no worse yea, rather better for the Soul. If the
natural has profited any thing for the body; I pray God, these that are
spiritual may do more. You were well acquainted with them before: but they
would be ruminated again: For herein shall your Honor find ease, when you
are wearied: Company, when you sit most alone: Comfort, when you are most sad;
and gains, when, casting up your accounts you find that you have received
greatest loss. There is beer Music for the mind, Physic for a sick
soul; and Divine nourishment to feed them both. Sr Philip Sidneys Arcadia
has many fair and recreatiue discourses for Ladies; a fair Field in deed
to feed on, for young and fond Lovers. The Country it self, is a fresh and
pleasant Soil in the middle of Peloponesus, a ground that flows of many
delicates, fine pasturages for flocks, and pleasant Rivers. But this is a
spiritual Arcadia: It is your Honors little Arcadia. For here is a spiritual
food for wearied Souls: Here are Pasturages for the Flock of Christ; Here
raineth down Manna in abundance in this little plot of ground: Here it
flows with Milk and Honey. And here is that Rock out of which run the
rivers of waters of Life. Gather this Manna; feed on such Physic, eat this
Milk and Honey, and taste of these Waters, and do not only taste them, but
drink freely of them. The flock of Arcadia do ruminate, and chow their
coode: So should we Christians do after prayer by meditation; For prayer is a
disposing of our Souls to meditation, and meditation is the spiritual chawing
of the Soul, which supplieth matter to our prayers, both give life and
strength the one to the other. The Countess of Pembrokes Arcadia is for the
body; but the Countess of Mar her Arcadia is for the Soul. The author of
the first, was a worthy and Noble Knight, the author of the other, was a
sincere and devote Pastor, a man known to your Honor, to be in his life,
holy; in his doctrine, pure and vncorrupt; still constant in his calling, not
after the rudiments of the world, but void of all affection to novelties. His
words were godly, his works and deeds heavenly, (for all his labors were in
Gods Vineyard.) He was the principal Shepherd of this little Arcadia: So by
such Arcadian pasturages, you may learn; how he tendered his Flock; in a
word, his life was answerable to that which be taught: A Preacher while he
lived upon earth; and yet still a Teacher whilst his body lies in the grave.
Your Ho. received them of him, as a Present, use them now as a precious Jewel,
wear them as a wedding Garment, and keep them as a Treasure: Nothing rests
then, but that your Ho. would vouchsafe your favorable acceptance of them,
protect, allow, and defend them, I mean with a liberty to pass under the
protection of your worthy name, and favor; since they thus pertain unto you,
and framed of purpose for you; I earnestly crave, that your Honors godly
disposition will not suffer these heavenly consolations of the Soul to be
blamished in the hands of Zoylus Sycophants, which (as Socrates says) be but
obscure persons, busy bodies, such as have no pith, nor substance in their
actions, going about carping at everything, to purchase fame, and credit unto
themselves, by dispraising others. I confess the Title is mine, whereat
(perchance) if your L. take offense for my presumption, in not first
frequenting your Ho. therewith, I must crave bumble pardon of your self, since
the offense (if any be) can offend none, but your self, who knows that I
have of long time given proof of mine honest service and fidelity, w^erevpon
I had a sure confidence, that the meek disposition of your own Nature, and of
your wonted kindnesses toward me, will accept my good meaning with lenity
by imputing such an offense rather to the infirmity of affection, than either
to base flattery or seducing hypocrisy, so that mine honest mind being ever
interpreted to the best sense, I may with boldness of a good conscience
testify the truth of what I have observed and seen with mine eyes amongst
the many Noble Ladies of this Kingdom, your Ho. to be a true Pattern of
modest Piety, a perfect mirror of feminine gravitie, and a liberal supplier
of the necessities of the poor, yea, in time of dearth, and scarsetie: And as
his Majesty long since, in his Book of Poesies, called your Noble Father the
Phoenix of all the Nobility; so may the world esteem your Ho. to be another
elect Lydia of that same Noble quality. Receive then (most Noble Lady) in
protection these Divine ejaculations of the Soul, that your very
countenancing of them, may not only add unto their goodness, but also may
procure a good estimation amongst many that are as religiously affected as
your self. They were of before known but to a few, now are they made legible
to the world, they were once in hazard to be lost, but by me they are
enrolled to be kept in the Printers Register. But least (being careful to
eschew that despitefull vice of ingratitude, for your continual vn-deserved
favors) some think I may perchance fall in offense by the prolixitie of many
idle words: I will therefore end, in commending my self under the assurance
of your H. pardon, committing these heavenly meditations as most cordial
restoratives for the Soul to your daily practice, as before; and thus my good
intention to your favorable censure, wishing always your Hon. not to think it
amiss, although it agrees not so much with my profession, as in respect of
others more beseeming, that I should exhort your Ho. as you have begun to be
constant in your religious duties, although I know it was not needful for me
to remember you of those things you have been taught of God, because I know
the sincerity of your profession and practice has so many witnesses, since
you believed the Gospel of Salvation, and was sealed by the Spirit of promise,
you have a witness in your self, which I am persuaded will not fail in life
or death to plead your abundant consolation. Now thus with due acknowledging
of the manifold kindnesses I have received, both from your self, and from my
right Honorable good Lord and Patron, I commit your Honors and your most
Noble Family to the merciful protection of the Almighty who mot without
ceasing multiply his graces upon you, and crown you with all kind of
blessings. The God of mercy and Father of Glory (who has abounded toward
you, not only in outward happiness of unstained Nobility; grandour,
greatness of means, and favor with the highest on our earth; but which is
greatest of all, in the unsearchable riches of Jesus Christ: in the largeness
and eminency of many singular gifts, and abundance of all good works) make
you perfect to do his will, and work in you an increase of all that is
pleasing in his sight. That ye may see many good and happy days in this
life, and end them with comfort, and immortality in the life to come, I rest.

Your Hon. own Physician in all humble duty, M. P. ANDERSON.

THE COUNTESS OF MARRES SANCTVARIE.
Morning meditation of the first Day.
I Do present my self, O LORD, before thy sacred Majesty, a poor sinful
creature, filthy within and filthy without: but where shall I go to be
cleansed? the waters of Jordan cleansed the leprosy of Naamans body, 2 King.
5.14.
but all the waters in the Ocean can not cleanse the leprosy of my soul: I am
enforced to come to thee, O Lord, for where shall I go? Thou have the words of
eternal Life. John. 6.47.
If thou wash me not, I can have no part with thee; John. 13.8
Wash, I beseech thee, O Lord, not my feet only, but my hands, and my head
also. Merciful Father, let not the gates of thy mercy be closed upon me,
which have been opened to so many poor sinners before me. If thou refuse to
be merciful, where shall mercy be found? Luc. 23.43.
O Lord, thou did not abhor the penitent Thief, nor the woman of Canaan,
when she requested thee: Mat. 15.22
neither the woman apprehended in adultery, John. 11 8.
nor the Publican praying to thee, Mat. 26 74.
neither yet the Disciple that denied thee. In the smell of these thine
Ointments does my soul run after thee. Cant. 4.10.
I do confess in sincerity, 1. Tim. 1 15.
O Lord, that of all sinners I am the chief, where sin has abounded, Lord
let thy mercy superabound. I say unto thee, O Lord, with that poor leper,
Lord, if thou will, Mat. 8.2
thou can make me clean; yea, although I be spotted as the Leopard, and
black as a Moore, one drop of the blood of Jesus Christ is able to make me as
white as snow. I believe, Lord, Psalm. 51.7.
help my unbelief. It is thy praise O Lord, that thou make the barren womb
the mother of many children, and turns the barren wilderness into a fruitful
Land. Psalm. 107 35. Exodus 15 25. John. 2.9. Mat. 12 10.
Thou Lord, can make bitter waters, sweet; and can turn water into Wine. O
Lord! pity my withered heart, as thou pitied the withered hand. Quicken this
dead heart of mine, by the quickening virtue of thy Spirit: yea Lord, Act.
16.14. Numb. 17.8.
open my heart, as thou openedst the heart of Lydia; thou that made the rod
of Aaron to blossom, make my soul to floorish in true repentance. It is no
small mercy, O Lord, that thou have spared me so long. If thou had dealt
with me, as I have deserved, thou might have taken the Axe in thine hand,
Mat. 3.10.
and hewed me down, as an unprofitable tree, and casten me into the fire.
Long have thou spared me, O Lord, but let me not be reserved to any further
wrath; as I am partaker of thy sparing mercies, make me partaker also of thy
converting mercy. Create into me a new heart, Psalm. 51.10.
and renew a right Spirit within me. Let me find that change into my soul,
that is proper to the children of God, Translate me yet further out of the
Kingdom of darkness, Col. 1.13
into the Kingdom of thy dear Son. Fashion me so to thine own image, Gal.
2.20.
that I no longer live; but Christ may live in me. Mark me with that new Name
which no man knows, but he that has received it. Give me to taste of that
hid Manna, which no man can decerne, but he that has tasted of it. Create in
my soul spiritual senses, that in a spiritual manner I may take thee up; who
is the spirit of spirits. Furnish my languishing soul with some of the first
fruits of thy heavenly Canaan, that in the strength thereof I may walk,
until thou possess me into that promised rest.

Be with me in all my tentations, and lead me through all difficulties, that
I may sing that joyful triumph with thine own Apostle; Thanks be to GOD,
who has given us victory through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Evening Meditation of the first Day.
SIN makes me ashamed to speak unto thee, O Lord, but my Savior
encourages me to present my self before thee; under the shadow of his
merits, do I appear in thy sight, and in his Name do I present my self, and
my supplications to thy Majesty. O Lord, do thou not number my steps? If
the conscience of the sins of this one day do so dash, and confound me,
what fears may arise in my soul through the memory of sins committed my
whole lifetime? I do confess, O Lord, my whole life has been a wandering
from thee: and all my days I have been doing nothing, but making up a d^tt^y
against my self; thou needst not, O Lord, to lead any process against me for
my conviction; the conscience may both accuse, witness, and condemn; O Lord,
all my life has been either sinful, or unfruitful. If I have done any
thing that seemed good; it was either counterfeit, or corrupt, or some way
imperfect; the dung of all my sacrifices justly might thou cast upon my
face. I have rather seemed, nor truly been religious; therefore do I seek
salvation without my self. Mat. 3.17.
I seek it in him, in whom thou art well pleased. Israel stinged with fyrie
Serpents, Numb. 21 6.
were healed by looking to the brazen Serpent, which Moses lifted up in the
Wilderness. I am stinged with the fyrie Serpent of sin; I look for health
in Christ, lifted up at thy right hand. Poor sick creatures got health to
their bodies at the poole of Siloam; John. 9.3.
I look for health to my soul at Silo, in Christ my Savior. Come, Lord
Jesus, Isai. 61. 1.
thou that deliverest the prisoner, and openest the eyes of the blind; Deliver
my soul from the bondage of sin; anoint me with thy eye salve. Come, as the
sweet Samaritane, and pour of thine Oil into my wounded spirit, Come, my
only Comforter; lead me to thy cellars, Cant. 2.5.
refresh me with thy flagons, comfort me with thine apples. Come, the Husband
of my soul, furnish out of thy Wardrobe a garment to cloth my inward
nakedness. Come, Light of the World, John. 1.9
bring light to my soul plunged in palpable darkness. Streatch forth thy
wings, O my Soul! mount above upon the chariot of spiritual meditations;
Delight thy self in the memories of the joys to be revealed, the like
whereof, the eye never saw, the ear never heard, 1. Cor. 2.9.
neither ever entered in the heart of man to vnerstand. Abide not still in
Babell, neither long for the flesh pots of Egypt. Sighe to the Lord, until
thou be delivered out of the prisonhouse of this body, Phil. 1.23.
and so be with Him, which is best of all.

And to this purpose, my gracious Lord, sanctify my rest this night; when the
body sleeps, Psalm. 11.
let the Spirit watch. Be thou ever in my mind, and let thy word be the
matter of my meditation. Keep me out of the hands of that roaring Lion, 1.
Pet. 5.8.
who greedily hunteth for my soul; let him get no vantage of me in the
night, who tempts me continually in the day. Let my thoughts, and visions,
be pure, and holy, being set on thee, and on thy heavenly kingdom. Let my
last thought this night, and my first thought to morrow be of thee: that so my
spirit, being ever with the Lord, while I am absent in the body, in thine own
time both body, and spirit may rest with thee for ever, through Jesus, who
has prepared that rest. Amen.

Morning meditation of the second Day.
LET thy servant, O Lord, have access this morning unto the throne of thy
grace. Lift up the light of thy countenance upon me. Oh Lord, I come as empty
of grace to thy Majesty at this time, as I had never received grace. It
grieveth me, O LORD, to be so ^rodigall of thy spiritual bles^inges. Thou
gave me, O Lord, some faith, some measure of divine light, some feel^ing,
some assurance of thy favor, which bred such joy, and peace into my soul, as
passed all natural understanding, but in stead of these; infidelity,
darkness, and senseless doubtings are stolen in into my soul.

O Lord, Hos. 13.9.
my destruction comes of my self, but my deliverance comes of thee.

The prodigal child, Luc. 15.17.
when he had wasted all, he had no other refuge, but return to his father. O
Lord, where shall I go now in my greatest distress? to whom shall I make my
moan: I will return unto thee; my loving Father; I know thy treasure cannot
be emptied. I do confess, I have sinned against Heaven, and against Earth,
and against thee; Luke. 15 21.22.
and is no more worthy to be called thy son. As thou opened the eyes of
Hagar, when her bottle of water was spent, and made her see a Well of water; so
Lord, open the eye of my soul, that I may see that fountain of Life, from
whence my soul may receive the waters of true consolation. Father, send down
that lightening Spirit of thine, to renew my faith, my feellings, and my
assurance, seeing I am content to forsake all things, to enjoy thee, and counts
all things doung in respect of thee. I confess, O Lord, that these desertions
are just punishments of my negligence in thy service, I take no such pains to
entertain thy Spirit, as I should do. I watch not so narrowly over my heart
as I ought. I labor not so painfully to mortify, and subdue my sinful
affections, Col. 3.5.
as becomes my Christian calling. Show me, O thou whom my soul loves,
Cant. 1.6.
where thou feedest, where thou lie at noone; Psalm. 23.
lead me to thy pasture; put in thine hand at the hole of the door of my
soul, Cant. 5.4.
and my heart shall be affectionat toward thee. Many times O Lord, by doing
of evil, Romans 7.19.
and by leaving of the good undone, have I grieved thy Spirit; yea, (allace) I
do what in me lies to quench the Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30.
but O Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.
thou know, that I am grieved in grieving thee; I am displeased with my
self, for displeasing thee. I know O Lord, it is some great sin that has
moved thee to punish me with these desertions. Lord, open mine eyes, that I
may see it. Lord, open mine heart, that I may repent for it. I am content, O
Lord, to quite any thing, to enjoy thee. If thou look blytlilie upon me, I
care not, who frown upon me. Ah Lord! that sin, which is not thy creature,
should so mightily prevail against thy creatures. I sin, Lord, but with a
wrestling; there is indeed a law in my members rebelling against the law of my
spirit: Romans 7 13.
the evil I would not do, that I do, the good I would feign do, I do it
not. I take thy Majesty to witness, Lord, it is my hearts desire, that the
flesh, and powers of corruption be weakened, that the Spirit, and renewed part
of my soul be strengthened. There was long wars betwixt the house of Saul,
2 Samuel 3. 1.
and the house of David, but in end, the house of David was strengthened, and
the house of Saul weakened. O Lord, weaken the power of my corruption, and
strengthen the power of the grace of God in me. Ismael and Isaac will not
aggree in one family, Genesis 21.10.
there can be no agreement betwixt the flesh, and the Spirit. Lord, crucify
the slesh, with the lusts thereof, quicken the Spirit, that my inner man may
grow. Thou know, O Lord, that I am crossed mightily by the remnants of the
old man. When my soul would mount up upon the wings of prayer to the Heaven,
I am borne down to the Earth. When I resolve to go forward into a good course;
I am drawn backward by the cords of a corrupt nature. If Iehoshua found fault
with the people of God, that they were slow in marching forward toward
earthly Canaan, how may Jesus find fault with me? he brought me indeed
out of spiritual Egypt, but slowly make I forward to heavenly Canaan. O
Lord, thou that sent thy Angel to Eliah, 1. Ki^ 19.
when he was sleeping under the juniper tree, and commanded him to arise, and
eat, for he had a long journey to go. Send down thy Spirit to put upon my
soul, that I may awake out of the deep sleep of unrighteousness; and take the
staff of God in mine hand, and never to look back with Lots wife, Genesis 26.
but ever to have my face toward the new Jerusalem, that in the end I may say
with thy servant Paul, 2. T^ 4.^
I have run a good race, I have foughten a good fight, from this time forth
is the Crown laid up for me. Lead me through the snares of this day. See my
feet upon a rock, Psalm. 2.
and order my going^. Furnish me with wisdom, that I may go in, and out
wisely before thy people, set a watch before my lips, Psalm.
and the door of my speech, let all my speeches be seasoned with grace, and
tend to edifieing. Let my heart ever be with thee, what ever I be doing
beneath. And finally, as thou led thy servant Moses unto mount Pisga, and did
let him see Canaan a far off; Deuteronomy. 34. 1
let my soul delight to walk upon the mountain of heavenly meditations,
looking a far off to that heavenly Canaan, while in thine own good time,
thou bring me through the waters of Jordan, even through death it self and
enter me into that rest. Now to my blessed Lord, the purchaser of this rest,
with the Father, who from all eternity appointed the same, and the holy Spirit
who daily confirms me in the hope of it, be praise for ever. 3 Ephesians. 1.13.
Amen.

Evening meditation of the second Day.
O LORD, let that same Spirit, which indyted thy holy Word, whereby thou
speaks to my Soul; indyte my prayers, Romans 8.26.
whereby my soul speaks to thee; thou know the voice of thine own
Spirit, but the voice of a stranger thou will not hear.

I continue my complaint to thy Majesty, still lamenting this ignorance, and
yet remains into the mind, notwithstanding I am ever endeavoring to know
thee. Who can take thee up, who is such an infinite, and incomprehensible
Spirit? thou dwell into a light, 1. John. 4.12.
wherevnno man can have access. No man can take thee up by natural light, 1.
Cor. 2.14.
for the natural man knows not the things that are of God, they are
foolishness unto him. I crave therefore such a measure of that uncreated
light, even the light of thy Spirit, as may breed into the mind a continual
reverence of thee; bring the heart to an holy obedience to thee, and make all
my affections, and actions directly to tend to thy glory.

True it is, O LORD, now and then I have enjoyed sensibly this light, but ever
after humiliation, and fervent prayer. I am become cold in prayer; I seek thee
not with that hunger, and thirst, as I should do; and this makes my feellings
not so frequent. Lord, stir up my spirit, that I may seek thee continually
with that holy zeal, and fervencie that becomes me. Indeed O LORD, these
desertions are ^earefull, and terrible to fall unto thy Children. Truly, I am
most certain, that greater deadness, darkness, and senselessness, can not
fall unto a reprobat. If the memory of by past experiences did not comfort me,
these fearful desertions would make me faint, and fall a back. Lord, let not thy
servant be tempted above his strength. 1. Cor. 10.13.


Return, O Lord, deliver my soul, Psalm. 119.8.
save me for thy mercies sake, forsake me not over long. And if it shall
please thee, O Lord, to hold me under the bitter sense of those fearful
desertions for a time for my further humiliation; let this ever be my greatest
grief, that I miss thy presence. Teach me to seek vncessantlie until I
find thee; to knock until thou open, to call until thou answer. Psalm. 39.7.
What wait I for, O Lord? Is not mine hope even in thee. Yea, let the hope I
have to enjoye thee, and thy presence for ever, make me to possess my soul,
with the greater patience in the midst of all these fears. And now, O Lord,
in this absence from thee, albeit the body be here on earth, Phil. 3.20.
let my conversation ever be in heaven. Give me grace, this night to examine
my heart upon my bed. Teach thou my reins in the night: Psalm. 4.4.
let me lie down in thy peace; and rest under the shadow of thy protection.
Psalm. 4.9.
Let my bed remember me of the grave, and my rising again; of the last
resurrection.

Make ^ee always w^tchfull, and suffer not Oil to be inlacking to my lamp.
Mat. 25.8.
When my Lord shall come, grant I may meet h m with joy, and ever be with him
in heaven, whom my soul hat^ sought on earth. Amen.

Morning meditation of the third Day.
O LORD, my God, if I had eyes to see the misery of this time, wherein I do
live, I could take up, both the universal defection of the whole world, and
the particular desolation of my own soul, then would mine eyes be a
fountain of tears. Thy servant David powered out rivers of tears, Psalm.
119.136.
when he did see the wicked not keep thy Law. 2. Pet. 2.8
Lots heart was vexed within him, when he saw the iniquity of Sodom, but
alaace Lord, I am not so sensible, these things are hid from me, therefore I
pray thee, remove this veil that overshaddoweth my soul. Act. 9.18.
Make the skales to fall from mine eyes, that I may take up those decays into
a clearer light; from the Priest, to the people, Hos. 4.9.
all have a part in this defection. Where is that wonted zeal to thy glory?
Who are they; who in singleness of heart seek thee? All do seek their own
things, Phil 2.21.
but few the things which are Christ's. Religion, which should overrule men's
ways are made a coverture to vice, and sin. O Lord, demaske them, and let
them appear, who turn the truth of GOD into a lie, and labor to cover
ungodliness, with a clo^ke of an holy profession. Mat. 2.12.13.
Take the scourge into thine hand, and purge thy Temple; put to the door those
buyers, and sellers, who make the house of God a den of thieves; and touch
mine heart, with a livelie feeling of my particular defects. I confess, O
Lord, I have fallen from my first love, from my former zeal, Revel. 2.4.
from my former care, and diligence in thy service. Where is the melting
heart, the mourning eye, the painful diligence, night; and day, at home, and
abroad, to seek thy face? Where I was wont to pray with delight, with liberty,
and with tears, now I weary of prayer. I find no inward liberty, no
softness of heart. I come unto thee, with a senseless heart; I depart from
thee, with as senseless a heart. Where my heart was wont to be pricked at the
hearing of thy Word, Act. 2.^.
where I was wont to depart from Sermons with great comfort; now I find my
self neither casten down, nor raised up. Thy Word, O Lord, works not upon
my heart as it was wont to do, this is one token that my spiritual Life is
weakened: therefore as thou have breathed in my nostrels, Genesis 2.7.
the breath of a natural life; breath upon my soul, Cant. 4.16.
that I may find the motions of a spiritual Life. Call upon my soul out of
the grave of sin, John. 12.43.44.
as thou called Lazarus his body, out of the grave. Let me find a quickening
virtue flowing from thy livelie Spirit, to quicken my dead spirit. Lord, teach
me to redeem these losses, and grant I may ever count it my greatest loss,
to lose the signs of thy presence Suffer not mine heart to be oppressed with
the thornie cares of this life; Luc. 8.
but learn me to cast my care upon the Lord. What ever I be doing in these
worldly things, 1. Cor. 7.29.30.
let me so do them, as I were not doing them. Give me that dexterity to
discharge such a duty in mine earthly calling, as may ever agree with mine
heavenly calling. Furnish me with wisdom, that I may walk wisely even
toward them that are without. 1 Thessalonians. 1^
Make my life a pattern of godliness, that where ever I come, or go, I may
smell of Jesus Christ. Give me grace to be careful not only of mine own
soul, but of the souls of all them, of whom I have any charge, that so thy
glory ever being before mine eyes; thou may glorify me one day, through
Jesus Christ, my Savior, who fitteth at thy right hand. Amen.

Evening Meditation of the third Day.
O LORD, I never prease to draw nere unto thee; but that Evil one draws
near to me. If Iehoshua come in before the LORD; Zach. 3.1.
Satan will be at his right hand to resist him: he troubles, and distracteth
my mind with Armies of unruly cogitations. It is my greatest difficulty, O
Lord, at any time to get a free mind to serve thee. Exodus 5.3.
When Israel desired to go to the Wilderness, and sacrifice to the Lord;
Pharaoh doubled their burdens, so does Satan double his tentations upon me,
when I would go out of my self, to serve thee. What am I; poor weak creature,
that I should resist such mighty spiritual powers? O Lord, 1. Cor. 12.9.
it is thy battle I fight, and thy grace, is sufficient for me. Thy people
when they builded the wall of Jerusalem, Neh. 4.17.
they did hold their weapons in the one hand, and builded with the other hand.
Lord, furnishe me with a double portion of thy Spirit, that I may resist Satan
with the one hand, and draw near to thee with the other. O Lord, I am come to
thine Holiness, to repent my sins. Ah Lord! my sins are great, but my
repentance is slender. Lord, give me that repentance, which thou gave unto
Peter; he sinned grievouslie, but repented earnestly; yea, he weeped
bitterly. O Lord, have not thou the keys of David, which opens, Rev. 3.7.
and no man shuts, and shuts, and no man opens? Open mine heart, that I
may make such a repentance, as ^ought to do. Thou did keep Jonas, that he
drowned not. Thou, O Lord, did streatch forth thine helping hand, and
kept Peter, Mat. 14.31.
that he did not sink, when he did walk on the waters. Lord, streatch
forth thine helping hand, let not thy servant sink into the sea of sin. O
Lord, thou prepared an Arc for thine own Noah, and the Whales belly, for
thine own Jonas. Lord, if I shall get my foot once within the Arc, I shall
be safe. Jesus Christ is mine Arc, let me be found in him; then shall there
be no condemnation to me, Romans 8.1.
my sins indeed are great, O Lord, but shall I balance the sins of a
finite creature, with the mercies of the infinite Creator? Psalm. 25.9.
Nay Lord, all thy ways are mercy, and truth to these that fear thee. I
have nothing to lay between me, and Hell, but thy undeserved mercy. O Lord,
my God, thou art a strength unto the poor, a refuge against the tempest, and a
shadow against the heat. Who so dwells in the secret of the most Hie, Psalm.
91. 1.
shall abide in the shadow of the Almighty. I will say unto the Lord, O my
hope, Psalm. 42.10.
and my fortress, he is my God, in him will I trust. Confirm my soul O
Lord, in the certainty of this persuasion. Strengthen also, the arm of thy
feeble, and weak servant, that I may fight with the greater courage against
that spiritual Gohab. Let me not depart from thee at this time without some
spiritual comfort. Thou would not suffer the multitude, Mat. 14.19.
that waited upon thee, three days in the Wilderness, to depart until they
were refreshed. Lord, refresh my soul with some crummes of grace, falling
from thy Table. When Jonathan was weary, 1. Sam. 14.28.
and put forth his rod, and tasted of the honey; his dim eyes received
sight, and his feeble body was strengthened. O Lord, Luc. 8.46.
if I shall touch Jesus by the rod of faith, my dim eyes shall receive
sight; and my feeble soul new strength. O my Lord! am not I seeking this
strenth of thee, to bruise the head of the old Serpent, Genesis 3.15.
a sworn enemy to thy Kingdom? Deny not armor to thine own weak
soldier, that in the power of thy might, I may subdue that great dragon
Sin; that it may be borne down, and Jesus his throne may be set up in the
secret corner of mine heart. Sanctify my rest this night in such sort, that
when this wearied body has received its bodily refreshment; I may rise, by
thy grace, to morrow, to do thee better service in Jesus Christ.

Amen.
Morning meditation of the fourth Day.
THY sacrifices O Lord, Ps^^ 5.17.
are a contrite, and a broken heart. I come to thy Altar, but I want the
sacrifice. O Lord, who vouchsafedst a sacrifice upon Abraham; Genesis 22.13.
vouchsafe a sacrifice upon me. I would wish mine heart could be dissolved in
bitter tears, but such is my present hardness, that neither can I repent as I
should; neither is mine heart so softened, as it should be. Ezekiel. 11.19.
It is thy praise O Lord, to take the stony heart away, and to give an heart
of flesh. Lord, I have a stony heart; rent it, O Lord, take it away, and give
me a soft heart; that I may make such a repentance, as my great offenses
require. Lord, there is no contentment to my soul, but either when thou
humblest me with a sense of sin, or raisest me up with a sense of mercy,
rather than I be senseless, let me be sensible of my sin, that in the
bitterness of my heart, I may bewail it. Teach me now to mourn with thy
children, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.
that I may rejoice in the day of their rejoysing. Cherish, O Lord, those little
sparkles of grace, which in thy great mercy, thou have kindled in my soul.
Increase my faith, my love, and my light. Learn me to forget those things
that are behind me, Phi. 3.13.
and follow hard toward the mark. O Lord, open thine own Treasures; and send
down of thy spiritual graces. Let me find a lifting up virtue in thy
spirit, continually raising up my spirit. Speak peaceable things to my soul
this morning; that all the day long, I may rejoice in thee. Give me faith, to
apply the sweet promises of mercy made in thy Word. Hedge me so about with
thy grace, that my secreet corruptions break not out. Let my whole life be a
walking with thee, and a moving toward thee. John. 12.32.
Draw me every day somewhat nearer to thy self, and deface the image of
sin in me; that the image of Christ may be set up in my soul. Be thou, O
Lord, a bulwark to thy servant, that the violent spait of the corruption of
this time, dryve me not away. Save me, that I communicate not with the sins
of other men, 1. Tim. 5.22.
and cleanse me from my own sins. As this body of clay wears, and
wastes, grant O Lord, that sin may wear, and waste in me. Bring the work
of thine own grace to perfection; and lead me from faith, Romans 1.17.
to faith, and from feeling, to feeeling, 1. Cor. 13.12.
until faith end in sight, and feelling into an endless fellowship, which I
hope to enjoy in the Heavens with my blessed Head, and Husband Jesus Christ,
Amen.

Evening meditation of the fourth Day.
I Bless the time, wherein I was acquainted with thy Majesty. If thou had
not sent the light of thine own Spirit; Ephesians. 2.12.
as I was borne a stranger, I had died a stranger. I confess, O Lord, that
before my calling I was doing the works of the flesh, Ephesians. 2.3.
and of the mind, and was by nature the child of wrath, as well as others. But
thou O Lord, who art rich in mercy through the great love, that thou have
loved me in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.4.
have made me to see, that I was walking in a way to mine own damnation; Thou
in mercy reclaimedst me, and broughtest me back; yea, thou did pardon
those selfsame sins in me; for the which, thou have condemned others. O
Lord, what did thou see in me, more than in others? Nothing but matter of
wrath, and condemnation. Yea, Lord, as thou did separate Eliah from Elisha,
2. King. 2.11.
walking in one way together, by a fyrie chariot; so have thou shed me from
the reprobat, sometime walking in one course with them. I say with thy servant
David; Not unto me, Psalm. 115. 1.
not unto me, O Lord, but unto thy Name let the glory be given. Who is able
to think aright of thy mercy? all thy ways are mercy and truth to them that
fear thee. Psalm. 25.1.
When I remember, what I have been, I am enforced to wonder at thy mercy. If
thou had been as ready to punish me for my sin; as I was ready to
commit sin; I had had my portion amongst the damned Spirits ere now.

What folly was there, wherein I did not take pleasure? I stopped mine care at
the voice of GOD, and hearkened unto the voice of the Serpent. The deceitful
pleasures of sin, ensnared my soul, but thou have broken the grinne, Psalm.
124.6.
and my soul, like a bird, has escaped: all things are naked, and patent
before him, Heb. 4.13.
with whom we have to do. Thou did see Nathanael under the fig tree. John.
1.48.
I do therefore in all humility, crave thee mercy for all my sins, before
my calling, and also after my calling. Like a Dog, I have returned to my
vomit, 2. Pet. 2.22.
and like a Sow washed, I have defiled my self in the mire again. After that
thou had made me clean, these same sins, for the which I have lamented,
and repented, I have fallen into again. As my salvation was begun of thy
mercy; so let it be continued, and perfected of that same mercy; for mercy
is all I lean to. At that last hour, when all these outward comforts, as
false friends will fly from me in my greatest need; then Lord, be at my
right hand; yea, be in the secreet corner of mine heart, that my death, as
well as my life, may edify others in the faith of Christ. Let my mouth, whilst
I have breath, utter forth a good matter. Psalm. 45.1.2.
Then lead thou me through the valley of death, and in end bring me into
that glorious, and lightsome Palace: where the glory of God shines most
brightlie, ^sal. 17.15.
that my soul may ever be delighted with the brightness of his Face; and may
have my part in that Song of Thankes^giving, Rev. 5.9.10. etc.
which the glorified Spirits sound to the praise of GOD, to whom be
everlasting praise.

Amen.
Morning meditation of the fifth Day.
O Heavenly Father, as all the waters run into the Ocean, so does all poor
sinners power out their complaints in thy bosom. Thou art the only refuge
of a wearied soul; to thee only do we fly in our greatest necessities,
and at thy mouth, do we seek resolution in our most perplexed affairs. I
have many things to lament to thy Majesty, but in special, I lament to thee
that my meditations are so confused, and mixed, with impertinent cogitations.
Lord, this is a token of a confused heart. I am sorry that the heart, which
should be the dwelling place of thy Spirit; should be so preoccupied by
earthly, fleshly, and profane cogitations.

I may withdraw my self from the company of the World; but (allace) I can
not with draw my self, from a profane heart; where ever I go, I carry a
profane heart about with me, and albeit, thou give me an outward liberty
to bow the knee of my body, yet my spirit is bound. Ah Lord! I can neither
speak nor think of thee, as I should do. Thou art infinite, unmeasureable,
incomprehensible; what can a finite creature take up of an infinite God.
Forgive me, Lord, that I worship thee in such ignorance, let me see thee in a
clearer light, and I shall worship thee with a greater affection. The better,
O Lord, that I know thee, the better I love thee, the more will I reverence
thee. That woman of Samaria, John. 4.9.
before Thee knew thee, preferred a drink of water to thee; but from time she
knew thee, she esteemed much of thee, and preferred thee unto all things. To
the end therefore, O Lord, that thou may have that rowme in mine heart, that
thou ought to have; manifest thy self more clearelie to my soul. Draw
abacke this curtain off my soul, that I may take thee up more sensibly, I
crave light, with the increase of light, and grace, with the increase of grace;
faith, with the increase of faith; (and because that here is no perfection)
Grant I may study to a growth; until thou perfect thine own work, and in
the mean time, O Lord, consider what I am, and where I am a weak creature, in
a waste Wilderness. Therefore, as thou carried thy own Israel upon Eagles
wings, through the wilderness toward that earthly Canaan, carry me
through this waste Wilderness of the World, until I come to mine heavenly
Canaan. Thou know, O Lord, my soul is as a ship tossed to, and fro, with
continual tempests; many times when I have a straight course to Heaven; I am
driven aside by the contrary winds of my corrupt affections. Lord Jesus, be
thou Pylote to the Ship of my soul; that I make no shipwreck; as
tentations, follows tentations, like the waves of the sea, every one upon
the back of another; so let grace be doubled, that although Satan seek to
winnow me as wheat, yet he prevail not. I long O Lord to be with thee, where
Satan will not tempt, sin will not accuse, and these unruly affections will
not trouble me. Ah, when shall this poor spirit be disburthened of this
lodging of clay, that that, which is divine, may behold thy divine Majesty
always so long as I am here in the body. Thou that teachedst David's fingers
here to fight; Psalm. 18.33.
so that a Bow of brass, was not able to withstand him. So, strengthen thou
mine arm, that I may be able to resist these malicious enemies. Thy servant
David overcame the Lion, and the Bear, and the uncircumcised Philistim; yet
was he overcome with his uncircumcised heart. Of all difficulties, it is the
greatest to ^me man to overcome himself. Lord, help me by grace, to sight
against my self. I will not despare, Lord, notwithstanding of all these
enemies, so long as I may make my plaint to thee. Thy eyes are upon the lust,
Psalm. 34.15.
thine ears open unto their cry. Thou did hear the groanings of thine own
Israel; Lord, hear the gronings of my soul. Thine ear, O Lord, is not
heavy, Esaias. 59: 1.
nor is thine hand shortened; streatche forth the arm of thy mercy, and
help my distressed soul. Did not thou command the stormy winds; and raging
seas when thy Disciples were in hazard! and they obeyed thee. If my small
affections never rage so mightily, if thou will command peace, they will
settle, and be obedient to thy voice. And now, O Lord, this day wherein I am
entered, I know not what inconvenient I may meet with, lead me safely through
all difficulties (O thou) that art the shepherd of my soul, Psalm. 23.1.
that I safely going through the snares of this day; at evening I may bow my
knees, and sound thy praises in Jesus Christ. Amen.

Evening meditation of the fifth Day.
I Have wandered from thee, O Lord, this day. That troublesome Spirit, has
oppressed my Spirit, with variety of unnecessary affairs. I bussie my self
about many things, Luc. 10.42.
but yet one thing is needful, I find by daily experience, that the cares of
this world are thornie cares; they prick, and annoy my soul; Mat. 13.7.
they chocke the seed of grace, which in mercy thou did sow I to mine
heart: they are mighty impediments to the growth of my inner man. I pray thee,
let not these earthly cares diminish mine inward peace, nor prejudg my union
with thy Majesty; nor draw on darkness upon my mind but O Lord, let the secret
beams of thy lightsome face continually shine upon my soul. Let me ever
live in a spiritual sense of my union, from the which, such inward joy may
flow to my spirit, as may make all estates acceptable to me. O Lord, of all
difficulties, I find it the greatest, to keep the heart in a sense of thy
presence. I confess, O Lord, for all the pains I have yet taken in thy
worship; if thou yet leave me, I may fall into as great Athisme, as they who
never knew thee. Therefore, waken my Spirit; renew my senses; lift up all the
powers of my soul, Phil. 3.19.
that I may ever mind heavenly things. True it is, O Lord my earthly calling
is a great impediment to my heavenly calling; although I were no ways
distracted, but all times gave my self to reading, prayer, and meditation; it
were little enough for the intertaining the life of Christ in my soul. But O
Lord, as thou have laid a double burden upon me; so double thy Spirit upon
me, that even whilst I am doing the points of my earthly calling; my spirit
may be above. Lord, open mine eyes, that I may see my predominant sins; let
me not be a slave to my affections, but give me grace to strive against
every sinful motion And as thou O Lord, do now cover all things here
beneath with darkness; so cover my sins, that they be not seen again. Let
never mine heart be so far from thee, as it has been; neither be thou so
long absent from my soul. Esaias.
Write my name upon the palms of thine hands, and let me be as a signet upon
thy right hand. O thou the Watchman of Israel, Psalm. 121.3.
who neither slumbrest, nor sleep; be thou my keeper this night. Let this
temporal rest, be a pledgde to me of that everlasting rest, which I hope to
enjoye in the Heavens through Jesus Christ.

Amen.
Morning meditation of the sixth Day.
I Complain to thy Majesty, of the incessant malice of my sworn enemy, he
is a restless tempter, and I am a careless resister: he knows my
weakness, and takes his advantage of my infirmities. When I have best
resolutions to serve thee; then rages he most against me; and when I set my
face toward heaven, then he labors to dryve me from the right mark, that
Evil one albeit I went not to my rest, after in calling upon thy name, yet
has carried my fantasy after profane, earthly, and carnal things. Ah Lord
I what he cannot accomplish in the day, he labors to bring it to pass
in the night. Take not these for mine actions, but for mine enemies divelish
suggestions. I would wish the mind were so pure, and the heart so spirituallie
disposed, that ever, sleeping, or waking I were about spiritual matters. And
because, O Lord, thou can not dwell inro a filthy heart, sweep the house of
my soul; wash me anew, Psalm. 51.7.
and make me clean: prepare a lodging for thine own Spirit into the secreet
corners of mine heart: possess tho^ thine own dwelling, for thou have bought
it with the blood of thine own Son. Keep me, O Lord, 1. John. 1.7.
1. Pet. 1.5.
unto that Life, which thou have keeping for me, and whilst I am here in the
body; save me from carnal security. Let my delight ever be to watch, and
pray, and multiply the spirit of prayer upon me. Mat. 6.6.
Let me not weary of weldoing, but lead me in thy paths. I am sorry that
my time has been so wasted, time slydeth away, and I profit little, or
nothing in it. Let no day slip away without some spiritual advantage. O Lord
I count it my greatest gain, to gain Christ: Phil. 3.8.
yea, I esteem all things doung in respect of him. Let me feel sensibly, O
Lord, that I am rooted, Ephesians. 2.20.
and builded in him. Let virtue proceed from him to heal my diseased soul, in
him, Lord, be well pleased with me thy weak servant. Furnishe me with
grace, to do every point of thy worship with some piece of good conscience:
that in the end thou be not ashamed of me, nor deny me not to be thine;
but may call upon me, saying; Come faithful servant, Mat. 25.21.
enter into thy Masters rest; unto the which rest, O Lord of thy infinite
mercy bring this poor soul of mine, in thy own good time.

Amen.
Evening Meditation of the sixth Day.
WHAT shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits bestowed upon me a
sinful worm. Psalm. 116.12.
I have found thy kindness in outward things I have had a proof of thy favor
in inward mercies. If Ruth, Ruth. 2.3.
when she found favor with Boaz, in suffering her to gather corns on his
field amongst his slaves, and give her bodily refreshment with his servants,
made such an humble confession, saying, What am I, that I should have found
favor in thine eyes, and that thou should know me, seeing I am a
stranger? What may I say to thy Majesty; who albeit I was a stranger from the
womb, yet have thou O Lord, received me to mercy, and communicatest of thy
spiritual Treasure to my soul. O Lord, thou have powered in life in my soul,
where Death had taken seasing; yea, as thou quickened Lazarus his dead body,
John. 11.43.
so have thou quickened my dead soul; thou made light to break up, where
there was nothing but darkness. As the morning cloud passes away at the
rising of the Sun, so the cloud of natural darkness, passes away at the
breaking up of the light of thy Face Thou have O Lord, brought liberty to my
soul, where I was fettered in the chains of an unbelieving heart, whereas at
my first wakeninges, I found terrors, fears, accusations, and great inward
griefs; thou have now pacified my soul, and brought peace, and joye, to mine
heart. Blessed be the time that ever I knew thee! happy was that hour,
wherein thou manifested thy self unto me. Peter, James, and John were so
ravished with the glory of Christ his transfiguration, Mat. 17. 1.2.
that they desired never to have removed off that mountain; so Lord, the
smallest glimmering of thy light does so delight the heat; that it makes us
to forsake all, that we may abide with thee. I say to thee, Ruth. 1.16.
O Lord, as Ruth said to Naomi, where thou go I will go. My dear Lord,
strengthen my weak faith, that day, by day, I may get a faster grippe of Jesus
Christ; and howbeit I continue not at all times in the like degree of feeling:
yet let never my faith fail me, and whenever I miss thee; give me grace
to seek thee with a sorrowful heart until I find thee. Lead me forward
from faith, to faith, and feeling, to feeling, until faith end in sight, and
feeling in a perfect fruition of these supernatural joys, which I long for,
and daily awaite in Christ Jesus, our Lord, and Savior, Amen.

Morning meditation of of the seventh Day.
IT has pleased thee, O Lord, to separate this Day from the rest of the days
for thine only worship. LORD, in like manner separate me from my
corruptions; and in some measure sanctify me this Day to thy service; that I
may dedicate the same wholly to thy service; and not only cease from meddling
with my worldly business, but I may cease from sin, and have all the powers
of my soul lifted upward, (O Lord) warm mine heart with the love of thee,
inslame mine affections with the zeal of thy Glory: Oh, Lord, how long shall
I dwell in the tents of Kedar, Psalm. 120.5
when shall this wearisome pilgrimage be ended? when shall that blessed Iubile
come, when all thy Saints shall be set at liberty? and we to enjoye perfect
rest with thee for ever. Here I am oppressed with fears, doubtinges,
deadness of spirit, blindness of mind: In the mean time, sweet Christ
Jesus, leave me not in this place of my banishment, for thou art Light, and
without thee I can do nothing but walk in darkness: John. 8.12.
Thou art Life, and without thee; there is nothing but present Death: Thou art
the Way, and without thee I can do nothing but walk in the broad way. Go
thou before me, my dear Savior, then shall I cheerefulie follow thee; let
me see the way I should walk into, and lead me into that way: Make the light
of thy face continually shine upon my soul, that in thy light, I may see
light. And now (O Lord) since I am to go to thy house to hear thy will out of
thy Word, be thou my convoy: and give me grace to take heed to my feet,
Eccl. 4 5.1
when I go to the house of the Lord; grant I may watch so narrowly over mine
heart and mind, that I be not wandering in time of thy worship; make thy
word comfortable unto my soul, yea, let it be sweeter to me, than the honey
and the honey comb; that I may return from thy Service, with a mind more
illuminated, and heart by grace better established, and affection better
informed, and all the powers of my soul in a greater measure sanctified,
finally so rule me by thy good Spirit this day, that no part of it be stolen
away from thy service, but that I may spend it so regiouslie, that when the
Evening shall come, I may reap the peace of a good conscience; the which peace
is to me an arles penny of that endless Peace I hope to enjoye in the
Heavens, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Evening Meditation of the seventh Day.
O Lord, my God, although thy Majesty knows it was my purpose in the Morning,
to have spent this wholly day in thy service, yet I have stolen a part of it
from thee, my mind has gone a whooring after other vanities, no, I dare not,
but confess, that even in the very hour of preaching and prayer, my heart
has wandered from thee: Oh, Lord, it is easy to promise obedience, but not so
easy to perform; I perceive by doolefull experience, that my soul is subject
to such inconstancy, that I can not keep it in the state with thy Majesty,
no, not the space of one day, no, Lord, not one hour, yea, scarce a quarter of
an hour; I resolve well, Romans 7.18.
but practice nothing; my desire is ever to walk with thee, but (alace) every
moment I wander from thee, many are the changes whereunto I am subject,
sometime I find the Spirit-slightering upward; incontinent drawing down to
the earth: sometimes delighting to talk with GOD, at other times wearying of
spiritual exercises; sometime marveilouslie enlightened with a great light at
other times plight with a palpable darkness: ^. Pet. 1.
sometimes rejoicing with an unspeakable joye, other times, refusing all
comfort: sometimes doubting and distrusting, othertimes firmly believing, and
steadfastly apprehending: sometimes longing for to be dissolved, ^hil. 1.
other times loving to Judge still in this tabernacle of clay: in all these
things where is my comfort but in this? that thou art vnchang^ble. As for me,
O Lord, I confess, Malach. 1.
for my best action thou might condemn me, for the sins of my prayer,
hearing of thy word: what then should be mine estate, if thou woldst enter in
judgment with me? Teach me to walk in trembling, and fear before thee let
it be my first care to keep thy presence save me (O Lord) that by my unclean
thoghts, profane speeches, and ungodly actions, I quench not thy Spirit, but
let me ever find that Spirit working and moving into my soul; when I wander,
bring me home again, when I fall, raise me: when I sleep, waken me, and hold
me waking (O Lord) that when the Bridegroom shall come, I may be in the rank
of the wise Virgins, Mat. 25.
with my lamp clearlie burning attending his coming. And finally, forgive
me all the infirmities of my prayers, and accept of my lean and unworthy
sacrifice,in and through that alsufficient Sacrifice, that my blessed Lord has
offered in my name, and in the name of all these that loud his second coming,
To him therefore be praise, honor and glory for ever Amen.

Now unto the King everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto God only wise,
be honor and Glory, for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
AN Ascension of the SOVLE TO HEAVEN. By meditation of the Passion, Death,
Burial, and Resurrection of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ.

1. Tim. 3.16. And without contraversie; great is the Mystery of godliness,
God manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, etc.



EDINBVRGH, Printed by John Wreittoun, 1625.

An Advertisement to the Christian Reader.
MAN in all his actions, purposes to himself Glory, and Gain, whereof if he
give unto God the first, which is due unto him, he will make the second
redound to thy use: Therefore, ^^ght we with the Angels to sing, Gl^rie be to
God in the Heaven; and with Zacharias, Luc. 2.4.
Blessed be the LORD GOD of Israel who has visited and redeemed his people.

Then must we consider, wh^^ be the benefits we gain of Christ^ death,
which are in number many^ in feeling comfortable, in estimat^^ most precious:
The first is, Purgation of sins; thus happy is he whose wickedness is
forgiven, and whose sins is covered: Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
imputes none iniquity, Psalm. 31.1.2.
but most miserable are they that lack these: The penitent sinner of a
troubled spirit, Psalm. ^1.17.
of a broken and a contrite heart, forsaking his own ways, and renounceing
his own imaginations, Mat. 4.17.
promising amendment, and purposing the fruits of repentance, confessing his
own misery, and appealing to the mercy of GOD, Esaias. 1.18.
and the merits of Christ, has his soul though as red as Scarlot washed in
his most precious, gracious, and glorious blood. Heb. 9.13 14. Lev. 6.14.
For, if the blood of Bullocks, and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer,
sprinkling them, (that are unclean) sanctified as touching the purifying of
the flesh, how much more shall the blood of Christ, which through the eternal
Spirit offered himself without spot to God; 1. John. 1.7.
purge our conscience from dead work^s, to serve the living GOD: Thus the Blood
of Jesus Christ the Son of God purges us from all sin, O purge me with
this Hysope, and I shall be clean: wash, Psalm. 51.7
and I shall be whiter than snow.

2. The second benefit is, Remission of sins. Sin is in the Child of God,
but it reigns not. Sin is in the Elect, but covered: Sin is in the Heirs of
Salvation, Romans 8.33.
but not laid to their charge, because it is forgiven: Exodus 25.17.
As the Arc was covered with an golden sheete^, alled the Propitiatory: So
Christ is the propiciat^^n of our sins, Mat. 26.28.
by whom we have redemption through his Blood, even forgiveness of them, Col.
1.14.
for the voice of his blood is remission of sin^^s ever proclaimed in the
h^artes of the godly, Ephesians. 1.7.
calling for ^etter things, than the blood of Abel. Heb. 12.24.


3. The third Benefit of Christ p^ssion, is Deliverance from the curse of the
Law, the Law accuses Christ ex^useth; The Law te^^fieth, Christ comfort:
the La^ curses, but Christ blesses, f^ Christ has redeemed us from the curse
of the Law, Gal. 3.13.
when he was made a curse for us, for it is written, Deuteronomy. 21.23. John. 1.17.
Cursed is every one that hange^h on a tree. And the Law was given by Moses,
but Grace, and Truth came by Jesus Christ: i^deede, Cant. 1.4.15.
we be but black by nature yet are we white by Grace. Bla k in Adam, yet
comely as the tents of Kedar, Cant. 6.9.
and as the curtain of Salamo^, yea pleasant in Christ: now in Him, we l^^ke
as the Morning, fair as the Noone, pure as the Sun, terrible as an Army with
Banners, hard favored by merit, but beautiful by Mercy, for Christ is the
end of the Law for Righteousness t^ every one that believe. Romans 10.4. John.
5.24.
They th^^ which in a livelie faith apprehend Christ crucified and risen
again: have what the Law requires, that is, perfect obedience, performed by
Christ imputed to them: who was delivered to death for our sins, Romans 4.24
Romans 4.25. Col. 2.14.
and risen for our justification. Thus has he put out the hand-writting of
ordinances, that was against us, which was contrary to us, he even took it
out of the way, and fastened it upon the Cross.

4. The fourth Benefit we reap by Christ's passion, is freedom from
damnation, and purchase of eternal Life, for God so loved the world, John.
3.16.
that he has given his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in
him, Romans 8.1.
should not perish, but have eternal Life: For what destruction can come to
them which are ingraffed in Christ? the Author and finisher of our says and
salvation, Heb. 12.2.3.
who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, an^ despised the
shame, how can the second death take hold on them that have their part in the
first Resurrection? Rev. 20.6.
and are in Christ, John. 4.6.
the Life it self: For when Christ, which is our Life, shall appear; Col.
3.4. John. 10.
then shall we also appear with him in his glory: The Devil can not pluck
them away fi^aly from GOD, who is stronger than any, and has given them to
Christ, who is one with the Father, and has their names written in the Book
of Life having washed their Garments in the Blood of the Lamb. Phil. 4.2.
Rev. 20.14.
Hell cannot terrify them, which patiently look for an inheritance in
Heaven. Ephesians. 1.4.
We are in Christ by election before the world was made. Romans 5.1.
We are justified by a livelie Faith; the obedience of the son of God, Romans
5.16.
being imputed unto us; we are sanctified through the Spirit; 1. Pet. 1.2.22.
John 15.3.
our souls are purified in obeying the Truth. We walk not after the flesh,
when we resist covetous cogitations, Romans 8. 1.
ambitious desires, voluptuous thoughts, envious conceits, Gal. 5.19.22.
malicious purposes, or whatsoever else corrupt of old Adam. We walk after
the Spirit, when we embrace love, we follow peace, and holiness, show long
suffering, gentleness, meekness, temperance, crucifieing the flesh, with
the affections, and lusts thereof; to such as are in Christ, there is no
condemnation.

5. The fifth Fruit we have of Christ his Passion is, the Wrath of God, is
pacified, Col. 3.6.
for as they which obey not the Son, shall not see Life, but the w^ath of
God abides on them; so they which believe in the Son have everlasting Life
reserved in Heaven for them, 1. Pet. 1.4.5.
which by the power of God are kept to salvation; for his sak God pardoned all
our offenses; and our sins, and our iniquities will he remember no more; Ier.
31 33 34.
but will put his Laws in our minds; and write them in our hearts, and will
be our God, Esaias. 42. 1.
and we shall be his people; Mat. 3 17.
for he is his beloved Son, in whom he is well pleased; who is also our
Advocate with the Father if we sin, 1 John 2.1,
even Jesus Christ, the lust.

6. The sixth benefit of Christ his passion, is, Victory, over Satan for
where sin is purged, Genesis 3.15.
and remitted, and not imputed, where the malediction of the Law is abrogated,
Ephesians. 2.14
where the second Death is abolished, where the wraith of GOD is pacified,
there the Devil has naught. For Christ by death destroyed him that had power
of death, Heb. 2.14.
(that is) the Devil, that he might deliver all them, which for fear of
Death, were all their lifetime subject to bondage. For this purpose appears
the son of God, 1. John. 3.8.
that he might lowse the works of the Devil: wherefore, though Satan be
yet suffered to tempt the children of God, yet shall he never b^e able to draw
them away from the state of Salvation, because, John. 18.28.
God is saithfull, and will not suffer his, to be t^mpted above their
strength, but shall in the midst of their tentation make a way, that they may
be able to bear it.

7. The seventh benefit is, Victory over Death, and our freedom from the
fear thereof: (for he says) I will redeem them from the power of the
grave. Hos. 13.14
I will deliver them from death: O Death! I will be thy death. O grave! I will
be thy destruction. Death, 1. Cor. 15.55.56.
where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory! the sting of Death, is
Sin; and strength of sin, is the Law. But thanks be to God, who has given
us victory through the Lord Jesus Christ. Now ^y the means of the death of
Christ; death is nothing else, but a sweet passage and way to eternal life to
the faithful; John. 8.51.
for if any man keep his word he shall never see death. Let us therefore,
courageously follow our Ch^staine, the Lord Jesus Christ, who as he did not
perish in Death, so shall he not suffer us to perish neither; he is the God of
the living, Mat. 22.32.
and not of the dead: (that is) which cease to be. For this is his Fathers will
which has sent him, that of all, which he had given him, he should lose
none; but raise them up again at the latter Day, for the things, which the
eye has not seen, Cor. 2.2.
neither ear heard, neither came into man's heart, are, which God has prepared
for them, that love Him. And finally, besides these singular benefits by
Christ's Passion, Romans 5.2.
we have the same peace of conscience, which passes all understanding, Heb.
2.18.
and access to this grace, wherein we stand, by the mediation of Christ; and
after this wretched life entrance to behold the glorious, and blessed Trinity,
in Glory, Majesty, and Eternity.

AND now (Gentle Reader) that we may make heavenly, and spiritual use of his
sufferings. First, diligently weigh, what person in the Deity did suffer.
Se^ondlie, what he did suffer. Thirdly, why he did suffer. And lastly, what
our Me^iatour requires at our hands The Apostle s^yeth, 1. Pet. 2.21.
Christ suffered once for us; that is the Son of God, and the virgin Marie.
John. 1.14.
That Word which was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we saw (says
hee^ the glory there of; as the glory of the only begotten Son of the
Father full of grace, and truth. And so confesses Peter, Mat. 16.16.
Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God which was ^e who^ when the fulness
of time was come; Gal. 4.4.
GOD sent forth made of a woman, and made under the Law; John. 7.14.
for his name is Immanuel; being a child borne to us; and a S^nne given us,
Esaias. 9.6.
whose government is upon his shoulder, whose name is wonderful, Ephesians. 3.9.10.
Counselor to the mighty God, everlasting Father, the Prince of peace. But
we should rather adore the Hypostaticall union, and Incarnation of the son of
God, than search it by our shallow brains anxiouslie: for the mind, and
understanding of man cannot reach to it; much less can it be expressed by
tongue, yea, and the very Angels admired, 1. Tim. 3.16.
that the eternal son of God, that did take the shape of a servant, Phil.
2.7.8.
and willingly yielded himself to the ignominious death of the Cross.

But why was thy Mediator both God, and man? If he had been man only, he
could not have satisfied the Justice of God, so should our Redemption have
been imperfect, and not sufficient, for he suffered in that nature, 1. Pet. 4.
1.
that could suffer, that is, the flesh. Yet because of that strait union of
both the natures in Christ, we may convenientlie say, God to have been dead,
and crucified for the son of man, and purchased his Church, Act. 20.28
by his own Blood.

Now then, because thy Mediator is God, he can free thee from death and Hell,
1. Tim. 2.5
and because he is man, bone, of thy bone, and flesh, of thy flesh, he is
sensible of thy misery; for we have not a high Priest, Heb. 4.15
which can be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all
things tempted in like sort; yet without sin; go therefore boldly unto the
throne of grace that thou may find mercy, and receive grace, to help in
time of need. But why did God perfyte this great work of our Redemption from
Sin, by the death of his Son, and not by other means, besides that it
pleased God to declare his mind most evidently to us, it belongs to the
Justice GOD by the same reasonable creature, Genesis 3.15.
the Devil should be overcome which he had gloried to be subdued by him, as
God therefore he triumphed over Death. The offering of Isaac is a shadow of
this dispensation done for us: Genesis 22.8.
Isaac being a type of the divinity, and the Rain of the humanity. In the
purification of the Leper also, for whom was taken two Sparrowes alive and
clean, whereof the one was killed, Lev. 14.4.
and the other dipped in the blood of the slain, then let g^e the live Sparrow
into the broad field: And so of the two Goats offered for the sins of the
people, whereof the one was sacrificed, and the other did escape.

2. What did he suffer? in Soul and Body man has sinned: so did he suffer
in both; not in his Passion only, but all the time of his life he was in the
flesh; As his poverty, flight to Egypt, and all other his persecutions,
contained in the history of his Gospel, declare.

Esaias. 53.4.
3. Why s^ffered he? surely he has borne our iniquities, and carried our
sorrows; 1. Pet. 2.24.
he his own self bare ^ur sins in his body on the tree; that we being
delivered from sin, should live in righteousness, by whose stripes we are
healed. Thy trespasses brought shame and ignominy on thy Savi^ur, and nailed
him to the Cross, and drived him to the lowest part of the earth.

Hence does shine God his Justice and Mercy to us w^rd; and esp^^ially Jesus
Christ his l^ve to us all: Of his Justice, punishing sin: The Angels which
kept not their first estate; deludge of Noah, Iud. 6.7.
the subversion of Sodom, Genesis 19.24
and Gomorrha are examples which suffer the vengeance of eternal fire, Chorah,
Numb. 16.32. Mat. 23.37.38. ^sal. 76.2.
Dathan, and Abiram, their destruction, and the miserable desolation of
Jerusalem; the beauty of the earth, and the chosen habitation of GODS worship
can bear record. B^t none of them all can be compared with this, that God
would not, but by the death of his only begotten Son be pacised for our
sins.

Cease therefore to provocke so just a GOD by thy wickedness: Psalm. 95 7.8.
since thou receiuest a kingdom that can not be shaken; crave grace, Heb.
12.2^
that thou may so serve GOD, that thou may please him with reverence and
fear; for even thy GOD is a consuming fire, Romans 1.15.
whose wrath is revealed from Heaven, against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men: The fierce Lion is tamed and dauntoned, when the Whelp
is beaten with rods in his sight:: Psalm. 147.19.20.
cast thou off superfluity of maliciousnes, for whilst thou see, not only
the people dearest to GOD of any, Esaias. 2.6.
for he has not so done to every nation, so dangerously forsaken, because
they did not repent, nor acknowledge the day of their visitation: but his
well-beloved Son also in whom he is well pleased may thou behold to die,
1. John. 3.5.
that execrable death, because he appeared, that he might take away our
sins, and in him is no sin.

Despise not, therefore, the riches of his bountifulness, Romans 2.4.
and patience, and long suffering, not knowing that the bountifulness of GOD
leads thee to repentance.

It behooved our wounds to be very deep, and corrupt, which could not be
healed, Esaias. 1.6.
but by the wounds of the Son of God: he has redeemed us, not to sin,
but from sin, not with corruptible things as Silver, or Gold, 1. Pet.
1.17.18. Heb. 10.29
but wi^h the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled, and without
spotte. How sore punishment shall he be thought worthy, which treads under
foot the Son of GOD, and compteth the blood of the Testament, as a unworthy
thing, wherewith he was sanctified, and despiteth the the Spirit of Grace?

Again, nothing more could declare GODS mercy, Romans 5.8.
than the death of his own Son, what is dearer to man, Ioh. 3.16.
than his own children? Jacob deploreth his son Joseph David yielded a
bitter and heavy sorrow for Abs^lon, yea, Genesis 37.34.35. 2. Sam. 18.23. Ier.
31.15.
in Rama was a voice heard, murning and weeping, and great lamentation Rachel
weeping for her children and would not be comforted: for such case has
procured in many astonishment, rather than tears: seeing, therefore, that GOD
has delivered his Son, begotten from all eternity, Phil. 2.6.
equal with himself, coessentiall, and consubstantiall to a shameful death
for thee: despare not with that damned Crew, Cain, Saul, and Judas: But rouse
up thy self in the cons^ience of GOD'S mercy, saying with David, The Lord is
full of compassion and mercy, slow to anger, and of great kindness, he will
not always chyde, nor keep his anger for ever; Psalm. 103.8.9.10.11.12.
he has not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us after our
iniquities; for as high as the Heaven is above the Earth, so great is his
mercies toward them that fear him: So far as the East is from the West, so
far has he removed our sins from us. As a father has compassion on his
children, so has the LORD compassion on them that fear him. For as by one
man's dissobedience, Romans 5.20.21.
many were made sinners: So by the obedience of one, many shall also be made
righteous: For where sin abounds, there grace abounds more, that as sin
has reigned unto death, so might grace also reign by righteousness unto
eternal Life, by Jesus Christ our Lord, who was made a curse for us, Gal. 4.4
5.
that the blessing of Abraham might come on thee, through Christ Jesus. Thus is
he made unto us of GOD, 1. Cor. 1. 30.
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption: Seeing, therefore,
that we have Christ, the pledge of GODS favor and l^ue, who has paid more,
than we were indebted, and he restored, that which he took not; Psalm. 69.4.
and has merited more for us, than the Ocean Sea is bigger, tha^ the smallest
drop of water. The righteous GOD of his Justice being once satisfied; can not
sue double pay, in punishing those that believe in Jesus Christ.

And what can be said of Jesus Christ his most burning Love to mankind? never
Bridegroom loved his Bride so entirely and ardently and never man matched so
unworthily, and with greater disparagment in marriage, as Christ and his
Church. If thou see any cast his affection upon a Wen^h deformed, maimed, yea,
a s^old, and durty, thou will say, Such a one is benumbed yea, bewitched. But
God, when we were dead in sin and trespasses, Ephesians. 2.2.
yea, which is worse, walked after the course of the Devil his enemy, 1.
John. 1.8.
empty, and void of all goodness, fraughted, and defiled of all vice; of
mere unlooked for love, not only had he given his only begotten Son, to
deliver us from the bondage, and staverie of Satan; but has adopted us to be
anexed heirs with him; Romans 5.6 7.
thus that loving Christ, when we were yet of no strengtht dyed at his time
for the ungodly, that through death; which was for the redemption of the
transgressions; Heb. 9.15.
they which are called, might receive the promise of the eternal inheritance:
Doubtless one will scarce die for a righteous man, but yet for a good man one
dare die.

Thus (I say) that God sets out his love toward us, seeing that while we
were yet sinners, Christ does for us, we were altogether deformed, of
polluted, Eze. 16.34.56.
and poisoned parents, from whom descended an hereditarie corruption, which we
increase daily by the abominable and detestable thoughts, words, and deades:
none eye pitied us, none had compassion upon us, when we lay, not half dead,
but stark dead, and buried in sin; But thou as the Samaritane took us up,
and made us thy people, Luc. 10.33.
which were not thy people beloved, which were not bel^ved: H^s. 2.23.
that being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we might serve thee
all the days of our life without fear, Luc. 1.75.
in holiness and righteousness before him.

4. What does thy Spouse and Redeemer require at thine hands for all these
his kindness bestowed upon thee? even that thou should love him again: For
in this appears the love of GOD toward us, 1. John 4.19.
because GOD sent his only begotten Son in the world, that we might live
through him, herein is love, not that we loved GOD; but that he loved us, and
sent his Son to be a reconciliation for our sins. Let us prove therefore
thankful, obedient, and direct our life according to his will and word. Now
this is the love of God, 1. John. 1.3.
that we keep his Commandementes; No man will say, he loves the King, and
gaine-stand his Laws: but for every trisle, and small moment will contraveene
the same: such is the inconstancy and ingratitude of corrupt nature, that we
will place the object of our love in flat contrary things, to the liberty
which we have acquyred by Christ.

Let us therefore, be ashamed of this perverse, and extreme vnthankfuln^ss^,
and reciprocate our mutual love unto him; least we, be excluded from that
eternal Joy, and blessedness with the guest, Mat. 22.12.13.
which had not on the wedding garment, who was bound hand, and foot, taken
away, and casten into utter darkness.

Secondly, our Mediator craveth of us, that we imitate, and express his
example, so far as he shall bestow his heavenly grace upon us, for
hereunto are we called, for Christ also suffered for us, 1. Pet. 2.21
leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps. We should
therefore, study, and endeavor our selves to acquyre these virtues, which
shined in him; as first, Phil. 2.8.
his obedience to his heavenly Father, and humility unto Death, even the Death
of the Cross Secondly, Faith, and Prayer, in all our afflictions, and
persecutions, and dangers; for he waits patiently for the Lord, Psalm. 39.1.
and he inclined unto him, and heard his cry.

Thirdly, his patience for he was oppressed, he was afflicted, yet did he not
open his mouth; he was brought as a sheep to the slaughter; Esaias. 53.7.
and as a sheep before her sherer, is dumb, so he opened not his mouth.
Fourthly, love to our neighbor, for this new Commandment gave he unto us,
John. 13.34.35.
That we should love one another; as he has loved us: so also we should
love one another; for by this, shall all men know that we are his Disciples;
if we love one another. Fifthlie, we shall meditat aright on his Passion, if
we after his example, forgive our enemies, Mat. 5.44
when they offend us; love them, though they hate us; pray for them, though
they curse us.

Thirdly, our Mediator craveth of us, Col. 3.5.
that we mortify our members, which are upon the earth, we cru^ifie the
flesh, with the affections by putting off the old man, which is corrupt through
the deceivable lusts, and putting on the new man, which after God, is created
unto righteousness, and true holines^e: that we walk honestly, as in the day
time, Ephesians. 4.14.
not to fulfill the concupiscence of the flesh, Romans 13.13
for that were to forget Christ's passion, to seek to crucify him again: to
serve our enemy from which to redeem us, Heb. 6.6.
Christ died, to destroy that, as much (as in us is) which Christ so dearly had
bought: for what mother will cause incision to be made in all the wounds of
her body, and to gush out her blood, for the cleansing of the sores of her
child? but Christ has not spared one drop for us.

Fourthlie, he craves that we steadfastly beli^ue by him to be s^ved, and
live and die in true repentance: for our sins which made a division betwixt
God and us, which brought the Son of God from heaven into this Veil of
misery, and caused his death, which should make our hearts to bleed, and flee
from Sin, as from a Serpent, to renounce Satan, with his works, to be
grieved for our sins to cry for mercy continually: Then GOD will rejoice and
delight to do us good: Ephesians. 1.3.
then will he bless us with spiritual blessings in heavenly places. And
whatsoever we shall do, it shall prosper: Psalm. 1.3. Psalm. 32.7. Psalm. 23.6.
2. Tim. 3.8.
for he shall compass us with his mercy, as with a Shield. Doubtless,
kindness shall follow us all the days of our life, and we shall remain for
ever in these Joys appointed for them that look for the appearance of the
Lord Jesus Christ, to their immortality. Amen.

IOANNES LODOvicus Vives.
ADmirabile^ cerno speciem amoris Caput inclinat tua celsitud^, ut nos exaudiri
and possimus and speremus: porrigis os^ulum ad pace^, and reconciliationem,
quam tu offensus, lasusque nobis offers ultro, qui fecimus iniuriam: expandis
ad complexum brachia: ostendis perforatas manus, ut omnia dilargiar^, nihil
retineas. Apertum est latus cordis tui, ut illuc nos recipias, si velimus per
ostium patens ingredi: fixos habes pedes, ut sciamus nunquam te a nobis
recessurum, si ipsi non recess^rimus. O pater noster, and Domine, vid^s
duritiam nostri cordis, nedum lentitatem. Non satis est nos tam blande, tam
dulciter, tam amice allici, atque invitari; trahe, rape nos, finge novum cor,
and obsequens: nam hoc nostrum lapideum est, nullas sentit blanditias, nulla
ingentium bonorum spe movetur.

LECTORI.
PRo servis Dominus moritur, pro s^ntibus insons,
Pro aegroto medicus, pro grege pastor obit.
Pro populo Rex mactatur, pro milite Ductor,
Proque opere ipse Opisex, proque homine ipse Deus.
Quid servus, sons, aegrotus, quid grex, populusque,
Quid miles, quid opus, quid ve homo solvet? Amet.
B. R.

An Ascension of the SOVLE to Heaven: By the Passion of Jesus Christ. And
first, wherein the holy and saving meditation thereof consists, secondly,
which be the principal parts of the History, whereof some not all are
handled.
THat worthily thou may vnder-stand, these two things are necessary:
First, the knowledge of the History, which is common to the Elect, and the
Reprobat.

Secondly, the spiritual notice and application thereof to thy self: The
first is necessary for all that purpose to be saved; but it is not enough, and
sufficient.

For how can thou apply the passion of the Lord Jesus to thy self? unless
thou be instructed therein: Romans 10.14.
For how can they call upon him in whom they have not believed? And how can
they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear,
without a Preacher? John. 8.56.
Abraham had long ago cognition hereof, as Christ witnesses: Your father
Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad. So David in his
7.2. Psalm. and many more as if he had been standing by that wooden cross, and
heard these words of Christ's own mouth. And Esaias, in his 53. has clearlie the
history of the Passion, as if he had been at Golgotha in proper person: yet
this historical knowledge does shoot short, For the Devils believe, Iam. 1.
and they tremble; that is, have a simple and naked knowledge. Our looking up
to Heaven does not transport us thither: So, that bare knowledge does not
join thee with GOD, unless there be added a spiritual medi^ation, and
special application of his death to thy self, such as was in Abraham, David,
and Esaias. The Priests and Elders, the Pharisees, Scribes, and their
servantes, Pilate, Herod, and Judas, and innumerable more, knew this History,
whereof, they were presidents and actours: but never one of them void of fault
shall be saved, Heb. 11.6.
yea, it hade been more tolerable to them never to have seen nor heard of
Christ, John. 8 24.
which makes them the more inexcuseable: For if he bad not come and declared
his Fathers will, Mat. 11.21
they would have had some clock to pretend, but now they have none.

Remember, all thy lifetime is short, Iam. 4.14.
and insufficient, for the true knowledge of this so high a mystery of
salvation, which cannot be accordingly ^o the worth thereof expressed by any
mortal, and neither can thou be fully ravished in admiration hereof. It is
not the saving use of this Tragical history often to speak of it, or with
tears and lamentations, John. 14. Luc. 23.
or such humane feeling and sense to bewail, that the most righteous Son of
God, should have undergone such cruel and undeserved punishments, a most
shameful death it self, much less to fall out in bitter imprecations, and
spiteful cursings against Pilate, or Judas, and remnant which contrived this
innocent Lambs death; but it should pearse deeper in thine heart and soul;
that (his grace assisting) draw, and move thee to earnest repentance, 2. Cor.
10.
not to be repented of, patience in affliction; thankfulness and brotherly
love, to abhor and detest sin, for which our Savior was so tormented:
never to dispare, since for thy sake, he has given him out of the deep and
gulf of his love; who was his enemy, but seeing whilst thou was a sinner,
Romans 5.8.
Christ died for thee, much more being now justified by his Blood, shall thou
be saved from wrath through him: For thou may be persuaded, that, if when
thou was a foe, was reconcealed to God by the death of his Son, Romans 8.32
much more being reconcealed, shall thou be saved by his Life; for be that
gave thee his Son, will not he give thee all things also? Especially during
the time of thy life, carry a thankful heart to thy Redeemer that for
maintenance and defense of his glory, Act. 21.^
thou would suffer all calamity and misery whatsoever, yea, death it self,
thus (if it were possible) to make a requital to him. But always, which is
most acceptable in his sight, by true faith establish thy confidence, that
after all the distresses of this wretched world are finished, thy Redeemer
shall stand the last on the earth, Job. 1 25.26
and though after thy skin worms destroy thy body, yet shall thou see GOD
in thy flesh, whom thou thy self shall see, and thy eyes shall behold, and
none other for thee; and so enjoye eternal felicity with thy Christ in the
Heavens, who shall be All in All.

THE FIRST STEP in this Ladder to ascend, are of things which went before
his Cross.
HERE consider (my Soul) how he was betrayed by Judas with a kiss: Mat.
26.48.
Whose delight was to be with the children of men. Pro. 8.31.
Accused of the Jews, who is the Judge of the World. Condemned under Pilate,
who would all to be saved, 1. Tim. 2.4.
and come to the knowledge of Truth. Crucified between two malefactors, who is
among the midst, and in the midst of two, or three gathered in his Name,
his Soul sore troubled, Luc. 2.25.
who is the consolation of his own secret ones, his heart grieved, who is the
joye and mirth of his Elect; Psalm. 66.1.
his Body tormented with the nailing of his blessed Hands and Feet, who
created the Heavens, and the Earth, Deuteronomy. 32 18. Psalm. 110 1.
and these be the works of his hands, whose enemies shall be made his
foote-stoole. With the pearcing of his gracious side, which yielded streams of
Iordan-like blood, Mat. 26.28.
and water to cleanse our leprosy, whereof one drop was sufficient
satisfaction for infinite worlds be reason of the personal union of the Deity
therewith. 1. Pet. 1.12.
The bespitting and beating of that Face, on which the Angels of the Heaven
take pleasure to behold. So the Son of God, the Lord of glory, the Prince of
peace, was hainouslie, ignominiouslie, and cruelly entreated of miserable
miscreants: so he which knew no sin, was made a sacrifice for sin, 2. Cor.
5.21.
that we might be made the righteousness of God through him. The Devil the
prince of this world, albeit a Liar, John. 8.44
a manslayer from the beginning, came, and found in him nothing, John. 8.46
yea, who could rebuke him of sin? Now if the veil of the Temple of
senseless stones was rent, if the Earth did tremble, which of it self was so
firmly sounded, Psalm. 104.4.
that it could not be moved, to condole the manifestatioun of that strange
passion: and hard Rocks rave asunder, which thunder-boltes, and Earthquakes
could not divide. If these creatures (I say) void of reason and sense,
expressed their sorrow; reverence, and obedience, thus to their Creator, Phil.
2.8.
who had emptied and abased himself, so to be handled, by the children of
darkness; how can it be? but thou (my Soul) who did the same, and for whom
it was done, should be much affected, and feelinglie take to heart, these
undeserved favors, purchased for thee: thy Bowels may quake, thy Reason be
astonished, thy Understanding amazed to think of it; and so may thy Tongue to
speak of it: Yet may (thou sorrowful Soul) rejoice in Christ crucified; Gal.
6.14
which is the only true object of all thy solid Joy, for by virtue of his
painful Passion, 1. Cor. 1.30.
thine hudge ransom is paid; thy running wounds are healed, perfect and
absolute satisfaction for all thy sins made: The first Death converted to
Life, the second valiantly conquered, the reid Dragon Satan, 1. Pet. 5.8.
that Lion goes about to devour thee, courageously subdued: Rev. 20.14
Hell that gapeth for thee overcom, Col. 2.14.
that Obligation that was against thee, cancelled, sinning sin, and that
sin that hangs so fast on, Heb. 12. 1.
killed: thy justly offended God, pacified, and thou with strong cords of love
and everlasting mercy betrothed and reconcealed to him. Hos. 2.19.


And now to call to memory (wretched Soul) these actions which went before his
Cross, may thou not think that his sufferings were exceiding great, when he
did sweat blood? Luc. 2.7
He spent his Blood in his circumcisi^^ in our behalf before: and now in
mount Olives, being in an agony, kneeling down devotelie, Luc. 22 44.
and praying most earnestly, drops of Blood does burst through his sacred
Body. It is an usual thing for man in anguish to sweat, but to sweat
blood, and that in such quantity and abundance; that it should trickle from
him upon the ground; is a strange thing, and an vnaccustomable thing, and only
proper to such an eminent personage, whose Grief was unspeakable, and Pain
intolerable.

And did he thus shed drops of blood for thy sin (poor Soul?) and can
thou not, nor will thou not, shed tears for the same? thou can bewail and
mourn for vanishing and deceiving toys of this earth: but for thy trespasses,
thy eyes are dried and shoot up. Ob that mine head were a well of water! Ier.
9.1.
and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that thou may bewail thy blindness,
forgetfulness, and ingratitude!

And truly it was not without cause, that this terrible p^ssion did so sease
upon him, for the matter which he had in hand, Col. 1.22.
was weigh ie, 2. Pet. 3.13 Ephesians. 6.12 Ephesians. 2.2.
the work which he had to accomplish was great; the conflict strong, the
enemies mighty, Luc. 4.13
their assaults many, the work was man's eternal redemption; the battle was
with detestable Sin: destroying Death, devouring Satan, insatiable Hell,
accusing Law, and with the consuming Wrath of God; and would not (dear Soul)
these enemies, so many in number, so mighty in power, so terrible to behold,
make a man to fear, to tremble, to sweat: Truly, if Christ had been mere
man only, he could not have encountered with them, for he should have
succumbed under the burden of his own sin, much less, should have releaved
others. But being very GOD, and very Man, Jesus Chr^ste the Just; 1. John. 2^
he did fight them all, overcame them all, led captive all, Ephesians. 4.8.
and has triumphed over them all, it cost them all their lives for ever; and h
m drops of blood, with strong crying and tears? Heb. 5.7.
What, say I drops of blood? costed him no more? yes, yes, that which was
dearest unto him, his very Life; which could not be taken from him, but laid
it down for thee, Mat. 20.28.
and has the power to take it again, according to his Fathers commandment.
But now, thou see him crowned with Glory and Honor, which is made a little
inferior to the Angels through the suffering of death, Heb, 2.9.
that by Gods grace, he might taste Death for all men. He is that stronger
man, that entered in the strong man's house, spoiled all that he had; and this
and much more he did, Mat. 18. 11.
before he could bring under so mighty enemies as man had, and so accomplish
so painful a work as Redemption is; Romans 4.10.
and pacify so great a Person, as is the most hie, Almighty, and everlasting
God.

O (my Soul) diligently remember, and often call to mind the heavenly drops
of that inesteemable Blood, which he shed for thy sake, thy soul and vile
sins, for (thee unworthy soul) and salvation. 1. John. ^ 19. Ephesians. 5.5 ^sal.
^. Romans 8.3
Love him for it dearly, thank him for it earnestly, serve him in
humility, obedience, and simplicity.

And that thou may receive deeper impression of his blood: mark here
diligently (my Soul) to how many several respects, and diverse ends he had
in this work: For first, Romans 8.32
GOD the Father, delivered him, who spared not his own Son, but gave him for
us all to death: It was be that smote the Sheepe-Heard, Zach. 13.
and the Sheep was scattered. For the sins of his people he smote him, I
say, Esaias. 53.
for the Lord had laid upon him the iniquity of us all: And it behooved him to
drink of the cup that the Father had given him; but what shall I say, they
persecute him whom they have smitten, Psalm. 69.26.
and they add unto the sorrows of them, whom thou have wounded. As Judas, who
said, What will ye give me, Mat. 28.15.
and I will deliver him unto you: not assisting, or cooperating to Gods will,
but perfecting his own maliciousness, as did the rest. The Jews also took
him, John. 18 13.
and bound him, and led him away unto Annas, Pilate also delivered him to be
crucified at their own will: Yea, John. 19 16.
Satan had a enterest herein, who from the his Nativitie persued him, even to
his Baptism, Mat. 4.
where he hand to hand combated him; but got the foil, and now has entered in
Judas. O! Ephesians. 5.2
but most of all (dear Christ) thou gave thy self to death for the love of
thy Church, for thou loved thy Church, and gave thy self for it.

Truly, Psalm. 1^ 3.
thou might have said, The snares of Death compassed me, and the grieves of
the Grave caught me; I have found trouble and sorrow: Psalm. 22.
many young Bulls have compassed me, mighty Bulls of Basan have closed me
about, they gape upon me with their mouths, as a ramping and roaring Lion,
Dogs have compassed me, and the assembly of the wicked have enclosed me

The chief Priests who should have defended the Shepe-Heard and Bishop of our
Souls, 1. Pet. 2.25. 1. Cor. 8.2.3.
who pretended knowledge, and in whose hands were the Oracles of God, most of
all both privatlie and publicly did procure his Death. For Envy corrupted the
whole mass of their learning: They knew where Christ should be borne, Mat.
2.4.
they had ofttimes disputed with him, after that John had testified of him;
John. 1.19.
he himself, confessed and denied not that he was the Son of God, Luc.
22.67.69.70.
yet they never pretermitted no opportunity while they had his life.

It is good to understand according to sobriety: Romans 12 13. Mat. 11 25. Luc.
10.21 John. 7.4.46.49. 1. Cor. 13.2.
The Lord did bide those things from the wise and learned, and reveiled them
to Babes: They were blind leaders of the blind: learning profits not, unless
it be accompanied with Humility and Love: Thus seeing, they see not, and
groping, they find nothing. Act. 17.17
The Athenian Philosophers, Epicures, and stoics, Act. 2.13.
most of al withstood Paul. The religious of every Nation under heaven, mocked
Peter The Syrenians, Act. 6.12.
and they of Alexandria, desputed with Steven, and falsely accused him.

And finally, the whole Jewish nation at Jerusalem, (...) little handful only
excepted which did not dream of (...) spiritual Kingdom, combined to
conclude his death, as was fore-spoken: The people raged, Psalm. 2. 1.
the kings of the earth band themselves, and the Princes are assembled
togethe^ against the Lord, and against his Christ: Destitute of a^ Consolation,
Col. 1.16.
in so much a the Creator of the Armeis o^ Angels had need of one o^ them,
Heb. 2.7. Luc. 22.43 Luc. 16.22.
(O! but One) fr^^ Heaven to comfort him; so greatly was he forsaken of hi^
Father for our sins: Neither yet shall the Angels leave thee in the like
hour of death, and necessity of help, if thou trust in him, which always
behold the face of his Father in Heaven. Mat 18.10.


By which, Christ evidentlie declared, it was no jest, nor collusion betwixt
his Father and him; but that in deed, and in truth he was terriblie astonished,
and aghast, Mat. 26.37.
while his Blood did so copiouslie run from him; but his Father was highly
offended, Psalm. 6. 1.
and greatly enraged at our sins; for he is a GOD, Psalm. 11.5.
that loves righteousness, but the wicked, and him that loves iniquity,
does his Soul hate: Wherefore, Christ was wounded for our transgressions,
Esaias. 53.7
he was broken for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him,
though he had done no wickedness, neither was there fraud in his mouth.

Despise not thou (dear Soul) those who at the fear of Death are most
dejected, humbled, and stupefied; neither yet judge those to have the better
cause, who yield themselves foolishlie, and too boldly to Death. But be thou
taught, to be god-lie afraid of the separation of the Soul, Luc. 12.40
from the Body, and ever as (Death were instant) to foresee the same, and
learn to die; which follows thee at the heels, as the shadow does the
Body. LORD, Psalm. 90.12
teach us to number our days, and apply our hearts to wisdom: For the
meditation of Death is greatest Philosophy. Remember (my Soul) thine end,
and thou will not sin for ever, and the more the outward man decay, be thou
renewed, and strengthened in the innerman: And here the first and second Adam
do meet, for the first in the Garden made a beginning of our misery; Genesis
3.2.
and the second builded the ground of his Passion for our Redemption in the
Garden. 2. Cor. 5.18
That (is I say) that amongst greatest pleasures meditate of thy mortality.
There Christ was taken, and bound, John. 18.2.
the place was known to Judas, because Christ would not shun the occasion
of our deliverance, but he would not have him to know the person, with whom
he was to eat the Passover by name, least he should had sought means to
prevent the same, which he could not, because his hour was not come.

The second Step to ascend by.
SEcoundlie, thou may conceive (poor Soul) that thy Spouse suffering was
exceeding great, when being sorrowful and grieuouslie troubled, he said,
Mar. 14.34.
My Soul is heavy even unto death: He that said unto his servant in the
Prison, Act. 23.11
Be of good courage, now is afraid of his imminent passion, being like to us
in soul and body, and infirmities, Heb. 4.15.
and all things, Sin excepted: As God has said, I am the Life, and
restores the dead to life; exhorting his Disciples, John. 5.25.
not to fear them that can kill the body, but not harm the soul; as God, I
say, how can he be afraid to whom the Saints do sing. The Lord is with
me, Psalm. 117.6.
therefore I will not fear what man can do unto me. The humane nature was
borne to suffer, and to be partaker of all our afflictions, that he might
communicate solid constancy of his power to us; for unto the world he came
as a rich Merchant traffecting with us, that of his fullness we might all
receive; John. 1.16.
taking ours by a marveilous translation, Col. 1.13.
and exchange: Iam. 1.5. Mat. 26.53.
and giving his most liberally, and reproached no man, giving (I say) for
shame, Honor, Salvation, for Dolor, for Death, Life, and though he might
command more than twelve Legions of Angels to aid him, he had rather receive
our fear, than exercise his own power; yea, it aggreged his grief, Mat.
26.24.31. John. 13.1
Judas treason, the scandal of the Apostles whom he loved to the end:
rejection of the Jews, Esaias. 48.4
for whom he had done so much: And the fearful destruction of Jerusalem, on
which there was not to be left a stone upon a stone: Mat. 23.38.
So that he had forewarned the mourners thereof, Luc. 23.28
weep not for me, but weep for your sevels, says he; and your children.

When thy Love (beloved Soul) was transfigured on mount Tabor, Mat. 17.2
his face shined as the Sun; but now he is despised, and esteemed nothing,
both pale and wan, for there was no beauty in him now, who before was fairer,
Esaias. 53.2.3.
than the Chrildren of men; but now, despised, Psalm. 45.2
and rejected of men: A man full of sorrows, and bad experience of
infirmities; that by sufferinges, he might learn obedience. And he who taught
his Disciples to pray for us, and for himself, John. 16.26. Heb. 7.25 and 9.24.
practiced the same lesson; by blessing prayer by his own mouth, not once in
that short moment of time, but thrice according to the weight of that imminent
necessity: O Father! Mat. 26.39.
if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me! meaning, his bitter
passion, and the dregs of the vialles of Gods wrath, not that he was
unwilling to drink thereof ( for he went always about his Fathers bussinesse:
Mat. 3.15.
and it was meat for him to do his Fathers will, submitting himself, that
he might fulfill all righteousness.) But these earnest speeches declared the
heavy burden of sin, which lay on him, the painful grief which he
endured, the greatest torments and terrors which he sustained for (thee
unthankful Soul) and his Elect.

The Soul (of thy Bridegroom) was from Heaven, Mat. 1.20.
heavenly, never bespotted and defiled with any uncleanness, 1. Pet. 1.19
Act. 2.27.
but pure without corruption. Notwithstanding, that it was sad, and touched
with the fear of Death for thee, which has deserved the same: 1. Pet. 2.22 24.
all which were fastened on his shoulders, and he did bear them; who never
displeased God, nor offended man: and of whom his very enemies did confess,
He had done all things well, yet did the Lord broke him, and made him subject
to infirmities, Esaias. 53.10.
and laid upon him the iniquities of us all.

And what grief think thou was he in? when he sweat so powerfully, and
prayed so ferventlie? No doubt, he felt the unsupportable weight of thy sin,
Mat. 11.28
the fierce wrath of God against it, Romans 2.8.
the justice of the righteous God requiring due punishment for it, 1 Thessalonians.
1.10.
the killing power of the Law, Romans 5.12.
pronuncing condemnation to it, the strong force of Death, Romans 7.11.
the Stipend and reward addebted to it, the tyranny of Satan, John. 8.34.
insulting on thee for it, the infinite and eternal torments of Hell, 1. Pet.
2.19
just desert to it, which no tongue can express, 1. Pet. 3.19 Mat. 24.41. Mat.
13.42.
nor heart conceive, where the worm dies not, and the fire not quenched,
where there is weeping, and gnashing of teeth.

This (I say) made thy sweet Savior in anguish of spirit so to bemone
himself, John. 3.16.
yet to show that God so loved the world, that be gave his only begotten
Son for it: And that be came hither to save sinners, Ioh. 12.47.
for whom he was contented to die: He yielded his will to Gods, saying;
nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will.

THE THIRD STEP to ascend by.
Thirdly, this did aggravate his miseries, that he was betrayed by his
familiar friend whom he trusted, Psalm. 44.9
which did eat of his bread, his own Purse-master, John. 13.12
whose feet he had washed and that with a kiss, speaking as the custom of
this world is, pea^eablie with his mouth, Ier. 9.8.
but in his heart be laid wait for his neighbor. Psalm. 28.3.
Be thou not drawn away (poor Soul) with the wicked, Psalm. 120.2.
and with the workers of iniquity: which speaks friendly to their
neighbors, Psalm. 105. 17.18.
when malice is in their heart. Deliver my Soul, O Lord, from the lying
lips, and from a deceitful tongue. So did Ioab kill Amasa, 2. Sam. 20.4.
Judge. 16.20.
and Cain slew Abel, Sampson is betrayed by Philistimes, so Joseph was sold
for a slave, they held his feet in stocks, until his appointed time came,
and the counsel of the Lord had tried him.

Hypocritical was thy salutation, O son of perdition (Say thou, Hail
Master? Thy Master, Judas, whom thou wast bound to defend: But what will not
the hungry desire of money do? by it, he lost Christ, Col. 3.5.
he lost his Soul, he lost Heaven, John. 3.36.
and damned himself. The Traitor had a fit end, he hanged himself, but that
was not all, he hanges in Hell perpetually for it, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.7. Judge. 1.7
Genesis 9.6.
as he deserved, so is he served, for blood will have blood; for had he
repented, truly, he had not put hands in himself, the word was in his mouth,
but the thing was not in his heart. Such is the force of conscience, setting
before him the heinousness of his fact, the grievousnes of GODS wrath;
judgment without mercy, and hells fire without redemption: For an evil
conscience is a Witness, a Summonder, a Judge, a Tormenter, a Prison of
sinners. What thing more grievous, tha^ day and night, to carry about such a
one; a man may avoid all things, but his own heart, for whither soever he
goes, it goes with him, either to accuse, or excuse. Romans 2.15
The testimony of a good conscience, is a continual feast, which makes a man
alvvayes merry: 1. Tim. 1 19.
The putting away of a good conscience, makes ship-vvracke of Faith.

Endeavor therefore (O my Soul) to have a clear Conscience toward GOD, and
toward man. For if thy heart condemn thee, God is greater than thine heart,
and knows all things: But if thine heart condemn thee not, then have thou
boldness toward him, and whatsoever thou seek in faith, shall thou receive
from him: A sick conscience can no Physician in the world cure, but that
heavenly Physician Jesus.

1. Tim. 6.10.
Thou see the desire of money, is the root of all mischief, they who are
poisoned therewith, do err from the Faith, Pro. 27.20
these pierce themselves through with many sorrows, they fall into tentations,
into snares, into many foolish and noisome lusts which drown men in
perdition and destruction; which is too evident in this miserable creature
Judas.

But thou (my Soul) fly thou those things, Tim. 6.11.12.
and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness,
laying hold on eternal Life, whereunto thou art called. Thus there is no
grief to that of thy mind, no loss to that of life no, fear, to that of
destruction: so there is no enemy to a covetous and a dissembling friend, no
treachrie, to that which one of a man's own may practice; Judas was amongst the
Apostles by external vocation, but not of them by inward sanctification, as
Christ often foretold them: that twelve he had chosen, John. 6.70.
and one of them was a devil. Where the Lords mercy is evident and thy
prodigious malice manifest; neither did the faith and firmitie of the Apostles
fall, by reason of this Traitors defection, for what though some did not
believe, Romans 3.3.4.
shall their unbelief make the promises of GOD without effect? God forbid: Let
GOD be true, and all men lyears. He departed from Christ, the rest did abide,
unto the end, they that continued, Luc. 23.28
shall be saved. He went to the chief Priests, he might have known, Psalm.
1.1.
That blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the wicked: And
Jacob in the spirit of prophecy; saw this Tragedy, and abhorred the Actors
Simeon and Levi, Genesis 49.5.6.
brethren in evil, the instruments of cruelty are in their habitations, unto
their secrets let not my soul come, my glory, be not thou joined with their
assemblies, for in their wrath they slew the man (Christ) and in their
self-will they dug down a wall.

He went (I say) not called, or sent for, or seduced by his Lords enemies,
but willingly offered himself: the sin is more tolerable, that has a
preceding cause. Adam was deceived by the Serpent, but the Devil hatched and
brotched these venomous contagions of himself, and in himself: No man motioned
this business to him, he intruded himself, separating himself in soul and
body from his Master. It is good to have the heart established by grace, Heb.
13.9.
and always to cleave unto the Lord. He would recompense the loss he had by
the pouring out of Mary's box of Ointment, but he came short.

Neither seeks he a certain sum, as to gain much by the bargane, but as
selling a vile slave, or base thing, refers the price to themselves, what
they would give: neither calls he Christ his Master, or Lord, but I shall
deliver (Him) as a contemptible creature, neither inquyreth of the quarrel,
what they will do with him, for his mind was only on the money.

And here remember (my Soul) that for a small price he betrayed the Word,
which was in the beginning, which Word, was GOD. John. 1.1.
Have thou received earthly or temporal goods to expel from (thy soul) thy
Savior? or by Brybrie, and Symonie perverted I^stice, and the word of Truth
that was in thee? betimes repent, many sins do thou commit for the thirst
of gold, desire of Preferment, and Ambition, climming to Promotion: He sought
the world, forsook heaven, but found none of them. Cast from thee therefore,
2. Cor. 4.2.
cloakes of sin and shame, and walk not in craftiness, neither handle the
word of God deceitfullie, but in declaration of the Truth: Approve thy self
to every man's conscience. Judas sold his Redemer, and hanged himself, lost
his grace; and justly, for no man can keep that which he has sold. Woe unto
them, Iud. 11.
that are cast away by the deceit of Balaams wages.

This wretch could not be moved by his Masters humility, good will, and
courtesy to repentance, albeit that mild Lamb sitting at Table with him, had
given him a savory and well-tasted morsel, which be had dipped in the
platter, and reached with his own hand; to signify, that he would feed and
benefit his very known enemy, and also to give evident demonstration, that
not of infirmity, but most willingly he did lay down his life for mankind.

THE FOVRTH STEP in the Souls ascension, by heavenly contemplation.
FOurthlie, consider diligently with thy self (my Soul) how naughtily thy
Christ was esteemed, when the Judge Pontius Pilate preferred an arrant
Male-factour, Mat. 27.16.
a notable prisoner, Barabbas to him who is the Image of the invisible GOD, the
first borne of every creature, Col. 1.15.18.
he is before all things, and in him all things consist; he is the bead of
the body of the Church, he is the beginning and first borne of the dead, that
in all things be might have the pre-eminence; and good reason it were so, for
he is the brightness of his Glory, and the ingraued form of his Father,
Heb. 1.3.
and bears up all things by his mighty Word. Now is he that Stone casten
aside of the builders, and vilipended of all men, yet is become the head of the
Corner: Psalm. 118.22.
A Stone (I say) tried, and most precious, so that, Esaias. 28.16.
whosoever shall fall on this Stone, he shall be broken, Mat. 21.44.
and on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.

And notwithstanding, this timorous Judge knew that for envy they bad
delivered him, Mat. 27.18.
and though his wife sent unto him upon the Judgment seat, to have nothing to
do with that just man, and though he found by his own sentence, no cause of
death in him, be took water and washed his hands, saying, I am innocent of
the blood of this Just man: And albeit that Christ himself our Lord and
Savior, under Pontius Pilate, witnessed a good confession, for this cause was
he borne, and for this came he into the world, John. 18.37.
that he should bear witness unto the Truth. Yet, (I say) for all these
things, the multitude of the Jews denied the holy One, and the Just, and
desired a murderer to be given to them, Act. 3.14.
and killed the LORD of Life. O what villainy, and indignity is this! But
consider (O thou my Soul!) that Jesus of N^zareth, a man approved of God
amongst them with great works, Act. 2.22.23.
and wonders, and signs which God did by him in the midst of them, as they
themselves also knew, (him I say) did they take by the hands of the wicked,
being delivered by the determinat counsel and foreknowledge of GOD, and have
crucified, and slain him: Do thou condemn this base, and vile contempt of
the Son of God? consider that through Ignorance they did it, 1. Cor. 2.8.
as also their Governors, for had they known, they would not have crucified
the Lord of glory.

But alas, (poor Soul) how often do thou not prefer a man's life, but any
foolish toye, and vanishing shade of thy Lust and filthy pleasure, to thy
Redeemer For in every sin thou do commit, thou have a secret discourse in
judgment, and a corrupt reason of election, what shall be rejected, or
embraced, avoided, or excepted And thou (such is thy vainitie) do make thy
idle concupiscence (not so heavy as a feather) to proponderat, and weigh down
in the wrongous and false balance of thy fantasy, the Love, Fear, and
Obedience, that thou ought to Christ.

But these things (Ignorant Soul) that thou supposest be vantage unto thee,
Phil. 3.7.8.
the same count loss for Christ's sake, yea, doubtless, think all things but
loss for the excelling knowledge sake of Christ Jesus thy Lord, for whom
counpt all things loss, and judge them to be dongue, John. 12.32.
that thou may win Christ; who does draw all men to himself.

And shall this Ignorance excuse them? no truly, for ignorance in those that
would not understand without doubt is a sin: Ignorance in those that could
not understand, is a punishment for sin. But thou (my Soul) after thou have
escaped from the filthiness of the world, 2. Pet. 20.21.
through the knowledge of the Lord, and of thy Savior Jesus Christ, if thou
be yet entangled therein and overcome, the latter end is worse with thee, than
the beginning, for it had been better for thee not to have known the way of
righteousness, than after thou have known it, to turn from the holy
commandment given unto thee, for the servant that knows the will of his
Master, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes, yea, he that
neither knows nor does, shall be beaten with few, Iam. 4.17. Luc. 1.77.
always shall be beaten, but to him that knows, and does it not, 2. Pet.
3.18.
to him it is sin, For Christ gives us grace to grow in this knowledge.

But before thou come (poor Soul) to a deeper contemplation of this Step
foresaid, consider how our Savior entered into this conflict with Sin, and
the Wrath of God due thereto, which was, when he had discharged the duty to
them who were committed unto him, instructed them, and commended them to God,
The^ was it a seasonable time in Peace, Rest, and Security, with a good
conscience to lay down his life, this should be especially meditated, (of
thee) my Soul.

And so went he on to the Mount, John. 18.2.
which place was well known to Judas: so voluntary was his sacrifice, for we
should not have reaped benefit by it, unless willingly, and with such a
readiness to pleasour his Father, and satisfy Gods anger, he had died, as
man nor Angel cannot express.

Then to Judas again, be was familiare and acquainted with Christ, Luc. 22.21
if it had not been so, he would not have come hither to have taken him, and
now (de^re Soul) no man betrayeth Christ, but he that knows him, and his
Truth. Take heed to thy knowledge, and look that it be in sincerity and
not in hypocrisy, or else in the end thou shall prove an Apostate: The
thoughts of the Just are right, Pro. 12.5.
but the counsels of the wicked are deceitful.

And thus Judas lost security, arming himself with the power of the guarde of
the high Priests: It is the peace of God that passes all understanding, that
fortifieth the heart of man; for peace is nothing, but a good conscience:
Although I were compassed about with ten thousand men, Psalm. 3.6.
yet would I not be affrayed, for I know assuredly that thou will be with
me.

It is a dangerous matter to harden the heart against Christ, or if it be
once ind^red, t^ou shall not stay, until thou come into extreme induration.

I pray the LORD, preserve thee my Soul from the hardness of heart against the
Truth, Romans 9.18.
2. Pet. 3.17
and against Jesus Christ, for seldom is it that one going forward therein, and
ever returns to grace, Genesis 18.14
but with the Lord all things are possible: For it is an hard matter to be
given over to a reprobate sense, and when the Lord takes out of the Soul,
Zach. 8.6.
all sight and sense of his judgments thou shall never leave off from evil
doing. Strive therefore (O my Soul) to keep thy self in fe^^ing; Romans 1.26.
and let not that miserable sward and scroofe to grow over thy understanding;
but waken the conscience with the acknowledging of the power and mercy of God,
and suffer not it to come to such fatness, Act. 28.26 27.
as seeing thou should not see, and become incurable.

In the Garden then, the cup of Gods indignation was presented unto him: even
as the good master of the house distributeth to his servants their task, so
does the Lord dispose the measure of afflictions unto his own: But unto the
wicked, in his hand he has a cup, and the wine is red, Psalm. 75.8.9.
it is mixed, and he shall pour out of the same; surely all the ungodly of
the earth shall wring out and drink the dregs thereof. But well knows the
wise God, 1. Cor. 10.13.
how strong a measure of temptation his own can bear.

What is the reason then, that thou do not fully rely on thy God, to whom
all thy bones are known? Psalm. 139.15.
though thou wast made in a secret place, and fashioned beneath in the earth.
And why do not thou willingly receive at his hands wha^soever quantity of
trial it pleases him to send? Psalm. 50.15.
Call on him therefore in the day of trouble, he will deliver thee, and thou
shall glorify him.

The translation of this Cup, he craved then of his Father, whom he knew
carried a favorable affection toward him, Esaias. 65.24
who will before we call, answer, and whiles we speak he will bear, for
it is not the will of our Father which is in heaven, Mat. 18.13.
that one of these little ones should perish.

Parents may neglect duty to the children, Esaias. 49.15.16.
and a woman whose love is most vehement, may forget her child, and not have
compassion on the son of her womb, though they should forget, yet will I not
forget says the Lord, behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands.

But alas (poor Soul) thy sins made him both kneel, and be cast below on
the earth, and will thou with a stiff neck, and out-streached arm proudly
walk therein: he sweat blood for us, and we draw the blood of our brethren,
by Avarice, oppression, and usury. Would to God, the Blood of Jesus would
soften our hard hearts as the blood of Goats do break Adamantes, that
being sanctified by the same, we may render new obedience unto him, by
feeling and lamenting our sins and imperfections, and ever have recourse from
the angry God to the pacified god, giving ear in reverence and fear to the
admonitions, and exhortations out of the word, least it befall us, because he
has called, and we refused, And be streatched out his band, and none would
regard, be also laugh at our destruction, and mock when our fear comes:
Pro. 1.24.
for this is the nature of Gods invitation, that the men do die that speak the
word, but the word shall be found living: Zach. 1.4.5.6.
And so it is that the Prophets dyed with their fathers, but the word never
left them, until it brought a judgment upon the disobedient.

With Tears therefore (poor Soul) confess thy sins unto the Lord, ^sal.
6.6.
for if thou hyde them, thou accusest thy self, Psalm. 32.5.
be forgets them, when thou rememberest them, thou art dear unto him, when
thou art vile unto thy self, he finds thee, when thou art lost, and
annibilated, he much regards thee, when thou art nothing in thine own eyes,
Beggars do show their wounds to move compassion, let us open to God the sores
of our festered conscience without delay, least by the occasion of sin, and
delay of repentance, grace be intercepted from us. Remember what t^y Savior
has done for thee, and with what unkindness thou have recompensed h m.
Consider the wrath of God against sin, which may move very senseless
creatures: but join here withal, a lively faith, taking hold on the mercy
of God, which he has manifested in his beloved Son, 1. John. 2. 1.2.
for his mercy is the port unto the which sinners should aryue, the comfort of
the offenders, and great security of the righteous. I know his mercies are
great, but can not comprehend the quantity, and am ignorant of the quality of
the greatness thereof, for unless it had been great, few or none should have
ever been saved. When Christ came in the flesh, he called Magicians, Mat.
2. 1.
or wisemen, then the Publicans, then the Whoores, the Malefectors, and whom
last? the Blasphemers: these are, the first fruits of his calling, even those
who be tied with the bonds of Sin. Art thou therefore ungodly? remember the
Magicians, art thou an oppressor, think on the Publican, art thou unclean,
the LORD pitied the whore; art thou blood-thirstie, let that Traitor and
Malefactor be obversant unto thine eyes, art thou profanelie wicked, remember
Paul, who was first a blasphemer, and then an Apostle, first a Persecuter, and
then an Evangelist, for this is a true word, and by all means worthy to be
received, 1. Tim. 1.15.16.
that Christ Jesus came into the world to save Sinners, of whom I am chief
(says he.) Notwithstanding, for this cause was I received unto mercy, that
Jesus Christ should first show on me long suffering, to the example of them,
which shall in time to come believe in him unto eternal life.

But here there is required especially, that thou should fight a good
fight, keeping faith and a good conscience, in surrendering obedience, in
holiness to God, Charity to thy neighbor, purity of life, and diligence in
thy calling, that the Lord may direct thy steps in his Truth, may guide thee
by his Counsel, and reserve thee to his Glory.

For thy Armor are Tears, and Prayers, other-wise thou neither can resist,
nor possibly prevail. Jacob against Esau used these spiritual means,
Patience, and Devotion, for a slender and light wind of temptation, can
shortly cut us off from confidence: for Peter was a dese^bler, a liar, and
perjure, until that grace reduced him: So man is nothing, yea, he is much in
himself to his own mind, until he have the experience of his own
deficiencie; but being tempted, he will learn from whom he has received
strength, and with how much vigilancie he should keep the same. For who
denies me before men, I will deny him (says he) before my Father, which is
in Heaven, he that denies him by mouth, does not belee^e by ^eart, the faith
in the heart is the root of confession, confession is the fruit of Faith,
while the Root is living, there are blossoms and leaves, if not, dead: For ^y
the heart we believe to righteousness, Romans 10.10.
and by the mouth, we confess to salvation: And therefore (Soul) the
confession of the mouth without faith in heart, neither faith in heart, without
confession of the mouth avails.

Lord, give that thou ask, and ask what thou will, Peter was prompt in
promising, fearful in keeping, but diligent in amending, greatest spirits
gather strength to themselves the greatest occasion of sin. If we consider
how feeble we are to resist evil, and changeable to persever in goodness, we
would quake.

But (O dead Soul) thou art nothing else, than a vanity and shadow of death,
and gulf of darkness, in earth without form, and void, which without Gods
blessing, can bring out no good thing, I have confusion, sin, and death of my
self, whilst I stand, it is by thy gift, if I fall, it is of me, and ever
should lie, unless thou raised me. Blind am I, unless thou enlighten me,
and when I fell, unless thou laid thine hand under me, there should I have
lain: yea, ever have fallen, unless thou had sustained me, oft-times
perished, unless thou had governed me. And now (dead Soul) remember the
occasion of this Peter his fall: Preachers, are Cocks to crow the glad
tythinges of salvation, so Nathan to David, Ier. 7.26.
and Jonas to the Ninivites, but ye would, not hear me, nor incline thine
ear, but hardened the neck (says he.)

The Lord look on us with the eyes of his mercy, that we may bitterly and
worthily weep for our transgressions, applying the merits of Jesus Christ by
a true faith unto our souls, for we have many sweet promises of salvation,
and favor of our God offered unto us, who came not to call the righteous, Mat.
9.13.14.
but sinners to repentance, for the whole need not a Physician, but these that
are sick. For it is not only requisite, that thou accuse thy self for sin
but thou first accuse thy self and look not for rebuking from others, but who
can build without God? keep witho t God, begin without God. O! Romans 11.33
the unsearchable, and infinite, and unspeakable goodness of God! amongst the
railinges of the Priests, falshoodes of witnesses against Christ, being buft
and bespitted; Christ casts a glanse of his eye unto Peter's tossed faith.
Turn unto me, believe in me, follow me, this is the time of my Passion,
the time of my marriage; will thou follow me; be not afraid, thou shall
overcome, let not the infirmity that I have taken for thy sake, make thee
swerve, be strong in me. Thus, he that sleeps, is wakened, the feeble,
confirmed, the casten down, raised, out of the dry rock of his heart, floods
of tears do spring, once being touched with the rod, and meditation of his
bitter Passion. For Thou art he who will not the death of a Sinner, but rather
to convert, and live: for Thou came not into the world to judge it, but to
save it.

THE SECOND DEgree in this Ladder of the ascension of the Soul to Heaven, by
the meditation, of the Passion of Jesus Christ, And the first Step thereof.
INto this Garden, then in Mount Olives, over the Brook Kedron, came out a
multitude with Judas, and bound Christ, and carried him to Annas the high Priest.

Here have thou deep matter (poor Soul) of spiritual contemplation, thy
Savior of his wisdom did see all these things, yea, the very hour of his
death. But he that dwells in heaven shall laugh, Psalm. 2.4.
and have his enemies in derision: For their counsels are not hid from him,
who by his word only was able to cast them to the ground: Which is like a
fire, I^r. 5.14.
and men as wood, to devour them, for it is lively, and mighty in
opereation, and sharper than any two edged sword, and enters through, even
unto the dividing asu^^^er of the Soul, Heb. 4.12.
and the Spirit, and of the joyntes, and marrow, and is a discerner of the
thoughts, and intents of the heart.

If such a mylde word did cast his enemies down, what shall become of them in
that day, Psalm. 37.12.13.
when he shall rebuke them in his wrath? so the wicked practiced them against
the just, Mat. 25.47.
but the Lord shall laugh him to scorn, for he sees his day comes.

Neither is our sweet Savior so much moved with his own cause (as indeed he
was very much) that he did forget his Fatherly care over his own Disciples.
Let these go; Job. 1.10.
The Lord has a hedge about his own against Satan: Zach. 2.5.
he is (I say) a wall of fire round about his own, yea, he is patient, and
long suffering with his enemies, who being cast down, he permits to rise,
and not to be swallowed up of the earth, Number. 16.32.
with Corah, Dathan, and Abiram.

Thou can not marveill sufficiently on the blindness of this company; they
had oftten seen him before, yet Judas (to be sure that Christ should not
escape) as by his divinity he had done sundry times gave them the sign of a
kiss. The Lord can keep his own, and not suffer them to be exposed to the
pleasure of their foes. They that sought for Lot, were smitten with blindness
by the Angels, Genesis 19.11
and so the Lord did to the Syrians at the word 2. King. 6.28.
of Elisha, but small was their power against him, for how soon Christ
professed that it was he, they fell, and being risen again, are no whit
bettered, but persevere in their wicked course.

O! the riches of the mercy of God, Ezekiel. 33. 11.
as I live says the Lord, I desire not the death of the wicked, but that be
turn from his way, and live. Ier. 20.12.
Turn you, turn you from your evil way, for why will ye die, ye house of
Israel. He might have casten them to the lowest hell, for he is the Lord that
searches the heart and reins.

Thus they bound him, they play thy part (sinful Soul) as Dalilia in behalf
Judge. 16.5.
of the Philistims bound Sampson: and thus did David confess in our name,
Behold, Lord, Psalm. 116.16.
for I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son of thine hand-maide:
thou have broken my bones. We should not rail on the Jews but detaste our
sins, which bound our Savior: We were (allas) bound by the setters of sin,
and death, to loose our bonds, and bring us out of captivity. Was he thus
entreated? his captivity was our liberty, his ign^minie, is our glory, his
voluntary infirmity, is Gods power to our salvation. Thus we are saved
through the Blood of the Covenant: ^ach. 9.11.
He has loosed the Prisoners out of the Pit, wherein there was no water;
Psalm. 124.7.
our soul has escaped even as a bird out of the snare of the Fowler, the
snare is broken, and we are delivered, our help is in the Name of the Lord,
that made heaven and earth, who delivered us (I say) from the power of
darkness, Col. 1.13.
and translated us in the Kingdom of his Son, and glorious liberty of his
adopted inheritance.

When thou (poor Soul) feels thy self fast tied with the snares of thy
sins, haste thee to Christ, who bids all come that are weary and laden,
Mat. 11.28.
that he may r^lieue them: And this deliverance from sin, and Satan, has
he sealed up unto us, by his holy Sacraments, as undoubted pledge; and earnest
thereof, He that shall believe, and be baptized, Mar. 16.16.
shall be saved. As the other, This is the Blood of the New Testament, that is
shed for many, Mat. 26.28.
for the remission of Sins. And therefore, carefully should thou beware of
Sin, that being made free from it, Romans 6.18.
thou be the servant of Righteousness: for as Sampson often bound, Judge. 16.22.
at last was made a mock to the of Philistims; so being loosed from the
cords and grinnes of sin, must not serve our own concupiscence but live the
life of God, least we be bound hand and foot, Mat. 22.13.
and cast out into utter darkness.

But here (dear Soul) meditate to learn Patience, whereof thou have much
need, Heb. 10.36
that after thou have done the will of God, thou may receive the promise; for
if wrongouslie thou be committed or bound, or if the Lord to daunt and
chastise thy corrupt nature; suffer the bonds of sickness, poverty, or other
whatsoever adversity to be laid on thee, Christ knows, and has felt the
same himself, and has learned to remember them that are in bonds, Heb. 13.^.
as though he were bound with them, and them that are in affliction, as if be
were afflicted in the body.

And if it come to pass, as (alas) thou often do cast fetters of sin of
thine own accord upon thy self, give not over, nor despare, but then most of
all, direct the eye of Faith to behold Christ that was bound, Zach. 12.
who does sanctify thy captivie, and satisfies for all thy sins by his
captivity.

Indeed the binding of him made all his Disciples to fly, oblivious of the
oath that they made at the entry to the Garden, for besides that, Christ had
truly foretold them, they would all leave him; so was it not in man's power to
presever in goodness, we are so weak to resist, and easy to fall. The
faithful must go out of themselves, and judge themselves as ^roken vessels,
for as the sting of the smallest pin does make the wind in a blown bladder
to burst out; so the least temptation will overthrow the strongest Champion, if
we be not guarded with mercy and vpholden by the Lord. Dese^tion is
dangerous, think modestly therefore of thy self, yea, be that thinks he
stands, 1. Cor. 10.12.
beware least be fall.

The Disciples did flee (I say,) Christ had no helper, nor support in this
business, that all the glory and praise thereof might be his; Esaias. 6.33.
who did tread the winepresse alone, neither is there salvation in any other,
Act. 4.12.
neither is there any name given under Heaven amongst men, by which we must be
saved. And as the first Adam merited by his rebellion; that all the creatures
should fall from his obedience, yea, and to make insurrection against him: so
it behooved our Surety; and Cautioner to be left of all; that by his obedience
all our debt being paid, we might be received in favor; and with all the
Saints to be made free Denisanes, and Citizens in Heaven.

He then that loosed Lazarus, four days dead from the bonds of death, John.
11.39
and Peter from the iron bonds in prison, and them that dwell in darkness,
and in the shadow of death, being bound in misery and yrons, so that be broke
the gates of Brass, Psalm. 107.10.13.
and burst the bars of iron asunder, could he not loose himself? for the love
he carried to thee, he would not: for he knew that God would raise him up,
Act. 1.24.
and loose the sorrows of death: because it was impossible that be should
be holden of it, Act. 8.28.
(for they did nothing, but whatsoever thine holy hand, O Lord, and thy
counsel had determined before to be done.) But thou, O God, verily hydest thy
self, Esaias. 45.15.
O Savior of Israel.

Say thou therefore (my Soul) I greatly rejoice in the Lord, and my soul
shall be joyful in my God, Esaias. 61.10.
for be has clothed me with the garments of salvation, and covered me with
the robe of righteousness, he has decked me like a Bridegroom, and as a
Bride tyeth her self with her Jewels. For thy Christ is to preach good tidings
unto thee, Esaias. 61.4.
to bind up the broken hearted, to preach liberty to the captives, and to them
that are bound the opening of the prison.

But before thou pass the Garden and his bonds, meditate the resemblance of
the first and second Adam, the first was accompanied with Eua, Genesis 3.22.
the second alone, left of all his own, for Adam did not alone sin, but Christ
alone paid the price of our redemption. The first Adam being thrust out, that
he should not have regresse, a fiery sword was appointed to stay him from
entry: but our second Adam was smitten, yet Paradise opened. To what purpose
should the Garden be kept, when the Tree of Life which is (Jesus Christ)
that gives immortalie, is carried from the Garden? Now is there no more the
wrath of God; but Reconciliation, no Vengeance, but Mercy, no Hatred, but Love
with this Tree of Life, which is made a Sacrifice for us, purchased to us all.

THE THIRD STEP of the ascension of the Soul, by meditation of those things
which were done in the house of Annas, Father in Law to Caiaphas.
Mat. 26.
ANd now here, (sick Soul) consider well Christ's presentatio^, John. 18.
Luc. 2^.
examinatioun, boxing, and answer to that wicked fact.

Joseph. lib. 28. antiq. cap. 8.
Valerius Gratus deposed this Annas, and planted in his place Ismael the son
Fabius, who is thereafter rejected, and Annas his son substitute, But the year
after, Simon the son of Canuthus is promoted to that dignity. Miserable was
the condition in these times, those things which should be done by the holy
Ghost in the warrant of his Word, Exodus 29.29.
were traversed by Symonie, such was the greedines and pride of the Roman
Precuratours, a presage of their fall, which is to be feared, where the like
had place also.

This Annas house apparantlie was in the way they came. And they would
gratify him, to see this miserable spectacle, the most mischievous fact that
ever was done in the world, the crucifying of the GOD of Glory. Woe unto them
that deliteth to see the bonds of Christ, in his servants.

From thence he is carried to his greatest enemy, John. 11.49.
that gave counsel, that one should die for the people; it is a prophecy
whose tongue was guyded by the Lord, as Balaams was: Men would have their
Counsel put in execution, and before it fail, they had rather hang themselves
as A^hitophell did. 2. Sam. 17.23.


O remember (my Soul) many servantes to humor their masters, do villainous
factes, 1. Sam. 22.9.10.
Many Doegs now adays who to hunt their Superiors favoures, will not spare
the life of four score and five Priests.

Cajaphas mind was to cut by all means Christ off, but God most wise in his
eternal decree, found it most expedient, that Christ should die for thee, else,
we should all have been lost. Gal. 3.28.
All (I say,) for there is neither Jew, nor Grecian, there is neither bond, nor
free, there is neither male nor female, but all are one in Christ Jesus.

Yea God shall never be destitute of his own glory, for if men would
suppress it, God would draw it out of very dumb beasts, Number. 22.2^. Luc.
19.40
as he did out of Balaams Ass, yea, make very stones to speak.

The Judges therefore in great hate do meet by day, which if they had done
for decerning of a good cause and just, it had been worthy of praise and
commendation: Esaias. 59.7.8.
But their foot ran to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood:
Their thoughts are wicked thoughts, desolation and destruction is in their
paths, the way of peace they know not, and there is none equity in their
goinges, they have made them crooked paths, whosoever goes therein, shall not
know peace.

Psalm. 82.6.
Judges that delays the righteous cause, and prorogates it from time to time,
has cause to be affrayed, seeing they are Vicars to God, Romans 13.1.
to minister justice indifferently to all.

But here (dear Soul) consider this high Priests negligence and sloth,
should he not have known those things, which were done and spoken in his
own Church? O! but the malicious fellow sought the occasion, if possibly he
could of binding on Christ's back the crime of Heresy, and Sedition.

But our Savior appealed to his Auditors, whose judgment he is not affraied
of, being a pattern here to Preachers of the Gospel, not to be like dumb
Dogs: Mar. 16.15.
But to preach the Evangell to every creature, neither to be affrayed of
their sincere dispensation of the word, but to render an account of the hope
that is in them. Mar. 16.15.
And thus the servant of the high Priest void of all humanity, gave Christ a
box, to show his loyalty to his master. But truth breeds hatred, Ieremias,
and Mica, has proved the same before. Light is noisome to sore eyes: Such
master, and such servants, Hos. 4.9.
such Priests, such people; and good reason it is, for like in sin, like in
punishment.

But here a notable image of flatterers, Christ is accused of Treason, and
beaten besides, because he had so answered the hic Priest. Great men's courts
are full of Caterpillars, which are Mothes to destroy the best constant
Commonwealth. He that rebukes a man, Pro. 28.13
shall find more favor at the length, than be that flattereth with his tongue;
for why? a man that flattereth his neighbor spreads a net for his steps:
Pro. 29.5.
But good King David served the Amalakite, 2. Sam. 1.15.16.
hypocrite, and flatterer otherwise. Neither is t^is to be passed, that as the
maliciousnes of the servant was inexcuseable, so the Priest was to be blamed
also, for the servants fault redundeth to the master. Baana^, and Rechab which
did slay Ishbosheth the son of Saul, 2. Sam. 4.7.
David commanded them to be slain, and therefore, all in place and
authority, should observe that Princely counsel of King David, Psalm. 101.8
to cut off all the workers of iniquity be times from the house of the Lord.

But here the patience, and long suffering of the Son of God, passes all
commendation, by his power he did not punish this sinful servant; Psalm. 103.10.
but delayeth, looking for amendment, and is not moved to vengeance. Far be it
from thee (my Soul) thou abuse his patience, not one blow, but a number have
thou given him, when thou purse west him in his members grieuouslie, Act. 9.5.
Romans 2.24.
and blasphemest his holy Name, denying thy Christ for belly and favor;
Philip. 3.19.
contradicting his word, and dissembling the truth: but he that boldly shall
put hand in the members of Christ, 2. King. 13.4.
let him but think what became of Jeroboam.

And yet just defense with meekness is tolerable, so did Paul tell Ananias who
gave commandment to beat him: Act. 24.10
Indeed captives should not be hardly entertained,; for the Iayler used great
humility, and favor to Joseph. Genesis 39.


And now (dear Soul,) behold Christ's innocence, he spoke nothing in
secret, whereof he culd be chale^ged, indeed he did not cast pearls before
Swine, Mat. 7.6.
the substance of his Doctrine was ever one, both to the people, and to the
disciples. But after diverse manner of his passion, he taught and admonished his
Apostles of the ruin of Jerusalem, Luc. 18.
Luc. 22.
and mysteries of the kingdom of God, and sundry passages at the supper,
which the world was not capable of, that it might be fulfilled which was said,
I have not spoken in secret, Esaias. 65.2.3.
neither in a place of darkness in the earth. And again, I have spread out
mine hands all the day unto a rebellious people, which walks in a way which
was not goood, even after their own imaginations, a people that provokes me
ever unto my face.

But thou (vile creature) should thy Creator who has made thee of the dust of
the earth (by grace,) receive a blow? Servants, when they are made freemen,
do receive such a stroke to enjoye liberty.

But thou (my Soul) remember thy Savior gives his cheek to him that smites
him, Lam. 3.30.
be is filled full with reproaches, and has given his back unto the smitters,
and his cheek to the nippers, Esaias. 50.7.
neither hid be his face from shame; and spitting; that thou may be
admonished of the greatness of thy sin, and weight of Gods anger, thou did
merit for thy sins, in everlasting punishments in Hell.

So did thou not (O Lamb of God) resist evil, Mat. 3.39.
but whosoever did smite thee on thy right cheek, did turn to him the other
also, ever beaten while life did last thee. By thy shame, bloody and
blew-face, bewtifull do we appear, who were deformed in sin.

Now it restes: His examination and process thereof, to be discussed.

Woe is me (poor Soul) that not only false records, witnesses for wicked
ends but that the Princes and Elders, should have admitted, suborned and
co^stituted them, without respect to the law of God. Act. 6. 11.
So Steven had proof thereof, God will never suffer his followers in this,
Ier. 7.4.5.6.7.
to be destitute of comfort.

Mat. 7.21.
For we should not have Christ in our mouth, but do the will of him that sent
him, else, all boasting of the Temple of God is to no effect, for what has the
wicked ado to declare his ordinances, Psalm. 50.16 17.
or take his Covenant in their mouth, seeing they hate to be reformed, and do
cast his words behind them.

But what did these false witnesses? they could do no other, than to mix
Truth with Falset, or interpret against the mind of the speaker, right done,
or things spoken falsely. Our Savior had said, Destroy this Temple, John.
2.19.
and in three days I will raise it up again: But they said, I can destroy
this Temple, he meaning of his body, they of the material temple; Christ
said, I will raise it up again, they said, he would build it.

Great are the offenses, (dear Soul) which false witnesses commit against
God, Exodus 20.
whose commandment they wilfully break against the Son, who is Truth it
self, against the holy Ghost, whose habitation they defile with lies. For the
mouth that lies, kills the Soul, yea, and offends against the Judge, who
believes them, and against their neighbor, who falls in the hazard of his
life, and goods, as of Naboth.

1. King. 21.9.
And therefore, Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord, but they that deal
truly are his delight, Pro. 12.22.
and reason, for false witnesses shall not be v^punished, Pro. 19.9.
and be that speaks lies, shall perish.

And therefore (dear Soul) come never in custom hereof, for both spiritual
and corporal punishments abides them: For he that slandereth not with his
tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor receives a false report against
his neighbor, Psalm. 15.2.3.
shall rest in the Lords Mountain. And therefore, speak truth in the heart,
for when inquisition shall be made, and thy witness be found false; Deuteronomy.
19.19.
shall be done unto thee, as thou thoughtest to do unto thy brother.

Therefore (my Soul) eschew the thing that is evil, and be not ashamed to
say the truth for thy life. Accept no person against thine own conscience, that
thou be not confounded to thy own decay. Eccl. 4.33.


Here then, he admits al, while the witness prove nothing, but appoints as
Darius did, in favors of his Nobles, Dan. 6.16.
our Daniel to be casten in the Den of Lions.

Now what is Christ thy Saviors part in all this business, he holds his
peace, First to accomplish the prophecy, Esaias. 53.7.
next, a grave example of patience. If the Judge do thee wrong, thou art no
better, than Christ was, commit thy cause unto God, Psalm. 146.7.
which executes justice for the oppressed, and loses the prisoners. Truth
may be hid, but not overcome, iniquity may floorish for a time, but can not
be permanent.

His innocence also here appears, which behooved to be, that we might be made
the righteousness of God by him. 2. Cor. 5.21.
And these things he suffered the night-tyde, that the licentious in a soft
bed, when his head, Prince and King did suffer these things by night, should
earnestly regard them.

I see Annas does not loose our Savior, which of compassion did loose the
Daughter of Abraham, whom Satan bound many years, Sampson by virtue of the
hair of his head could burst the bonds of strange women, but Christ after so
many miracles, wonders, and powers done by him, willingly gave himself bound
to releive our bonds.

Our Savior being asked if he was Messiah, not only confessed, but told he
should come in judgment in visible form, at which the high Priest rent his
raiment, and accused the most Innocent of blasphemy.

I pray thee, why do thou adjure the Son of GOD? it was not to find out
truth, but occasion of death, if any could be, such as was in Achab who
ajured Micha the son of Iemlie, whom he presently committed to fetters.

The sleeping of the Conscience is common both to the wicked, and to the
godly, and it should be diligently attended unto, that it may be tymouslie
wakened, for the longer the Conscience lies in sin, the bitterer and harder
the wakening will be: David did lie a year in this stu^ber, and after
adultery, 2. Sam. 11 4.
committed murder, yet the Lord in mercy wakened him.

Ready is it to be lulled asleep, and of all judgments a sleeping conscience
is the greatest, happy is he that finds him reconceiled to his God, a
wakening conscience will tell thee when thou have done evil, that thou may
have displeasure and repent, and when thou have don well, thou may have joy
through Jesus Christ, Romans 2.19
of whom we have our sufficiency, and without whom we cannot think a good
thought.

What is it then that he asks of Christ? is it concerning his Doctrine and
his Disciples; he did not point out any particular, because he had many to
lay to his charge, his dittay should have been made before he was taken. How
should the high Priest been ignorant that Christ was both Messiah, and the Son
of God? for he saw his marveilous works, which testified of him, he saw the
Prophesies only fulfilled in his person. Yet our Savior did with his mouth
confess freely that he was the Son of the living God, Heb. 4.15.
which is the greatest comfort that ever can befall any soul, that he has the
Son of the living God his Mediator, Priest, and King, and companion in all
his calamities. And shall not such a mighty King revenge the injuries done to
his members? Truly he will not only take the defense of the^ in this world,
but draw them, as his own flesh and bones to himself, for he is gone to
prepare a place for them, John. 14.3.
and will come again, and receive them to himself, that where he is, they
may be also.

For what can be more comfortable (my Soul,) tha^ to remember we have such
an omnipotent and everlasting King, not only night and day to have care over
us, but that our flesh also does possess the heavens; where we shall be in
the presence of God for ever, he went alone to heaven, but he, all entered
into it, for a bone was not broken of him, both head and members shall be
found in heaven.

He has given us the earnest of his Spirit, and taken the earnest of our
flesh, and carried it as a pawnd to Heaven, where we and all they that have
true faith shall be brought, and here withal, to lance this unrighteous
Judges heart, he makes mention of the latter day, which is his day, wherein
he shall judge all flesh, as Daniel has fore-spoken, who beheld in visions
by night, one like the Son of man, Dan. 7.13.
coming in the clouds of heaven, and approaching to the Ancient of days, and
they brought him before him, and he gave him dominion, and honor, and a
Kingdom that all people, Nations and Languages should serve him: And so said
another, Zach. 10.
They shall look upon me whom they have pearsed, and shall lament for him, as
one mourning for his only son, and be sorry for him, as one is sort for his
first borne.

Which second coming, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.
seeing it is at hand, we should remember of our accomptes to be given to him,
and the precisnesse of that Justice wherein we shall render a reckoning for
every idle word: Mat. 12.36.
Let it not depart from our memory, but what-soever thou take in hand, Eccl.
7.36.
remember thy end and thou shall never do amiss: Christ suffered for a good
cause, ^. Pet. 4.15.16.
even for righteousness sake, who although he was in bonds and afflicted, as
though he were an evil doer, yet the word of God that was in his mouth, was
not bound. Judges as they exercise their judgment, shall be ju^ged again, for
he that for thy cause was presented to jugdement, shall be Judge, who has said,
That God has sent his Son, not to condemn the world, but that be world by
him should be saved. Believe in Christ, and thou need not to be afraid of
judgment, will be condemn them for whom he has suffered all these things?
John. 3.17.
suffered (I say,) both of the hie Priest who spak to him, against order of
Law, and of the hie Priests servant, who struck him against order of law, for
maintaining the truth before he had been judged, neither was it a fit place
to punish a man in judgment though he were never so bad.

And now the high Priest at this innocent Lambs answer, rent his choathes,
Joel. 2.13.
but thou should have so done to thy heart. He pretended the Majesty of God,
to be hurt be this external behavior, but inwardly well pleased; that now
he might have occasion to fulfill his wicked counsel.

The godly indeed should burn in zeal when they see the glory of God to be
impared, Mat. 22.
as Lot was vexed with the uncleanly conversation of the wicked, for he being
righteous and dwelling amongst them, 1. Pet. 2 7.8.
in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their
unlawful deeds.

But alas (poor Soul) how oftimes do thou both pollute thy self, and do
hear the holy Name of God blasphemed by oaths and perjuries, it becomes
thee to avert the wrath of God by all means, ^. King. 11.30.
when thou shall hear such Rabsakeas blasphemies, as Hezakiah did. Nothing
should more grieve thee, tha^ when we see the glory of God his Majesty to be
hindered or hurt, by any; Who is weak? and I am not weak, who is offended? and
I burn not. 2. Cor. 11.24.


Now by this outward gesture, he would declare the punishment of the Law in
commiting blasphemy justie to appertain to Christ, Lev. 24.13
to be stoned to death by the whole multitude; but this is our greatest
comfort, that by these means he has redeemed us from the condemnatorie
sentence of the Law, Gal. 3.13.
for as the Father has life in himself, so likewise has he given to the
Son, to have life in himself, and has given him power also to execute
judgment in that he is the Son of man.

But the high Priest did not understand what he was doing, for being risen from
his place, he might have presaged the loss of his Priesthood, and chair
therein; and that in this rage, in re^ting his cloths, he did signify the
translation of the Law, for the change of the Priest-hoode imported the change
of the Law also. The like was done to Jeroboam, whose upper garment was cut in
twelve pieces by the Prophet, who did deliver unto him, with the ten pieces,
the ten Tribes.

Now as if they had not tormented him enough, the hie Priests leave him to be
mocked of their servants, until the dawning of the day that the Counsel should
sit: For what marveill is it, when the Magistrates give evil examples, that
unrighteousness, violence, and oppression reign every where.

And now (dear Soul) raise up thy self to thankfulness, and let thy heart
be inflamed with his love, when thou shall remember, what, and how great
bitter things all that whole night thy Redeemer suffered. For his face was
bespitted, as if it had been most ignominious; with their Fistes they boxt him,
and spitefully mocked him, covering his face, that being stricken, he should
tell them who had done it. Great therefore, must be the anger, and wrath of God
for sin, for which Christ did suffer so much, and therefore, we should
abhor it from our hearts. But most of all have thou to consider the infinite
mercy of thy heavenly Father, who to vindicate and assoilyle thee from
everlasting ignominy, suffered his beloved Son so shamefullie to be
entreated; well might he have said, Psalm. 22.7.
I am a worm, and not a man.

Remember therefore, thy uncleanness, and inward corruption, who is borne in
iniquity, ^sal. 51.5.
and in sin has thy mother conceived thee, to purge thee from these spots,
and to present thee without blotte or wrinkle. Ephesians. 5.25.
Was this blessed face of Jesus embrued with spittell* Justly may we deplore
the impuritie of our nature which must be cleansed by the Blood Christ. 1.
John. 1.7


Yet does not the wicked now cease to beat Jesus in his members, and which is
most abominable, do scorn the divine Majesty, as if he did not see, nor had
care, nor were to crave vengeance for that they do: but do cover the face of
Jesus, (in their opinion) while they afflict his members, giving themselves to
careless security, but he does see, and beholds all these things, for
their oppression, and their sighs are before him, and their wandringes are
compted, their tears put up in his bottle. But although he appear not to
see^ neither the God of Jacob to regard, yet understand ye unwise among the
people, and ye fools, when will ^ee be wise; be that planted the care,
shall be not hear, ^r he that formed the eye, shall be not see, or he that
chastises the nations, Psalm. 94.7.8.9.10.
shall be not correct, he that teaches men knowledge, shall be not know,
yea, the Lord knows the thoughts of men, that they are vanity.

But here is a notable image of eternal punishment represented unto us, which
we ha e deserved in body and soul, for if we examine our life and
conversation (not to speak of our thoughts) and weigh them in the balance of
Gods Law, we cannot but judge our selves to be worthy of eternal contempt,
rebuke, and shame, and if we would not with everlasting punishments be plagued,
let us in all possible haste, repent and turn our selves.

But here is abundant consolations offered against persecution and contumelies
which the wicked do inflicte on the godly. His shame was changed in an
unspeakable glory, the ignominy redunded on the head of his enemies: so
shall the persecutions of his members receive a co^pensation of eternal life.
Rejoice therefore, in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that
when his Glory shall appear, ye may be glad and rejoice, if ye be railed
on for the Name of Christ; blessed are ye, for the Spirit of Glory, and of
God rests on you, which on their part is evil spoken of, 1. Pet. 4.13.14.
but on your part is glorified.

O! but here have we a notable defense against the wrath of God, and
everlasting condemnation, for if God had suited us before his judgment, and
appointed the due punishment for us, we should not have been thought worthy of
a temporal but, an everlasting confusion. But Christ (such was his mercy) has
become debtor for us, and has removed al our shame and ignominy; sanctified
and cleansed us, that he might make us unto himself a glorious Church, holy
and without blame. What shall we ^ander unto the Lord, for all his goodness
bestowed upon us most vndeservedlie? Psalm. 116.12.
we will take the cup of salvation and call on his Name in presenting to him a
mindful, and thankful heart.

By the spetle therefore, that he was defiled with, has he washed the face of
our soul, by the covering of his face; has he taken away the veil from our
hearts, his head was beaten, that all his members might receive spiritual
motion, life, sense, and influence; and with Fists was he rigorously
stricken, that we may render glory, praise, and honor unto him with heart,
and clapping of our hands.

THE THIRD DEGREE, and first Step of the ascension of the Soul unto heaven by
comtemplation of Christ's exaltation on the Cross.
ANd now here consider, the hie Priests and Elders their diligence in
conveening their Counsel. Mat. 27.
Judas the tratour his conterfeit Repentance, Mar. 15.
whose end was desperation; and the consultation of the Elders, Luc. 23.
for buying a Potters field.

They pretermitted no time, so speedily would they have, yea, even before the
Sun arose, the Sun of righteousness dispatched, and fearing least he should
escape, the more short deliberation take they for killing of him, although their
meeting did hold by the 70. and one which was their Sanhendrin, for the which
cause, the kingdom was taken from them, the Scepter from Judah, Genesis 49.10.
Judgment and the Priesthood from that Nation. Hos. 13.9.
Thy destruction is from thee O Israel: Esaias. 5.4.
What more could he have done to his Vine-yarde, than he has done? Genesis 3.11.
That which Adam had committed, our Savior paid, Christ's silence made a
defense for Adam, for he heard from Euah, that which was not lawful, and
spoke things also, which he should not, he heard and obeyed his wife,
counselling wrongouslie, and excused himself, when the Lord accused him. But
contrarily, Christ accused by the wicked; holds his peace, and as a deaf man
neglects their forgeries, for well knew he their malice, to come to such
hight, that neither would they hear him, nor put him to liberty, and yet
consta^tly professed himself, Luc. 22.69.
to be Son of man, and the Son of God, and one that should sit at the right
hand of ^he Maj^stie in Heaven, Mat. 26.64.
which, to make a way to their own decree against him, as having testimony
out of his own mouth, with many words they insult against him.

But what is Judas part, seeing that thus Christ had incurred their sentence of
condemnation, Mat. 27.3.4.6.7.
whose Conscience being raised from sleep, by the sting thereof, and sense of
Gods fierce anger, rendered the money, and testified Christ's innocence, which
they employed for a burial for strangers.

Well believed Judas, that he had been in a good case, when he once had
received the money, but having done this mishant fact, his eyes were so
opened, that he not only did feel his abominable offense, but also is
tormented with such horror in soul, that he believed no no remedy to be
left, but hanging of himself.

But more particularly, (poor Soul,) examine these circumstances, the time
when he did see Christ adjudged to death, soon enough if well enough, late
repentance is seldom true, but true repentance is never late: Ezekiel. 18.27.28.
For when the wicked turns away from his wickedness that he has committed,
and does that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive,
because he considers and turns away from all his transgressions that he
has committed, Ezekiel. 23.16.
he shall surely live and not die, for none of his sins that he has
committed, shall be mentioned unto him, as is evident in the Malefactor that
hang on Christ's right hand.

But this goodness of God should not breed security in thee, abide not, nor
prolong the time, Romans 2.4.
when thou shall not be master of thy own thoughts. They that are in Fever,
rave before they cool; and many die before they intend to repent, because the
time, Luc. 12.40.
and hour of death is uncertain.

Consider, he brought the thirty silver pieces, and restored them, Ezekiel. 33.15.
which sometimes, was a undoubted token of repentance, as in Zacheus. Luc.
19.8.10.
But he was destitute of true Faith, in applying to him the mercy of God, Who
came to seek and save that which was lost. Mat. 18.14.
He also made a free confession of his sin, which is very requisite in
repentance, but it was not to the Priests, but to God, and to his only
begotten Son. What marveile therefore he be void of comfort: And this he
proclaimed in the very Temple; but, alace, many do we find, who does not come
so far off, although their wickedness witness to their face, Psalm. 3.8.
but do deny or threaten those which admonish them of it. But this is
remarkable, that he bare record of Chirsts innocence, for such an high Priest,
it became us to have which is holy, harmless, undefiled, Heb. 7.26.
separate from Sinners. The high Priests did answer, What is that to us, look
thou to it.

Neither for promise, norrewarde, or pleasure of any man, fall under the wrath
of God by sinning; whose breath is in their nose-thirles, and whose help is
vain. They would not acknowledge that it belo^ged to them, surely, both they
and their posterity feel the smarte of that Innocent Blood Which men, though
they know the Law of God, how that they which commit such things, are worthy
of death, yet not only do they sin, Romans 1.32.
but also favor them that do them. For to sin by himself, or by another, is
all one, and he that consents, is access^^ie to the fact. But here is their
great blindness, that they did not revoke, and retreat their sentence, hearing
his innocence justie by the traitor confessed. In no ways speak thou against
the word of Truth, (my Soul) but be ashamed of the lies of thine ignorance,
strive for the Truth unto death, Eccl. 4.25.28.
and defend Justice for thy life, and the Lord God shall sight for thee against
thine enemies.

But hardest of all, is that rough answer that Judas received, they ministered
no comfort unto him, but increased the flamme of despare that was kindled in
the heart of him. The weak have ye not strengthened, Ezekiel. 34.4.
as he complains justly of them; the sick ye have not healed, neither have
ye bund up the broken, nor brought again that which was dryven away, neither
have ye sought that which was lost, but with cruelty and rigor have ye ruled
them. But the good Sbepherd never rests, but goes after that which was lost,
while he find it, Luc. 15.4.6.
and makes his rejoicing the compensation of his travel.

He did cast the money in the Temple from him, which was so dear unto him,
that for it, he post-poned the life of his Master. Now he became so execrable,
that he gained nothing of it, but a conscience burnt with an hot iron, evil
acquired goods shall never benefit the possessor, nor the posterity. 1. King.
21.16.
Achab believed all was well, when by violence and fraud he had obtained
Naboths Vineyard, which he lost with his life, and the favor of God most of
all: For what avails it to gain the whole world, Mat. 16.26.
and loss his soul, And what fruit have they then in those things, Romans 6.
21.
whereof they are now ashamed? for the end of these things are death.

But terrible, was his execution, for when he had thrown down himself
head-longs, he burst asunder in the mids, Act. 1.18.
and all his bowels gushed out; how great destruction does abide them, that
serve the unclean spirit: this was not an evasion by death from Gods
judgment, but a more short and compendious way thereto. Let not Satan by his
deceit allure thee, neither for fear of Ignominy, as he did Saul, or with
loathsomeness of thy life, to such abominable practices.

But (alace) many now adays, do harden their hearts at wholesome exhortation,
whereby they make the Lord to cut the thread of this life, and adjudge them
unto eternal death, besides, that many by drinking, and gluttony, does
shorten their days; And does not whoredom, and vicious venery procure sudden
death? What can be said of Avarice, and Covetousness, which, whiles it
thirsts for the blood of others they are pearsed by that vnrighte^us Ma^mon,
whereby they are ^beacked, and killed: And what shall be thought of those, who
provoke the single combat, and thinks it a great indignity unless they kill
not themselves, or their neighbor.

Lord grant every moment, while we enjoye this life, we may consecra^e it to
the glory of the Giver, that we may be ready at all occasions, to give an
account of our times spent here, that we may say with Simeon, Now let thy
servant depart in peace, Lu^. 2.29.
according to thy word, for my eyes have seen my salvation.

Then learn here (my Soul) by this his desperation, the nature of sin, for
before it be perfected, it makes men drunk, but being put in execution the
pleasure is extinguished, the conscience remains heavier than Leed, which
unless the Lord prevent, may drive thee to despair, For the deceitfulness
of sin and delight thereof for a season, makes men so brutish, that they can
not decerne betwixt good and evil, yea causes them beleuee they are most
blessed in greatest sins.

And therefore (my Soul) resist the Devil, and he will flee from thee, whilst
thou do not resist the custom of sinning, it brings necessity upon thee,
for it hardneth the senses, that they cannot clearlie see, it blinds the
understanding, lest punishment should terrify it, fettereth the heart, to make
filthy things pleasant, it weakeneth the strength, that being overcome, they
succumbe. The sickness of their Soul is much more sensible, than the diseases
of the body. There is no greater dolor, than the wound of the conscience for
sin, nor any greater burden, than the heavy weight of our vile transgressions.

Here Satan is a great politician, for he changes himself into an Angel of
light, while he lessens our sins, and extenuateth the^, intysing me^ to fall.
But when the deed is done, like lightening he shines in me^, casting his
sins suddenly before him, at the which thunderbolt, he is benumbed and
stupefied, feeling the bitter pangues of an evil conscience, and does so cast
him down, with this great stroke, that he, who before gloried in sin, now
thinks himself secluded from mercy and salvation. Lord hide thy face from my
sins, Psalm. 51.9. 10.11.
and put away all mine iniquities, creat in me ^ clean heart, O God, and
renew a right spirit within me. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take
not thy holy Spirit from me.

But diligently perpend Peter's, and Judas repentance by comparing them
together, that thou may understand (dear Soul,) in what state their
iniquity was committed. Their falls heavily wounded their consciences
doubtless, for Peter not only denied Christ, but bound himself to cursings
if he had known him, which was a sin almost to death: And the other Judas did
commit an heinous trespass, worthy of everlasting condemnation; but Peter's was
of frailty of the flesh, and fear of death: But Judas was of set purpose, and
of destinate malice did atempt that detestable fact. And Peter's again, not in
a cause of it self so much blameable, but of immoderate timeritie conjoined
therewith: And to Judas desperate malice, was an insatiable greediness annexed,
but the forgetfulness of the word of God was the fountain of both their
falls, It concerns us ever to pray the living God, to give us ears to hear,
and to lay up in our hearts his promises, and threatenings, to strengthen us, or
beat down our pride, and to say, Esaias. 50.5.
The Lord has opened my ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned I back.

But as their fall was, so was not their repentance, both were Apostles, both
had wounds of conscience, and frighted with the sting thereof, but Judas gave
such place to the overburde^ing strength, thereof, that he despared of Gods
mercy.

But Peter believed, that Christ is the reconciliation of our sins, 1. John 2.3
and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world, by Faith
applying the merits of Christ unto himself, to do this business, whereof
Judas destitute, contemning the deepenesse of his mercy, and riches of grace,
lost hope of recovering: no man can seriously repent, but he that looks for
forgiveness. And therefore, to wrestle with temptation, is first to look to the
promises of God, which is so sure and certain, that it is more easy, that
beaven and earth should pass away, Luc. 16.17
than they should fail, or that any title of the Law should fail: For the
Lord is strong, Exodus 34.6.7.
merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness, an^ truth,
reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquities and transgressions, and
sins, for the Lord is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, Psalm. 145.89.
and of great mercy, the Lord is good to all, and his mercy is over all his
works. In this conflict cast the eyes of thy faith on Christ Jesus, to whom a
voice from Heaven came, Saying, Mat. 3.17.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. For he received of God the
Father, honor and glory, 2. Pet. 1 17
and there came such a voice to him from the excellent. It is reported that
Alexander the Great, when he saw Iaddus the hie Priest, with his priestlie
apparel meeting him, ceased from his rage against Tyrus; and also richly
rewarded him: How much more, when our everlasting Priest, Jesus Christ, who is
just, yea, our righteousness shall appear in the sight of God his Father,
making intercession for us, to mitigate his wrath, Heb. 7.26.
and shall give us forgiveness of sins, and life everlasting, for he is able
perfectly to save them that are able to come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them.

Let not therefore Satan bereave thee of Gods love and mercy toward thee,
the merit of his passion and efficacy of his death. For the gift is not so,
as is the offense for if by the offense of one, many be dead, much more the
grace of God, Romans 5. 15.
and the gift by grace, which is by one Man, Jesus Christ has abou^ded unto
many.

Moreover, never sinner yet to this day, desiring to be reconcealed with his
God, was ever secluded from mercy, if the sin be great, his mercies is
abundantly more, and so much more, as all the whole globe of the Sea
exceeds the smallest drop of water.

If thy sin be old, which thou have drunken in from thy mothers breast, and
in process of time has ever augmented the same: be think thee of Gods
mercy, is from al eternity, and if thy iniquity be lately committed, Gods
mercies are daily renewed, which every moment he pours upon us.

And therefore (poor Soul) because of the savor of thy Bridgromes oyntme^ts,
Cant. 1.2.3.
his Name is as an ointment poured out, therefore, the Virgins love him, draw
me, we will run after thee, the King has brought me unto his chamber, we
will rejoice and be glad in thee, we will remember thy love, more than wine,
the righteous do love thee, yea, thou despysest not the poor sinner, thou
abhorredst not the confessing Thief, neither the weeping woman, neither her
that was found in adultery, neither him that sat at the receipt of custom,
nor the humble Publican, nor the denying Disciple, nor the persecuting Paul,
yea, not these that crucified thee, but prayed for them.

Strengthen thy faith therefore in the spiritual fight, by the holy meditation,
and use of the Sacraments, for whosoever are baptized in Christ, Gal. 3.27.
has put on Christ; he covers our nakedness, and does wash away the filth
of our Souls, whose sins, if they were as Crimson, Esaias. 1.18.
shall be made white as Snow; for it is the blood of Jesus Christ that
cleanses us from all sin. 1. ^ohn. 1.7.
Be not therefore affraied (sinful Soul) Art thou baptized in Christ? he
will have care of thy cause, as if it were his proper own: The Rainebow was a
sign of the Covenant betwixt God and man; That the earth should never be
destroyed by deluge of water thereafter; Genesis 9.13.
So baptism is a undoubted seal of our purgation by Christ, and at Gods hand
he made a league with us for our foul sins, never to be cast from his
presence.

But in the Sacrament of the blood and body of Jesus, have we a most certain
and lively pawn, which is our Passover offered for us, who by his obedience
has delivered us from the Tyranny of death, and made us partakers of life
eternal.

It was worthy of consideration, how precislie Peter's falls are registrate in
the book God, For whatsoever things are written afore-time, are written for
our learning, Romans 15. 4
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. Peter
therefore denied his Master, seven times. Four times to Maids, Mat. 26.69.
and three times to men. First, to Maids (I say) when he sat without the
Hall, and the Maid came unto him, saying, that, Thou wast with Jesus of Galile.

Secondly, as Peter was beneath in the Hall (for now he had entered, but
before he was not come in) There came one of the Maids of the high Priests,
Mar. 14.66.
and when she saw Peter warming him, she looked on him, and said, Thou wast
also with Jesus of Nazareth.

Thirdly, then a Maid saw him again, and began to say to them that stood by,
This is one of them.

Fourthlie, when he went out into the Porch (from the common Hall) And another
Maid saw him, and said unto them that were there, Mat. 26.71.
This man was also with Jesus of Nazareth. Thus four times denied he his
Master before these weak Vessels. Man never should be courageous and stout in
his own conceit. The Lord is my strength, my buckler, and the horn of my
salvation. If the Lord leave us to our selves, we are a prey to Satan, and to
every wind and blast of temptation.

Thrice also denied he before men, and first, John. 18.25.
before the Soldiers, standing and warming himself.

John. 18.26.
Secondly, he denied before Malohus coosen, whose ear he smote off.

Thirdly, he denied him anon to them that stood by, who said unto him
again, Mat. 26.70. Mar. 14.70.
Surely thou art one of them, for thou art of Galile, and thy speech is like.

Neither do I so punctually set these dolorours spectacles before thine eyes
(sinful Soul,) to dig up the Sepulchers of these glorious Saints which are in
heaven, who repented and weeped bitterly for their sins, and who were
patterns to others, not to distrust; And thou Peter, being converted, confirm
thy brethren. And David after his fall; did teach the Lords ways unto the
wicked, Psalm. 51.13
that sinners might be converted to him. The believing and repenting sinner,
therefore may be persuaded that there is ever mercy to be found, how great
soever his sins has been; Peter was taught this lesson of his Savior. That
he loved much, to whom much is forgiven, and so being demanded, if he loved
him more than the rest of the Disciples did; he (according to the multitude of
his compassions bestowed upon him) referred the answer to his Master, John.
21.15.
whom he knew, did know all things, and knew how much, and in what degree he
loved him.

Neither is this contradicent to the word, which says, Thou shall deny me
thrice, for Christ said not thrice (only,) but thrice, and he that denies
seven times, denies also thrice.

Peter had said before, shall I forgive my brother seven times, to whom
Christ answered, not seven times, but seaventie times seven times. Christ's
favor to his own, is above the affection of men, or love of women, as David
said of Jonathan; and according to his everlasting mercies, does he so much
more freely and readily forgive, yea, this was also to strengthen Peter, that
when he should fall (which Christ did foresee) he should not be swallowed up
in desperation, but constantly believe with a lively and justifying faith in
the Son of God; as he had professed before his Master, To wh^m shall we go,
John. 6.68 69.
thou have the words of eternal life, and we believe and know, that thou art
the Christ the Son of the living God. Mat. 16.16


Thus have we spoken of these two Disciples Peter and Judas, their falls and
repentance, which are as different, as Heaven is above Hell.

How are now the Priests and Elders of the people employed, they are about the
counsel, for buying of the Potters field, because they would not put his
money in their Treasures. Narrow and strait is their conscience in small
things, but rowme, large, and broad in greater affairs. They are constrained
to perfect the Lords decree, pronounced by the Prophet Zachary. It is
impossible that the enemies of Christ can stop the course and strength of the
Truth: There is neither wisdom, neither understanding, Pro. 21.30.
nor counsel against the Lord.

O prophetical certainty! O great and unspeakable knowledge of the holy
Ghost! He said not ten, or twenty, but preciselie thirty, as if he had told
and debursed to them these pieces of silver. Let nothing diswade us from the
certanty of Gods promises, although there appear unto flesh, and blood, no
reason how they shall be accomplished, yea, and that all things tend to the
flat contrary, never do thou swerue nor shrink, but believe against hope
under hope. Romans 4.18.


Many beautiful shows of outward holiness does these represent; they knew
unlawfully purchased alms was displeasing unto God. They knew, a care should
be had of the poor, and strangers departing this life, that they be buried;
and for the perpetual memory thereof did give the place a name. Here is
their Pharisaicall hypocrisy, they attend outward religion, but lack
internal worship of the mind; which is not looked to. Well said Christ of
the^, Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites: for year like unto
whited Tombs, which appear beautiful outward, Mat. 23.27.28.
but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all filthiness: So are ye
also; for outwardly ye appear, righteous unto men, but within, ye are full
of hypocrisy and iniquity. Yet the faithful should not omit their duties of
humanty, to support the indigencie of their brethren while they live, and
duetiful care of them, when they are dead, neither not to pull the goods from
their heirs unto themselves.

Yet one thing here thou must learn (poor Soul,) of their hypocrisy, to
bestow thy charity and alms upon the poor, of thy own lawful goods: For I
the Lord, Esaias. 61.8.
love Judgment, and hate robbery for burnt offering; and I will direct their
work in truth, and will make an everlasting Covenant with them; for the
sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, Pro. 15.8.
to present him in his members, with such, is to associat him to their villainy,
he that takes away his neighbors living, Esaias. 1. 11.12.
slays him, and be that defraudeth the labourer of his hyre, Eccl. 34.23
is a blood-shedder.

But here behold an everlasting monument raised by them, of their impiety and
malice against Christ, for whiles dissemblars will cover their wickedness,
then most of all, it is made manifest by reason of Aceldama.

But this was long time before figured in Joseph, who at the desire of Judah,
was sold to the Ishmaelites, Genesis 47.5 6.
whereby it came to pass, that the Land of Goshan was given his brethren to
dwell in; So Jesus, sold and delivered to death; John. 14.2.3.
prepared a place for us, where, being delivered from all troubles, John.
17.24.
we might enjoy rest for ever.

Remember (my Soul,) that thou art sold under the tyranny of sin; But by
Jesus Christ, who was sold for thee, thou art restored to liberty, Being
then made free from sin, we are made the servants of righteousness, and as
ye have given your members servants to uncleanness, Romans 6.18.19.22.
and iniquity to commit iniquity, so now give your members servants unto
righteousness and holiness, that being fred from sin, ye have your fruit
in holiness, and the end everlasting Life.

Mat. 13.18.
Wherefore, this Field is the world, the Potter is God, who made man of the slime
of the earth. Genesis 2.7.
The strangers are Christians, who have no abiding City here, Romans 9.21.
but have renou^ced the world. The burial place is our rest in Christ whose
sepulchrs are sanctified by him, Col. 2.11.
1. Cor. 15.42.43.44.
and who shall restore our bodies committed unto him, as unto a faithful
Creator, the price of blood is the merit and virtue of his Passion. 1. Pet.
1.19


The second Step in the third degree of the as^ension of the Soul unto Heaven,
etc.
NOw have we conveyed our Savior from the Garden, to Cajaphas, now we would
accompany him to Pilat, John. 19.
there false accusation against him, Mat. 27.
of the sending of him to Herod, Luc. 23.
and of most wrongous excambing of him with Barabbas with the most mishant
condemnation of that Innocent Lamb of God. Mar. 15.


Pilat at the desire of the Jews is deaf for he hears nothing worthy of
death in him: The Jews were very diligent to take all occasions to put
Justice to execution, if any had been against him, which now is often times
delayed; But the cause that he should be presented before his Tribunal, was,
Mat. 20.19.
that it behooved the Son of man to be delivered to the Gentiles, to mock,
and to scourge, and to crucifice him, that both Jew and Gentile as they had
conspired his death, so should both be partakers of his Life: And the first,
If they abide not still in unbelief, Romans 11.23.
should be graffed in, for God is able to graffe them in again. And for the
second, God has concluded all under sin, Gal. 3.22.
that the promise of faith by Jesus Christ should be given to them that
believe.

Wherefore (my Soul) be not affrayed, by him thou have access to the Throne
of Grace; neither sickness, nor calamity shall bereave us of comfort. He was
presented to the Bar of Gods Justice that we should remember our Absolution
from it, therefore boldly may thou say, Psalm. 42.11.
Why art thou cast down my soul, and why art thou this disquieted within me?
wait on God, for I will yet give him thanks, be is my present hope and my
God. The superstition and hypocrisy of the Jews is very clear, they would
not enter into Pilates house, least they should be debarred from eating of the
Passover, Numb. 9.10.
according to the Law, given against the unclean, they indeed were afraid,
to be polluted in this strangers Judge his consistoriall place, yet were not
ashamed to shed the blood of their innocent countrie-man; they will not be
defiled with the dwelling place of Pilat, but never examine the pollution of
their own sins in their heart. They left the weightier matters of the Law, Mat.
23.23.
as Judgment, mercy, and fidelity, which are rare in such false seditious
people, for they could pretend no excuse, wherefore the Lord did reject and
forsake them, seeing of their own mouth, that they did confess they had no
power of death and life, but their authority was devolved in the Romans
hands. For the Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from
between his feet, Genesis 49.10.
until Shiloh come, and the people shall be gathered together unto him, but
God in his righteous judgment has given the^ the spirit of slumbering; eyes
that they should not see, Romans 11.8.
and ears, that they should not hear to this day.

But was it not lawful to kill a man for blasphemy, Lev. 24. Lev. 20. Numb.
25. Lev. 26.
for adultery, for profanation of the Sabbath day, for murder, for Idolatry,
Deuteronomy. 21.
and for wilful disobedience to Parents, yea, Deuteronomy. 17.
and for neglect, and not due reverence to the high Priest, yea, John. 18.31
and did they not stone Steven to death? But this was, that the word of Jesus
should be fulfilled, signifying, by what death be should die. Besides this,
they accused Christ of sedition, and vproare; they might stone, burn, kill,
and strangle, but to crucify they had no power, for the very Nations did
worship idolatrouslie stones and timber; but Christ's forwarning culd not be but
accomplished, Mat. 20.19.
they shall deliver him to the Gentiles, to mock and to scourge, and to
crucify him: Thus Christ's enemies are means, and instruments, to manifest
Gods Truth, and to perfect man's Salvation. The covetousnes of Judas, procured
remission to all believers; so the rage of the Pharisees and deceit of Satan,
did serve to the glory of God, For all things work for the best, Romans 8.27
to them that fear him.

Now Pilat inquireth what they had to object against him; they attribute so
much to their justice and authority, that there needed no more inquisition,
but to rest on their Conscience, yet by reason of his place, he would have a
Process, which is, that Christ subverted the people, denied tribute to be
given to Caesar, and to make himself a King, which Pilat (in their mind)
could not abide.

O! but what sin is it, (my Soul) to make Pilat and the communalitie g^iltie
of Christ's death? a less sin it had been, if they had killed him
privatelie: but to cause a Judge against conscience by the testomonie of false
witness, to decree, or intise ignorant men, by bud, and promises to offend, is
the greater sin. For Christ never meaned of an earthly dignity here, For
when Jesus perceived that they would come, and make him a King, he departed
again unto a mountain John. 6.15.
himself alone; Neither did he ever deny tribute to be given to Caesar, but
directed to give to Caesar, Mat. 22.21.
things which are Casars, and give unto God, these things which are Gods.

Remember here (poor Soul) that all these, (more than false calumnies,) were
spewed out against him, that not only he might satisfy the Justice of God,
but also signify, that his Church should ever be exposed to hatred, and
envye. Achab called Elias, 1. King. 18.17.
the troubler of Israel. If they were of the world, the world would love them,
John. 8.
and yet they are in the world; wherefore he prays to his Father, not to
take them out of the worl^ but to keep them from evil: John. 17.
for he has made us unto his Father, Kings, and Priests, whom be has
gathered out of every Tongue, Tribe, and Nation. Rev. 5.10.


Here therefore (poor Soul) great is thy comfort; not only against false
accusations of the wicked, but also against Satan's impudent reproaches,
whereby he cease not night and day to accuse the Sai^ctes before their God,
whom they do overcome by the blood of the Lamb, Rev. 12.10.11.
and by the word of their testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the
death. So by his bonds, we are delivered from the bondage of sin, death, and
hell, by his mockings, we are made honorable in the sight of God, and by his
accusation, we are fred from all guiltiness. Thus he has made our sins to
be his; that he might make his righteousness, ours.

An evil turn can not be done, but by evil means; The Jews have here
their part, and so had Herod, but the sin of Pilat is laid upon the
Jews, and he may forethinke, that ever he was Governor of Judea: In
conscience he was persuaded of Christ's innocence, and their calumny, but he
was entangled in his Judgment so deep, that he could not free himself. Such
a thing is it to satisfy the appetit of wicked men In Pilats deeds and words,
many excellent virtues which are rare to be found in Judges do appear, as the
great moderation of his mind, being supreme Magistrate, to whom belonged
honor. The Jews would not superstitiouslie come in to him; he makes the
travel, and went out to them. A Magistrate should be such a one to others,
Pro. 19.1^
as he would wish others to be to him, if he were a private man. The Kings
wrath is like the roaring of a Lion, but his favor is like the dew upon the
grass: To this, his civil Justice in searching the truth is eminent; rash
judgments are dangerous, and therefore, will not condemn Christ, until he
hear him. Genesis 39.16.20.
Pothiphar did otherwise to Joseph. And therefore, now he entered unto Christ,
with whom softly, moderately, and friendly he reasons, not with disdainful
speechs, as did the Jews, for it was not grievous unto him to bow down his
ear unto the poor. Eccl. 4.8.
Being therefore demanded, if he was a King, our Savior denies not, but a
spiritual King. It was not now time, to teach and play the Doctor to Pilat,
for that part was ended. Now he must play the Priest, and suffer patiently
his death, which he would not stay.

Thou should use (poor Soul) the opportunity of the word, very earnestly
while the rain thereof from Heaven does water the dry and thirsty souls of
men, and whilst it is called to day, let us not barden our hearts.

The Lord, therefore, will know the inventer of this accusation, and in all
the History will have every man's part known in this action. I am no Jew said
he; cleansing himself: Thine own Nation does accuse thee, I count not for
the Messiah, religion troubles me not so much. The Clergy and Churchmen must
take heed thereto. A lively image of wordlings, who in the matters of the
earth, are more tha^ curious. But spiritual things are spirituallie decerned:
For he inquireth not what a King he was, and where his Kingdom was, that he
might have a part and sh^re thereof; but breaks off in an accusation of Jesus,
if he was a King, The natural man knows not the things of the spirit of
God, 1. Cor. 1.14.
for they are f^clishn^sse to him: And therefore Christ takes the mouth of
Pilat to be witness that he was a King: Who albeit he was equal with the
Father, Phil. 2.6.
and thought it no robbery, made himself of no reputation, by taking on him
the form of a servant to his Father, to be witness to the Truth. He would have
hereby won Pilat if it had been possible, but he was interrupted, for the
word is ever a sweet odor to God, 2. Cor. 2.15.
either to salvation, or damnation, in mercy, or Justice. With great
constancy and gravity without respect of persons does Christ answer: and so
should his servants defend Gods honor, and not to turn their fail, to every
Wind, and therefore, he did avouch his Kingdom as anonynted of the Father,
Psalm. 2.6.
and sat upon M^unt Syon his holy Mountain, Zac. 9.9.
who is just, and saved himself, and his people from their sins. Mat. 2.21.
Blessed is he, that comes in the Name of the Lord, Hosanna, Mat. 21.9.
thou which art in the highest heavens, who has given us to inherit the
Kingdom prepared for us, Mat. 25.34.
from the f^undation of the world.

And therefore (weak Soul) Why art thou aff^aied? Is it of the Devil? he can
not hurt one hair of t^i^e head, Mat. 8.31.32.
without thy Kings will. Art thou troubled with sickenesses? At his command
they depart: Mar. 1.31.
Are enemies risen against thee? He can crushe with a Scepter of Iron, Psalm.
2.9.
and break them in pieces, like a Potters vessel. Art thou astonished at
Death? 1. Cor. 15.55.
Death is swallowed up in victory, fear not therefore (feeble Soul,) For it
pleases the Father to give thee his Kingdom, Luc. 12.32.
who can therefore separate thee from the love of Christ? be persuaded, that
neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor hight, nor deep, nor any other
creature shall be able to separate thee from the love of God, Romans 8.35 38.39.
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, for he has al power in heaven, Mat. 11.^7
and in earth; His Kingdom is not subject to change and vanity, but eternal,
John. 3.35.
and reaches above the heavens, and the earth, and the depths thereof. Ier. 6.7.
Therefore (poor Soul) place thy treas^^e in heaven, but (alace) as the
Fountain casts out her waters, so do we cast out our malice. Let the world
be crucified to us, and us to the world: Gal. 6.14.
For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him, 2. Tim. 2.11.22.
if we suffer with him, we shall reign with him; if we be therefore
troubled with the Children of this world, remember (my Soul) his Kingdom is
not of this world, John. 16.33
in the world thou shall suffer affliction, but be of good comfort, be has
overcome the world.

This his Kingdom is from Sea to Sea, Psalm. 72.8.
and to the last parts of the earth, and it is governed by the preaching of the
Gospel, Heb. 2.8.
who in place of taking tribute from his subjects, Luc. 24.47.
has carried upon him our sorrows, plagued of God, Esaias. 53.4.
and smitten of God and humbled, who has given us eternal goods, as
Righteousness, Romans 14.17.
Peace, and joye in the holy Ghost. And therefore (my Soul) be wise, serve
the Lord in fear, and rejoice in trembling, Psalm. 2.10.11.12.
kiss the Son, least he be angry, and thou perish in the way, when his
wrath shall suddenly burn, blessed are all they that trust in him.

I came in the world to witness the Truth, John. 14.6.
who am the Way, Verity, and Life, to give knowledge of salvation unto my
people by remission of their sins; Luc. 1.77.
that all that believe in me, ^ohn. 3.15.
should not perish, but have everlasting life.

He is therefore, not only the Teacher of that heavenly wisdom, John. 3.32.
but is also made our wisdom from God. 1. Cor. 1. 30
Receive therefore (comfortles Soul) receive his testimony, He that
receives his testimony, John. 3.33.
has sealed that God is true, for he whom God has sent, speaks the words
of God, for God gives him not the spirit by measure, John. 8.47.
he that is of the Truth, does hear his voice; and be that is not of God,
John. 10.27
hears not Gods word, John. 12 48.
for the word that he has spoken, shall judge him in the last day. Verily he
that hears his word, John. 5.24.
and believes in him that sent him, has everlasting life, and shall not come
unto con^emnation, but has passed from death, unto Life.

So Pilat coming from the Common Hall testified Christ's innocence, but herein
he offended, that he did not deliver him, who suffered wrong from the band of
the oppressor, Eccl. 4.9.
but was faint hearted, when he judged. Iam. 1.26.
All this while in silence and patience our Savior possessed his soul, vseing
great moderation in speeches. 1. Pet. 3.10
If thou lay thy injury (poor Soul) at Christ's feet, he will avenge it, if
thy wrong, he will repare it, 1. Cor. 6.7.
if thy sorrow, he will care it. And therefore, learn to suffer wrong, and
sustain harm.

Thy Christ (sad Soul) is thy patron, and Advocate in the presence of God, who
by his silence has opened thy mouth, and given thee liberty to speak for,
because thou art his son, has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into thy
heart, Gal. 4.9.
which cries, Abba Father. Let not therefore thy unworthiness dash thee, so
that thou should be frighted: Therefore come boldly unto the Throne of grace,
Heb. 4.16.
that thou may receive mercy and grace in the time of need.

The third Step of the third degree, of the ascension of the Soul to Heaven,
etc.
NOw must Christ pas to Herod, Tetrach of Galile in such perilous case wherein
Pilate could not absolve the innocent, and have the favor of the Jews,
unless he had perverted Justice, but casts this fire in Herod his enemies
skirt, for that he was of his jurisdictio^, and that he had punished Judas and
Theudas, Galileans, for insurrection before. But most of all, would God draw
out of Herod, a testimony of Christ Jesus innocence. Such subtersuges and
evasions did Pilat brotch, and because they were at fead: he presented him,
and gifted the Person of Jesus Christ: (the best gift that ever was given, if
he had rightly understood,) for by this means, Luc. 23.12
Herod and Pilat were reconcealed the same day. But the providence of God does
shine most here, For as Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance, Mat. 9.13.
but sinners to repentance, so to diverse sorts and degrees of people, does
he offer himself, to Herod, and his Courteours; which will not admit his
Grace, but despise the day of their peace. He looks for some miracle of his
curiosity to be don by Christ as a Iugler, so does the children of this world
hunt after their pleasure in the Gospel, which, when it will not afscord, they
loath the same.

Herod therefore, did ask Christ of many things, as fools which do not
know, what they would have. His mind was not to be instructed, but to have
occasion of calumny. H^e that will be informed of Christ, must as a Disciple
come with humility, and earnest desire to learn, but the Jews inquired a
sign, 1. Cor. 1. 22 23.
as the Grecians sought after wisdom: But Christ crucified, unto the Jews is
a stumbling block, and unto the Grecians foolishness. This Herod was Archilans
brother, Mat. 2.
the son of that Herod, who killed the Infantes, Luc. 9.
and beheaded John. In great policy therefore demanded he questions of Christ,
to catch occasion against our Savior: For after his Fathers example, he would
have the whole seed of David rooted out, that he might reign alone. But Christ
will not cast pearls before Swine, neither give that that is holy unto Dogs.
Mat. 7.6.
And therefore, he is mocked of the Courteours; for as the Judge of the people
is himself, so are his Officers, and what manner of man the Ruler of the City
is, Eccl. 10.^.
such are they that dwell therein. Thus was he, in whom the Godhead dwells
bodily, and in whom are all the treasures of wisdom, Col. 2.
knowledge, and understanding, disdainfully entertained of these Courteours,
and usually it is so; that in highest places where wealth and pleasure abounds,
small regard is had of Christ and his word. The servants of Saul would not
kill Abimelech at his command. 1. Sam. 22.17. 1. King. 18 3.
Abdiab hid an hund^eth Prophets, whom King Achab bad appointed to death. These
do account Christ a fool, in clothing him in white raiment: For so does the
world esteem the preaching of the Gospel, 1. Cor. 1.23
to be foolishness. But Herod ignorantly, by this Badge declared the
innocence of Christ, and that shortly, Christ should enter into his
Kingdom, yea, they honor him, while as they contemn him in clothing him
with this Vesture as an Ephod, he being both Priest, and Lamb, the sacrifice,
and sacrificer: Herod therefore, and Pilat, who were before divided, entered in
friendship, and conspired against Christ, to take him out of the Land of the
living; but all in vain: Psalm. 2.1.
The Kings of the Earth and people may rage against God, and his Anointed; but
the Lord shall have them in derision: If Infidels could so shortly be
reconcealed, laying apart all dissension, Ephesians. 4.32.
should we not be courteous one to another, and tender hearted, forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ's sake forgave us. And so much the more, Ephesians.
2. 14.
because Christ is our Peacemaker, and our peace also, who has broken down
the partition wall, and made of both Jew, and Gentile one.

Christ must be then brought home again to Pilat, who sought by all means to
put Christ to liberty, in commending of his innocence, in making choice of
him with Barabbas, and in gratifying the Jews by scourging of him, and
exponing of him to the cruelty of Soldiers, far against al Justice seeing
there was nothing to lay to his charge; For such a Savior it behooves us to
have, H^b. 7.26.
who should be free from all sins; 1. Pet. 2.22
and that his very enemies should bear record of his integrity, for Herod
was well acquainted with the Jewish religion, as Pilat was with the affairs of
the Romans, but neither the one nor the other could impute any thing to that
Innocent, who satisfied for us, that were guilty.

And therefore, Pilat bethought himself, that the Jews should not be so
stark mad and obstinate, as to prefer a seditious murderer to Christ:
gives them option, which of them to choose: John. 5.25.
but the blinded Jew would kill him, that quickened the dead, Lev. 24.21
and deliver him that killed the living. And this was a custom brought in
besides the word of God, Deuteronomy. 19.11.12.
at the solemn day of the Passover, Exodus 12.3.
who were not contented of the Pascall Lamb only, to signify the
deliverance from Egypt, but would add this ceremony against reason and
Justice: For Magistrates are the Ministers of God, Romans 136.
to take vengeance on them that do evil, Genesis 9.6.
and a blood-shedder should be punished by the Law, but we should not follow
customs, but Gods truth, and not suffer an evil use to become a law.

Pilate knew that they had delivered Christ unto him for envy, Mat. 27.18
for Jesus did tax their corrupt doctrine, 1. Tim. 3.6.
and vicious manners: This Envy is the daughter of Pride, Genesis 4.5.
for the proud must be invyous. This did cast down the Devil, Adam and Eve,
this made Cain kill his brother. And what evil has it not done? Wis^. 2.24.
For by the envy of the Devil, Death came into the world: John. 6.15.
Very unconstant is the voice of the common multitude: A little while before,
they would have given him Princely honors, but now they desire him to be
crucified, and that at the instigation of the Elders: Ier. 23.1.2.3.
Evil Magistrates either in Church or Commonwealth, are noisome Pestilences.
The people did in great pomp, Mar. 1.33.
and frequent solemnity ofttimes resort to Jesus; but now they turn to be
his adversaries, and they that should have carried the keys of the Kingdom,
Mat. 23.13.
they will not enter, nor suffer others to enter; but blows the bellows of
malice against Christ, not in heart only, Esaias. 48.4
by cogitation or privy grudge, as the Jews did before against Christ; but by
outward exclamation, not one of the multitude, but all; Esaias. 1.6.
impiety had so crept in, as a canker and fire to consume the communalitie.
Beleeuest thou that when the Son of man shall come, that be shall find faith
and truth in the earth? They therefore desire, this bloody Fellow to be put
to liberty, Deuteronomy. 11.12.13.
and that against the Law; and the Innocent to be condemned. Whosoever in place
of Justice, does not stay sin when he may, by his oversight gives way to
it: Punish thou them therefore, that thou be not punished for them.

How odious is this comparison: Mat. 12.2.
Christ, the Author and Prince of Peace and Salvation; Barabbas, a mutinous
bloody Rogue: Christ, the Physician of al our sores, the restorer of the dead
unto life; Barabbas, a inflicter of wounds and man slayer: Christ a most
perfect and absolute Patron, 1. Pet. 2.21.
and example of all virtue: Barabbas filthily defiled within and with our, with
all kind of vices. Infinite is the difference betwixt them; and yet Barabas by
vote and voice of the people, is delivered: The punishment of One, Romans 5. 15.
does satisfy for the wickedness of many: So, the liberty to sin, breeds
occasion to very many to do the like, better burn, and cut one member,
rather than the whole body perish.

Thus is the prophecy fulfilled, Esaias. 53.12
He has poured out his Soul unto death, he was counted with the
transg^essors: and be bare the sins of many, and prayed for the trespassers.

Consider here (my Soul) how vile and filthy a thing Sin is, which did
drive Christ to such deep ignominy, that he is judged more contemptiblie,
than a common Briggand and Villane. But this is thy sure comfort against the
wrath of God, that hereby, he has delivered thee from everlasting shame, and
given thee a beautiful and happy Inheritance in the heavens: For it does not
appear now what we are, but when this corruption shall put on incorruption,
1. Cor. 15.53.
and be translated in the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, Romans 8. 21.
then shall we be like unto him, gathered from the shame of eternal death,
to the City of the living God, the celestial Jerusalem, into the company of
innumerable Angels, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just
and perfect men, Heb. 12.22.23.
and to Jesus, the Mediator of the New Testament, and to the Blood of
sprinkling.

And not only Herod's resembling the Jew, and Pilate representing the Gentile,
two supreme Magistrates, but al so Pilates wife having her dream governed by
Gods providence, gives testimony of Christ's innocence, to make both Judge
and Jews the more inexcuseable.

A Woman truly for modesty to be commended, that did not take upon her,
Esaias. 45.24.
any civil government, but made intimation by message to her husband, not to
meddle with Jesus Christ; And for Counsel, admirable, far contrary to
Iezabel, 1. King. ^1.7.8.
who gave advyse to idolatrous Achab, how to possess himself in Naboths
Vineyard, for the which impiety, she was justly punished, and not she
only, but the whole house and posterity of Achab destroyed.

Let women here learn what it is to give their husbands bad and sinistrous
informations, lest the iniquity redownd to both their posterities. Indeed
women's counsel is not to be rejected, but wisely to be balanced, Such was
Abigall, her counsel to David, 1. Sam. 25.23.24.
which brought great love before God, and credit before men. Men should not
always ly under the direction of their wives, but they should be a sounding
bell in their ears, not to sin against Christ and his members. Pilat should
have pitied Christ, if he had loved his wife, who had suffered much for him.
Now it is to be fulfilled, which was prophesied, He looked for judgment, but
behold oppression, Esaias. 5.7.
for righteousness, behold a crying. And again, I have forsaken my house, I
have left mine heritage, I have given the dearly beloved of my Soul unto the
hands of enemies, mine heritage is unto me as a Lion in the Forest, it cries
out against me, therefore have I bated it.

But behold Pilate here greatly contraveened the law of Justice, he knew of
malicious envy Christ to be accused; yet to mitigate the Jews mind, so
highly incensed against our Savior, and to free him from the punishment of
death commanded him to be whipped. If they had known the God of Glory, 1. Cor.
2.8.
they had not dealt so contumeliouslie with him. Great things, such as are
heavenly and spiritual, are contemned by the world: But vanity, and such as
are foolish deceitfulness, and pleasures here below, are in great
admiration: but far other ways was Moses choice, when he came to age, refused
to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, and choose rather to suffer
adversity with the people of God, Heb. 11.24 25.26.
than to enjoye the pleasures of sin for a season, esteeming the rebuke of
Christ great riches, more than the treasures of Egypt; for he had respect unto
the recompense of the reward.

And here consider (my Soul,) that Christ was scourged, not of one, but of
many; this shame would thy Cautioner undergo, Mat. 5.1^.
not only to leave thee here an exsample of his patience, Act. 5.41. and.
11.1^. and. 11.15.
but also to sanctify the diseases, and sicknesses, which he uses as
scourges to daunt, and chastise thy wantonness.

Now a crown of Thorns is platted on his head, for the Lord uses their
hands, Psalm. 1. 16.
for his Coronation. Here meditate (my Soul) the reparation of Adams curse,
Genesis 3. 18.
to whom thorns and briers, for his rebellion was a punishment, 1. Cor.
1^.56.57.
and the point and sharpness of our sins are blunted by his satisfaction for
them, which are briers to pierce us through. Come forth ye Daughters of Syon,
and behold thy King Solomon, (a type of Christ) with the crown wherewith his
mother the (Jewish Church) crowned him in the day of his marriage, Cant. 3. 11.
and in the day of the gladness of his heart, for earnestly desired be to
eat that Pascall Lamb with them; his greatest triumph is in his sufferings.

He is clothed with a Purple garment, the sign of Labor, wrestling, and
victory, for he was all imbrodered with his own blood. This combat with
Death, he took in hand for us, for it was we that clad him there with all: And
all our life here, is nothing else, but a continual war-fare, but in the end,
we shall be more, than Conquerours by him who loves us, Romans 8.3^
and washed us in that Lambs blood. He is buffetted, that we should not be
plagued everlastingly with Satan. There is a R^ed put in his right hand, in
place of a kingly Scepter, whereby they would insinuate that his Kingdom was
waste and void, and brittle, subject to every wind and blast of stormy
tempest, as the R^ede is. And that his Kingdom was not guarded with any
humane help, far are they deceived; His Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom,
for he has received the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the ends of the
earth for his possession: Psalm. 1.8.9
whom he shall crush with a Scepter of iron, and break them in pieces, like a
Poters vessel.

In all these things, Christ is innocent, and so declared four times by
Pilate; otherwise he could never have justified us, nor yet could our Faith
rest in him. But it is wonderful, that the Lord wrought so with this reprobate
Pilate before he put the decr^e of reprobation in execution, inviting him to
Repentance, and suffering, with long suffering, the Vessel of wrath prepared to
destruction: but he according to his heart, Romans 2.4.
that could not repent, heaps up vengeance against the day of the revelation
of the just wrath of God.

And that nothing should be left, of unspeakable disdain, and rigorous
dealing with Christ, they spitted in his Face; on which, the very Angels
delited to behold: according to the prophecy, which went before of him, Esaias.
5.6
I hid not my face from shame and spitting: and making a knee, they saluted him
as King: they said truly, but it was not an earthly, but an heavenly
Kingdom.

Now (dear Soul) consider the estate of Christ's Kingdom in this world. It
is not accompanied with Pleasures, or Power, or Strengt^ of man, but
replenished with Thorns, labors, and dangers. For whosoever will follow me,
let him forsake himself, Mat. 16.24.
and take up his cross, and follow me,

Confirm therefore thine heart, that thou may continue in thy faith, for
thou must go through many afflictions, ere thou enter into the Kingdom of God.
Act. 14.22
Wherefore these illusions, and mockings of Christ, do strengthen us against
the wounds of Conscience, and all the bitter sorrows of this life: for his
stripes are the plasters, Esaias. 53.5
whereby our souls are cured, and healed. Adam fell from his innocence, for
which, Christ was ^^ladde with Purple, and was crowned with Thorns, that he
might plat on the heads of the faithful, an eternal Crown of Glory.

Thus apparelled, (as a most miserable spectacle) is he brought forth to the
Jews, if possible he might move them to commiseration, saying, Behold the
man: Would ever such a despised creature usurp a Kingdom? What think ye of
him, (now so miserably casten down) as ye see? He is a man like unto your
self, and not a beast: He is your flesh, and your Brother, John. 1.11.
why are ye so cruelly bent against him? Can not your hearts be inclined to
pity? Unto very brutish creatures, one would show more rueth; and none would
do so much outrage: For a good man will have pity on his own beast, but
the mercies of the wicked are cruel. Well did the Prophet foresee this, Who is
this that comes from Edom, with red garments from Bozrah? he is glorious in
his apparel, and walks in his great strength, I speak in righteousness, and
mighty to save. Wherefore is thine apparel red? and thy garments like him
that treads the wine press? I have trodden the wine press alone, and of all
the people, Esaias. 63.1.2.3.
there was none with me, my blood is sprinkled upon my garments, and has
stained all my raiment. Let us therefore be ashamed of sin, when we look upon
this face of Christ; but especially, detest Pride, since the Son of God did
so humble himself beneath all men, Phil. 2.5.6.7.8.
that he might mount us into the heavens.

But such is, (that more than barbarous cruelty) of the Jews, yet not only
are they not touched with any sense of mercy, but becomme to be more fierce
and raging against Christ: and therefore put they in a new false delation, That
be made himself the Son of God, he professed indeed, Mat. 3.17.
and that truly, that he was the Son of God; for the voice from heaven did
testify it, but Verity beside such stiffenecked people had no place, and
therefore condemned him to die: But O Jew! if it be the law against
blasphemies, that thou accusest the Savior of the world of! Deuteronomy. 13.13.14.
why should he not be rather stoned to death? why do thou make the Law of
God a courting to thy knauerie? should it be thy pleasure and not Gods will to
be obeyed?

Wherefore, Pilat hearing this recent accusation against the Son of God, asks
him, not of his Country, for he knew him to be a Galilean, but of his
pedegrie, parentage, and descent, fearing he had taken his beginning from some
of the gods of the Gentiles, as Saturn, Jupiter, or Mars: and therefore, should
have incurred their wrath and hatred, be cause he had made Christ to be
whipped. For such were the fabulous foolish ignorances of the Gentiles, that
they made unto themselves demigods or semi-goddes, or children of the gods,
as Bacchus to come from Jupiter, and Herculas to have had his beginning from
them: This was it, that made them of Listra, Act. 14.11.12.
when Paul and Barnabas curing an impotent in his feet, which was a creple
from his mothers womb, to say, Gods are come down in the likeness of men,
and they called Barnabas Jupiter, and Paul, Act. 14.12
Mercurius. And therefore he imagined gods to be avengers of these, who
disdained their progeny, as Pentheus was ^e^t because he despised Bacchus.

And now (my Soul) consider of these Jews, How do ye say, we are wise,
Ier. 8.8.
and the Law of the Lord is with us? should ye not have searched, Luc. 24.43
who, and from whom Christ was, when he called himself the Son of God, Tit.
1.2.
if be had lied (which he could not) why do ye not punish him? and if he
spoke the truth, why do ye not worship him? why do ye not search your
Scriptures, Tit. 1.2.
which testify of him? why do ye not produce his works to Pilate? that it
may appear, if he be the Son of God? Why speakee ye not of him, John. 11.
and 12.
that was four days dead, and restored to life? where is that widows only
son? the Prince of the Synagogues daughter. Mat. 9.25.
why do ye not declare the way, and means these miracles were perfected: If
thou beleeu^st not him, believe his works, that he does, John. 1.14.
told not he, that the word should be made flesh, was it not forespoken?
Behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and they shall call his Name
Immanuel. Esaias. 7.14.
Can this Name agree to any, but to him, that is both God and Man? And yet
forsooth came shouting to an Heathen man, Act. 14.16
that knew no Scripture, and saw Jesus only a man (said they) who has made
himself the Son of God. Indeed he respected his false gods more, tha^ the true
and only God: 1. Cor. 8.6.
he was more affrayed of his acounts in the administration of the Commonweal,
and Presidencie of Judea, to be rendered to the Roman Emperor, than of that
great charge shall be preciselie exacted of him in that day, Esaias. 2.19. and
26.11.
when we shall all be presented before the tribunal seat of God to receive
what we have done in this flesh good or badde. The very Romans Lysias Faelix
and Festus, had a conscience of the innocence of Paul, who had only the
light of Nature; but they had light by the word, yet the malice of their hearts
put out that illumination and corruption blotted it. Whence it comes of Gods
just judgment, that all conscience is scraped out, and they became like
beasts, and fell into a Reprobate sense.

What ever was the Jews part, or Herod's, or Pilates, the Lord had his decree
therein, and will have his only begotten Son to die for the sins of the
world: But look to the Lords dispensation, he will have the Judge protesting
his innocence, he will have the hearts of the accusers hardened to sue after
Christ's blood, for if their conscience had bin wakened, it had not been so.

Consider here (my Soul) how willingly Christ came unto his passion, not that
he did smite and crucify himself, but that he did not against and the
wickedness of the Jews, nor approving their impiety, but wisely disponing the
benefit that should redowned thereby. One and the same, was the passion of
Christ, but the actions and intentions in God and the Jews, far different
and diverse; but even amongst the Jews and Governors was there lesser and
greater sins in this action. He that delivered thee unto me, John. 19.11
has the greater sin, yet thou Pilate art sinful in this business also,
all sins are not alike, as all the glory is not alike, 1. Cor. 15.41.
for one star differs from another in glory. In my Fathers house (said he)
there are many dwelling places. John. 14.2.


Now then Pilate believed he had done amiss, as he did in deed, when he had
scourged the Son of God, he knew nothing, but what nature furnished him,
yet his conscience within him did tell him powerfullie, that be ought to fear
and honor God: This natural spunck of light is left to bridle man from sin,
but it will not hold us, Romans 2.14
being so weak in the fear of God; yet if it had been taken away, we
should be more miserable, than the brutish beasts. Psalm. 49.20.
Trust never to nature, but strive to acquire grace, by the holy Spirit, Luc.
11.13.
who overcomes the ca^ker of the heart. This Pilate, has glances and
glimmerings of Christian virtues, but they evanished. When the Lord gives
light, John. 1.4.
and boweth the heart, establishing grace in it, and grace abiding with thee,
thou art not far from the Kingdom of heaven, but is happy and blessed in
deed.

Now Pilate, in anger begins directly against Christ, whom oftimes before
he had pronounced innocent, (because he had not answered him) with insolent
bragging, glorying of the power that he had above him: and falling out in
blasphemy against God, his heart being never truly renewed, Act. 8.23.
nor having any fear and reverence to Jesus, but being full of the gall of
bitterness, claimed unto himself an absolute power, which God has not given
neither to man nor Angel, Romans 13.1.
for it is proper to himself, but a power restrained and limited by Gods Law.
Natural men in high places, having power from God without sanctification, Tit.
3.3.
are but mad men, as here he protests, that Jesus was innocent, and now, that
he had power to do with him what he pleased, which is in effect to be a
murderer, for what else is he, who will take the life from an Innocent; pride
in his heart, made his mouth so foolish. 1. Pet. 5.5.
The proud dishonor the Majesty of God, therefore, caused he his lips to
speak to his shame, to accuse himself; but woe unto them, Esaias. 5.21.
that call evil good, and good evil.

The Magistrate is the ordinance of God indeed, Romans 1.3.4
to punish the guilty, 1. Pet. 2.13.14.
and maintain the righteous, as Christ says, Thou should have no power,
Psalm. 82.6.
unless it were given thee from above. But because, Pro. 8.15.
Kings do reign by God, they should therefore use their power accord ng to
his will.

And happy are Judges, if they follow the direction of I^hosaphat, King of
Judah, 2. Chro. 19 6.
who said to the Judges, whom he had set over his Cities, Take heed what ye
do, for ye execute not the judgments of man, but of God, and he will be in
the cause of judgment. Wherefore now, let the fear of the Lord be upon you,
take heed and do it, for there is none iniquity with the Lord our God,
neither respect of persons, nor receiving of rewards: And although Tyrants, and
wicked men, as Pilate was, have power from above, yet the wise God can use it
to the glory of his Name, as he did by the hand of Nabuchodonazar King of
Babel, Ier. 27.6.7
his servant. And here Pilate deceives himself, believing he had his power
of Caesar only. Christ did hold his peace before; but now will speak in defense
of his Fathers honor, and make him understand, albeit he was in his hands, yet
he was in Gods hands also, without whose special dispensation, nothing can be
done, 1. Sam. 14.45.
as is evident in Saul and Jonathan: for it was not in Saul's hands to kill him
howsoever he had given out sentence against him: He ordained that Agag should
live, 1. Sam. 15.33.
but Samuel killed him. For Gods eternal decree and power over-ruleth all,
which, while men will not acknowledge, Dan. 4.29
they become like beasts. God will never denude himself of his own power, Esaias
10.15.
for what was Ashur, but an Axe or a Saw in the hand of the Sawer, or a rod and
staff, which should not exalt it self, as if were no wood? But O Ashur! Esaias.
10.5.
the rod of my wrath, I will send him to a dissembling Nation, I will give him
a charge against the people of my wrath. Neither is it amiss, that wicked men
should have power to hurt, to try the patience of the godly, and punish the
iniquity of the wicked.

But here is thy comfort, (my Soul,) that Tyrants do not according to their
pleasure and perverse will rage against the Saints, but when and how far it
pleases God by special permission, and yielding; grant to them, for the Lord
has put a bounds unto them which they can not exceed, for while they abuse
their power to tyranny, Exodus 14.28.
the higher they ascend, the nearer destruction they are: For they are rods,
Act. 12.23
which when the wrath of God does relent, and our punishments are ended,
shall be burnt with everlasting fire, as in Pharaoh, and Herod is evident. Christ
submits him to the power which he acknowlegded Pilate to have of God, and
so should subjectes, not so much look to men, as to God, who has armed them
with that power which is the ground of our obedience to Magistrates, when we
see Gods providence to overruled all things; for they are but Vicegerents, and
Leiu-tenants of God, and to be obeyed, by hearty subjection of their people,
For he that resists the Power, resists the ordinance of God, 1. Pet, 2.13
and shall receive to themselves judgment, And now, Pilate is not offended at
his answer, nor provoked to revenge upon Christ, but takes a course how he
might put him to liberty. And yet there is some spuncke of Justice lying under
the corrupt ashes of fear and dread our in Pilates heart, wherefore the Jews
gives an peremptory instance, If thou deliver him, thou art not Caesar's
friend. Before, they laid the crime of treason to Jesus charge, Now, they
devolue that accusation against Pilate, who studied to keep a good conscience,
toward the Innocent (Jesus.) But the tentation grows the more, for it is
impossible to keep a good conscience without temptation, either inwardly, or
outwardly. For Pilate must either lose his good conscience, or his life, for
he is challenged of treason; but (alace) he savv no better life, than this
present life, for Caesar was his god. That natural conscience of his was not
underpropped, and supported by Faith, with better and higher things, than
these of this world. Rev. 3.11.
He shall be crowned, that perseuereth to the end, for whosoever will save
his life, shall lose it, and whosoever shall lose his life for my sake, shall
find it; Mat. 16.26.27.
For what shall it profit a man, though he should win the whole World, if
he lose his own soul. Happy is the man that has his conscience
strengthened with faith in Jesus Christ, and has a sight of heaven, and of
God: That man only shall stand in temptation against the Devil, and the
world.

This assault was so vehement, that he begins by little and little to lose
his conscience, for he is astonished, and brings forth Jesus, crowned to the
people, and sits down in his Tribunal, where he begins to shrink, and
decline from justifying Christ's innocence, where he had a privy battle
betwixt the spuncke of his conscience, and the malice of his heart. He had a
doubt in his heart, and did not first pronounce the sentence, but said. Behold
your King. This strife of conscience, albeit it be once dumb, yet will it
come again, and will fasten it self in thy soul, that it can not be shaken
off. Pilate by this, concludes all that ever he can or would do for Christ,
when he has sought all the shifts he could; he would say (alas) this is a
silly King, who would think that ever he would seek a Kingdom, much less this
of Caesar's? But all will not avail, Christ must go to the tree, to please his
Father, and end willingly the great work of our Salvation. Lev. 19.15
But the Judges should not do unjustly in judgment, thou shall not favor the
person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty, but thou shall judge
thy neighbor justly. But woe be to him which justifies the wicked for a
reward, Esaias. 5.23.
and takes away the righteousness of the righteous from him.

It was very true, as Pilate said, that he was their King, and promised
Messiah, of whom all the Prophets did bear witness, so does the Lord direct
the speeches of his enemies to the glory of his Name: for as in an army,
diverse are the intentions and designs of the Soldiers; some for spoil and
riches, some for glory and promotion, some for hatred and revenge: yet all do
fight for their Prince, and for victory: so did both good and evil wills of
men serve Gods purpose, whose decree can by no means be illuded.

And seeing him at the decay and swerving from conscience they multiplied the
tentation, and spoke no more modestly, but with forcible exclamations cried,
Away with him, away with him, crucify him, crucify him. It is diligently to
be observed (poor Soul) to keep a strong watch over thy conscience, for if
Satan once get thy conscience in a weak case, he benummeth, and stupifieth
thee, besiedging thee with double and triple temptations, making thee like an
Horse, and Mule, Psalm. 32.9.
that has no understanding, or like a deaf Adder, that will not bear the
voice of the inchanter: much like these idolaters, who burnt their children,
and when they wept, they caused Timbrelles to sound, that they might not hear
their lamentable out cries.

Great was this blindness and malice of the Jews, yea, vnremeidable, for the
worse and worse is their minds kindled in spyte against Christ, by how much
more testimonies of his innocence are exhibited, even as clay is hardened at
the heat of the Sun.

And truly, if thou will not slatter thy self (poor Soul) thou vvilt
confess thine own contumacie to be as great: because the brightness of the
Evangel does shine to thee. Luc. 1.79.
(As a owl at the light of the Sun) so art thou blinded in perfecting the
works of darkness. And what else is the greatest part of us all, but
hypocrites, having Jesus in our mouth, but serving wickedness against the known
Truth, John. 8.34 Romans 4.20. 2. Pet. 2.19.
approaching to him with our lips, but our hearts are far from him: But this
is worthy of admiration, that these hardened Jews, rather will obey the
commandment of Caesar, than be the servants of Jesus Christ, They say, we
have none other King but Caesar. Woe to them, that renounce such a King; He
and Caesar, might both have been their King. But loved the Jews Caesar? No,
but pretended his authority, to kill the Judges consciences, and to crucify
Christ. They that love not God, will never love their King, nor the Church.
Easy was this yock which the Jews did cast off the^, Mat. 11.30
which their posterity feels this day. Let us not therefore (being taught by
their example) withdraw our selves from his obedience; for if God, spared not
the natural branches, think thou that he will spare the wild Olive? Deuteronomy.
32.15.29.
O Israel! thou have forsaken God, who made thee: and regarded not the strong
God of thy salvation! Oh! that they had been wise, then they would understand
this; they would consider their latter end, my people have done two evil
things, they left me the fountain of living water, Ierem. 2.
and dug unto themselves broken cisternes, which ca^ hold none.

And to rid, and transfer the burden from Pilate, they laid it upon
themselves, and their posterities: For malice joined with ignorance is ever
temerarious, the blinder the man is, the more rashly will he endanger
himself: they had the light of Nature, and the Light that came down from
heaven, his Word, which they contraveined, as Steven vpbraided them, Ye always
resist the holy Ghost, Act. 7.51.
as did your fathers, so do you: for they killed the Lord Jesus, and their
own Prophets, and have persecuted the Apostles, and God they please not, 1 Thessalonians. 2.14.15.16.
and are contrary to all men; and forbid to preach unto the Gentiles, that
they may fulfill their sins always. For the wrath of God is come upon them
to the utmost, both upon them, and on their posterity: For upon them is come
all the righteous blood, that was shed upon the earth, from the blood of Abel
the righteous, Mat. 23.35.
and the blood of Zacharias the son of Barachias, whom they slew between the
Temple and the Altar.

Every man detesteth this heinous cruelty, and thou (my Soul) says, That
if thou had been in those days, t^ou would not have put hand in thy
Savior. But thou lackest nothing but time, for thou resistest the known Truth
of Christ, and hate the professors thereof, whereby thou crucifiest again the
Son of God, Ephesians. 4.19
and make a mock of him: For he that despised Moses Law, died without
mercy, under two or three witnesses, of how much sorer punishment suppose ye
shall he be worthy, which treads under foot the Son of God, and counts
the blood of the New Testament as an unholy thing, Heb. 10.28
wherewith he was sanctified; and does despite the Spirit of Grace. And
therefore, well might Christ have said, As for me, b^hold, I am in your hands,
do with me, Ier. 26.14.15.
as ye think good and right, but know ye for certain, that if ye put me
to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood upon your selves, and upon
your city, Luc. 19.
and upon the inhabitants thereof, for of a truth, the Lord has sent me
unto you, for to speak all these words in your ears, but for three
transgressions of Israel, Amos. 2.6.
and for four, the Lord will not turn to it, because they sold the righteous
for silver, and the poor for shoes; for the which their cities were left
desolate, and Jerusalem without an inhabita^t, for the flight did perish from
the swift, and the strong does not strengthen his force, neither did the
mighty save his life; nor be that handles the bow, does stand, and he
that is swiftest of foot does not escape: neither does he that rides,
Amos. 2.14.15.16
save his life, and he that is of mighty courage among the strong men, did
flee away naked in that day. Whereof Josephus that saw all these things with his
eyes does write, that there was slain at the same siedge of Jerusalem, eleven
hundredth thousand, besides nyntie thousand that were taken captives, and the
City lamentably destroyed and sacked. Thus vengeance is mine, says Lord, I
will repay it.

But here (dear Soul,) far be it from thee, that once the least conception
of shedding of blood come in thy mind: yea, remember this, be that hates his
brother, is a man slayer: be therefore void and free of such inordinate
passions: Be angry, and sin not, let not the Sun go down upon thy wrath,
but overcome evil with good. But here especially call to mind these
imprecations, and cursings the Jews use against themselves; There is nothing
more effectual to destruction, than the words which proceed out of thine own
mouth, beware therefore of violent and immoderate perturbations, which louse
the bridle raines of the tongue: neither excuse thy self by inco^sideration,
rashness and anger to have done the same. Accustom not therefore thy mouth
(dear Soul) to swearing, Eccl. 23.9.10.11.
for in it, there are many falls, neither tak up f^r a custom, the naming of
the holy One, for thou shall n t be unpunished for such things: For as a
servant which is often punished, can not be without some skarre, so, be that
swears and names God continually, shall not be faultlesse. A man that
uses much swearing, shall be filled with wickedness, and the plague shall
never depart from his house, when he shall offend, bi^ fault shall be upon
him, and if he acknowledge not his sin, he makes a double offense, and if
he swear in vain, he shall not be innocent, but bis house shall be full
of plagues.

Now Pilat thinks himself secure, when he is exonered to be enemy to
Caesar; sits down, absolues Barabbas, and which is worse, condemns the
Innocent, beats and scourges him; then delivers him to the Jews, to
satisfy their wicked appetite, his Conscience fast a sleep, runs on, Heb.
6.6.
as the arrow out of the Bow to a mischief^: For when man is past feeling, and
without remorse, Mar. 15.15
he gives himself to wantonness, to work all uncleanness, even with
greediness, and with such speed, as an horse rusheth into battle: For Pilate
did this to gratify the people had he their favor for it? no; they delated
and accused him to the Emperor, which banished him, and for fear of greater
shame, being participa^t also of Christ's blood, put violent hands in himself,
and slew himself. How is the matter Pilate? is this the form of judgment that
thou have learned from the Romans? wherein thou neither have regard of
reason, examination of vvitnesses, the guilty, of Laws, but only respects
the desire of tumultuous me^: Was it not to asswadge vproare, and establish Law
and Justice that thou was sent President to Jerusalem? Will it mitigate
sedition to kill the Just? No; rather increase it: what did these wicked Jews
through all Palestina and Syria commit under Caius Claudius Nero, until
Ve^pasian and Titus were sent to overthrow them? and thou in thy time did
know what it was to hu^t after the applause of the people.

The third Step in the third degree of the ascension of the Soul to Heaven,
etc.
NOw is Barabbas let loose, and Christ delivered unto the Soldiers in purple
apparel to be crucified. The murderer Barabbas, did live by the bounty of
Christ; (for there was but one to be set free at the Passover, not two) and
Christ adjudged to die. This Barabbas represented all the Children of Adam,
Ephesians. 2.
for we were all the children of wrath, liable in Gods just judgment to
eternal death, neither was any deliverance to be looked for, but by his death,
who was condemned for us, so that now there is no condemnation to the^ that are
in Jesus Christ: Romans 8.1.
now the soldiers were as ready to receive him, as Pilat was to deliver him to
put this wicked sentence in execution: 1. Sam. 22.18.
Good Judges, shall never find goods Officers to execute so readily a good
action, 2. Sam. 3 39.
as the wicked do find for an evil: For the devil has many servants in the
world, but God has few. Neither suffered they him any where to rest, scarce
while the cross was in preparation, but takes him to the Co^mon-Hall: For the
malice of men against wickedness will end, but against an Innocent who
suffers for Christ, will never end.

But these torturers were instruments of that terrible wrath of the Father
upon his Son, who is a co^suming fire. He was stripped of his purple vesture,
least the people should have been more enraged at that royal apparel he was
clad with, and despise authority, when they saw him crucified in the same. But
sure it was their mind, to renew his recent blood, and fresh wounds, and to
add more affliction to his running sores. And therefore, they did put on him
his own clothes, that he might be more fully known, and contemptibly
esteemed of all the beholders; and the Soldiers were to divide his vestments
amongst them, Psalm. 22.17.
for it was not in a Gentilish, but a Jewish apparel that he was crucified
in, that all the sins that then were committed, might redownd on the head of the
Jews. And that, as the parti-colored garment of Joseph was dipped in the Kids
blood, so our inward man was dyed in the Blood of this innocent Lamb: And
blessed are they, who have washed their robes therein.

But as he was stripped first of his own clothes, which signified the
rejection of the Jews, and thereafter arrayed in Purple, which is the
gathering of the Church of the Gentiles, so last, shall that Jewish clothing
be put on, that, when the fullness of the Gentiles are come in, then all
Israel shall be saved. But most of all, it was, that his very enemies should
not thereafter have fained, that some other did suffer in his place. And that
the clothes of righteousness and holiness, which Adam had lost (for after his
fall, he was found naked) this second. Adam might restore to the believers, for
we had never so much hurt in Adams fall, as we have a thousand fold and
above, restitution by Jesus, if we rely on him by a lyuelie faith.

The fourth Degree and first Step of the ascension of the Soul unto Heaven, by
meditation of the exaltation of Jesus Christ our Savior upon the Cross.
THus being delivered to these bloody Hell hounds, who had shifted Christ of
his clothes, and arrayed him in Purple. And again, to renew the fresh stripes,
have unclothed him, putting on his own, bringing him out unto the place of
execution, carrying his own Cross, accompanied with two evil doers (so weary)
that Simon of Cyrene was compelled to bear the end thereof.

All this was, that he should suffer extreme shame, which always follows
upon Sin, for as he took the one, so did he the other upon him. But here are
heap^s of shames, the death of the Cross; the world gazing on him, two Thieves
led with him, but the more ignominious the death was, the glory and triumph
was the greater, and the more stinking Golgotha, was, the more sweetly
savoured his sacrifice, and smelled in the Nose-thirles of his Father. Lev.
4.11.
Now, therefore, was he carried out, for the bodies of those beasts, whose
blood was brought into the holy Place by the his Priest for sin, were burnt
without the Camp: Heb. 13.11 13.14.15.
Therefore, even Jesus, that he might sanctify us with his own Blood; suffered
without the gate. And should not thou (dear Soul) go forth, out of the
Camp bearing his reproach. Thou therefore, should cast off the care of this
world, denying thy self, and thirsting for that eternal country, vvher thy
title, and burgesship is: For we have not here a continuing city, but we
seek for one to come.

Wherefore, whensoever thou shall be cast out, and put in exyle for his Names
sake, thou have Christ thy Chiftan and Companion with thee. But most of all,
was he carried out of the ports, that we might have access unto the face of
his Father, and never be thrust into those eternal punishments. For he, as an
off s^ouring of the world, unworthy of the fellowship of men, was carried out
of the city, to open that heavenly Paradise to us: and therefore, that he
did not suffer for Jerusalem, nor for Judea, or for one part of the world only,
but for the sins of the whole world, who shall believe in him. We children
of Adam were cast out of Paradise, he is als^ gone out of the gate, to seek
us, and bring us home again.

Here have thou (sinful Soul) thy Abel carried out into the fields and killed
by his brother. Genesis 4.
Thy Isaac, Genesis 22.6.
asce^ding the montaine to be sacrificed. The Masters Sonne^ of the Vineyarde,
Mat. 16.24.
who sought fruit of it, killed by the husb^nd men, and cast out of it.

Now must his wearied Corpse carry this Cross also, which should be
diligently learned to be done of all Christians. But we should earnestly
consider, Christ carried his own Cross appointed to him, by divine
dispensation, and not to bring upon our selves, 1. Pet. 2.20
without the bounds of our calling unnecessary crosses. 1. Pet. 4.15


The bearing of his Cross should comfort thee (poor Soul) against the weight
of sin, for he his own self bare them in his body on the tree: Esaias. 53.5.
1. Pet. 2.42
now therefore, calamities and miseries being sanctified by him, are not tokens
of the Lords wrath, Heb. 12.5.6.7.8.
but means to make us conformable to his Son: for he did bear the burden,
not only of murder and theft, but of all the sins of the Elect. For he went
out with two Thieves, bearing the burden of one of them, and releiving him of
his sins, who did sup with him that night in Paradise. And to a greadge his
ignominy the more; two evil doers are brought out with him, as if he had
been a Captain of wickedness, and that all Nations which had conveened at the
Passover in Jerusalem, might tak the clearer notice of him.

Now must Simon, (little thinking of this business) help to carry his Cross,
for when we promise greatest tra^quillitie to our selves, the^ are we most
object to calamities. He is compelled to do this favor to Christ, for it is
properly in borne in us, to love the pleasures of this world, and seek for
glory, riches, and quietness, until this vile flesh be constrained to
undergo afflictions. For it is good that we be afflicted, that we may learn
his statutes, ^sal. 119.71.
because none shall know himself without temptation, and none shall be
crowned, Esaias. 26.17.18.
but he that has overcome, and none can overcome, unless he fight, and none
can fight, Iam. 1.3.4.
unless he have an enemi^.

But here consider, (my Soul,) how this Simon did meet Christ, now
miserably debilitated (God so providing) him to lift the end of the Cross,
that Christ should not faint in the way: For God is faithful, Cor. 10.13.
which will not suffer his to be tempted above that they are able, but will
even give the issue with the temptation, that they may be able to bear it
Whenever therefore (poor Soul) thou art cast down in the depth of
sorrovve, remember, that as thou art partaker of the sufferinges, so shall thou
be also of the consolation, 1. Cor. 1.7.
yea, 1. Pet. 4.13 14.
rejoice in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his
glory shall appear, ye may be glad and rejoice.

But this Joseph was a Gentile, to signify the Gentiles also should be
paricipant of the benefit of Christ's sufferings: For the preaching of the
Gospel to them that perish, 1. Cor. 1.18.
is foolishness, but unto us, that are saved, it is the power of God; neither
did the Jew touch this cursed tree, to help Christ to the hight of Mount
Calvarie, but constrained this Lybian famous for his two virtuous and godly
sons, Alexander and Rufus to suppor our Savior, not for any compassion or
loving affection they carried to him, for they hated him to death: but eue^ to
declare the acceptance of the Gentiles to the participation of grace in the
Lords accepted time.

And now is Jesus come to the place of Golgotha, who had sanctified it unto his
martyredome, and those public torments to who^soeuer should die in constant
profession of his Name. For, Number. 24.
he is that brazen Serpent, that whosoever looks on him, by a livelie, and
true faith, John. 14.
shall be healed of all their infirmities, for our Savior did die the cursed
and execrable death, to releive us from the curse, and therefore, seeing we
are bought for a price, Gal. 3.13.
we should glorify God in our bodies and in our spirits, 1 Cor. 6.20.
for they are Gods.

Now did he hang (sorrowful Soul) with out streatched arms, to welcome and
embrace readily all that would come unto him, Mat. 11.28
he is lifted on high, as exposed unto all that would believe in him; and to
show, that by cross and calamity we must enter to glory. He would hang (I
say) betwixt heaven and earth, to reconceale them together, for when he was
exalted from the earth he did draw all things to him, and naked did he hang,
to cloth thee with his righteousness and holiness, and confirm thee against
crosses and poverty, when thou shall know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ:
2. Cor. 8.9.
that he being rich, for thy sake became poor; that thou through his poverty,
might be made rich, for more are we in obligation to his poverty, by which
we were redeemed, than by his riches by which we were created, for what benefit
was it, to have been borne, if we should not have been delivered from
eternal death? And therefore, neither hunger, nor nakedness, nor death it
self, can separat us from this love and conjunction with him. Romans 8.38
The pride of our Progenitors Adam and Eve brought this base condition on
Christ, when as the Lord cladde them, for hyding of their nakedness: but now the
world is given to supersluity of vanity in their raiment, Esaias. 3.19.^26.21.
which is a conspicuous badge of their rebellion against God. But our David is
scorned of Michal for his nakedness, but more glorious is be, than the very
Angels in heaven, for bringing home the Arc of the promises, and the sealing
up the Covenant betwixt God and man by his blood and death. He is the Tree in
the midst of the Paradise of God, which sweetneth the bitter waters of Meribab.
1. Sam. 6.16.
O give us grace, (dear Jesus!) that we may comprehend with all Saints,
which is the breadth, and length, and deepth, Ephesians. 3.18.19.
and hight, and to know this thy love, which passes knowledge that we may be
filled with all fullness of God.

Now may they tell all thy bones, all thy nerves, sinews and veins are drawn
in length; Psalm. 22.
thy whole body disjoynted: they pierced thy hands and feet and rivers of blood
did burst out: Behold, all that go by the way, Lam.
if there be any dolor like unto my dolor.

The second Step of the fourth degree of the ascension of the Soul to
Heaven, etc.
Now in this Mount Calvarie, he begins to thirste, wherefore the Jews to
fulfill the Scripture (though far beside their minds) They gave me gall in my
meat, and in my thirst they gave me Vinegar to drink: But Solomon has
counseled more charitably, Give ye strong drink unto him that is ready to
perish, Pro. 21.9.
and wine to them that have grief in heart: but the Son of God was destitute
of all consolation, that we might receive abundance of comfort in him: Psalm.
16.11
For in his presence is fullness of joy, and at his right hand, there is
pleasures for evermore. But he would suffer thirst, that he should not
hasten death unto himself, before the appointed hour; for he knew the Lord
would bring all this business to a blessed event.

He would (I say) beside these torments inwardly in his Soul, against the
wrath of God, Hell, Death, Law, and condemnation, suffer also in all his
outward senses: in his Tasting, the bitterness of gall: in his Sight, the
bespitting, and watching: in his Hearing, blasphemy and mocking: in his
Touching, beating, buffeting, whiping, and crowning with thorns: in his
Smelling the filthy bespitting, and vile odor over-spreading that precious
Body, whereby it was imbrued, and these many stripes received he for us.

And now consider (my Soul) what shall be the pains they shall suffer in soul
and body, who shall not be found in Christ. The rich glutton in Hell could not
obtain one drop of water to cool his tongue in that burning torment.
Terrible is that drouth and hotnesse that sin brings with it, Mat. 5.
But blessed are they, that hungers, and thirste for righteousness, for they
shall be filled, John. 4.
and have in their belly the fountain of living water (Jesus Christ.) Whilst
thou art quaffing and scolling sweet and delicious cups, to the contempt and
abuse of Gods creatures, remember this bitter and sour drink of Christ, which
we do make him drink again, how often soever we do injury to his members.

Then beware of all that can separate thee from this thy Christ, especially of
bad, profane and idolatrous society, for their god is not as our God, and
their wine is of Sodom, and Gomorrha, their grapes are grapes of gall, their
clusters are bitter, their wine is the poison of Dragons, and the cruel gall
of Aspes. Well might Christ have said, My strength, and hope is perished from
the Lord, Lam. 3.19.
remembering mine affliction and my mourning, the wormwood and the gall.

Now, while our Savior is thus fastened to the Cross hands and feet, as our
high Priest, at his Altar, (For every high Priest is taken from among men, and
is ordained for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both
gifts, and sacrifices for sins, so likewise, be in the days of flesh, did
offer prayers and supplications, Romans 12.15. Mat. 18.35.
yea, for his very enemies) and so should we, forgive, and it shall be
forgiven us.

Here have thou dear Soul) great matter of comfort and consolation, never to
be casten down, and despare with the opinion of thy own sins. Thou have an
high Priest, 1. John. 2. Esaias. 63.12.
and Advocat with the Father even Jesus Christ the lust, to whom thou should
have recourse in all thy tentations, and boldly approach to the Throne of
grace, that thou may receive mercy and grace in time of need. When the
Princes did stone Zacharias, he said, Lord look to it, and require it, and so
did the blood Abel call for vengeance. But this mylde Lamb of God, Heb. 12.24.
the Mediator of the new Covenant, his blood speaks better things, than
those: He regarded not the injury, shame, and pain he was in, and forgotte
not to have pity on them that cruelly tormented him: He suffered together
with them, of whom he did suffer: he cured them, that wounded him, and
procured life for them, that killed him. And therefore, by this his prayer,
full of Majesty, He was heard in that which he feared, for he is his beloved
Son, Mat. 17.5.
in whom he is well pleased.

But here diligently consider, what was the company he was crucified with,
for he came not to save the just, Mat. 9.13.
but sinners: an example, whereof he manifested in saving of one of the
Thieves, touched with repentance, whereof his faith and confession gave notice.
So is he on the Cross, as if he were in that great Day of judgment, giving
out sentence of salvation to the Elect, and condemnation to the Reprobate.

Perilous is it to delay Repentance, and to promise our selves security to
the last day: It is a fooilsh thing to neglect the matters that concerns
eternity in glory; or pain, and embrace the changable occasions of this world,
which is all put in evil. The privilege of a few is not a law to all yet
where undoubted signs of Gods grace and goodness does appear; there, may
Christian charity interpret unfeigned repentance to follow; for there is
neither measure, nor time can be appointed to the Lords mercy: For what day
soever a Sinner shall repent, he shall live, Ezekiel. 18.22.
and not die. As this Malefactor did confess Christ's immortality, in that he
desired to be remembered, when he came to his Kingdom, who had taken the life
of others before. The Lord being tied to the Cross, hands and feet, and
nothing free, but Heart and Tongue, which he gave to that Penitent, who by the
bear believed to righteousness, and by the tongue confessed to salvation. Romans
10.
By Faith he did see that Christ should reign, whom he did see die with him.
By Hope, he looked for an entry to his Kingdom, and by Love, defended the
innocence of our Savior Jesus Christ against the reproach of his fellow:
Great is this his Faith, Who had taught him? had he seen miracles (who had
been kept in prison) either of giving sight to the blind, or raising of the
dead? yet he confessed him to be an everlasting King, who was companion to him
in punishment, despising the present pain, and praying for things to come;
requiring rather to be exemed from eternal judgment, tha^ delivered from
te^porall punishment, sorrowing and longing for that, that he hoped for, tha^
feel that, that he suffered. In Christ's extreamities, he believed in him, and
was not ashamed to have the Jews witnesses of his Faith (who railed on
Christ) in the midst of all the scandals and reproaches of the people; and now
when Christ was in his weakest and most miserable estate, what did thou see
sinful convert to ask here for a Kingdom? thou had only before thine
eyes, the Cross and the Nails: O! but the cross is the ensign of a
Kingdom, and it is the duty of a King even to expone his life for his
Subjectes, As the good shep-heard does his Soul for his sheep: Ioh. 10.11.
Genesis 17.1. Genesis 18.3.
Abraham believed, but taught from heaven, and by the Angels which came unto to
him. Esaias. 6.1.
And Esaias, but he saw the Lord sitting upon his Throne, and lifted up, and
the lower parts thereof filled the Temple. Ezekiel believed, but he saw the
Lord upon the Cherubines, Ezekiel. 1.4.
and so did the other Prophets, but after diverse manners God spoke. Heb. 1.1.
Moses believed, but the Lord spoke unto him out of the burning Bush, but none
of these occasions did this penitent have, but saw no Majesty of glory, but
equality of pain: he saw him tormented, but worshipped him as if he had been
in glory: he saw him on the Cross, but praised his Savior, as if he had
sitten in the heavens; he saw him condemned, yet acknowledged him to be a
free and absolute King, and would not shrink but died in that profession, in
spyte of all the the arguments that Satan could object, or flesh and blood
urge in the contrary. Truly Faith is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8.9.
that no man should boast himself: Therefore should we pray, Lord increase
our Faith: So where Sin abounds, Grace super-aboundeth: The Lord is more
ample in his grace, than he in his prayer, he gave more, than he could
seek. He sought to be remembered, when he came into his Kingdom, but the
Lord promised, that this day he should be with him in Paradise. O the great
goodness of God! unspeakable is thy favor toward them whom thou love.
Thou as the bright Sun, have made thy hot beams to shine upon our souls,
thereby to draw us to the Knowledge of Thee, and to warm our hearts, that we
may love Thee. Expel this darkness, (O Lord,) wherewith our hearts is
replenished and thaw, by the heat of thy mercy, the frozen condition of our
souls, that they may melt, considering that everlasting and unsearchable
favor thou have borne toward mankind.

The third Step in the fourth degree of the ascension of the Soul to Heaven,
etc.
Only John and some women, in great constancy, did atte^d Christ on the
cross; Whose grace was sufficient for them; 2. Cor. 2.9.
whose power is made perfect through weakness, in whose infirmities, the power
of Christ is shown: who took pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in
necessities, in persecutions, and anguish for Christ's sake: For when they were
weak then were they made strong. That is true friendship which is founded in
God, and whose knot is Christ: they that be touched with the sense of the
misery of his members, shall never lack that is good.

Marie the Virgin, Marie Cleophas, and Marie Magdalene, accompanied, were
inspectors of this lamentable spectacle; his own Mother he called, and John,
whom he ever loved; his Mother he honored and would have her provided for, for
he knew it spoken by Simeon, that the sword should pass through her Soul,
Luc. 2.35.
and with the eye of mercy, did see her wrestling with such calamities. He
especially, of singular favor looked on her, because she loved me, Psalm.
91.14.15.
therefore will I deliver her, because she has known my Name. So did David
(fugitive from the face of Saul) commend his parents to the King of Gath. But
the obedience, promptitude, and alacrity of John, in receiving his Mother,
declares the willing heart of a Disciple, to accomplish the mind of his
Master, so he acquitted love for love. Nothing is comparable to the sense of the
love of God in the heart of man: If it had been no more, than natural love,
Marie would never have followed her Son to such a vile death, if she had not
believed, that that Death should not have turned into a glorious life. She knew
the conference betwixt her, and the Angel before, for Faith and Hope will not
extinguish Displeasure, and natural Joy, but will mitigate them both, for she
looked to have with him a joyful meeting, her heart was knit with him, whilst
he hang on the Cross; not ashamed of him, neither he forgetful of her: He
called her woman, 2. Cor. 5.16.
not Mother, raised from all earthly things which men count much of, for he
knew nothing according to the flesh, for in heaven we shall be like Angels, to
the end, that we may enjoye that heavenly life. And her (I say) He commended
to John, whom he loved inteirelie, neither will he translate her from the
world, but will have every member of his Church to keep one another, as he
commended his mother to John to be entertained: in his suffering forgetting (as
it were) himself, yet forgetting not her, not willing to divide the first and
second Table; in the first, keeping his duty to his Father to the death, and
in the midst of that obedience to his Father, having regard and respect to his
Mother: for if thou hate not father or mother for his sake, Lu. 14.26
thou art not worthy of him: Prefer God to any natural affection, which
Christ, notwithstanding in the midst of torment of blasphemies, and combat
with everlasting Death, with the wrath of the Father, and with all the
infernal powers, is careful to observe. Sanctified affections do entertain
natural love, or else they are suffocated: for this duty stands not in
ceremonies, but in performing of necessary adoes: this registration will rent
the conscience of these, who procure their mothers curse; John ha^ ^rection
from the Cross, we from the heavenly Throne, he took an others Mother, not
his own, and that to his own house. Seeing Christ therefore has suffered in
the flesh, it is convenient, that we be of the like mind.

Naomi, destitute of her two Children, Ruth. 1.
did say when she came to Bethlehem, Call me not Naomi, that is (beautiful).
but Mara, which is, bitterness. Tob. 10.
What did Tobias mother, when her Son went away? Did not King Solomon
acknowledge the true mother of the Child, 1 King. 3.24.
while she would not have him cut in two? And what did Rizpah, in hanging up
the sackecloathes from the beginning of Harvest upon the Rock, until water
dropped upon them from the heaven, 2. Sam. 21.10.
neither suffering the Birds of heaven to light on the sons of Saul by day,
nor beasts of the field by night: But what doloure (I say) can be compared to
this of his Mothers, whose heart was so deeply wounded through? She did not
extinguish those affections, but moderated them, for she stood by the Cross of
Christ seeing them, whom he had fed in the wilderness with Ma^na, brought through
the red Sea present her Son Gall for Manna, and Vinegar for water. Thou did
feed five thousand with five loaves, and filled all Judea with the words of
Life; and now is that Sun eclipsed, the bright Moon darkened, the creatures
acknowledge their Creator; but the miserable Jews shut their eyes from the
tender mercy of God, whereby, Luc. 1.78.
the dayspring from on high has visited them: but it could not be that
either affection, or the tender bowels of compassion could stay this sweet
Jesus from perfecting the will of his Father, and that glorious work of the
Redemption of his own Elect.

The fourth Step of the fourth degree of the ascension of the Soul to
Heaven, etc.
Between eleven and twelve a clock, both sentence of condemnation and
execution thereof fell out. From twelve hours to three afternoon, the space of
three hours, a fearful and terrible darkness was over the face of the
earth, and yielded the Spirit between three and four hours: His Father did
testify by this darkness, not only of his innocence, as he was man, but
also of his Glory as he was God; the creatures did utter their sorrow, and
began to teach that senseless and hardened people, such a judgment is it, to
fall into a reprobate sense. This Eclipse fell out beyond natural course, in
the full Moon, for the Passover was to be celebrated in March, the fourteenth
day thereof, when the Sun and the Moon are far from other, and the whole
Globe of the car^h casten betwixt them; but in this Eclipse, the Moon which
was opposed to the Sun, turned suddenly, and came under the Sun, which
made this darkness. For the which cause, Act. 17.
the Philosophers in Athens, not finding natural reasons, erected an altar to
the unknown God.

At this time began his greatest agony, which was in his Soul with he wrath
of his Father from Heaven, which were the dolours of death, so extreme, like
as a woman has in hearing her birth, Act. 2.
which does express also the pains of hell, 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.
where mountains of dolor and heaps of wrath are laid up for the reprobate:
as the waves of the sea follows one another, so are they in growing
everlastinglie.

His Godhead never left him, nor never shall; but the Godhead kept it self
so close, that it would let him have no joy, until he should pay that ransom
to the utmost farthing, whereby the Justice of God was satisfied, for our
sins: And therefore he cried out on the Cross, as deserted of God, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me. Confidence in God will oftimes be without
feeling of joy, albeit the spirit be not taken from the Soul, yet at last, it
does reviue: For ^s knowledge avails where feeling is always dead, and no
sense of the old canker of sin mortified, and quickened with a new life, to
live to God.

Those then are not words of Diffidence or Indignation but of combat of the
flesh with Faith, in the which, he felt the eternal curse, that was due for
sin, otherwise, he would never have called, God his God: the burden of one
sin, yea, of an evil thought, can not be born of all the world, how heavy
must all the sins of the Elect be, that Jesus ba^e on his back.

And now (poor Soul,) behold the dealing of God with his own, albeit he loved
them never so well, he will touch them with the sense of wrath for sin in
some measure from heaven, that thou may understand how heavy a wrath Jesus
suffered, that he might conquesse unto thee mercy and peace of conscience,
which was bought and paid for with his Blood. Detestable, and filthy must
sin be that made him thus double his crying: Fie on the filthy works of the
flesh, which drown men in perdition: Esaias. 34.7.8.
He did take him to prayer; vvilling thee ever to have refuge into thy God in
all trouble, Psalm. 22.
who neither can, nor will leave thee: He choosed this armor to resist out of
the Scripture. Which is, Ephesians. 6.13.
the sword he has put in our hands, for it was in our persons that he found
himself deserted, but in him are we taken up and saved. Martyrs, and witnesses
of the truth, have suffered great and grievous torments, but divine
consolation from above did abundantly shine in their souls, the part which
tyrants could not kill nor touch; looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher
of their faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross,
Heb. 12.2.
and despised the shame and mocking of them that stood by, who turned his holy
word in scornful jest, as though he had called for Elias.

Christ's Soul now being burnt up with the wrath of God for Sin: Psalm. 69.22.
and all the moisture of his body dried up with the same, yet did he not
quensh his thirst, until the wrath of his Father was satisfied, John. 19.28.
the infinite wrath of God thirsted after the blood of the mediator, bearing
our sins, Mat. 11.2.8. Esaias. 12.3.
and was not quenshed, till the Blood of the Mediator was dried up. But blessed
be Jesus, that had a spiritual thirst and pleasure to obey his Father to the
death, Esaias. 55.1.
to save thy soul from hell, and yet in bitter malice and scorn, they took a
watersponge, and putt it to his mouth on a reed: The wrath of his Father was
begun to be mitigated, yet the wrath of the Jews could not be assuaged, for
when he was living, they raged against him, when he was dead, they persecut
him, when he was in glory they would shame him: The Lord seeks but
chastisme^t, the wicked seek overthrow of body, and soul, if it were
possible. For Evahs sweet Apple, Christ must drink this bit er liquor, both thy
bread and drink must be boght with the blood of Jesus: To them who are
sanctified, all things are sanctified: If thou be not found in him, thou shall
be accused as a violent possessour of what-soeuer thou have.

Now thou do hear him daily in his members calling upon thee, I hunger, I
thirst, Mat. 25.35.
but thou convertest Gods good creatures to the fulfilling of thy lust, and
rather bereaueth the servants of Christ that, that they have, than vouchsafe
any thing on the^. Christ, after he had drunken, cried out in the audience of
them al, It is finished, the work of Redemption is ended, the ransom is paid,
to buy heaven, and conquer life, which is the first work, and to put us in
possession of it, which he began at his Resurrection, and shall continue till
his coming again: and declared that no man did take his life from him but
laid it down, John. 10.17.18.
and would tak it up again; for he was not a common man, but God also to keep
his life, or put it out at his pleasure. He might have lived longer by the
strength of Nature, for the other two out-liued him, and were not dead, till
they came, and broke their legs. And now when he yielded up the Spirit, he
had a divine power above Nature, which put out the life, saying, Father, into
thine hands, Psalm. 31.5.
I commend my Spirit, while his Soul was loused from his body with joye.
Which sweet death, he did communicate unto his Martyrs, Act. 7.59.
as Steven, and all his members.

Consider here (vveake Soul) that Christ has purchased unto thee, the great
benefit of Adoption: John. 20.1^.
For thy Brother (Christ) has made his Father thy Father, and therefore vvil
have a Fatherly care of thee for ever. For who is more faithful, 1. Pet. 4.
19.
than our Father, to vvho^ we commend our souls, which do not perish, but
are kept by him, 1. Cor. 15.21.22.
while they be joined to the body at the resurrection, and are received,
when we depart this life in his Arms, who will not suffer them to be taken
from his hands, but will surely keep them in peace. Be thou therefore
careful of thy Soul at al times, but specially at the hour of separation,
for then the devil is busy to devour thee, For be knows his time to be
short, and the gulf of hell open to swallow thee up. If Jesus, who had no sin,
be so careful for his Soul, how careful shuldst thou be who is nothing else,
but a mass of sin? yea, he cried so loud, that the Earth quaked again, and
the Temple rave asunder, now to declare his Power and Victory, to terrify the
Jews, of whom he is so mishantly handled, and to bring, if it were possible,
that stubborn people to Faith and Repentance. Now has the Dove gone out of the
Arc, which will return with an Olive branch in sign of peace. The Deludge is
the wrath of God for Sin, the Arc, is Christ's Body, the Dove, his Soul, At
his Resurrection. how great joye, peace, and comfort does he purchase to
mankind: Romans 4.25.
For as he dyed for our sins, so rose he for our righteousness. The^ yielded
and delivered he his Spirit, which was not taken from him against his will:
For he hanging on the Cross, did make all the creatures quake, and tremble.
Great was his humility, being made obedient to his Father unto the death,
even the death of the Cross; of the which thou may learn the exceeding
greatness of his Majesty, who even then when he was exalted from the earth,
did draw all things unto himself, for where a Testament is, there must be the
death of him that made the Testament, Heb. 9.16.
for the Testament is confirmed, when men are dead, for it is yet of no force,
as long as he that made it is alive. So behooved this Testament (leaving such
an inheritance to his Saints, in that exceeding great glory) be ratified by
the blood of the Testator, which is the ground of thy Salvation: His death is
thine honor, the assurance of thy life, is the assurance of his death, his
ignominy and shame, is thy Glory.

Now have we heard of the Passion and death of Christ: now shall we touch
briefly the things which followed thereafter.

The fifth Step of the fourth degree of the ascension of the Soul to Heaven,
etc.
THere fell out immediately four things, of the which, two did teach the
people. The other two, the quaking of the earth, and renting of the Rocks, did
threaten destruction: for no man (to take all excuses away) shall perish
without advertiseme^t. The first of these, the veil of the Temple is re^t
after the darkening of the Sun in Christ's greatest humiliation: The Father
gave greatest tokens of his Glory, who is the Lord of Life, for dumb and
senseless creatures did shame the Jews, and glorified their Maker.

The Temple was divided in two: For the Priest went always into the first
Tabernacle and accomplished his office, Heb. 9.6.7.8.
but into the second went the high Priest alone, once every year, not without
blood, which he offered for himself, and ignorances of the people. Betwixt
these was a fair wall overgilt with fine gold, upon the which hang a glorious
Tapestrie, wroght curiously, which did hide the Sanctuary, as by a courtaine,
from ^he sight of the people and Priests. But at Christ's suffering, these
shadows were taken away, and no more use of that Veil. Whereby the holy
Ghost signifieeth this, that the way into the boliest of all was not yet
opened, whilst as yet the first Tabernacle was standing, this earthly veil
rave asunder at the voice of the Lord. But the Jews minds are hardened, for
until this day remains the covering untaken away, 2. Cor. 3. 15
for the Veil is laid over their hearts, but when their hearts shall be
turned to the Lord, the Veil shall be taken away. So hard and evil it is, to
do against the knowledge and conscience, whereof comes a reprobate sense,
which is past all-feeling, that sooner a stone shall hear, tha^ they will
obey: They were admonished of the subversio^ of the Temple, and of their City,
and that there was no difference now betwixt Jew nor Gentile, Gal. 3.28.
but the partition wall being demolished, they had ^like communion by faith in
Jesus Christ. Act. 10.34


The Earth also did tremble whilst the Soul of the Lord separated from his
Body, threatening to swallow them up, Number. 16.32.
as it had done to other rebellious and obstinate before, which were not
worthy that the earth should bear, but either to receive them in her mouth
to consume them, or else to spew them out, according to the Lords commination
in his Law. Lev. 20.22
Thus the Earth did preach and groan, Romans 8.22.
and travel in pain, but they hardened their necks, and would no return to
be healed. It quaked, and the foundations of the Mountains moved and shook,
Psalm. 18.7.
because be was angry at their obduration, And should not the Land tremble
for this, and every one mourn that dwells therein. Amos. 8.8.


The Mountains also did cleave to fall on them, which would not suffer the
dishonor of their Maker; but they were nothing moved with it; so much were
they void of light in their soul. A mighty strong wind rent the Mountains,
and broke the Rocks before the Lord; but this people, 1. King 9. 11.
neither by the word of God, by natural sense, or creatures void of reason will
be taught: no, even then, when the Dead did rise, for the Graves did ly open
from three a clock afternoon, about which time; the Lord gave up the ghost,
all that day, and all that night, the nixt day and the nixt night till that day
in the morning, that the Lord did rise; by virtue of whose resurectio^, Hos.
13.14.
the Saints arose and went into the City, lowsing the bands of the Grave; 1.
Co. 15.54.55.
by his death; but their hearts could not be opened. But it behooves us all to
compeare before his Tribunal Seat and to receive what we have done in the
body, 2. Cor. 5.10.
Romans 14.10.
good or evil. The Saints (I say) arose, for his glorious resurrection
belonged only to them, which being sanctified in Christ, did die in the
Lord, and they all shall go into that holy City Dan. 12.25
even that Jerusalem, Gal. 4.26.
the Mother of us all, which is above, to abide with Christ for ever. 1 Thessalonians.
4.6.


The senseless creatures, the Saints departed, the Gentiles, Centurion, and
Officers did all testify of Christ, every one in their own degree; but the
Pharisees, Scribes and Elders, were no whit moved. For this Centurion confessed
of a surety, that this man was just. And such as before lacked the fear of
God, feared greatly, saying, Truly this man is the Son of God: the poor
multitud which cried, Crucify him, went smiting their breasts, but the Priests
were not touched, neither by word, nor work: they had judgment and
understanding, and had read the Prophets, yet repined against the hol^e Ghost,
Act. 7.51.
and against their conscience opponing themselves to the known truth. The
Centurion was rather pricked in his soul, (as the Jews were at Peter's Sermon)
and Christ is glorified of him, Act. 2.37.
when he appeared to be quite forgotten, and got more friends in his death,
than in his life: for this precious Sacrifice hanging on the Cross, did cast
such a sweet smell on the earth, that they w^o were his enemies, went away
mourning, and beating their breasts, Luc. 18.13
testifying their dolor, resolving, that if God would deal with them in his
judgment, Psalm. 143.2.
they were worthy of eternal damnation Neither were women ashamed to bear
record of the Love, and Faith they had to the Lord Jesus; for some stood so
near, that he did speak to them from the cross, and they heard him; and when
he was dead, Luc. 23.59
they would not depart from him, their hearts were so linked with him, and he
who is a sweet perfume, and incense in the nose thirles of the Father, is a
fragrant odor and smell unto them: For more of them followed Christ to the
Cross, (than men, which were favorers of him) and did minister to him on
their own charges. Christ's innocence made them not to shrink, but constantly
to fight unto the end against al temptations, 2. Tim. 4.7.8.
that they may receive the Crown.

They were fed with that Bread of Life, that came out of his mouth, 1. Tim.
5.17.18.
and they communicated unto him freely and liberally, that which they had.
Christ was poor, 2. Cor. 8.9.
to make us rich: John and Peter, had not a farthing to give the Creple; Act.
3.6.
and Paul wrought with his hands for his bread. Act. 18.3
That, that thou can not do to Christ in his own person, 1. Cor. 4.10 11.
do to his members. But this is remarkable, that these women have the honor
to be ey witnesses of the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, Deu. 15. 11
and themselves to be preachers of it to the Apostles; Esaias. 51.7.
and to have the names of some of them to be registrated perpetually, to
their everlasting praise: yea, and to be written in heaven eternally, for so
it falls out often, that the weaker and simpler the sex be, the more
spiritually it is disposed and affectionated to heavenly things, for if any
man seem to be wise in this world, 1. Cor. 3.18
let him be a fool, that he may be wise.

Now the taking down of his Body from the Cross, comes by a request made
by his enemies to Pilate, Deuteronomy. 21.23.
That there should not be a breach of the Law, for these that were hanged. They
strain a gnat, Mat. 23.23
and swallow a camel, they were spoilde of all power, they can neither put on,
nor tak off the cross, slaves were they, which would not acknowledge the true
King of Glory, who would have made the^ free. And this petition they sought
not for any pity they had on him, but the Lord so appointed it, Exodus 12.46.
that he should not lack even the support of his foes, and yet it lay not in
their hands to break one bone of him, 1. Cor. 5.7.
for he is our Passover, who, sacrificed for us, died and was peirced with a
lance, yet his Legs was not broken. His members may be tossed with many
calamities, but shall not be utterlie forsaken, for many be the troubles of
the righteous, but the Lord shall deliver him out of them all. Psalm. 34.19.20.


The Lord would have many witnesses of his death, the executioners, the
Soldier with his spear, and the testimonye that the creatures gave: For
without shedding of blood and death, there had been no remission of sins for
us: They were enemies to the Cross of Jesus Christ; yet did they record the
truth for our well.

Neither did this Soldier alone, but m^nie more now, do pierce his side, Romans
6.9.
whilst he sits at the right hand of the F^ther by mocking and contemning
him in his word, Mal. 3.8.
Zach. 2.8.
and defrauding him of the means of his glory, Act. 9.4
for he that touches his Saints, touches the apple of his eye, as it was
spoken of Paul, persecuting him. And this was done, to confirm Gods power,
Zach. 12.10.
and providence forespoken, by the Prophet, which which they did accomplish
of mere ignorance

Therefore out of his heart came Blood, and Water. Blood, for the finest and
cleanest, is about the heart: and Water, by the which liquor, the heat of the
heart is cooled, and refreshed; for as yet the Body was warm. No man can live,
when his heart blood is shed, which is the seat of Life. This signifies, a
power flowing from his death, to the remission of sins, 1. John. 6.6
and washing of our foul nature; which two great blessings are represented
unto us in two Sacraments, of Baptism and the Lords Supper: Number. 20. 11.
for as Moses, while he smote the Rock, water did come forth to refresh the
people: So Blood and Water did gush out at Christ's side, for the benefit of
the whole world, which is that Laver, 1. Cor. 10.4
wherein our souls are purged from their inward spots: 1. John. 1.7
For as in Egypt, when the first begotten was killed, so many as had the posts
of their doors marked with the blood, were free; so by this Lambs Blood that
brings salvation to the world, Heb. 9.13.
are we delivered by Faith from destruction, that we may serve him in
righteousness, and holiness. And not presume to be so bold, Tit. 2. 11
as by our profane life, to tread his Blood under foot. Now here is a place
for thee, at his very heart (dear Soul,) where thou may creep in, and
rest thee: for as out of the side Eve was taken, while Adam did sleep, so now
is he cleanseing and purifying his Church by redemption, and regeneration in
this time of his death.

The fifth Degree and first Step of the ascension of the Soul unto Heaven, by
meditation of the burial of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Now has his very enemies procured at Pilate, that he should be taken from
the Cross. John. 19.31.
That blessed Corpse being laid on the ground, Joseph, a rich, just, godly
Disciple of Christ, boldly begged the dead Corpse at the hands of Pilat, that
as his death was notable, so should his burial be also, and his glorious
resurrection, be made famous. He was not taken from the Cross without leave
of the Magistrate nor buried with out the same, as he was not condemned but by
the Magistrate, that thou migh^st be fully fred from all points of the Justice
of Gods wrath for sin. For if this power had been in the Jews hands, they
would have opponed themselves to heap more shame and ignominy upon him, but the
Lord will have a noble man, and a notable fair place appointed to this work,
that the honor of the Son, and his glory should begin at the burial, which
was shameful in it self, and that he should be instrument, 1 Pet. 3.7.
who should be hiere with him of that Kingdom of glory, and of that life. All
the glory of this world pertains to the faithful, howsoever they apeare to
have least part thereof. Joseph is called to this great honor, 1. Cor. 1.26
which is rare to be seen in men of like condition, for the Lord in his death
was more mighty, the^ in his life. For when the corn of wheat lies in the
ground, and dies (as Christ foretold of the power of his death) it
fructifieth, John. 12.24.
and brings forth much fruit, for where ever the dead Carcass is, thither
do the Eagles resort: Of the which number this Counselor was, who looked for
the Kingdom of God, and there is no mention of such another great man, but
Nicodemus, John. 7.50.
who opponed himself to the death of Christ in the counsel, for God has his
own in every part, 2. King. 19 10. Romans 11.4
of whom he will be served: and albeit he durst not for fear of the Jews
openly profess, ^say. 42.3
yet the Lord will not break the bruised reed, nor quensh the smoking flax.

To the supplication of Joseph Pilat yielded, but wondered that Christ was so
seen dead, whose miracles was so many, the shortness of his life upon the
Cross, and floorishing time of his age, which was thirty three years, and
some od months, which imported that the death of Jesus was extraordinary,
John. 10.17.
who only had power to lay it down.

Joseph therefore bought a fine linen cloth, to wrappe the Body of Jesus in,
and Nicodemus an hundredth pound weight of a mixture of Myrrh, and Aloes. The
wisdom, the learning, and the riches of these men, were cast at Christ's
feet, whereof they coun^ed much of before they had a sight of Jesus, now
they counted all but dongue. Phil. 1.
They felt a sweet savor and odor coming to them from his death; therefore
would they meet it with a sweet savor. But there needed no odours to preserve
it, being filled with the presence of God. Wherefore with one concord,
co^stantlie they accomplished his burial after the custom of the Jews (that
is) honorably, Act. 9.37.
for never was a more honorable Man than Christ, and all these were
ceremonies, and the rest of their washings were figurs of him to come, who is
the earnest of our resurrection, For he shall raise all these which do sleep
in monuments. In a new grave therefore hewn out of a stone, by Joseph, to his
own use was he laid in a Garden, near by Jerusalem, that Christ's burial
might be the more honorable, in how much as he was above all the kings of the
world, separated from sinners, and made higher, than the heavens.

The Father had his loving care of him, albeit he appeared to have forsaken him
on the Cross: He is buried in another man's Sepulcher, for he died for the
sins and salvation of others, that he might sanctify our burials, by coming
unto them, and from them, to ascend to the heavens.

But remember (poor Soul) it is a new burial place, that he will be laid
in; so a renewed heart by the Spirit, is his dwelling place, for he can not
rest in the ludging of that soul, that has sold it self to sin: as he will
have also a clean and a pure body as a winding-sheete, to be wrapped in as
sweetly smelling savours of Virtues, Faith, Repentance, Love, Patience, etc.
joined thereto.

To the mouth of this Burial do they roll a great stone, by the Lords
providence, to stop the mouths of his enemies: Ephesians. 1.19.
for it was he that raised him from death to life, wherein, most of all
things, his power did appear: And this was done in the preparation to the
Sabbath: For as God the Father perfected the work of creation then, so the
Son has accomplished the work of redemption; and did rest the Sabbath from
his work, 1. Cor. 15.24
and shall give sweet security and peace to our bodies and souls.

Now have thou (woeful Soul) the accomplishment of the Prophets concerning
his burial, Psalm. 16.9.
that his flesh should rest in peace: and the type of Jonah perfected. ^^y. 53.9
And therefore seeing in Christ and by Christ our sins are buried; let us not
dig them up again of new, Math. 12.39.
but since we are buried with him by Baptism, unto his death, Romans 6.4.
that like as Christ raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, so,
we also should walk in newnes of life, And albeit our burial was a part of
the punishment inflicted to Adam, Genesis 3.19.
that he should turn to dust, yet now they are not filthy prison houses of the
body, but glorious Bed-chambers of the Son of God, from whence he shall
raise us to that heavenly inheritance, Esaias. 57.2.
after that we have sleeped a little while therein for he has sanctified them
by the virtue and power of his burial. Dan. 12.2.
For as he carried our sins in his Body upon the tree, so has he hid
them in the grave with himself; to the which place we must ever send Satan,
when he shall trouble and assault our vveake consciences with the terrible
face of Sin. For Jonas being cast in the sea, it was quieted: So Christ's
resting in the womb of the earth, as in a whales belly, does mitigate the
Lords anger. For as Death now has been pursued by Christ to the utermost,
yea, even unto the grave, and bowels of the earth, so can it not hurt, John.
5.24.
but greatly benefit the believers to e^ernall life. And therefore, now
may thou boldly say, Phil. 1.23.
I desire to be dissolved, and be with Christ.

The second Step of the fifth Degree, of the ascension of the Soul to Heaven,
on the burial of Christ Jesus our Savior.
WHile Joseph and Nicodemus thus handled the glorious Body of Jesus, and laid
it in the Grave; the women that followed him, heavy hearted, looking on that
spectacle, yet had they great hope to see him rise again, when the grave was
closed; with sadness and joy mixed together, prepared for embalming of him: The
third day following, the morrow was the Sabbath, wherein they rested, and the
third day, Christ did rise before they came, and they disappointed of their
commendable intention, wherein shined their godliness, Liberality, Love,
Diligence, Ability, and more than manly fortitude, 1. Cor. 1.17
whereby, God to his glory, out of the weakest instruments does effectuate
great things. For as they were going to the Grave, the Lord of glory sent an
Angel to tell the resurrection to these women. An Angel was a witness before
the women, and the women before the men, which rolled away the stone from the
door of the Grave: For neither in death, nor in burial, the Godhead had
uttered it self, but in the resurrection it brake out: And therefore the Lord,
having respect to the weakness of these women, which were not so able to remove
the stone; did send an Angel, that when they came, they should see that Christ
was risen from the dead: They heard before, that the third day he should rise,
but they being weak in Faith, were supplied by the Angel, who testified of
his resurrection.

The Lord did promise to make an everlasting Covenant with his people of the
sure mercies of David: Esaias. 55.3.
Therefore said he, Act. 13.34
It behooved the Lord to rise from death, for mercy had never continued, if
Christ had not risen, For all the promises of God are in him, Yea, and Amen, 2.
Cor. 1.20.
For he would not suffer his holy One to see corruption. ^sal. 16.10.
Had he not risen, his Body behooved to rotte, but God did raise him up, who
said, Psalm. 2.7.
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten Thee. Esaias. 538.
And who is able to count his Generation? for he is that everlasting Essence,
and albeit he died, he arose to live without end.

And now (my Soul) since thou art dead with Christ, Col. 2.20.
and risen with him: Seek these things which are above, where Christ sits
at the right hand of God: Set thy affections on things which are above, Col.
3. 1.2.3.
and not on things which are on earth, for thou art dead, and thy life is hid
with God in Christ: When Christ which is thy life, shall appear, then shall
thou also appear with him in glory. Be careful therefore, to get this
excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus thy Lord, for who^ count all this loss,
that thou may win Christ, and may be found in him, not having thine own
righteousness, which is of the Law, Phil. 3.8.9.8.10.
but that which is through Faith of Christ, that thou may know him (I say)
and the virtue of his resurrection and the fellowshippe of his afflictions, and
he made conformable unto his death, if by any means thou may attain unto
the resurrection of the dead. Let thine heart ^ee filled with the word and
promises of salvation, that it may be established by grace. And now seeing
Christ is thy riches, thy treasure, and all that thou sta^dest in need of, let
thy heart be where he is. Ascend with him, live in this world, as not living
here, for thy conversation is in heaven, it is not thou now that live, Gal.
2.20.
but Christ that lives in thee, and in that, that thou live in the flesh,
until thine appointed time, thou live by Faith in the Son of God, who loved
thee, 1. Cor. 6.17
and has given himself for thee. Be thou therefore joined to the Lord, that
thou may be one spirit with him. And behold as in a mirror, the glory of
the Lord with open face, and be changed in the same image from glory to
glory, 2. Cor. 3.18.
as by the Spirit of the Lord. Let all thy understanding, wisdom,
cogitation, and memory be bent on him who is risen, and Death shall no more
prevail over him. Pour out thy best affections on him. Be sorrowful to
offend him. Rejoice in serving of him according to his will, be afraied of his
justice, whereby he will surely punish the wicked. Place thine hope in his
eternal mercy, bottomless grace and everlasting glory.

The third and last Step of the fifth Degree, of the ascension of the Soul to
Heaven, by contemplation of Christ's entrance there.
ANd now (Pilgrim Soul,) will thou aspire upward? yea, let me hear (Lord)
thy loving kindness in the morning, for in Thee is my trust: Psalm. 143.8.9.
Show me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up mine heart unto thee:
Deliver me from mine enemies, for I hide me with Thee: Remember me with the
favor of thy people: Psalm. 106.4.5.
Visit me with thy Salvation, that I may see the felicity of thy chosen, and
rejoice in the joye of thy people, and glory with thine Inheritance: Pour
clean water upon me, and make me clean from my filthiness: Ezekiel. 36.36.37.
Give me a new heart and a new spirit: Take away that stony heart out of my
body, and put in an heart of flesh, that I may walk in thy Statutes, and keep
thy Judgments; For thou art the Poole of Bethesda, John. 5.4.
with five porches, within the which whosoever steppeth in, and does cast
the anchor of Faith in the depth of thy wounds, shall be made whole of
whatsoever disease he has.

But (alace) whosoever washes himself because of a dead body, Eccl. 34.26
and touches it again, what avails his washing, for no unclean thing shall
enter into thy Kingdom: Such as do return with the Dog to his vomit, and
believe but for a season, Pro. 26.11
and in the day of temptation go away

But (I) (sorrowful Soul) as the Heart brayeth for the rivers of waters, Luc.
8.13.
Psalm. 42.1.
so do I pant after thee (O God ascended.) But woe is me, sin is a
sickness incurable, which none can forgive, but thou O Christ, Luc. 5.21.
who puts away iniquity for thine own sake, Luc. 7.48.
and will not remember sins. For this purpose will I (weak Soul) make a
covenant with the Lord God of Israel, Esaias. 43.25. 2. Chro. 29 1^.
that he may turn away his face from me: and now will sorrow that I do not
feel my self so much sorrowful for the weight, filthiness, and multitude of
my sins, whose number does pass the sand in the Seashore, and do bear me
down as a heavy burden, and are grown over mine head. With Peter, not of
infirmity, once and again, but infinite times have I denied Thee. With Judas,
I, even I have betrayed Thee. Heb. 6.10.
With Jews and Gentiles I crucified Thee: often have I renewed thy wounds, and
trod thy precious blood under foot: with my lovers has my soul gone a
whooring, notwithstanding of that promise of marriage in my Baptism,
whereinto I was betroathed unto thee, confirmed in thy blessed Supper,
ratified on the Cross, in thy blood, to be solemnized in thy glory, whereof
I received the first fruits and earnest of the spirit. Now (alas) do I know
and behold that it is a bitter and an evil thing, to have forsaken thee my
God, Ier. 2.19.
and that thy fear was not in me.

And these displeasures have I (O my Christ) because I dearly love thee,
although there were no hell, nor punishment at all. I do acknowledge all the
torments of the world can not satisfy for the least imagination of the
thought of man's heart, Genesis 6.5.
which is only evil con^inually, yea, my righteousness (if any I have)
which is the beauty and flower of all that is best in me, is as a fi^thie
clout. But t^ou promisedst in truth, ^s^y 64.6
and wilt perform in mercy, that thou will not the death of a Sinner, but
whenever he shall repent, be shall live. Lord, accept of the desires and
groans of my heart. Hear my cries and weeping; forgive my frailty, wipe
away the filth and corruption of my soul, furnish me strength and spiritual
courage against the life of sin, so pregnant and powerful within me:
Inflame mine affections zealouslie to be disposed to thy glory, grant
Perseverance Love, Hope and all Christian virtues, unto my last breath, for I
resolve by thy grace (O my God) to walk in thy vvayes the rest of my days I
have to spend; lame^ting for by past offenses, and promise to shun all
occasions of evil hereafter.

O of how short continuance is this life! Esaias. 40.7.
endless is the eternity in that life to come, Job. 2.7.
and plentiful is that reward: Wisd. 2.3.4.21.
it is mome^tary that pleasureth, everlasting, that annoyeth, yet as the Lords
greatness is, so is his mercy. Romans 8.28


And therefore do I account that the afflictions of this present time are not
worthy of the glory which shall be shown; 2. Cor. 4.17.18.
for the light affliction, which is but a moment, causes a far more
excellent, and an eternal weight of glory, The things which are seen, are
temporal, Gal. 3. 1.
but the things which are not seen, are eternal. I know (troubled Soul) it
beboued Christ (whom thou did see) suffer, and so enter into his glory, Luc.
24.26
in thy Place to take state and possession, that where he is, thou may be
also, for he has married thee unto himself for ever, ^os. 2.19.
yea, he did marry thee in righteousness, and judgments, and in mercy, and
in compassion, he has even married thee in faith fullness, and thou shall know
the Lord. ^ant. 2. 16.
Therefore thy beloved is thine, and thou art his, it is the voice of thy
well-beloved that knocks, saying. Open to me, my Dove my Sister, ^ant. 5.2.
my Love, my well-beloved, for mine head is full of dew, and my locks are wet
with the drops of the night. Say not (deceitful Soul) to thy Christ, Go and
come again, ^ro. 3.28.
and to morrow I will give thee, if thou now have it. Remember the portion thou
shall have with him in wed-locke, who has acquired unto thee, by his Poverie
a Kingdom, by his sorrows thy joy, by his travles, thy rest, by his shame thy
glory, by his Death thy life, and who would buy a match at such a dear and
costly rate. Return therefore (disobedient Soul) unto the Lord, and he will
not let his wrath fall upon thee, for he is merciful, Lam. 3.12.
and will not keep his anger. And who is great like unto him? who tak^th away
iniquity, and passes by the transgressions of the remnant of his heritage?
he retains not his wrath for ever, because mercy pleases him, he will
turn again, Micah. 17.18.19.
and have compassion, yea, he will subdue thy i^iquitie, and cast all thy sins
in the bottom of the Sea: For thy Christ did come into this world to finish
the wickedness, Dan. 9.24
and to seal up the sins, and to reconceale the iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting righteousness. Rev. 3.20.


And now behold (poor Soul) he stands at the door, and knocks, if thou
will hear his voice, and open the door, he will come in unto thee, and supp
with thee, Esaias. 60.19.20.
and thou with him, where there shall be no more Sun to shine by day,
neither the brightness of the Moon, John. 14.23.
to shine to thee, for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and thy God
thy glory, and the days of thy sorrow shall be ended.

Love him therefore, freely (beloved Soul) and keep his word, 2. John. 3.24.
and his Father will love thee, he will come unto thee, and dwell with thee,
for he that keeps his commandments, dwells in him and Christ in him, and
hereby shall thou know, that he abides in thee, even by the Spirit, which
he has given thee.

I will entreat thee of all favor (poor Soul) to meditate thy omission of
good things, commission of evil, and loss of wholesome time, and occasion;
which three are past by: and these three present the shortness of this life, the
difficulty to be saved, 1 Pet. 4.17 18.
and the fewnes of them that do enter in that strait way: For if judgment
begin first at the house of God, what shall be the end of them which obey not
the Gospel of God, and if the righteous scarcely he saved where shall the
ungodly and sinners appear. Do not forget these three things to come, Death,
than the which nothing is more terrible: the last Judgment, than the which
nothing is more horrible: eternal Punishment, than the which nothing is more
intolerable. O that thou were wise! then would thou understand this, Deuteronomy.
32.29.
thou would consider thy letter end.

But I (poor Soul) do not know what to do, ^. Chro. 20.12.
but mine eyes are toward thee, O Lord, for truly great travel do sinners
take to perfect their iniquities: they imagine nothing impossible, so they may
aquire their designs. The way of sinners is made plain with stones (so smooth
think they i^, Wisd. 5.7.
) but the end thereof is hell, darkness, and pain. Flee from sin, as from a
Serpent: the teeth thereof are the teeth of a Lion, Eccl. 21.10
to slay the souls of men, All iniquity is as a two edged sword, the wounds
thereof can not be healed. And if thou have sinned, do so no more, but pray
for thy fore-sinnes, that they may be forgiven thee: Eccl. 5.5.6.7.
And because thy sin is forgiven, be not without fear, to heap sin upon
sin: And say not, The mercy of God is great, he will forgive my manifold
sins: for mercy and wrath come from him, and his indignation comes down
upon sinners. Make no tarying to turn unto Lord, and put not off from day to
day, for suddenly shall the wrath of the wrath of the Lord break forth, and
in thy security, thou shall be destroyed: But blessed is that people, whose
God is the Lord; for peace shall be upon them, ^^l. 6.16.
and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Unto him therefore, ^h. 3 20.
that is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we ask or think,
according to the power that works in us; be praise in the Church, by Christ
Jesus, thorowout all generations for ever. Amen.

THE AGREEMENT OF DIFFERENCES IN THE INCARNATION, PASSION, AND Ascension of our
Savior.

THE MYSTERY OF the Incarnation.
A Mother and a Virgin bears a Son,
The Creature her Creator on her knee,
From all beginning, yet but now begun,
Servant, to Time, Lord of Eternity.
Earths Weakness, and Heave^s Power in him does dwell,
That is both God and Man, Emanuel.
Meekness is here combined with Majesty,
The Lion with the Lamb keeps peaceful place,
Obedience finds a Seat in Emperie,
This Earthly substance breeds a heave^ly grace,
To Poverty, rich Gifts, are brought by Kings,
Terrestrial figures, of Celestial things.
Who sits in Heaven upon the Throne of State,
Suckes here on Earth, the milk of Infancy,
Who rules the Stars, and guids the stern of Fate
Sustaines the yoke of humane Misery,
Eats, drinks, wakes, sleeps, and weeps a mortal man,
In whom Immortal happiness began.
THE MYSTERY OF the Passion.
THe Judge of Man, by Man is judged to die,
He that commands the law, the law obeys
Submission has a Seat in Soveraingn'ty
This stormy Night, begets our Hal^yon days,
The best of Hope springs from the worst of Fears
And gives us cause of Joy, from cause of Tears.
The Lord of Life, is subject unto Death,
The Masters power, the Minister obeyes:
At once inspyring, and expiring breath,
Submittes to Kings, yet Kings and kingdoms swayes
Sin upon Virtue, has imposde a Blame,
Honor by Baseness, is exposde to Shame.
Thus from the Cross our Blessedness is bred,
His suffering made it a triumphant Sign,
Our looks are raisde, while he bows down the Head,
He tastes Vinegar, to give us Wine,
Saues all, by loosing all to Tyranny,
Helps all, yet cries Lamasabachtani.
THE MYSTERY OF THE Resurrection, and Ascension.
DEath from the Grave, Life to the Grave is brought
Flesh without Sin, sees no coruptio^
By yielding, was this noble Conquest wroght
Over Sin, the World, Death, Hell, and al Pollution,
Extensiue Weakness, with intensiue Power,
His Hurts have healed these wounded states of our.
ASCENSION.
He that the Earth has for his Footestoole laid
Makes his Ascens up to his Heavenly Seat;
There dwells his Power, which his Mercy made
And here his Mercy, which his Power makes great.
All glorious in his Sea^ he sits upon,
All gracious in the Place he treades upon.
He which is taken up, is left behind,
Unbounded Power does circumscribe al things
He that has framed the heart, and ruls the mind
Does give Himself to Beggars, as to Kings:
Mercy remains, whilst Majesty does tower,
And Grace descends, with his ascending Power.
Succumbat ratio fidei and captiva quescat
A SHORT CONFESsion of our Sins.
MY life (O LORD) is a perpetual rebellion against thee, for who can make
clean that which is conceived in the filth of sin. My time was a Sea, and
flood of sorrow, secluded from all goodness, until thou did put forth thy hand
and pull me into thine Arc, and had I not been made clean in some measure,
by the red Sea of the Blood of thy Son in Baptism, I should have lain in the
filthy puddle of my vile corruption. Neither has Satan ceased to bereave me
of the love, whereby thou first did love me: He did not show me, (deceiving
Serpent) the wages of Sin: but ^^eeting and turning, did hyde thy wrath from
me. Amity with him, is enimitie with my God. His love is hatred, because the
Image of my Savior is in me, he pursues at my heales, but if thou be with
me, who shall be against me? I can not think a good thought of my self,
but shall do all things through thee (O Christ) who strengthenst me, who is
my life and resurrection the hope of the afflicted, my light in darkness, the
wholesome dew of my dry and withered Soul, my strength in weakness, the
Physician of my wounds, and salve for my sores, whose mercies are infinitely
more than my detestable sins can be. I have wandered (alace) like a lost
sheep, (Good Shepherd) seek me, and bring me home again. O Lamb of God,
who takes away the sins of the world, let the light of thy countenance shine
on me, and look on me, as thou did on Peter. By dying thou have overcome
Death, and brought ag^ine Life by rising therefrom. If I had the knowledge of
Angels, and all my members were converted into tongs, never should I be able
worthily to magnify the boweles of thy compassion extended to me (wretched
sinner) which passes all understanding. Thou did not take (dear Christ, the
Angels, but the seed of Abraham being made like unto me in all things (Sin
excepted) which nature thou have glorified in the heavens. Now since it is
humane nature wherein thou raignest, I believe also to reign and be glorified
with thee: And albeit my sins hinder me, in the constant course of my
Salvation, yet thy love, this Commnuion, and conjunction takes all lettes out
of the way. Thou art not so hard (O Lord) as to despise me, since thy Son
has carried my nature unto heaven. Can thou forget that which thou have fast
by thee? No truly, thou art slow to anger, full of mercy, with thee is
plentiful redemption: Most loving art thou, for no man hates his own flesh
at any time, thou (O God) love thy Son, and they that are his, which are
risen with him, and placed by Faith and hope in heavenly places. I was not
worthy to be thy servant, but thou have made me thy Son and fellow-Heire
with my Brother Christ Consider the pains of my Redeemer, and pardon the
redeemed his offenses. Why did he so obedientlie suffer the punishment of
disobedience, but only to save me, and thine Elect? There was no goodness
in me that could induce thee to the same, it was thy bounty, and free mercy,
and now thine hand is not shortened, but it can save me. Will thou then try thy
power against straw, and stubble, against me who am but a shadow, and lighter
than vanity. My sins are always in my sight still representing before me
thy anger, I feel the grievous burden of them, and thy judgments against
them, but thou will not the death of a Sinner, but that he should turn, and
live. Enter not therefore in judgment with me (O Lord) for no flesh shall be
justified in thy sight, for thy Christ, whom I embrace by a true Faith, is made
unto me righteousness, wisdom, and redemption. To whom with thee, and the
holy Ghost, be all glory, and praise for ever, Amen.

A PRAYER BEFORE the Communion.
WOunderfull must thy love be (O Lord) toward me, poor and miserable
Sinner, that thou would have thy dear and only Son, to suffer all
torments, and death for me, and to take upon him all my infirmities and
miseries: and yet not contented therewith, would have the remembrance of
this thy great mercy (least it should be forgotten, and razed out of mine
heart) and that my Faith should not wax faint, (since thy Son has ascended
up to Heaven) after a strange and wonderful manner fed and nourished me, and
distilled in me that spiritual Life, by the means of his Body, making the
Cross the wine press, out of the which those grapes and liquor of eternal
life are drawn out. Give me thy holy Spirit, that I may have strength against
Satan, the World, and the Flesh: Grant spiritual life to abide in me, as the
branches has that natural from the wine; that forsaking my self, loving of
my self, I may live in thee, by thee, and for thee, until I come unto thee
where I shall see thee face to face. True it is (O Lord) no reason can reach to
this spiritual food, but Faith only does go through, for by those visible
Elements I d^e apprehend spiritual and invisible graces, and that not by
imagination, for as Bread does nourish the body, so do thou (O Christ)
the soul: And as Flesh is a substance, so thou Son of God incarnate, is the
cause of this substantial nourishment of my soul. As life is in the body, so
Christ by his Blood shall give me life, and is my life, the condition and
estate of my flesh, my blood, and my whole life was more than miserable: but
by, through and in thee (O Christ) all things were restored and made perfect in
me. The forebidden blood of beasts in the Law should make me shun a brutish
and a beastly life: But thy Blood teaches me to live a Christian, holy,
righteous, and sober life: For it is not now I that lives, but thou in me,
who is only consubstantiall with the Father, and holy Ghost, yea, this union I
have with thee, by true faith, as the head with the members, an union (I say)
of affections, wits, participation of heavenly and eternal blessedness,
that I live not to my self, but to thee (O Lord) who loved me, and gave thy
self for me. For they that live on sweet meats, have sweet breath, so they
have a sweet odor in all their words and works, who taste of this spiritual
and heavenly food, in whom Christ does spiritually dwell by faith. (O
Christ) thy manhood was seen on earth, but the Godhead, not at all, yet did
great and wonderful things without changing or co^founding of natures so in
these Symboles Christ's body I see not, which notwithstanding works in me a
beginning and grouth of renovation: The body of the Suns light above, is in
it self whole, albeit it be dispersed here beneath, so thou, (O Christ) is
above in heaven whole, yet do communicate to every belieuer, to be partaker
of thy Body and Blood, but diminution or weakening of thy self, which thou
offeredst for me weak, not enclosed in me, when thou is received of me,
without any dishonor at all to thy Majesty, when thou comes unto this my
sinful cottage, having mine heart to be thy Temple and dwelling place, who
fills the heavens, and the earth thy Footstool, O happy is he, that does
eat the flesh of my Lord and Savior, with earnest desire to obey his will,
and stays on his promises, trusting alwaye^ on him. In this earth am I
partaker of Christ by the help of his word and Sacraments: But in heaven
above, without any external means, I shall feed on that heavenly Bread,
and drink of that spiritual drink, feeling in effect his presence, and
enjoying that glorious life fulfilled in the Kingdom of God, where I shall
hunger no more neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on me
neither any heat. For thou (O Lamb) which is in the midst of the Throne shall
govern me, and lead me unto the lively fountains of waters. And thou
(sweet Savior,) shall wype away all tears from my eyes (O happy day, when I
shall feed on that heavenly Manna, the food of thy holy Angels in that
Paradise, and thrice happy am I in Christ, to taste of the sweetness of the
life to come: I do refuse the deceitful pleasures of this world, and choose
rather to suffer adversity with the people of God, than enjoy the pleasures
of sin for a season. Rejoice thou, one of that flock, on whom it has
pleased the Father, to give a Kingdom. Thou art my good Shepherd who feeds
me with thy own Blood, that I may live by thy life: For they that live by the
infected and poisoned blood of old Adam only, are more miserable, than
beasts. Prepare (O Lord) in me love and repentance, make me clean, and
purify mine heart by Faith, the only receptacle and mansion of thy presence,
to receive such a precious Guest: Put on me the wedding Garment; since thou
dear Husband (Jesus) will join and unite thy self to me; never hereafter
on thy part to be dissevered make me beware of Hypocrisy, and cou^terfaite
dealing, in approaching with my body, but my heart far off, betraying thee
again with a Judas kiss. The pure, the contre^te and broken heart, for the
sense of Sin laden and weary are here invited by thee, who will not break the
bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, such are eased and find rest to
their souls. And because none oblation pleases thee without reconciliation
with my Brother, I make an atonement with him, forget and forgive him, as I
hope to be forgiven, for his sake, who has come under the poor roof of my
soul, by participation of his body on earth, beginning already a life in me
in heaven: for whom have I there but thee, and whom can I desire on earth,
beside thee. The Israelites did eat that Manna, and died, but they that eat
this heavenly food, shall never perish: But after thou have guided me by thy
counsel, will receive me to glory. Adams forbidden tree procured death, but by
thee is everlasting life, agreeing heaven with earth, Men with Angels, and as
it is the fulness of Joy, to behold thy Face, and feel thy presence; so let my
soul have a lively feeling of comfort in my Christ, with a growing strength
in grace, and in the saving knowledge of thee, my God, and not to loss a good
conscience for the trash of this world, and as thou wills me to remember thy
Sons death, (O F^ther) be thou as (thou have promised, and wilt perform,)
mindful of me in the riches of thy mercy to the ending of my life in Jesus:
To whom with thee, and the holy Ghost, be praise and honor for now and ever.

So be it.
A Prayer and Thanksgiving after the receiving of the holy Supper of our LORD.
O LORD GOD Father Almighty, I yield thee hearty thanks for thine
inestimable love, and favor toward me miserable Sinner; not only for that I
have my being, moving, and living in thee, and from thee, but also because it
has pleased thee of thy mere mercy, to redeem me from eternal damnation,
wherein I was cast by reason of transgressions, and that by the Blood of thy
Son our Lord Jesus Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled and without spot, that I
might live with thee in that thy Kingdom in the Heave^s. Let not the effusion
thereof be in value toward me, but still feed and nourish my soul by
participation of the Body of thy Son Christ Jesus, as an effectual pawnde, and
earnest of that glory, which shall follow. And now, what shall I render unto
thee for all thy spiritual and temporal blessings thou have vouchsafed on
me? And what does the Lord (my God) require of me, but to fear thee, to walk
in all thy ways, and to love thee, and serve thee, with all mine heart, and
with all my soul. Command me (Lord) what thou will, and do in me that thou
command. The most detestable vice is ingratitude, and greater honor can be
given to none, than to be called the Child of God. Thou have the Son of thy
delight, with whom thou might have contented thy self, and have thou not the
holy Angels, which do readily thy will, yet it has pleased thee to adopt
mankind. O suffer me not (holy Father) to degenerate from thee, and to turn
to my former nature: Give me an understanding heart, to do thy will, and
preserve me as the apple of thine eye: Remove my sins, which are as a cloud
betwixt thee and me, O my God, which art my light, my life, and salvation:
albeit I find in my self great temptations, and grievous assaults of Satan,
the flesh and the world. Though thou, even thou my dear God, would kill me, yet
will I trust in thee, for I know thou can reviue me, and when thou woundest
can heal me. Grant I never doubt of thy promises through unbelief, but
being confirmed in Faith, give glory to thee; as fully persuaded, that thou
that promisest, art also able to do it. For it is the greatest punishment that
can befall man, to forsake thy word, and admonitions, not to rely on thy
promises, but harden the heart by obstinacy and rebellion. Take not thy Spirit
from me but fasten mine heart to thee: Show me the light of thy countenance,
that I wander not from thee, and sleep in sin, but I may gather in this last
age of the world, Manna, for that great and everlasting Sabbath in the Heavens,
that Jerusalem above, the City of the living God, where I shall find peace and
rest for ever; having access and entry to that light of Glory, which has
broken and overthrown the kingdom of Satan: For I know as thou strengthenest
and fortifiest thy secre^ ones, thou redoublest their temptations. O^ but hard
is the combat when thou striu^^ against us, and seem to be our adversari^^
for how should dust and ashes stand before thee. Strengthen and guide me by thy
might, that encouraged by thy promises, I may conquer and be conpassed with
joyful deliverances: Great infirmity and weakness does remain in me, I am
full of vexation and anguish of mind, but let me never yield no^ wax faint,
but sustained, and vpholded by thy grace and power, that b^eing pressed, I be
not oppressed, but rise again, as the Palm tree. For as the seed, dead, and
rotten in the earth, brings forth greater abundance; so tribulation is the
seed of the Church. Assist me therefore, by thy heavenly grace, to try how much
more precious the trial of my Faith is, than gold; which brings so great a
glory, when thou shall change my tears into joy, my mourning into mirth, my
sorrow into solace; my death into life. Make my delight to be always in thy
word, which being eternal, can make me also eternal. I choose it to be my
Treasure, that mine heart may be always therein, for he that will live, must
needs know thee, he that will reign must needs serve thee, and that he will
have joy of heart, must needs praise thee, for thou art that Ladder by which
Angels come down to us, and w^^ ascend up to Heaven to them. Thou art the Way,
the Verity and Life, no man comes to the Father, but by Thee.

Quicken ^^e therefore in thy Blood, that I may be of the number of thy
Children, and true member of the body of thy Church, and never forget this
Covenant, I have now bound up with thee, who has given me that Inheritance by
thy Will and Testament, whereof this holy Supper is a true pledge. Now hence
forth I am fully deliberated to obey willingly thy Statutes, and persevere
ioyefullie unto the death, and suffer crosses patiently since thou my Savior
art my life. To thee therefore, with the Father and the holy Ghost, Trini^^e
in Unity, be all praise, and glory, and honor for now and ever. Amen.


