PERTH ASSEMBLY. CONTAINING 1 The Proceedings thereof. 2 The Proof of the
Nullitie thereof. 2 Reasons presented thereto against the receiving the five
new Articles imposed. 4 The oppositenesse of it to the proceedings and oath of
the whole state of the Land. An. 1581. 5 Proofs of the unlawfulness of the
said five Articles, viz. 1. Kneeling in the act of Receiving the Lords Supper.
2. Holy days. 3. Bishopping. 4. Private Baptism. 5. Private Communion.


EXODUS 20.7. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the
Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain. COLOS. 2.8.
Beware lest there be any that spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit,
through the traditions of men, according to the rudiments of the World, and not
of Christ. MDCXIX.

TO THE READER.
THE external worship of God, and the government of the Church (Gentle and
indicious reader) are like Hippocrates twins: they are sick together, in health
together: they live together, they die and dwine together. As long as the
government of the Church of Scotland stood in integrity, as it was established
by laws, civil and ecclesiastical, according to Gods word, so long was the
worship of God preserved in purity. Since the former government was altered,
and the insolent domination of Prelates has entered in by unlawful means
amongst us; popish rites and superstitious Ceremonies have followed, and are
like to prevail universally. They have verified in their persons their common
tenent, No Ceremony, no Bishop. The liberty granted to our Church, to indict
and hold general assemblies from year to year and oftener pro re nata, was
the chief bulwark of our discipline. This bulwark was broken down to the end
a more patent way might be made for their exaltation. When vote in Parliament
(the needle to draw in the threede of Episcopal authority) was concluded, to
the great grief of the sincerer sort, many protestations were made, that no
alteration in discipline, or divine service was intended: many cautions and
limitations were made to bound the power of the minister voter in Parliament.
They were ordained to be countable to the general Assemblies, for the manner
of their entry and behavior in this new office: But like bankrupts, not being
able to render account, they labored that no account should be made at all:
that is, that there should be no ordinary general assembly to take account.
Some few extraordinary Assemblies have been convocated of late years at their
pleasures, for their purposes, and according to their device, constituted as
they thought good: wherein they procured, or rather extorted with terror and
authority, a sort of pre-eminence above their brethren. They were Lords in
Parliament, Council, Session, Checker, Lords of Regalities, Lords of temporal
lands, Presenters to benefices, modifiers of Ministers stipends,
grand-Commissioners in the high Commission. Was it wonder then if so great
Commanders commanded the Assemblies constituted, as is said, and carved to
themselves a spiritual Lordship, when their worthy brethren were banished,
imprisoned, confined, or deteyned at Court, that they might the more easily
effectuate their purpose. They have broken the caveats made with their own
consent, violated their promises, and have sought pre-eminence both in Church
and Common- wealth, with the ruin of others, and the renting of their mothers
belly. We have notwithstanding been so silent hitherto, that the world has
judged our silence, rather slumbring and slothfulness then true patience. They
are not satisfied with the wrongs already committed, but do still provoke us
with new irritant occasions: and specially by obtruding upon us superstitious
will-worships, and polluted inventions of men. It behooveth us therefore to set
pen to paper, and say somewhat for the surer stay and better information of
professors, tenderly affected to the sincerity of religion, lest they be
deluded with the glorious name of a pretended and null-Assemblie, or seduced
with temporizers, swallowing up all abominations or corruptions whatsoever.
The means of printing and publishing are to us very difficill: we wish
therefore every good Christian to take in good part our mean travels, and not
impute unto us want of good will, but of means, if they be not served
hereafter continually after this manner. We shall be ready God willing for
our own part, as need shall require, and opportunity will serve, to defend
the cause we maintain against any of our opposites their answers, or replies
whatsoever, worthy of answer. We have seen of late some Pamphlets, which have
rather exposed their authors to laughter and contempt, then deserved any
serious Confutation. In the Epistle before Basilicon Doron his Majesty
protests upon his honor, that he misliketh not generally all Preachers, or
others, who like better of the single form of Policy in our Church, then of
the many Ceremonies in the Church of England: and are persuaded that their
Bishops smell of a papal Supremacy, that the surplesse, the corner cap, and
such like, are the outward badges of popish errors. And that he does equally
love and honor the learned and grave men of either of these opinions. His
Majesty uses this Provision, that where the Law is otherwise, they press by
Patience and well grounded reasons, either to persuade all the rest to like of
their judgment, or where they see better grounds on the other part, not to be
ashamed peaceably to incline thereunto, laying aside all preoccupied opinions.
We are able to prove that no Ecclesiastical law has been made in any free
and formal Assembly for the alterations bypast, or presently intended,
either in Government or Ceremonies. The ratification of civil Laws already
made, or to be made, cannot rectify the Ecclesiastical, as long as we are
able by good reason to impugn their authority, and evince the vicious
constitution, the informall and unlawful proceedings of these Assemblies,
where the said Ecclesiastical Laws are said to have been made. Put the case
that no exception might be made against the Law, his Majesty's provision
permits us to persuade others with well grounded reasons. The verity of our
relations, and validity of our reasons, we refer to the trial of every
judicious Reader, making conscience of his oath, promise, subscription, and
purity of his profession.

THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE ASSEMBLY HOLden at PERTH in August, Anno Dom. 1618.
TVesday the 25 of August, 1618, the first day of the Assembly. The general
Assembly was indicted by his Majesty to be holden at Perth the 25. day of
August 1618. Intimation was made twenty days before by open proclamation with
sound of trumpet. For obedience to the proclamation and his Majesty's
particular missiues, the persons following conveined at the said Burgh the
appointed day: his Majesty's Commissioners my Lord Binning Secretary. Lord
Skoone. Lord Carnegie. Their Assessours Sir Gideon Murray Treasurer Deputy, Sir
Andrew Ker of Pharnihirst, Captain of the guard. Sir William Olphant the kings
Advocate, and Sir Will. Livingstoun of Kilsyth. Noble men, the Earls of
Louthiane, Lord Ochiltrie, Lord Sanquhar, Lord Boyde. Barons: Waughtoun,
Lutquharne, Glen-vrquhart younger, Clunie-Gordoun, Boningtoun-woode, Weymis,
Balvaird, Bilcolmie, Balcarras, Balmanno, Bombie, Blackbarronie, Lagg.
Burgesses: for Edinburgh David Akinheid George Fowlis. For Perth James Aedie,
Constant Malice. For Dundie; Mr. Alexander Wedderburne younger, Robert
Clay-hils: for Aberdine, Mr. John Mortimer. For Sterling, Christopher
Alexander: for S. Androes, John Knox, Thomas Lentroun: for the University of S.
Androes, Doctor Bruce. Bishops, all except Argyle and the Isles. Ministers,
Commissioners from presbyteries.

According to the ordinance, and laudable custom of this Church anent the
sanctification of her meetings by fasting and prayer, intimation was made upon
the Sabbath preceding in the Church of Perth of a fast to be observed the first
day of the assembly: but the fast was little regarded, saving that two sermons
were made. The first was made in the morning by Patrik Bishop of Aberdine. His
text. Ezra. 7.23. he observed and enlarged this ground, that nothing should be
done or determined in the Church by any superior power whatsoever, but that
which is according to the commandment of the almighty King. The other sermon
was made at the tenth hour by John Archbishop of Saint Andrews in the little
Church. His text. 1. Cor. 11.16. was very pertinent, but he ran quickly from
it. He discoursed the space of two hours first in defense of ceremonies in
general. Next, of the five articles in particular. His best arguments for
proof or improbation was some testimonies cited out of Calvin, Martyr, Beza
but perverted. The said Arch Bishop in his discourse, made ample protestation
that he understood not of the intended novations before they came of his
Majesty. Item, that his Majesty would have had these five Articles registered
as Canons in the book of the general Assembly, without either reasoning or
voting: but by his means his Majesty was put of, till the consent of the
Church should be obtained. This his protestation he confirmed with a dreadful
execration, that the curse of God might light on him, and his, if he had not
spoken truly. Immediately after the said discourse; was holden the first
Session of this assembly in manner following.

There was set in the little Church a long table, and at the head thereof a
short cross table. At the cross table were set chaires for his Majesty's
Commissioners and the Moderator. At the side of the long table were set forms
for Noblemen, Barons, Burgesses, Bishops and Doctors. The Ministers were left
to stand behind them, as if their place and part had been only to behold.

The Archbishop placed himself at the head of the table in the Moderators
chair beside his Majesty's Commissioners. After prayer he notified to the
assembly, that Master Thomas Nicolson ordinary Clark had dimitted his office
in favor of Master James Sandelands Advocate. He commended the said Master
James, as a man qualified for that office, and ready to further the brethren
in their particular affairs: And so without formal voting or lyte he took
him sworn and admitted him Clerk. The Brethren were ordained to give in their
commissions to him after the rising of this session.

After that, Doctor Young, Deane of Winchester, by birth a Scotishman presented
his Majesty's letter, directed to the Lords of the privy Counsel, and the
Bishops. This letter was twice read in open audience. Terrors were mixed with
allurements to move the assembly. After the reading of his Majesty's letter
the Archbishop had a speech, wherein he protested, that neither he nor the
Church of England had craved these nouations, nor given counsel thereanent, and
that it was against his will, that ever they were motioned. Yet now he is
persuaded, that his Majesty would be more glad of the consent of this
assembly thereunto, then of all the gold of India: assureing them on the other
part in case of their refusal, the whole estate and order of our Church will
be overthrown, Some Ministers will be banished: other some will be deprived of
their stipend and office; and all will be brought under the wrath of authority.
He advised them rather to consent in time, then afterward to beg favor by
offering conformity, and find none. He alleged a letter written to him by a
banished minister, M. John Sharp, requesting liberty to serve God in his own
country, and offering to submit himself in all things. But the letter was
neither read nor seen. O, said he, I know when some of you are banished, and
others deprived, ye will blame us, and call us persecuters; but we will lay
all the burden upon the King. And if you call him a persecuter, all the world
will stand up against you.

After his own speech, he required Doctor Young to speak, if so be, he had
intention or commission to that effect. The Doctor after his preface of
insinuation, laid out the proceedings of the last assembly holden at S.
Androes, the taunt and reproaches breathed out at Court against the same: his
Majesty's high displeasure kindled by occasion thereof, like a flame of fire
ready to consume all, except it were quenched in this present assembly by
condiscending to the five articles. He taxed the state of our Church, whereof
he was ignorant. It pleased his wisdom to bring in the Puritan and the Papist,
like Herod and Pilat conspiring Si non contra Christum Deminum, tamen contra
Christum Domini. In end with words framed for the purpose and uttered in a
mourning manner, he went about to catch consent to the five articles.

The ministers defenders of the established order perceiving the drift of these
discourses, and all other means to be prepared and disposed for dashing of
simple men, modestly required four things. 1. That none be admitted to vote,
but such as are authorized with lawful commission. The Archbishop answered,
hi^ Majesty had written to noble men and Barons willing them to be present at
this assembly, if any man had any exception against them, they should be heard.
It was replied that they were not to except against their honorable persons or
presence; but earnestly to ^rave that the order of the Church might be
observed: whereby it is provided that without commission none have place to
vote in general assemblies.

2. That the liberty of the Church be not broken in the election of the
Moderator, and that a lawful lite be made to that effect. It was answered by
the Archbishop that, this Assembly is convocate within the bounds of his
diocese he would understand who will take his province over his head. So he
intruded him self in the Moderators office without election.

3. That the articles proponed in short and general sums, might be put in
form, and amply extended as his Majesty would have them inacted, that they may
be the better advised and considered. The pretended Moderator answered, let
alone these toys, trouble us not with needless questions, we shall speak of
these things in the privy conference.

4. That some of either opinion may be set apart to collect, and put in order
the reasons of either side for the more sure and easy information of the
assemblies. The pretended moderator rejected this also as impertinent.

He proceeded at his own pleasure without advice or information of the
provinces or presbyteries to the nomination of the privy conference, before
that the Clark had received the commissions. He nominated besides his
Majesty's commissioners, their assessours and the noble men, all the Barons
except three* all the Bishops, the Commissioners of Edinburgh, Perth, Dundie,
37 Doctors and other ministers. The most part was such, as were already
resolved to yield. Others were not experienced in the state of our Church, some
few of the other opinion were taken in, to try the force of their arguments in
private, that in public they might either be evaded, or suppressed. After the
said nomination the conference was appointed to convein at 3. afternoon and
the assembly at 8. hours in the morning. So ends the first session.

The conference convenied at 3. afternoon. His Majesty's letter was read again.
The Moderator aforesaid seconded the same with many terrors. To make them go
quickly to work, he affirmed that four articles were already concluded in the
Assemblies holden last at Aberdine and S. Andrews respective, howbeit not in
form as his Majesty required: that kneeling allanerly rested to be consented
unto. For assisting of his declaration a minute was read containing the points
conferred upon at the places foresaid. And no further evidence was produced for
probation of the alleged agreement. But particularly mention was made, that
his Highness altogether refused cautions and conditions added by the said
Assemblies as frustrations of his Highness intentions. And as was affirmed by
the said Moderator, his Majesty was still offended at that Assembly holden at
S. Andrews. For removing of that offense the Moderator aforesaid would have
had the Article of kneeling voted in the conference without reasoning. But
after much business and earnest dealing, the said Article by plurality of
votes was put to reasoning. For clearing the state of the question, the
Ministers defenders of the established order, required again that the said
Articles might be extended to the full, and put in perfect form. 2. That the
party of the other judgment, would prove them necessary and expedient for our
Church, according to the revealed rule, Affirmanti incumbit probatio: or
otherways improve our former order already established, as defective,
superfluous* or confused. 3. That time and place might be granted to all,
having calling and interest to reason freely, and hear reasoning in presence
of the Assembly for their better direction. 4. That the reasons of moment might
be proponed and answered in writing, and some few of either side appointed to
put them in due form and order.

The Moderator notwithstanding of the reference of these conditions to the
privy conference, rejected them: and as for the party pursuer, and party
defender in the reasoning, he determined by himself, that the Ministers
defenders of the established order must either prove the Articles to be impious
and unlawful, or else they must prove disobedient to his Majesty. It was
replied, That poor subjects neither ought, nor conveniently could dispute a
question so affected with disobedience to their Sovereign, as was there
alleged. But if reformation be intended, and the truth of the Articles
proponed be sincerely to be searched so far forth as they may prove good and
expedient for this Church; the order agreed upon by his Majesty at Perth 1597.
cannot of reason be refused, viz. That matters touching reformation of external
government be proponed, ordine and decenter animo aedificandi, non tentandi,
for searching the truth the undoubted ground of true unity. Notwithstanding of
whatsoever could be alleged, the Ministers standing for their possession, were
forced to be persuers, and either to object against the said Articles, or else
to be reputed disobedient to his Majesty, and to have no reason on their side.
The time being spent, some few reasons were alleged by the Ministers, which
were cut off rather by cavilling and quarrelling at men's persons* then solidly
answered. The conference was appointed in the morning at eight hours,
notwithstanding the said hour had been appointed for the second Session of the
Assembly.

Wednesday the 26. of August, the second day of the Assemb^y.
THE privy conference convened at 8 hour in the morning. Much time was spent
with the Bishops discourses, and other preparations for making way to summary
reasoning. Some few Arguments were proponed by the Ministers against kneeling
in the act of receiving the sacramental elements of bread and wine; but
answered as before. The pretended Moderator to cut off reasoning instantly
required, that kneeling might be voted in the conference. The Ministers
alleged that the proper use of the conference is to prepare and put in order
matters that are to be entreated in the face of the Assembly; and therefore
required that the Articles might be formed: and after long debait it was
concluded by plurality of votes, that they should be formed. The rest of this
short time was spent in naming of Bishops and Doctors for forming and extending
the Articles and Acts that were to pass thereupon. The conference was
appointed to conveine at 4. afternoon.

The Assembly being frustrate of their diet in the morning, assembled at 4.
afternoon at the call of the Bell, by the Moderators expectation. He showed
unto them, that that hour was appointed for the conference allanerly. But
seeing they conveined, he thought good to make known to them, that the four
Article^ formerly condescended upon at Aberdine and S. Andrews, as also the
fifth Article against kneeling, after long reasoning were concluded in the
conference, and ordained to be formed and produced before them. And so he
desired them to depart to the end that matters might be exped, for ending the
Assembly the morn. But opposition was made in the contrary, that kneeling was
not voted, and the other four Articles were neither reasoned nor voted. After
the removal of the Assembly, the act of kneeling as it was formed, was read in
presence of the conference, The pretended Moderator urged that kneeling should
be voted. It was answered, that it was an intolerable novelty in this Church, a
great prejudice to persons, purposes, and privileges, and a presumptuous
usurpation of a few to vote and conclude under the colorable pretense of a
conference, matters of weight belonging to the whole Church. They required
therefore that according to order, reasoning and voting might be reserved to
the full Assembly. The pretended Moderator answered, First, that it was the
custom of the Lords, of the Articles in parliament to proceed after that
manner. Next, that he would not spare to commit twenty preiudices to please the
King. And thus kneeling was put in voting without regard of the Assembly, and
concluded by plurality of votes. The rest of this short time was spent in
talking upon Symony, the planting of the Church of Edinburgh, and order to be
taken with beggars. The conference appointed the Assembly to conveine the morn
after Sermon.

Thursday 27. Aug. the third day of the Assembly.
WIlliam, B. of Galloway made a Sermon, his Text Rom^ 14.19. His doctrine was
far contrary to that which he taught before the estates of Parliament An. 1606
He set at naught the ancient order of our Church, sometime highly commended by
himself, and extolled his new light. He presumed to teach them a new kind of
Catechism, under whom he himself might be as yet catechized. The second and
last Session of this assembly began after dinner* and ended this day.

The Kings Commissioners, and the Bishops, masters of this Assembly,
determined to end all this after noone: and having the assise enclosed for that
effect, assured them that out of that house they should not go until his
Majesty were satisfied of his desire. The pretended Moderator earnestly
aggreadged the nncessity of yielding and instantly urged present voting without
further delay strongly enforcing, that his Majesty behoved to be satisfied,
and assureing them, that his Highness would accept of no other answer but
yielding. To effectuate his purpose, he blew out many threatenings in most
peremptory manner. He insulted upon the ministers assembled, as if they had
been hirelinges, saying, I know you all well enough. There is never a one of
you will suffer so much as the loss of your stipends for the matter. Think not
but when the act is made I will get obedience of you. There is none of you that
voteth in the contrary minds to suffer. Some men, said he, pretend
conscience and fear more to offend the people then the King: but all that will
not do the turn. Albeit he had formerly affirmed in the case of requiring
consent, that although the act were made, his Majesty would be merciful in
vrgeing obedience thereto. And they knew him to be more favorable to his
brethren then any Bishop of England. He took it also upon his conscience,
though it was not true that there was neither lass nor ladde rich nor poor in
Scotland some few precise persons excepted, who were not only content but also
wished that order of kneeling to be received: whereof he had proof and
experience in his own city of S. Andrews, and in this Town since he came
hither. He made mention of a pamphlet casten in the pulpit at Edinburgh,
wherein it should have been affirmed, that the Bishops were bringing in
Papistry, and that good professors will fight in defense of their own religion.
By way of answer thereto, he confessed that the ceremonies make not the
separation betwixt us and the Roman Church, but their Idolatry, the which if
the Romanists would forsake, they would meet them midway, and join with them.
And as if the Ministers had known any such professors disposed to fight for the
religion, or had been of purpose to join with them, he disswades them to lean
to such words, for he had seen the like of that before time at the 17. day of
December. He wished if such a thing should happen, it would please his Majesty
to make him a Captain, never any of these braggers would come to the field.

After these blasts and terrors, the Ministers with modest importunity
insisted that the matters depending might be better cleared by further
reasoning and advisement; so much the rather, because these matters had not
been reasoned in full Assembly, for the information of all that had interest.
After much dealing, and many earnest speeches and desires to be heard, some
fashion of liberty was granted to a few, but with such checkes and limitations
to the party that preased to propone and reason, that quickly they were cut
off and sourely rebuked, rather borne down with authority, then satisfied with
reason. His Majesty's chief Commissioner, and pretended Moderator, straightly
enjoined them either to propone a new reason, or else to hold their peace, when
as the argument either had* not been proponed in conference; or if proponed,
not answered; or if answered, not suffered to be replied unto. And suppose all
this had been done in the conference, yet all was new to the full Assembly, and
ought to have been repeated and fully discussed for information of all voters.
Yea many Ministers had not so much a^ access to hear or propone one argument:
they had no seats provided for them, as the other party had: Gentlemen
thronged in before them. The defenders of the Articles were permitted to
discourse as long as they pleased, to gybe, mock, and cavil, so light account
made they of the matters in hand, or the fearful schism ensuing upon such
disorders, that their behavior was offensive to the beholders. The best
arguments and answers were taken from the authority of the Kings sword. He
will ranverse all, except we yield; or the authority of his word; as when it
was alleged out of Zanchius upon the fourth commandment, that things
indifferent abused to Idolatry should be altogether removed. The pretended
Moderator opponed the judgment of the King of Great Britain, to the judgment
of Zanchius, or any of the learned. In a word, the pretended Moderator
professed plainly, that neither their reasons nor their number should carry
away the matter. These Articles must be concluded, and should be concluded,
although there were none but the eleven Bishops, with the authority of his
Majesty's Commissioners, they shall impose them. After some few reasons
proponed and answered, as is said, it was confessed, that if his Majesty could
have been pleased, or put off, they would have reasoned against these Articles,
and the introducing of them in this Church. Doctor Lyndesay being posed in
conscience, confessed that they had neither reason, nor Scripture, nor
Antiquity for them, yet to avert the Kings wrath of this Church, yielding was
best. Kneeling was chiefly agitate. Some velitation there was made against Holy
days. Nothing spoken of the three other Articles, boasting and posting
confounded all.

The ministers not being permitted to reason and pursue their arguments
verbally with such liberty, as of reason should have been granted, and fearing
prejudice in voting, gave in some difficulties in writing, to be considered and
removed, before the articles should pass in voting, like as they were ready,
if place had been granted to present in writing particular reasons against
every one of the said articles, as was plainly professed. But for cutting them
short of that intention, the presenter of the said difficulties in a bosting
manner was commanded to subscribe the same, and rebuked as not having
commission. They suspected a protestation, against the proceedings of this
Assembly, for preventing whereof they had declamed before against the
protestation subscribed at the last parliament, as treasonable, and seditious.
But when it was perceaved, that he sought a pen for subscribing of the same,
the Moderator received them. Two of them was read, but no ways respectted; the
rest were suppressed.

The ministers notwithstanding of the preceding terrors most humbly and
earnestly requested his Majesty's Commissioners, that the concluding of the
articles might be continued, which their reasons in writing were sent to his
Majesty, and answer returned. But this humble request was dispysed.

Before the roll was called, his Majesty's letter was read again in open
audience of the said assembly, no doubt to the end the last impression might
incline the voters to consent. The ministers defenders of the established order
required again, that none might have place to vote, but such as were
authorized with lawful commission: but that order could not be admitted. Yea
the pretended Moderator answered, that if al Scotland were there present they
should have vote.

The question put in voting was thus formed. Whether will ye consent to these
articles, or disobey the King? the words chosen to distinguish the votes were:
agree: disagree: non liquet. The question proponed was affected with this
strait condition: he that denies one, denies all. The question being thus
contrived, the Moderator certified them, that whosoever voted against the
articles, his name should be marked and given up to his Majesty. For gathering
the votes, he took the roll in his own hand from the Clarke, to whom of office
it belongs so to mark the votes, that accordingly he may form the acts truly
as his oath and office binds him. First were called his highness
commissioners, and their assessours; then the Noblemen, Bishops, and Barons;
then the Doctors and Ministers, last of all the burgesses. The Doctors and
Ministers were called on without order. He called first on those, of whom he
was assured to be on the affirmative side without respect of the order of
Province or Presbytery, as for example, the Arch Deacon of Sanct Androes and
Mr. Patrik Galloway a man of many pensions were ranked with the Ministers of
the North. Some wanting commission were called and voted affirmative: diverse
others having commission of whose negative they were assured; were omitted. In
calling on the names, he inculcate these and the like words: have the King in
your mind: remember of the King: look to the King. In the end by plurality of
votes the five articles were concluded and consented unto. 1. Kneeling in the
act of receaving the sacramental elements of bread and wine. 2. five holy
days: the day of Christ's nativity, Passion, Resurection, Ascension, and the
Penticost. 3. Episcopal confirmation. 4. Private Baptism. 5. Private
communion. His Majesty's Commissioners and their assessors: all the noble men,
except one: all the Barons except one: all the Doctors except D. Strange: all
the Burgesses and a number of Ministers voted affirmative* one noble man, one
Doctor, and forty five Ministers voted negative: some few, non liquet.

THE NVLLITY OF PERTH ASSEMBLY.
THE general Assembly has usually met, since the reformation of the
religion, according to the indiction of time and place made by the former
Assembly. And if it happened that any Assembly was to be holden Pro re nata,
premonition was made in dew time by his Majesty, and the Commissioners of the
Church, and the occasions set down expressly, to the effect Commissioners might
be sent instructed according to the quality of the business to be entreated.
Nevertheles after diverse reports given out by such as stand in credit in
Church affairs, that his Majesty was so incensed against the last Assembly
holden at Sanst-Androes that there was no hope of any other Assembly: This
Assembly beyond expectation was proclaimed to be holden within twenty days
after the proclamation made at the market cross of Edinburgh, without any
advertisement given to the Presbyteries anent the matters to be handled.

The act of chattouris of old were void, and of none effect, when the meanest
member having vote was neglected, contemned, or not lawfully warned. Such
like the act of Provincial synods, when the mean^st suffragane was not
regarded with lawful citation, according to the rule Contemptus unius plus
obest, quam multorum contradictio. Nevertheless for lack of lawful warning* and
convenient space to provide and prepare Commissionars, there was absent from
that Assembly, four dioceses viz. Orknay, Caithnes, Argyle, and the Isles,
beside diverse presbyteries, whose interest was as proper and necessary in the
general assembly as of any suffragan in synod or particular member in the
chaptour.

The general assembly, the highest judicatorie Ecclesiastical within this
realm, has ever after exhortation made by the last Moderator lyted, and
lawfully elected a new Moderator according to diverse acts continual custom
and practice of this Church. The which presbyteries has been so regarded, that
the conuention holden at Perth by his Majesty's missiue the last of Feb. 1596.
although frequented by his Majesty's presence with a great number of the
nobility, Barons and Burgessis with the Commissioners from every presbytery
was for the defect aforesaid no further acknowledged to be a lawful Assembly,
then the general Assembly holden at Dundie the year following 1597. declared
the same, that is, to be a lawful extraordinary Assembly. Nevertheless no
moderator was lawfully elected in this Assembly, but the place usurped by him
who had practiced against the matter there proponed, and not as yet determined,
and consequently, who ought to have been secludid from any authority in
respect of the prejudice committed by him.

By order established, acts standing in force and continual custom free of
all controversy and quarrel, all and every one of the ordinary members of a
general Assembly, having place and power to vote, or capable of moderation,
are and should be authorized with lawful commissions from inferior Assemblies
viz. Presbyteries, Burghs and Universities, according to the act made anno
1537. Nevertheless the Bishops, a great number of noble men and Barons, and some
Ministets, having no lawefull commission presumed to carry themselves as
lawful members of the said Assembly.

Whereas the proceedings of the Assembly ought to be free without
preoccupation either with terrors or allurements. This Assembly was
preoccupied with Sermones, Letters, harangues with allurements on the one side,
and terrors on the other.

No other ought to be chosen members of the privy conference but such as are
authorized with commission to be members of the Assembly. Nevertheles the
pretended moderator did nominat for the privy conference such as he pleased,
before the commissions were delivered, and consequently not dewlie informed,
who were the just members of the Assembly.

According to the rule, Totum est maius sua part, the Assembly is greater
then the conference: and according to another rule Turpis pars omnis toti non
congrua. It is an absurd conference that disagrees from the whole Assembly,
Nevertheless in that Assembly some few named by the pretended Moderator, not
chosen by the Assembly, not only according to the custom of the privy
conference concurred with the said Moderator for preparing and digesting of
matters to be proponed in dew order, but took upon them to reason, vote, and
conclude the matters properly belonging to the whole Assembly.

It had been the commendable care of Godly Emperors, and their honorable
deputs in general Councels, to provide that nothing be done violently, nor
extorted by terror, but that time* and liberty be granted for reasoning upon
matters proponed* and that the book of God be laid open for finding out the
truth. Agatho writing to the Emperor Constantine advises him to grant free
power of speaking to every one that desires to speak for his faith which he
believes, and holds that all men may evidently see that no man willing or
desirous to speak for the truth was forbidden, hindered or rejected by any
force, threatenings, terror, or what soever else might avert them from so
doing. Conform to this advice, the Emperor answers as follows. By God
almighty we favor no party, but shall keep our selves equal to all, no way
making necessity in any point. Nevertheles in this assembly, the necessity of
yielding was enforced under no less pains then the wrath of authority,
imprisonment, exile, deprivation of Ministers, and utter subversion of the
estate and order of this Church. Such as by the providence of God had their
mouths opened to reason, were checked, quarrelled, rebuked, boasted,
interrupted, and for their discouragement, it was plainly professed that
neither the reasoning nor the number of voters should carry the matter away.
The party defender was forced to pursue. The collecting and putting in order of
the reasons of either side was refused.

In free and lawful assemblies private reasoning is not sufficient, but it is
requisite that there be also free reasoning in public for the full information
of all who have the right of voting. Nevertheles in this assembly public
reasoning was hardly obtained, and when it was obtained, it was not full and
free to propone, and pursue with replies.

In all free and lawful assemblies, humble requests for mature deliberation in
matters of great importance has been heard, and granted. But in this assembly
humble supplication for continuation till matters were more ripely considered,
or till his Majesty's answer was returned to the petition of the defenders of
the established order, was peremptorily refused.

Pope Leo excepteth against the second Council of Ephesus, call Praedatory,
that Dioscorus, who challenged the chief place, keeps not Priestly moderation
and would not suffer the synodall letters of the West to be read. In all free
and lawful Assemblies good advisements has been heard and followed. But in
this Assembly some difficulties presented in writing to be considered and
removed before the voting, were peremptorily rejected.

In all free and lawful Assemblies public voting should be free of all
terrors according to the rule, nihil consensui tam contrarium est, quam vis
atque metus quem comprobare contra bonos mores est. Nevertheles in this
Assemblies, his Majesty's letters were read the fourth time, immediately before
the public voting, to move the Assembly. The pretended Moderator threatened to
mark their names who dissented, and breathed out many terrors and threatenings,
and so he made good in public, that which he professed in private, that he
would commit twenty prejudices to further his Majesty's purpose.

In all free and lawful Assemblies the estate of the question to be voted,
ought to be so formed that it carry with it no danger. Nevertheles in this
Assembly the matter to be voted was proponed with sensible danger, agree, or be
reputed disobedient to his Majesty, that is, either make a constitution to
bind all Ministers, and professors of this reformed Kirk to return to these
five articles which they have vomited, or else ye shall be reputed disobedient.

As the acts which are to pass in voting should be distinguished in number:
clear in order, particularly expressed from point to point, because they
should contein directions of certain actions to be performed, etc. So the
matters offered to voting should be distinctly, clearly, and particularly
proponed. Nevertheles in this Assembly all was shut up in a confused caption a
multis interrogatis, and voted at once voting in one session. Justly therefore
may their conclusions be called Leges Saturae.

In all free Assemblies such order is observed in calling the names of the
voters, that no public prejudice be committed. Nevertheles in this Assembly
neither the accustomed order of Provinces, nor Presbyteries was observed; but
such were called on first, as were known to be affirmative voters, to
discourage and disperse the negatives.

Leo says Epist. 25. that some that came to the Council of Ephesus were
rejected, and others were brought in who at the pleasure of Dioscorus were
brought to yield captive hands to their impious subscriptions. For they knew it
would be prejudicial to their estate, unless they did such things as were
enjoined them. It is crimine falsi in gathering of votes, either to pass by
them, who have place and power to vote, or to admit such as are not lawfully
authorized. Nevertheles in this Assembly not only were some past by who were
known resolved to vote negative, but diverse others also disposed to vote
affirmative were admitted, or rather brought in without commission.

In all free and lawful Assemblies, not only Ministers, but all others of
whatsoever rank, ought to be authorized, with commission, or else they have not
the power of voting. Nevertheless in this Assembly, persons of all ranks not
authorized with commission, were admitted to vote, as may be seen by the
induction following.

It has pleased his Majesty in former times to send but some few Commissioners
in his Highness absence, to concur with the Assembly, and to propone his
Highness desire thereunto, etc. Nevertheless in this Assembly, not only his
Majesty's Commissioners, but also their Assessours gave every one vote, whereas
his Majesty's self being present; never clamed further, then the power of one
vote.

At Edinburgh in July 1568. it was ordained that Barons should be chosen
Commissioners in Synodall assemblies. At Dundie in March 1597. after the full
establishment of Presbyteries, it was appointed in presence of his Majesty,
that Barons should be chosen Commissioners with consent of Presbyteries, and
that one Baron only should be directed out of the bounds of a Presbytery.
Nevertheless in this Assembly, the Noblemen and Barons had neither commission
according to the old act, nor according to the new.

In the year of God 1568. it was ordained that Burgesses should be chosen
Commissioners by the Council and Kirke-session of their Burgh coniunctly. And
in the year 1597. that they should be chosen with consent of the Presbytery.
Item, that every Burgh have power to direct but one Commissioner, except
Edinburgh, to whom it was permitted to direct two. Nevertheless in this
Assembly, neither of the said acts were observed.

At Montrose 1600. it was statuted and ordained, that none of them who shall
have vote in Parliament in the name of the Church, shall come as Commissioners
to the general Assembly, nor have any vote in the same* unless they be
authorized with commission from their own Presbyteries to that effect. This act
was never repealed, no not at the pretended assembly holden at Glasgow, but by
the said assembly they stand countable to every general assembly for their
proceedings. Howbeit the Presbyteries were spoiled of their authority in many
things at the said pretended assembly: yet of the power of election of
Commissioners they were not spoiled. Neither is there any other order of
election of Commissioners, and constitution of the members of the assembly set
down by any act of our Kirk, their was established Anno 1597. Nevertheles in
this assembly, they not only presented themselves without commission, but sat
as Lords overruling it. They had practiced the ceremonies against the
established laws before they were proponed to the Assembly, they ought
therefore to have been secluded and sharply censured; but they usurped the
place both of Judge and party.

At S. Andrews in April 1582. it was thought expedient that Presbyteries
should not be astricted to direct their Moderator in commission, but whom they
judged fittest for the purpose. That constant Moderators should be constant
members of the general assembly, is a forged clause foysted in an act of a
pretended assembly holden at Linlithquow the year of God 1606. The which
assembly neither the Church then did, nor the Bishops now will stand to.
Nevertheles in this assembly, some Moderators of Presbyteries voted without
election, and only by virtue of the forged clause of the act aforesaid. If any
Presbytery directed their Moderators in commission upon ignorance and error,
having respect to the forged clause aforesaid. Their ignorance and errrour is
not lawful consent. It is in the mean time to be remembered, that the present
Moderators are not of the quality of these constant Moderators, but of a new
Edition set out at Glasgow, viz. They are the Bishops Deputes placed by them in
Presbyteries.

The Assessours to his Majesty's Commissioners, the Noblemen, Barons, Bishops,
Burgesses, and Moderators imposed upon Presbyteries with some Ministers voting
without warrant, being subtracted from the number of affirmative voters, the
negatiues will not be found inferior in number to the affirmatiues authorized
with commission. And suppose inferior in number, yet not in weight, for the
negative voters adhered to the judgment of the Church, heard no reasons for
the novelties proponed, were not overcome with persuasions or terrors, as was
the affirmatiues.

The affirmative voters authorized with commission, either had their
commissions procured by their Bishops, or else were mercenary Pensionars* or
Plat-servers for augmentation of stipends: or gapers for promotion: or of
suspect credit for benefit received or hoped for* or had subscrybed other
private Articles in private more dangerous then the present Articles: or had
been threatened privately by their own diocesian Bishops with deposition: or
were not well informed in their judgment for lack of full and free reasoning:
or were circumvented with promises made to them, by theit Bishops, that they
should not be urged with the practice, if they would only consent to make an
act to please the King: or were terrified with the public threatenings before
mentioned. Judge therefore whether their votes should be pondered or numbered.

In omnil us causis pro facto accipitur id in quo quis alium terrefacit quo
minus fiat. In this Assembly the affirmative voters confessed that they
assented not simpliciter to the Articles proponed as knowing truths, but only
to avert the wrath of authority, standing in their own Judgment against them,
and not for them, in respect of the estate of this church. Hence it may be
clearly seen that their votes were only affirmative in respect of their
fear, but negative in respect of their judgment, and duetifull affection to
this Church.

Other informalites may be observed, but these are sufficient to prove the
nullity of this pretended Assembly whereby the established estate of this
Church is so far prejudged, or rather simple people for their facility
endangered, if they upon the pretended authority of this Assembly shall
adventure to make defection from their former profession confirmed by so many
and well advised Assemblies, and blessed by the experience of Gods great love
in his best benefits, or to violate their solemn oath, and subscription. The
pretender may as safely profess that he will alter his profession, or violate
his oath, and subscription, suppose there had been no Assembly at all. But to
detain simple people in their bygaine revolt, it will be cried out and
inculcat that some few persons (and to make them odious they will be called
mall-contents, troublers of the estate, seditious persons, and what not? for
the which contumelies and reproaches account must be made one day) that they may
not, nor should not judge upon the nullity of the Assemblies. It is true by way
of jurisdiction or superordination (as they call it) no private man should
presume so to do, for that judgment belongs to another free, and lawful
Assembly. But by the judgment of discretion every christian man ought to judge
how matters of religion are imposed upon him, and by what authority. If thou
may not discern as a judge, thou may discern as a Christian. If ye shall
admit indifferently whatsoever is concluded under the glorious name of an
Assembly, then may we be brought to admit not only the English ceremonies, but
also Lutheranisme, and Papistry. If Ministers give way to their Parochinners to
practice the obtruded Ceremonies at their pleasures. If sworn professors
entangle themselves again with the superfluiities, whereof the Lord has made
them free, let the one and the other take heed how they defend themselves from
the just challenge of back slyding, and the rest of the inconveniences, that
may ensue on their change.

If the Parliament by acts, authorize matters affected with such informalities,
and nullities, matters of themselves so contrarious to our profession, their
ratification of a vicious thing can not be a rule to a Christian manes
conscience. But it is to be hoped, that the Lord shall so dispose the hearts of
stats-men to the love of the truth, quietness of the Church and Country, and
peace of men's consciences, that no unreasonable burden shall be knit upon the
members of Christ's body by any deed of theirs under the name of a benifit to
the Church. Invito beneficium non datur.

Consider three things: first the nullity of this Assembly. 2. Thy own oath and
subscrption, how it admits or abhors this change suppose the Assembly had been
lawful. 3. If the particulars offered can be made lawful, or expedient by any
Assembly whatsoever.

THE ARTICLES PRESENTED TO the Assembly Aug. 27. with some quotations added for
confirmation.
FOR so much as we have been debarred of access, and from heareing the
proceedings of the conference, their reasonings, consultations, and
advisements, anent the Articles proponed to this general Assembly: whereof
all and every one of them so neerlie touches us in our christian resolution
and offices of our Ministry. In most humble manner we present to your
considerations the particulars here after specified, in the fear of God
entreating your favorable answer to the same.

1 The articles proponed, if they be concluded, they do innouate and bring
under the slander of change the estate of this Church, so advisedlie
established by Ecclesiastical constitutions, acts of parliament, approbation
of other Kirkes, and good likeing of the best reformed christians without and
within this kingdom, and so evidentlie blessed with happy success and
sensible experience of Gods greatest benefits by the space of 58 years, and
above; so that we may boldly say to the praise of God that no Church has
enjoyed the truth and purity of religion in larger liberty. And upon some
such considerations, it pleased his gracious Majesty to continue the Church of
England in her established estate, as may be seen in the conference at Hampton
Court, and Thomas Spark his book written there upon. Ipsa quippe mutatio,
etiam quae adiuvat utilitate novitate perturbat: quapropter quae utilis non
est, perturbatione infructuosa consequenter noxia est, says Augustine Epist.
118. That is even a change that is helpful for utilitie, perturbeth with the
noveltie. Wherefore consequently a change that is not profitable, is noisome
through fruictles perturbation. Rarher a Kirk with some fault, then still a
change, It is said in the conference at Hampton court.

2 The receiving again of these articles so justly rejected, and so carefully,
and long kept forth of this Kirk, greeveth reformed professors tenderly
affected to our reformation, and gives occasion to our adversaries to reproove
our separation from them, of rashness, levitie, and inconstancy, and not only
hinders their conversion, but strengthens their hope of our further conformity
with them. Quoties non mutarunt suam quisque senten^iam? Quod aedificant body,
cras destruunt. Hodie lapidem locant in fundamentum, coementoque confirmant,
quem postero dic eruunt, and conterunt. Vbique revocationes, emendationes, novi
foetus, aliae atque aliae, quoties nova sententia placet, assertiones: alius
deturbat alium, confusio confusioni permiseetur: atque interim scinditur
incertu^ studi^ in contraria vulgus. Nec adhuc ^^rnimus aliud, est quis nisi
mente captus dicat istiusmodi artifices reaedificare Ecclesia Dei, quibus omnia
incerta fluxa, instablia, contraria: quibus nulla dogmatum constantia, nulla
animorum consensio, Antdidagma Coloniens. Page 4. That is, How often have they
not changed every one their opinion: that which they build to day, they
demolish to morrow: they place this day a stone for a foundation, and make it
sure with mortar which they pull up the day following and bruise in pieces:
every where there is revocations, corrections, new births, diverse assertions,
as often as a new opinion pleases any of them: One throws down another:
Confusion is mingled with confusion; and in the mean time, the doubtful
vulgars are severed in contrary factions. Neither do we as yet perceive any
other thing: and who will say except such a one as is beside himself, that
such artisans reedifies the Kirk of God, to whom althings are uncertain,
flowing, unstable, contrarious, who have no constancy in the heads of doctrine
no consent of minds. etc.

3 They cannot stand in one profession with brotherly kyndnes, peace, and love
which must be tenderly kept amongst the members of Christ's body, as the same
consists of stronger, and more infirm as may appear in the apostolical rules
following. First, all things are lawful to me, but all things are not
profitable. I may do all things but I will not be brought under the power of
any thing. 2. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own my^d. 3 Whatsoever
is not of faith is sin. 4 Let every one understand according to sobriety as
God has dealt to every man the measure of faith. 5 Take heed least by any
means this power of yours be an occasion of falling to them that are weak. 6
Through thy knowledge shall thy weak brother fall, for whom Christ died. 7
When ye sin against the brethren, and wound their weak consciences, ye sin
against Christ. 8 Whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. 9. Give no
offense, neither to the Jew nor to the Grecian, nor to the Kirk of God. 10
Please all men in all things, not seek^ing your own prosite, but the profit of
many that they may be saved. 11 Cause not your commodity to be evil spoken of.
12. Let all things be done, honestly, and in order* Things indifferent (put the
case man's invention were of that nature) in the case of scandal, cease to be
indifferent, and are as things moral. Perkins. Galat. 2.3.

4. They give way to humane inventions, and bring the wrong key of man's wit
within the house of God whereby toys and trifling Ceremonies in number and
force are multiplied as men's wits are variable to invent. Who requires those
things at your hands.

5. The admitting of some opens the do^e to the rest, and the multitude of
such make us inferior to the Jews in two respects. 1. Their Ceremonies were
all divine. 2. In number fewer then rituall Christians do observe betwixt the
Pasche, and the Pentecost, Gerson complains, quod multitudine levissimarum
ceremoniarum vis omnis Spiritus Sancti quem in nobis vigere oportuit, and vera
Pietas, Sit extincta. That with the multitude of frivolous ceremonies true
piety was extinguished and the force of the Spirit which ought to be powerful
in us. Jewel Apollog. Page 116. Sed quamvis hoc neque inve^iri possit, quomodo
contra fidem sunt, ipsam tamen religionem servilibus oneribus p^^munt, ut
tolerabillior sit conditio Iudcorum, qui etiamsi tempus liberta^is non
agnoverint, legalibus tamen sarcinis, non humanis presumtionibus subjiciuntur.
August. epist. 119. Howbeit it can not be found how they are contrary to the
faith, yet they press down religion it self with servile burdens, so that the
estate of the Jews is more tolerable, who howbeit they did now acknowledge the
time of their liberty, are subject notwithstanding to the burdens of the Law,
not to the presumptions of man.

Quanto majus accedit cumulo rituum in Ecclesia, tanto majus detrahitur, non
tantum lil ertati Christianae, sed and Christo, et ejus fidei. Confess.
Orthodox. Cap 27. That is, The more that the heap of rites and Ceremonies in
the Kirk increases, the more is derogated, not only from Christian liberty,
but also from Christ and his faith. Learned and grave men may like better of
the single form of policy in our Kirk, then of the many ceremonies of the
Kirk of England. Epist. before Basilicon Doron.

6, Matters of that nature bring inevitably with them disputations, divisions,
contentions as may be seen in all Kirkes, where such coals of contention gets
entry. The Pascha of the Primative Kirk, The Interim of Germany, the rent of
the Kirk of England, our own experience since the strife of the externnall
gubernation began among us etc.

7. They hinder edification, for how meckle time and zeal shall be spent upon
the inbringing and establishing of these, as much leisure and opportunity shall
Satan get to sow and water the tares of Athisme, Schism, Popery, and
dissension. Consider the sentences following. 1. Let us proceed by one rule,
that we may mind one thing. Philip. 3.16. 2. Let us follow the truth in love,
and in all things grow up in him, who is the head, that is Christ. Ephesians. 4.3.
Give no place to the Devil. 4. If ye be otherwise minded God shall reveal
the same to you. 5. Feed my sheep. 6. Take heed to your selves and to the
flock. 7. Let no root of bitterness spring up to trouble you. 8. Fulfill my joy
that ye be like minded, haueing the same love being of one accord and of one
judgment, that nothing be done through contention or vain glory, but that in
meeknes of mind every man esteem other better then himself. 9. Do all things
without murmuring and reasoning. 10. It was needful for me to write unto you,
that ye should earnestly contend for the faith, which was once given to the
Saints. 11. While men slep^ the enemy came, sowed his tares amongst the wheat,
and went his way.

8. They bring a sensible blot either upon the happy memory of our godly and
wise predecessors, in so far as we depart from that reformation, so wisely
brought in, appointed and established by them, or else upon our selves, by
resuming again of dangerous superfluities without reason, rejected by them, for
weighty and necessary causes, Magnum est hoc Dei munus, quod una est religionem
puram, et eutaxian, doctrinae videlicet retinendae vinculum, in Scotiam
intulistis. Sic obsecro et obtestor, haec duo simul retinete, ut uno amisso
alterum non diu permanere posse semper memineritis. Beza epist. to M. Knox.
This is a great benefit of God that ye have brought into Scotland true
religion and good order, the band that retains doctrine, at one time, so I
beseech you and obtest that ye retain these two together, so that ye
remember, that if the one be lost, the oher can not endure long. And again he
says quam recte illud, quod disciplinam simul cum doctrina conjungitis,
obsecro, et obtestor ut ita pergatis ne vobis idem quod tam multis eveniat, ut
qui in limine impegerint progredi non possunt, immo etiam interdum ne velint
quidem, quod long miserimum est. How well was that done, that ye conjoined
Doctrine and Discipline together, I beseech you and obtest, that ye go
forward, lest it happen to you which is befallen to many, that could not make a
progress, haueing stumbled in the very entry, yea sometime were not willing
which is most lamentable.

9 They set loose the filthy minds and mouths of fleshly livers to triumph
against the most sound and best reformed professors, and to rejoice in their
rotten opinions, and restored opportunities of sensual observations of
guising, gluttony, carrels, etc.

10 They are declared by this Church to be contrary doctrine, as may be seen in
the 1.2. and 3. chapters of the first book of Discipline, in these words: We
judge that all doctrine repugnant to the Evangell, should be utterly suppressed
as damnable to man's salvation. In the books of Old and New Testament we
affirm that all things necessary for the instruction of the Kirk, and to make
the man of God perfect, is contained and sufficiently expressed. By contrary
doctrine we understand, whatsoever men by Laws, Councels, or Constitutions
have imposed on the consciences of men without the express commandment of
Gods word, as keeping of holy days commanded by man, the feast of Christmas,
and other feasts.

11 The Commissioners of Presbyteries here convened sufficiently understand,
that neither the Presbyteries from whom they have their commissions, nor the
particular Churches of this Realm either require, are willing, or consent to
admit these novations. Consitentur Theologi nihil esse per Synodos Ecclesijs
invitis obtrudendum. The Divines do confess that nothing should be obtruded
upon Churches against their will.

12 The Commissioners of Presbyteries here assembled, understanding the
alienation of them from whom they received commission, from these Articles, can
by no warrant oblige nor bind their unwilling Presbyteries, and Congregations
to their votes. Ecclesiam dissentienlem and invitam obligare quis potest? Who
can bind a Church disassenting and unwilling.

13 There stand in force diverse acts of parliament in favor of our present
order, Ia. 6. Parl. 1. cap. 8. Ia. 6. Parl. 6. cap. 68. and cap. 69. Item, the
first act of the Parliament Anno 1592.

14 The Ministers of this Church by order of the same printed and inserted
before the Psalm book at their admissions respective promise in the presence
of God, and of his congregation assembled, to abhor and utterly to refuse all
doctrine alleged necessary unto salvation, that is not expressly contained in
the Old and New Testament, and according to the graces and utterances that God
shall grant unto them to profess, instruct, and maintain the purity of the
doctrine contained in the sacred word of God, and to the uttermost of their
power to gainstand, and convince the gainsayers, and teachers of men's
inventions. Item, to submit themselves most willingly to the wholesome
Discipline of this Kirk, by the which they were then called to the office and
charge, promising in Gods presence obedience to all admonitions, secretly or
publicly given, etc.

15 The subscribers of the confession of faith by their oath therein contained,
promise and swear to continue in the obedience of the doctrine and discipline
of this Church, and to defend the same according to their vocation and power,
all the days of their lives, under the pains contained in the Law, and danger
both of body and soul in the day of Gods fearful judgment: and to abhor
and detest all contrary religions, but chiefly all kind of Papistry in
general, even as they are now damned and confuted by the word of God and Kirk
of Scotland, but in special the Popes five bastard Sacraments, whereof
Confirmation is one, with all rites, ceremonies, and false doctrines added to
the true Sacraments without the word of God: his absolute necessity of
Baptism, etc. Which confession and practice following thereupon, is come to
the eyes of the world in print, and solemnly renewed in the covenant celebrated
in the general and provincial Assemblies, Presbyteries, and Kirk-sessions in
the year of God 1596. And how shall any man be heard to speak against that
whereunto he has formerly sworn and subscribed? See the conference at
Hampton Court. For the better understanding of their last Articles, I will set
down a short discussion of the Oath.

THE OATH DISCVSSED.
THE Religion, Doctrine, and Discipline received, believed, and defended by the
Kirk of Scotland, and namely the public ministration of Baptism, and the
Lords Supper, sitting at the table in the act of the receiving the bread and
wine of that Sacrament, the observation of the Lords day, and the examination
of children, for the first time at the ninth year of their age, for the second
at the twelfth, for the third at the fourteenth, excluding and abhorring
private baptism, private communion, kneeling in the act of receiving the
Supper, holy days, or feasts of Christmas, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension,
and sending down of the Holy Ghost: were brought in at the reformation of
religion, and enjoyed ever since in manner and form as follows.

After due trial and advisement taken of the heads in general and particular
above written, the whole Church was of one heart and judgment concerning the
same, and every man was permitted to hear reasoning, and such as would were
permitted to reason, every man professed himself to be persuaded in his own
mind.

The particulars to be embraced and followed, and the corruptions to be
avoided, were by Ecclesiastical authority in free, full, and lawful general
Assemblies, public confessions, and solemn protestations advisedly
established.

The estates of Parliament agreeing in judgment with the Kirk concerning the
said matters by their acts ratified and approved the Kirk constitutions, and
appointed civil penalties against the transgressors of the same, with
provision of order whereby they might be called, convicted, and punished.

The said unity of judgment authorized by the constitutions of the Kirk, and
laws of the Country, and the whole particulars established by these bands,
having been tried by practice, and otherwise, have proved expedient,
profitable and necessary by the space of fifty nine years, and now justly
have acquired the force of good and commendable custom.

For our further confirmation of the said religion, doctrine, and discipline in
general, and in the particulars before named, all and every one of all estates
of this Realm have solemnly sworn, that they shall continue in the obedience
of the doctrine and discipline of this Church, and shall defend the same
according to their vocation and power.

Notwithstanding of these five obligations, viz. unity of judgment, and
opinion: Ecclesiastical authority reiterated and confirmed by many famous
Assemblies: Many civil laws: Nine and fifty years practice and custom
universally commended: and the said solemn oath diverse times repeated, the
pretended assembly holden last at Perth, received certain forms formerly
excluded and abhorred.

Queritur, if one or more Preachers or Professors in the said Kirk, standing to
the Kirkes former judgment; and able to defend the same by good reason, at
least seeing no warrant in the contrary, may dispense with the said oath, or
follow the plurality of preachers, and professors dispensing with the same in
the assembly. And what power may compel the alteration of judgment, or loose
the said oath in any case aforesaid? Leaving the full answer to the wise and
well reformed Christian walking before God, and looking for a crown upon the
glorious day of our Lord. For present reformation we shall consider the said
oath: first in the persons, takers of the same. 2. The matter whereto they
swear. 3. The form and manner, whereby they are bound. 4. The force and
effect of that form for making sure men's particular deeds.

The persons takers of the oath are all baptized Christians of perfect age,
able to examine themselves, and so to eat of the Lords Supper, honored with
callings, and all professors of Christian fellowship, of Christ the searcher
of hearts, and of life and judgment eternal, free of madness, and of all
restraint of superior power in this case, understanding perjury and the pains
thereof, at their own liberty, and free of all coaction: as at length may be
seen in the confessions of faith registered in the Acts of Parliament, printed
in the book of Discipline before the Psalms in meeter, the confession of
faith subscribed by the Kings Majesty and his household, published by open
proclamation and yet standing in print. And in the covenant celebrated by the
general and provincial Assemblies, and by the Presbyteries, and particular
congregations, but more summarily in the heads underwritten, acknowledged and
confessed by themselves.

WE all, and every one of us after long and due examination of our consciences
in matters of true and false religion are now thoroughly resolved in the truth
by the word and Spirit of God.

We believe with our hearts, confess with our mouths, subscribe with our
hands, and constantly affirm before God, and the world, that the faith and
religion, received, believed, and defended by the Kirk of Scotland, the Kings
Majesty and three Estates of this realm particularly expressed in the
confession of our faith, established and publicly confirmed by sundry acts of
parliament, and now of long time has been openly professed by the Kings
Majesty, and whole body of this Realm, is only the true Christian faith and
religion pleasing God, and bringing salvation to man.

To this confession, and form of religion we willingly agree in our
consciences in all points, as unto Gods undoubted truth and verity.

We willing to take away all suspicion of hypocrisy and double dealing with
God and his Kirk, protest, and call the searcher of hearts for witness, that
our minds and hearts do fully agree with this our confession, oath, and
subscription.

We protest that we are not moved with any worldly respect, but are persuaded
only in our conscience through the knowledge and love of Gods true religion
printed in our hearts by the holy Spirit, as we shall answer to him in the
day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed etc.

Before and at the time of their solemn protestations, it was well known to
all the promisers, Swearers, Subscribers, that 1. At Edinburgh, the 18. day of
October. 1581. And from the reformation to that year it was resolved, and by
common consent concluded that in time coming no sacrament be ministered in
private houses, but solmnely according to the good order hitherto observed. 2.
At Edinburgh in Ianu. 1560. it was declared by this Kirk that Christ sat with
his disciples at a table, when he instituted the supper, and that sitting at
table was the most convenient gesture to this holy action. 3. That the Popes
five bastard sacraments, whereof Confirmation is one, with all rites ceremonies
and false doctrines added to the ministration of the sacraments were abhored.
And that examination of children, aftet the manner agreed upon in the Kirk, was
sufficient to unite baptized infants with the Kirk in the participation of the
Lords Supper. 4. That at Edinburgh in Ianuar. 1560. the Kirk judged utterly to
be abolished from this Realm, keeping of holy days such as the feast of
Christmas etc. Imposed upon the consciences of men without warrant of Gods
word, and many other things of the like nature condemned by preaching, and
corrected by public censures of the Kirk. Hence it is evident that no
exception can be taken against the persons promising, swearing and subscribing,
for despensing with the said oath.

The matter whereunto they bind themselves by oath is the religion, doctrine
and discipline received, believed and defended by the Kirk of Scotland. In
respect of this matter, the oath is partly assertorie, and partly promissorie.
They affirm as follows. 1. That it is Gods undoubted truth and verity
grounded only upon his written word. 2. That it pleases God, and brings
salvation to man. 3. That they are now thoroughly resolved in this truth. 4.
That they detest all vain allegories, rites, signs and traditions brought into
the Kirk without, or against the word of God and Doctrine of this true reformed
Kirk. Such assertions can not be loosed, an assertorie oath can not be
dispensed with, for it is already past. Assertorij juramenti materia in
necessitatem transijt. They have all already sworn that they are persuaded in
their consciences in the points aforesaid. This persuasion is not to be
performed, but is already past and sworn. We can not therefore go in the
contrary except we will be perjured. The promissory part is, to continue in the
obedience of the doctrine and Discipline of this Kirk, or to defend the same.
The indurance of the said continuance and defense is all the days of our
lives. The execration whereby they enforce the truth and promise of their oath
is, under the pains contained in the law, and danger both of body and soul in
the day of Gods fearful judgment. This continuance and defense in respect of
the worthiness of the matter affirmed, and of the nature of an oath and promise,
and in respect of the indurance, and execration adjoined, leaves no place to
allege the events of posterior accidents incident to the matter sworn to, to
loose or dispense with the said oath, or promise, as it may be clearly seen in
the nature of an oath.

The forms whereby the foresaid persons are bound to continue, and defend the
said religion are 1. Public profession before God and the world 2. Printed and
published confessions. 3. Subscription. 4. Obedience to the laws of the
Country. 5. Christian subjection to the order of the Kirk. 6. The solemn
covenant. lastly. The oath. All these forms amongst all people, but specially
amongst Christians are reputed for strong bands. If we consider the zeal of
our Christians to God and his truth, the oath may be called juramentum
affectionis, the oath of affection. If their willingness to cleave to their
brethren in sincerity of profession it is voluntarium et quasi conventionale,
it is voluntary, and as it were by paction. If their loyalty to his majesty and
reverent obedience to the Kirk it is judiciale, an oath before a Judge. If
suspicion or any other sort of undutifulnes, it is Purgativum, an oath of
purgation. If the fulness of the form, it is not simple, but componed, haueing
a most fearful execration expressed. If ye consider the matter sworn to,
viz. The religion, Doctrine, and discipline, as it is affirmed for undoubted
truth, it is assertorium, an assertory oath. If the continuance in defense of
the doctrine and discipline, it is promissory, Whereby the particular acts of
their future continuance and defense are bound to be established in religion,
doctrine, and discipline. In respect of the which establishment and future
continuance and defense, it is a thing bygone, and past in rem judicatam,
worthy of the said continuance and defense, but nowayes subject to the changes
accessory to the persons by oath addebted to these duties. The matter affirmed
in this oath, concerns God, our brethren and the rest of our own souls in
the course of profession. The duty that we perform to God, is to take him to
be Judge and witness of our sincerity and constancy of our profession. The
duty that we do to our neighbors is to put them in assurance of our
brotherly disposition and carriage in the communion of Sanicts. The honor and
the ease that we bring to our selves is, that we lay, a^ it were, God in pawn
for us who has the clear konwledge of most secret things, and is the
undoubted patron of verity, full of all justice, and power to punish perjurie.

The force and effect of this form being considered in the persons swearers
upon whom God principally has laid the law of swearing, should be a strong
cord to restrain us from the variable inconstancy and customable changes that
falls in the world for the reasons following. 1. An oath is the golden cord,
whereby we are bound to sacred verity, and the sacrificing knife whereby we cut
away superfluous controversies. 2. The effect of an oath is a most solemn and
sure obligation, and therefore by the consent of all the Doctors the oaths of
compulsion, and hurtful, in matters prestable, and not impious, are to be
keept. 3. A lawful oath by God alone may be loosed, who is the chief CVI for
whose sake it is taken. 4. It is a note of the Antichrist to dispense with
oaths. It was well said, that dispensations nihil aliud sunt quam legum
vulnera. What is more religious in religion then an oath? What shall be the force
of bands or contracts? with what coards shall societies be knit if men shall be
freed from their lawful oaths, or rather forced to violate them?

To elude the oath the temporizer objecteth that all oaths of inferiors are
made, salvo jure superiorum, seeing therefore the King and the Kirk, our
superiors, have made those innovations, we are freed of our oath, so far as
innovation is made. Answer, that an oath made by the inferior, with knowledge
and consent of the Superior can not afterward be loosed by the Superior. The
Canonist gives this example, a scholar is sworn to his Creditor not to
depart from the school beyond the bounds and limits agreed on betwixt him
and the creditor, before he make payment at the appointed day, his father
commands him to return home. If he contracted the debt for his study, he had
the tacit consent of his father. For setting him to schole, he did assent to
all necessaries serving for his studies. The father here is by his own tacit
consent spoiled of his authority in recalling his son. But far more when
he gives his express consent. In the present case, we had the consent both
of the King our father, and the Church our mother, yea they went before us in
example, subscribed, and sworn the Confession aforesaid themselves. The Bishop
of Elie in Tortura Torti answering to Matheus Tortus adviseing his Majesty to
grant liberty of conscience has these words, Page 81.82. Integrum jam hoc
illi non est: nam quod cum ea qua decet reuerentia dictum volo, non semel
perjurus sit, sed bis si te audiat. Qua enim (siqua est fidei bis datae
conscientia) vel conscientia vel fide, ferret in regnis suis ritus vestros, vel
usum eorum publicum, qui suscepta primum Scotiae, suscepta dein Angliae corona
regia, utrobique solenni ritu jus^^r^ndum Deo praestitit, de conservanda in
statu suo illa colendi Dei formula, nec alia quam quae in regnis suis tum
public recepta, and utriusque gentis legibus stabilita esset. Quarum etiam se
tum legum quoque, non minus quam religionis, sanctissime in se suscepit
defensorem fore? Eo autem consilium hoc tuum tendit, ut novator sit, ut
periurus, ut uterque sit: esset enim uterque, si utroque hoc tam gravi crimine,
vel coronae suae, vel etiam vitae securitatem redimeret. The Bishop is bold to
affirm that his Majesty cannot permit liberty of conscience, because he was
twice sworn to maintain the form and manner of Gods worship received and
established in his kingdoms. If his Majesty may not permit another form of
Gods worship then that which was received already, nor the use of Papisticall
rites, far less in the Bishops judgment, may his Majesty inioyne, or
command other forms and rites. As for our other Superior, the Kirk, it cannot
be denied but persons of all estates have subscribed and sworn since the year
of God 1580. The oath and subscription was universal Anno 1580. 1581. 1582.
and anno 1590. When the general band was made for the maintenance of true
Religion, and his Majesty's state and person. The said confession was published
with the general band, and subscribed. So again anno 1596. when the covenant
was renewed in the general Assembly, in the provincial Assemblies, in
Presbyteries and particular Congregations, the oath was universal. Besides the
universal oaths and subscriptions, upon diverse occasions, some particular
persons at diverse times have subscribed. So, a particular rank of persons, as
for example scholars passing their degrees, since the year 1587. subscribed
and swore the confession of their faith at their Laurocation. In like manner,
every Burgess at his admission protested before God to defend the religion
then professed and authorized by the Laws, to his lives end. In like manner,
particular Presbyteries, and Synods of late years: as for example, The
Ministers of the Synod of Lowthian assembled at Tranent anno 1604. subscribed
the confession of faith. The two pretended Archbishops now living, were present
and subscribed with the rest of their brethren. Any man may see, that few are
excepted, who have not made their personal oath. And least any man think
himself exemed, let him consider that the general Assembly, the Kirk
representative made a solemn oath by holding up their hands, at the renewing
of the covenant anno 1596. This oath of the Kirk representative obliges them
all who were living, to the maintenence of the purity of religion in Doctrine
and discipline as it was then professed. Yea the oath representative of Joshua,
and the Princes of Israel representing Gods people oblished their posterity:
and therefore many hundred years after was the famine sent upon the land for
the violation of this oath made to the Gibeoni^s and Saul's seven sons were
hanged. The young ones were not excepted in our oath: for the Parents did bind
for them, when they were baptized, to bring them up in the confession of faith,
as it was then professed in the Kirk, as grounded upon, and consonant unto the
covenant of grace made betwixt God and men for themselves and for their seed.
So ye see the oath of the Kirk of Scotland was partly personal and partly
real. Is any Assembly, never so lawful, free, and formal, able to free us of
this oath, let be a pretended Assembly, disturbed, and divided in it self, and
drawing down in one session, these things which were builded up in many years,
and by many famous and notable Assemblies, consenting in one heart. But as I
have said, our oath was with consent of the Assembly and Kirk of Scotland.
Seeing we are sworn severally, how can the same persons assembled together in
one body collectiue, dispense with this oath, seeing they have sworn to defend
during their lives. To consent to any alteration, is not to defend during their
lives, but rather to betray the cause, and incur perjurie. If they may not
violate their oath assembled collectiue, far less may a general assembly
representing only the collectiue body free them of their oath, least of a null
and unlawful Assembly.

They allege they have not violated their oath, because the substance of
Religion is kept, and only some indifferent points altered. But I answer.
First that an oath cannot be said to be kept, unless it be kept in all the
parts and contents, and in the form and manner expressed, Nam juramentum
servandum est in forma specifica. We swore to keep the same form or worship
that was used in the Kirk of Scotland, and specialie in the use of the
sacraments. This specification (the Kirk of Scotland) admits neither
English, Lutherane, nor Roman rites in the worship of God different from our
profession. Next our oath was in a matter of religion which is not changeable
as statutes of republics and corporations are. And every point of the
confession of a faith is a note of profession, whereby we profess our selves
to be distinguished either in substance, or purity of religion from others.
Confessions of faith should not be changeable as Hilarious complained of his
times Annuas and menstruas fides de Deo decernimus. Thirdly put the case, the
points of our profession that are innouated were matters indifferent, as they
were not so understood at the times of our oaths and subscriptions, but were
declamed against, as points of plain papistrie, yet seeing indifferent things
abjured for their abuse may not be received how can we receive them, except it
were proved, that our oath was at the beginning unlawful; or that our former
forms are become unlawful, not expedient for edification of the Kirk, Or
less edificatiue then the ceremonies presently urged. It was plainly
confessed in the last pretended Assembly, that they were not expedient for our
Kirk, and that they yielded to hold off an outward and external inconvenience,
a matter uncertain and depending in the effect upon Gods providence yea a
matter now denied, as importing tyranny for so is it constantly, reported. In
the mean time our assertorie oath is already past, and we become perjured if
we come in the contrary. This is a high degree of perjury, when not only we
contravein our oath by practice, but make Laws in the contrary, and thereafter
inveigh against our oath as Puritanisme. If sincere and constant professors
shall be still pursued for their constancy in their profession, and the
conscience they make of their oath: Do we not expone the whole Nation to a
woeful vengeance, and perpetual ignominy.

The unlawfulness of every one of the Articles shall be proved, as need shall
require, and opportunity will serve.

KNEELING IN THE ACT OF RECEIVING THE Sacramental elements of Bread and Wine,
proved unlawful.
IT has been the uniforme and constant order of this Kirk, since the
reformation: tha^ the communicants should receive the sacramental elements of
bread and wine, sitting at the table. In the second head of the first book of
discipline, are set down these words. The table of the Lord is then rightly
ministered, when it approaches most near to Christ's own action: but plain it
is, that at that supper Christ Jesus sat with his disciples: and therefore we
do iudge^punc; that sitting at a table, is most convenient to that holy
action. In the general Assembly holden in December 1562. It was ordained, That
one uniforme order be observed in the ministration of the Sacraments, according
to the order of Geneva. And in December, Anno 1564. It was ordained, That
Ministers in ministration of the Sacraments, shall use the order set down in
the Psalm books. In the Assembly holden anno 1591: it was ordained, That an
Article should be formed, and presented to his Majesty, and the estates,
craving order to be taken with them, who give or receive the sacrament after
the Papisticall manner. In the Kings confession of faith, subscribed and
sworn, by persons of all estates: are contained these words: We detest all the
ceremonies of the Roman Antichrist added to the ministration of the
Sacraments; we detest all his rites, signs, and traditions. This laudable
order was altered at the pretended Assembly holden last at Perth in August anno
1618. The tenor of the Act follows as it was formed by some of the Bishops,
and their followers. Since we are commanded by God himself, that when we come
to worship him, we fall down and kneel before the Lord our Maker: and
considering withal, that there is no part of divine worship more heavenly and
spiritual, then is the holy receiving of the blessed body and blood of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; like as the most humble and reverend gesture of
the body in our meditation, and lifting up of our hearts, best becomes so
divine and sacred an action. Therefore, notwithstanding that our Church has
used since the reformation of religion, to celebrate the holy communion to the
people, sitting, by reason of the great abuse of kneeling at the worshipping of
the Sacrament by the Papists, yet now seeing all memory of by past superstition
is past, and no peril of the same again is feared: In reverence of so divine
a mystery, and in remembrance of so mystical an union as we are made partakers
of, thereby do ordain, that that blessed Sacrament be celebrated hereafter
meekely and reverently upon their knees. This alteration is to us unlawful,
for that which has been established by so many laws, Civil and
Ecclesiastical, by so long custom, and prescription of time, confirmed by our
oaths, and subscriptions, we may not lawfully alter. But so it is, that
sitting at the table in the act of receaving, has been established by laws,
custom, long prescription of time, and confirmed by oaths and subscriptions
as is evident by the former diduction. It is notwithstanding expedient to
descend further in opening up the unlawfulnes of kneeling. 1. as it is a breach
of the institution. 2. as it is a breach of the second commandment. 3. as it is
with out example and practice of the ancient Kirk. 4. as it disagreeth from the
practice of the reformed Kirks.

Kneeling, considered, as it is a breach of the institution.
THE manner of Christ's proceeding, from the paschall supper to the
Eucaristicall, is to be observed, for the better understanding of the
Institution. Before and in the days of Christ, the Paschall supper consisted,
of two services or suppers, and a conclusion.

After the ordinary washing of their hands, they sat down to the first
service, and eat the Paschall lamb with unleavened bread. Then they rose to
the washing of their feet; thereafter, they sat down again to the second
supper or service, and did eat of a sallet, made of sour herbs, and dipped
in a composed liquor, as thick as mustard. Judas after he gat a sop of this
second service, he went out immediately. In the conclusion of the second service
of the Paschall supper, the Lord of the house took an unleavened cake of bread
and blessed it, after this manner. Blessed art thou o Lord our God, King of the
World, who have sanctified us by thy precepts, and have given us a commandment
concerning the eating of unleavened bread. Christ likewise took the bread and
gave thanks. The Lord of the house, after thanksgiving brake the bread, and
gave it unto the company, saying, This is the bread of misery, which our
fathers eat in Egypt: whosoever hungreth let him come near and eat, whosoever
has need, let him come near and celebrate the Passover. Christ after
thanksgiving brak the bread, and gave it to his disciples, saying, take ye,
eat ye, this is my body that is broken for you. Thereafter the Lord of the
house took the cup, and blessed it after this manner. Blessed art thou O Lord
who have created the fruit of the vine, after he had tasted the cup he gave it
to the nearest and so it was carried from hand to hand. This cup was called, the
cup of praise and thanksgiving, because they sung a Psalm after it. Christ
took the cup likewise, and after he had given thanks gave it to the nearest of
his disciples, saying, take ye, drink ye all of this; for this cup, is the
new testament of my blood etc. the cup was carried from hand to hand, the supper
ended they sung a Psalm. Morneus lib. 1. de missa cap. 1.
and Beza In Met c. 26.20,
do set down this manner of proceeding, as observed before by Munsterus, Paulus
Burgensis, Tremellius, Cassander, and Josephus Scaliger. Josephus Scaliger
sets down de emendat. temporum. lib. 6.
a paschall canon, forbidding, to take any meat or drink after the cup of
thanksgiving. This discourse being premitted the breaches of the institution
are to be considered.

The first breach of the institution made by kneeling, is the taking away of
that commendable gesture of sitting, used by Christ and his Apostles, at, and
after the Institution. Christ and his Apostles sat at table, after the form
of their usual sitting at ordinary bankets and feasts. They sat at the first
service of the Paschall supper. Baradius, Swarez, Iansenius, and others
affirm, that there is no circumstance in the text, Exodus 12, to enforce
standing at the Passover. Next, suppose the circumstances there expressed did
import standing, yet it was not enjoined as an ordinary rite, but as many other
circumstances, belonged only to the first Passover in Egypt, as to eat with
haste, and with loins girded up, and to sprinkle the lintill and two sideposts
of the door with blood, as Beza has observed Annot. in Mat. 26.20
and Scaliger in the late edition of his books de emendatione temporum Lib. 6.
p. 534.
says the like: put the case, that this gesture continued longer, yet long
before the days of Christ this gesture was changed. Scaliger produces out of
the rituals of the Jews, De emendat. temp. lib. 6. p. 539
their words: Quam diversa haec nox a ceteris noctibus quod in aliijs noctibus
semel tantum l^vamus in hac autem bis. Quod in reliquis noctibus comedimus sive
fermentum sive Azimum in hac autem onmino azyma. Quod in reliquis noctibus
vescimur oleribus omne genus in hoc autem intybis. Quod in omnibus noctibus tam
edentes quam bibentes vel sedemus vel discumbimus in hac autem omnes
discumbimus. How far different is this night from other nights? other nights
we wash once, this night twice: other nights we eat leavened or unleavened
bread, this night only unleavened. Other nights we eat all sorts of herbs,
this night only Cicory. Other nights as well eating as drinking, we either sit
or sup; this night we all sup, that is, sit leaning. In his first Edition he
says, That the b^oke Kiddush pesach, out of which their words are alleged, is
a little elder then Christ's time. It is clear then, that Anakeimenon
discumbentibus, cannot be translated, standing, neither did ever any translator
so translate the word any where. It is said likewise, they sat down at the
second service after he had washen the disciples feet. And whilst they did
eat, edentibus illis, Math. 26.26. Mark. 14.22. Christ took bread and
blessed, etc. If whilst they did eat, then also whilst they did sit. As
these two are conjoined, Mark. 14.18. The phrase imports, that nothing
intervened betwixt the eating and the celebration of the sacrament: it was
ministered therefore unto them sitting. This is so evident that never man
doubted of it till this last year. Even these who affirm but against the
truth, that they stood at the first service, confess that they sat at the
second, and the celebration of the Sacrament. M. John Mare in Math. 26. says,
Tametsi agnum typi^um dominus ^tans comederit ritu legis, sedens samen
communicavit.
That Christ sat, and he brings in an old verse to this effect: Rex sedet in
coena, turba cinctus duodena. Se tenet in manibus, se cibat ipse cibus. The
Bishop of Chester Desence page 248.
confesses, That it is true, Christ did administer the sacrament in a kind of
sitting gesture, and that in the same gesture the Apostles did receive it.

That sitting was institute, I prove it by two reasones. First, the gesture
that Christ retained in passing from the conclusion of the Paschall Supper,
that he did institute: sitting he retained, therefore sitting he did institute.
In the conclusion of the Paschall Supper some things were changed, other things
were retained, a third sort were neither changed, nor retained as belonging to
the institution, but only of occasional necessity which could not
conveniently be changed, but were done necessarly: as for exemple, vnlevened
bread because there was no other, the circumstance of the time, the parlour and
such other circumstances belonging to the Passover, they were retained of
necessity, by reason of the present occasion of the Paschall Supper and could
not conveniently have been changed. But as for the gesture of sitting, he might
have changed it, in standing, or kneeling without working any miracle, if it
had not been his mind that we should receive the sacrament of the
Eucharisticall Supper, with the same gesture the Jews received the Paschall
Supper. The second reason, we are bound to imitate Christ, and the commendable
example of his Apostles, in all things wherein it is not evident, that they had
special reasones moving them thereto which do not concern us. Yea it is
gross hypocrisy for us, to pretend more reverence and devotion in the act of
receving, then the Apostles did when Christ was present, or the Apostolic
Kirks did lately after the Institution. Wherefore does the Apostle propone the
custom of the first Kirks. 1. Cor. 11.16. 1. Cor. 14.33. 2. Tim. 3, 14. If they
did not oblige us to imitation? When Christ was in the state of humillitie they
sat: he was worshipped upon extraordinary occasiones. Math. 9.18. and 8.2, and
14.33. and 20.20. Ioh. 9.38. they were not now in any common action, or at an
ordinary Supper, they had now reason to kneel if they should have kneeled at
all. After his resurrection, when he was in Emaus with some of the disciples,
it is said Luke 24, 30. that as he sat at meat with them, he took bread,
blessed it, brake it, and gave it unto them. This place is interpret of the
Sacrament by Augustine, Paulinus, Esychius, Theophilactus, Beda, Euthimius,
Hieronimus, all aledged by Bellarmin De Eucharist. l. 4. c. 24.
and Gregorius de Valentia De legitimousu Eucharist. cap. 7.
: they aledge also some of our own writers to the same purpose but so it is,
they were sitting when Christ gave them the bread, whatsoever be the
interpretation of the text, ye see they acknowledge sitting at table. Last of
all, after his ascension and glorification in the heavens, the Apostlick Kirk
sat at table. The manner of the partaking of the table of devils was by
formal sitting at table in the house of the Idol: 1. Cor. 8.10.
Iohnathan the Chalde paraphrast Amos. 2.8. interprets the garments whereon
the usurer sat beside every Altar, to have been bedds prepared in the houses
of their gods, to sit on when they feasted upon things sacrificed to Idols. The
people of Israel sat down to eat and drink at the Idelatrous feast of the
golden calfe. The Apostle compares the partaking of the Lords table, and the
table of devils. 1. Cor. 10.21. Next, they sat at the love feasts: we can not
think that they rose from the tables, either before or after the love feasts,
to receive the Sacrament severally out of Paul's hand. Bilson says, they sat
at table Obedience p. 460
and to this purpose alleges Augustine: Epist. 11^
Non debent fratres mensis suis ista miscere sicut faciebant quos Apostolus
arguit and emendat, we may se then Christ instituted it, the Apostlick Kirks
followed it, no different respect of the state of Christ's humility or glory
brought in any other gesture.

It is objected that the sitting of Christ and his Apostles was not upright but
sitting with leaning. If we imitate the example of Christ, we should sit after
the same manner.

Answer. It was the custom received amongst the Jews before and in the days
of Christ, descending from the Romans, or as others allege from the Persians,
Ester. 1. the table was situate in the midst of the hall or parlour, and the
beds about the table except the part that was free for the service of the
table: They sat upon the beds somewhat leaning toward the table and their
feet lying out at the outside of the bed^s. The beds of the rich and wealthy
were so high, that it behoved them to ascend by steps. There was a space
between the beds and the walls of the Hall or Parlour, that servants might
have room to stand at the feet of the guests, and make service. They that
stood behind to serve, were said, stare a pedibus, to stand at their feet, as
Petrus Ciacconius proves out of Seneca and Suetonius. De Triclivio
By this discourse we may understand, first, that when Mary stood at Christ's
feet, Luke 7.38. she lay not groueling at his feet, Discourse of kneeling. p.
1351
as the Bishop of Rochester perverteth the gesture. Next, that Christ and his
Apostles used at supper the gesture used at ordinary suppers. If we sit
therefore according to the received gesture of the Country wherein we are, we
imitate aright, and it were Apith imitation to sit otherwise. It is indifferent
whether we use white or red wine* we are no more bound to the wine of Judea,
then to the wine of France, at the ministration of the Supper: these are but
national differences. Thirdly, there is so little difference betwixt the one
fashion of sitting and the other, that both the words, diseumbers and sedere
are translated indifferently, to sit, in the English translations. The delicate
and sinful woman, Ezekiel. 23. is said to sit in a glorious bed, and a table
spread before her. Josephus translateth the sitting of Ioseph^ brethren by the
word Kataclinein, signifying, half silling, balse leaning, howbeit upright
sitting was the gesture used in Joseph's time, a man standing leaning, is said
to stand as well as when he stands upright, siclyk sitting. Leaning is a
position of the body common to sitting or standing. The Jews themselves at
this day sit upright at their Pas^hall supper.

There is a difference betwixt customs brought into the Kirk by invention of
men, and the custom brought in by Christ, and entertained by his Apostles; as
there is a difference betwixt the Lords day and the Holy days invented by men.
It is safer for man's conscience to imitate Christ and his Apostles, then to
depart from them, and imitate the custom of Kirkes, which may err. Yea,
Christ's example seconded with the practice of the Apostles, is equivalent to a
precept as I have said. Yea this gesture may very well be comprehended under
the express precept of Christ in the institution, Hoc facite, do this: that
is, hoc totum facite, do all this. For we must not think that nothing
belongs to the institution, but that which is mentioned in Paul's narration,
1. Cor. 11. for then a table should not belong to the institution: no doubt our
Savior instructed them how to discern the Lords body, how to eat and drink,
before he commanded them to eat and drink. But the Evangelists, and Paul
writes of the Sacrament as of a thing known to the Kirk by practice,
presupposing a table, and the communicants convened and sitting at the table.

The second breach of the Institution made by kneeling in the act of receiving,
is the taking away of the use of a table. Christ and his Apostles sat at table.
1. Cor. 10. Luke 22. wherefore serves the name of a table if we keep not the
proper use and employment of it? The fathers call it the Lords table, the
heavenly table, the sacred table, the mystical table, the spiritual table,
the Rational table: whereto serve all these commendations, if in the mean time
it be not used as a table, but rather as an altar? If it be not used as Christ
and his Apostles used it, that is by sitting at it to receive of the dainties
set upon the table? The Sacrament is called a Supper and therefore a table is
answerable to it. It is never termed a Sacrifice in the Scripture. We sit at
tables, but not at altars: we eat and drink at tables, but not all altars. The
ancients called this table an altar, but improperly and in respect of the
co^memoration of Christ's sacrifice. This improper speech was dangerous, and hes
proven hurtful to the Kirk transforming indeed a table into an Altar. If we
retain no more but the name of a table, the Papists can, and do^ give that
name to the lidd of their Altar. The people of God had an altar for the
sacrifice, and a table for a feast. Siclyk the Ethnicks. So Christians have one
altar for one sacrifice, to wit, Christ who is Priest, Altar, and Sacrifice
Heb. 13.10. and a table for the feast after this sacrifice once made, to wit,
the Sacrament of the Supper. As the Israelites and the Ethniks sat at the
tables of their feasts made of things sacrificed, so do we at our sacred
feasts, to distinguish between an Altar and a table, a sacrifice and a Supper
made of the thing sacrificed. A dressour or Cupboord may serve as well for
disposing of the elements, and reaching them to the communicants as a table. If
a table should serve, to no other use but to set on these Elements, and reach
them from the table; Christ and his Apostles used not the table after that
manner. As it served them to the Paschall Supper, so it served to the
Eucharisticall.

The third breach of the institution made by kneeling, is the taking away of
that mystical rite representing Christ's passion, to wit, the breaking of the
bread. The Apostle says not, The communion of one bread; but, The communion of
one broken bread has in it a mystery of our unity. When the bread is carved in
little morsels before it be presented to the table, it is not the sacramental
and mystical breaking in the use of the Sacrament which ought to be performed
after the thankesgiving according to Christ's example. Augustine says: Cum
illud quod est in Domini mensa benedicitur and sanctificatur, Epist. 59. ad
Paulinum.
and ad distribuendum comminuitur. When that which is blessed on the Lords
table, sanctified, and broken in small pieces to be distributed, etc. This
breaking was needful both for mystery and distribution. The breaking of the
bread was thought so needful in the Sacrament, that it was called, Breaking of
Bread. The Syriack interpreter translateth the breaking of bread Eucharist,
Act. 2.24. and 20.7. Pareus on 1. Cor. 11. proves at length this rite not to
be indifferent, but a thing commanded. Where kneeling is practiced, we read not
in their Service-bookes of this breaking of bread after thankesgiving: whereby
the passion of Christ is not set forth to the communicants as it ought to be.

The fourth breach of the institution made by kneeling, is the change and
restraint of the commandment given to many in the plural number, Eat ye,
drink ye: to one in the singular number, Eat thou, dainke thou. Fenner in
the doctrine of the sacraments, expresses the pith of this phrase in a lively
manner. It is fittest (says he) to note out the fellowship and communion of the
Church in this work, the person of Christ by the Minister, bidding all his
guests with one love as from him to be merry, and eat with faith one
spiritual meat together. Our faith is further succored, when we may together,
and with one heart, apply our selves to the meditation and fruit of this speech
of Christ by the Minister, which in the particular speaking does loose that our
working together, and makes the minds of Christians hang the longer in the
waiting for this sentence, and the comfort of it, and their minds are offered
unto greater occasions of slips and with drawings, by humane infirmity, when
these things are prolonged, which may more effectually be done together and
speedily.

The fifth breach of the institution made by kneeling, is, the altering of the
enunciatiue words of Christ, This is my body which is broken for you: whereby
he declares his coming in the flesh and suffering for sin, the maine ground of
our redemption, and, changing them in a prayer to bless our body and soul.
The body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee, preserve thy body
and soul unto everlasting life. The Papist in this point goes nearer to the
institution: for he gives not the Eucharist, except the host be first
consecrated at some Mass, with these words, This is my body. This prayer
inserted betwixt the thanksgiving and the distribution, and repeated to every
communicant, is idle battalogie. The use of the prayer and thanksgiving for the
use of the elements, indureth all the time of the action. Christ's words in the
institution contain partly a command, partly a promise, partly institution.
Christ's promise is contained in their definitive words, This is my body that is
given for you: This is my blood which is shed for the remission of the sins of
many. When the form of the words is altered, the promise is obscured. It is
not enough to rehearse the words of the institution in the prayer immediately
preceding the action, but in the action every rite and ceremony should have the
words of the institution concurring. Let the word be joined with the element,
and so it shall be a sacrament, says Augustine.

The sixth breach of the institution made by kneeling, is the taking away of the
distribution that ought to be amongst the communicants. When Christ said, Take
ye, eat ye, he insinuates that they should take and divide amongst
themselves. The word Edoke^ he gave, does not import that he gave immediately.
The Disciples in setting the bread before the five thousand, Mark. 6.41. gave
the bread to the five thousand, Math. 14.19. the five thousand distributed
among themselves. Cajetanus upon Math. 26. acknowledges, that the Disciples
were in so great distance from Christ, that their hands could not meet with his
hands, Beza says, Epist. 2.
that howbeit Christ had sitten in the midst, as Painters make him to sit, yet
in respect of the manner of their sitting, it behoved either Christ to rise and
come to them that were far distant, or them to come to him, if he had given
the elements to every one in their own hands. Tossaus says, that Christ gave
to the two nearest, In Mat. 26
and they reached to them who were further off. In the first book of
Discipline penned Anno. 1560. it is ordained that the Minister break the
bread, and distribute the same to those that be next him, commanding the rest
every one with reverence and sobriety to break with other, because it is
nearest to Christ's action. Further, we have a plain precept, Luke 22.17. Divide
it amongst you, speaking of the communion Cup, and not of the Paschall. The
Evangelists make mention of four things belonging to the communion cup. 1.
Thankesgiving. 2. Distribution. 3. Assertion that it is his blood. 4. A
protestation that he will not drink of the Vine until the kingdom of God shall
come: the assertion that it is his blood, is set down afterward by Luke v. 20.
the other 3 are set down in this 17. verse. It is therefore the same cup. Next,
if it had not been the communion cup, and consequently the last, the communion
cup behooved to have come after: but that cannot agree with the protestation:
for how could Christ protest of the Paschal cup that he would drink no more of
the fruit of the wine, If he drank after it of the Evangelical cup. The
paschal canon interdyted to eat or drink after the cup of thanksgiving or
praise, the cup of praise in the end of the paschall Supper was changed as I
have said into the Eucharistical cup, and was all one with it: and the
protestation of not drinking, more agrees with the Canon made of the last
Paschal cup all one with the Evangelical. This cup was carried about from hand
to hand, and divided amongst them by them selves. The two Evangelists do not
so much as mention the cup of the Passover and yet make mention of this
protestation of not drinking more of the fruit of the Vine. The verses
immediately proceeding the protestation, make mention only of the cup of the
Lords Supper. Math. 26.28. Mark. 14.24. Fulk says, the demonstratiue pronomen
(this) Math. 26.29. declares, that be spoke of the ^ine in his hand that is of
the communion cup. If there was two cups then either the words of the
protestation were repeated, or set down by Matthew and Mark out of the own
place, and wrongfully applied, but none of these two is to be admitted. Thirdly
Luke omitteth the mention of thanksgiving and the commandment to drink of this
cup verse 20. howbeit both be expressly set down by other Evangelists, and the
analogy with the actiones concerning the bread requires the same. Whairfore
rhen did he omit them? even because speaking before of the same cup* verse. 17.
he had made mention of these two points, he eschueth to repeat them as already
mentioned. And wherefore made he mention of the cup verse. 17. even that the
protestation of not drinking more verse. 17 mig^t be joined with the
protestation of not eating more verse. 16. he makes mention of the assertion
of his blood verse 20. because it was not yet spoken of. The other 3. points
are omitted as already spoken of verse. 17. this inversion of order and making
mention of the cup of the communion before the order of Institution, was
observed long since be Lib. 3. de consensu Evang.
Augustine and in Mat. 26
Euthymius, and is acknowledged not only by our own divines, but also by
Barradius, Ians^nius, and other learned papists, Theobaldus Meushius Desensio
harmoniae generalis.
observes a constant continual inuersion of the order in this chapter of
Luke. Operae pretium est in his advertere hysteron proteron Lucae contrarium.
Augustine says, anti^ipavit ut so^^t. There is a clear instance verse. 21.
after the words of the Institution it is said, Behold the hand of him that
betrayeth me, is with me at the table. Now it is clear, that Iudus went out
immediately after he received the Soppe. Zacharias Harmon. Evang. lib. 4 cap.
156.
Chrisopolitanus observed herein a recapitulation of some things pretermitted
before. ( Quod post calicem datum, traditorem commemorat pretermissa
recapitulare videtur. Beza in his annotationes conjectureth, that the verses
are transposed, and that the 19. and 20. verses should be subjoyned to the 16.
and that the 17. verse should be subjoyned to the 19. and 20. Bilson Obedience
page 495.
and Jewel Of private Mass, division 8.
against Harding and many other divines, disputing against the private mass,
exponeth the words Luk 22.17. divide it amongst yo^* of the communion cup. That
which is spoken of the cup should be meant also of the bread, for as Christ said,
Take ye, drink ye, so said he, Take ye, eat ye. Tindal Page 477
in his tractate of restoring the L. Supper, requires that every man break and
reach forth to his neighbor. This distribution amongst the communicants was
commanded, no doubt to nourish love, and to be a bond of union amongst the
communicants and agrees best with the nature of a feast, where signs and
tokens of amity are interchanged. Clemens Alexandrinus Stromat. lib. 1.
says it was permitted to every one of the people, to take a part of the
Eucharist. Etiam Eucharistiam cum quidam ut mos est diuiserint, permittitur
uni^uique ex populo partem ejus sumere. When Tertullim says, We receive it of
no other hands, but the hands of our presedents, or rulers, he means not
simply of pastores but of any governors Ecclesiastical whatsoever. and
suppose he mean only of pascores, yet he confesses it to be tradition and no
scripture, as Iunius has observed upon that place. Howsoever this was the
custom in Africa to receive it out of the ministers hand, yet not so at Rome
and every where: for Justinius Apol. 2.
tells us how the Deacons gave to every one of them that were present, part
of the bread and likewise of the wine.

In the liturgy of S. James, it is said that the Deacons lift up the dishes
and cups to impart to the people. It came to pass afterward that the
Deacones dispensed not the bread, but the wine only, the ridiculous reasons
whereof are set down by Aquinas Part. 3. quaestr 82. art. 3.
this superstitious custom, of taking it out of the Ministers hand, did grow
afterward to Superstitious receaving in at the mouth, and in some parts to the
drawing of the wine out of the cupes with silver pipes, the minister ought not,
howbeit he might commodiously, give the elements out of his own hand to every
communicant, because it is against the institution and purpose of Christ,
willing the communicants by this rite, to interteine communion amongst them
selves. Whatsoever action or command is enclosed within the institution, may
not lawfully be broken: but that the communicants should distribute amongst
themselves, was both an action at the first supper, and a precept, as I have
proven. This precept and action by consequence discharges kneeling, because
that gesture and this distribution is no ways compatable.

Christ's general precept, do this makes the actiones of the first supper
precepts. The particular precept divide it amonngst you leaves no place to any
tergiversation.

The seventh breach of the institution made by kneeling is, an unnecessary
deviding of the communicants, making populous congregationes to receive on many
days whear they may receive in one. Every particular congregation ought to be
convened Epi to auto into one place, at one time to communicate together as far
as is posible. Although all the faithful communicate with Christ's body
spiritually, yet they only communicate Sacramentally, who have their communion
sealed by the outward action of eating of one Sacramental bread it being a
commandment of the Apostle, that every one should tarry one upon an other when
they assemble them selves to celebrate the holy Supper, it follows that they
should receive together, Ambrose expounding these words, says, Expectandum
dicit ut multorum oblatio simul celebretur et omnibus ministretur, they must
tarry that the oblation of many may be celebrate together, and so be ministered
to them all. Leo writing to Dios^orus, gave him this advice, that where the
Church was so little, that it was not able to receive all the people to
communicate together, the Priest should minister two or three communions in one
day* Calixtus De consecrat. did, 2. ^eracta.
ordained, that consecration ended, all communicate, that will not stand
excommunicate, for so the Apostle determined, and the holy Roman Kirk
observes. See more of this purpose in Jewels sermon at Paul's Cross.

The eight breach of the institution made by kneeling is, the altering of the
purpose of the institution, or nature of this Sacrament. It was instituted to
be a supper, a spiritual feast: it was the will of Christ therefore, that we
should behave our selves as ghuests invited to a banquet. Ghuests invited to a
banquet, even to a Princes banquet kneel not in the act of backeting. They are
invited indeed to a spiritual refreshment, but the Sacramental Supper should
carry the resemblance of a supper, in the forms and fashions thereof, or else it
could not rightly be called a Supper; for it is not only the matter, that is,
the dainties and food, that makes a banquet, but also the ordering of the
ghuests, and kindly interteinment of them. The Sacrament of the Passover was
also a holy Supper, and the people of God used it so: they kneeled not in the
act of receaving of it. When they received the law of the Passover, they bowed
the heads and worshipped. Exodus 12.27. Yet did they not so in the eating of it.
They were more reverent and devout, in hearing the law of it out of the mouth
of Moses then in the participation of it.

Let no man object against us, the examples of some kirks, where some of the
former breaches are made without kneeling: seeing kneeling has made them all,
and seeing we have the institution, standing to us in force of a command,
wherein nothing should be altered, in matter, form, or order; nothing added;
nothing diminished: for divine institutions admit, neither addition nor
diminurion says Pareus in 1. Cor. 11.
the Apostle alleges the institution against all abuses, that which I
received of the Lord, that have I delivered unto you, 1. Cor. 11.23. Doubtless
(says Pareus) he received this history of the institution from the Lord, with
other revelations, when he was ravished to the third heavens. It is not my
invention. (would the Apostle say) but the Lords ordinance, concredit unto me
to be kept as a jewel. It is not for naught, that the Evangelistes with one
consent do set down the form of this institution, and that the Apostle
tries all corruptions in the Supper by it, as by a rule. Ciprian says Epist,
3. lib. 3. we must follow the truth of God, and not the custom of men. And in
an other place he says when the channels ar corrupted we should run to the
fountain. It is not so much our purpose to tax others as to defend our selves

Kneeling considered, as it is a breach of the second commandment.
KNeeling in the act of receaving the Sacramental elements, is not only a
breach of the institution in the Gospel, but also of the second commandment
of the law.

The first breach of the commandment made by kneeling is, the sin of
Idolatry. Idolatry is committed in this act diverse ways. The Papists kneel in
the act of receaving, because they believe verily, that the bread is
transubstantiat into Christ's body, and upon this supposition of
transubstantiation and bodily presence, they kneel. This is the grossest
idolatry that ever was in the world. The Lutheran kneeleth upon his supposition
of consubst^ntiation, and Christ's real presence by consubstantition: this also
is idolarrie and the supposition false. A third sort kneel for reverence of
the Elements, not giving to the Elements that high kind of worship called
commonly cultus latriae, which the Papist gives, but an inferior kind of
worship due (as they think) to consecrate creatures: this also is Idolatry.

Kneeling for reverence of the elements, is Idolatry, because it is a religious
worship of a creature. It is not civil worship they give in the act of
receiving the sacred Elements: the matter and motive of their reverence is a
matter of religion, to wit, because the elements are holy signs and seals: it
is therefore religious worship. Religious worship is divine worship. All manner
of worship pertaining to godliness and religion, is religious worship. Defense
of Perkins 2. part. page 1180.
Divine or godly worship is all manner of worship pertaining to godliness and
religion (says Doctor Abbots.) Divine worship is proper to God: therefore
religious worship, or worship of religion is peculiar to God alone. Augustine
says* Apostolus and creaturam laudat and eitamen cu^tam religionis exhibere
vetat. Contra Faust. lib. 14 c. 11.
The Apostle commends the creature, forbids nevertheless that worship of
religion be yielded to it. And again he says, Contra 2. epist. Pelag. lib. 3.
cap. 4.
Quis dicat non debere observare Christianos ut uni Deo religionis obsequium
serviatur: Christians are to observe that with the duty of religion they serve
God only. Peter and the Angel refused religious worship. If it may not be
given to Angels and Saints, far less may it be given to dead elements and
senseless creatures. To kneel for reverence of the elements, and a religions
estimation of them in the mind, is to determine adoration in the creature. Some
honor r^doundeth to God, or Christ, but that convoy by redundance, is common
to all respective, and dependant worships given to dead and senseless things:
for Creatures without sense are not worshipped absolutely for holiness,
virtue, or any other excellency inherent in themselves, but for their
conjunction with, or representation of the persons represented, in whom the
excellency is intrinsecally: and this the Papist will grant, not only of his
Images, but of all sacred things also. They are worshipped only in respect of
the person, yet notwithstanding of this dependant and respective worship, they
affirm the sacred things are worshipped per se, howbeit, not propter se, by
themselves, howbeit not for themselves; because by themselves they have
relation, or conjunction with or representation of the persons adored: that is,
they have in them a cause of adoration, howbeit a dependent cause. Swarez
says, Honor illis exhilitus non in illis sistit, In Aquinatem. Tom. 1. Disput
51 sect. 3.
sed in ipsas personas propter quas adorantur, redundat. That the honor
determined in the Images or sacred things, redoundeth notwithstanding to the
principal. He that honors a man's image, honors it for his sake whose
image it is. This transient worship is convoyed to the principal, only
mediatly: God will have no mediate creature to go between him and his worship:
he will not communicate a glance of this worship to any creature. Civil
worship is convoyed mediatly to the person of the Prince, by bowing to
senseless creatures, as to the chair of Estate, the cloth of Estate, the
Kings letter and seal, because the estate thinks it expedient for Princely
Majesty that these things be reverenced, which serve in a special manner for
the Princes use, as signs of his presence or pleasure. But the ceremonies of
the Court, and mediate civil worships, are not rules of religious adoration.
For as Augustine says, Multa de cultu divino usurpata sunt, quae honoribus
deferuntur humanis, Lib. de civ. Dei. lib, 10. cap. 4.
sive humilitate nimi^, sive adulatione pestisera. That too great humility or
pestiferous flattery, may be the original of many humane honors and
courtesies. God hes inhibit mediate religious worships.

It may be objected, that holy things ought to be reverenced.

Answer. True, but not worshipped. Veneration is one thing, Adoration an other.
Adoration belongs to persons. Veneration to things perteining to persons,
and is nothing else, but a religious respect, or reverent estimation of things
perteining to the use of religion, a preservation of them that they be not
lost; a decently usage of them according to their kind. This veneration or
reverence, is a respective or relative reverence given them for Gods sake.
Kneeling for reverence of sensles creatures, is, to take the proper gesture of
relative adoration, and apply it to relative reverence. For religious kneeling
in all the Scripture is a gesture of adoration, and soveran worship. Augustine,
speaking of the brazen serpent, Sacred writings, and the bread in the
Sacrament, says. De trinit. lib. 3. c. 10.
honorem tanquam religiosa habere possunt, stuporem tanquam missa non possunt.
They may have honor as matters religious, but wonder, as matters of me^vell they
can not have. When Ezra read the book of the law Nehem. 8.3.4.5. the people
stood up, but when he praised God they bowed themselves and worshipped the Lord
with their faces toward the ground. Here ye see veneration and adoration.
submissiom, and recognition of some other thing more excellent. The altar, the
offerings, the Priests garment, were holy, yet the Jews worshipped them not.
The uncovering of the head, is a gesture of reverence, and yet the Gentiles had
their heads covered when they worshipped their Gods, as Brissonius proves.
Fo^mulae lib. 1.
Drusius proves the like Preterita. 1. Cor. 1.4
of the Jews, that they covered their head when they prayed to God. But
kneeling was ever holden among all nations for a proper gesture of adoration.
either civil or religious.

The Ministers of Lincoln in the third part of their defense laid to the
charge of their Church representative, that kneeling is intended for reverence
of the elements. I refer the reader to their proofs: for the present let it
only be observed, upon what occasion kneeling was urged. In their first
reformation it was left free. Gardener, Boner, and other Papists sought to make
the first book of common prayer odious, amongst other things for want of
reverence to the Sacrament. The Papists made insurrection, and challenged
proudly in their Articles a reformation, for reverence of the Sacrament: and on
the other side, some, inconsideratly fixed railing libels at Pauls-cross, and
other places, terming the Sacrament lack of the box, the Sacrament of the
Halter, round Roben etc. These proceedings moved Rid^y in his preachings at
Pauls-Crosse to proceed so far, that the cheifest papists seemed to desire no
more, but that his practice might be answerable to his doctrine. This stir
made also Cranmer, and Ridly, at the second revewing of the book of common
prayer, to inioyn kneeling, with this reason; that the Sacrament might not be
profaned, but holden in a holy and reverent estimation. They feared to offend
superstitious people in a time of strong opposition, until they were better
taught, neither was their judgment clear in this cause: for they thought it
not idolatry to worship the consecrate elements, with an inferior kind of
worship, and for the relation they have to the thing signified, providing they
yield not unto them soverain or godly worship, as they called it. They were but
newly come forth out of the dark den of popery, and could not see all things
in the first dawning of the day.

In the late act, we are ordained, to kneel for reverence of the divine
mysteries. I see not wherein this differs from the Bishop of Rochesters
argument. Discourse of kneeling page 124.
that great and reverent dreedfull mysteries, must be received with great and
dreedfull humility of soul, and humiliation of body: therefore in the act of
receiving we must kneel. If this argument were good, then the Sacraments and
sacrifices of the old law should have been thus worshipped: And if we will
measure by the sight, the sacraments and sacrifices of the old Law were more
dreadful then the sacraments of the new. For the slaughter of beasts, and
Sheding of blood, was more dreedfull, then the pouring out of wine. The
ancients held the sight of this Sacrament, not only from pagans, but also from
the Catachumenists, they preached darkly, they wrote darkly, to the same end.
This doing was not commendable, it made the mystery of this Sacrament both
dark and dreadful. Augustine hes already said, they may be honored as matters
religious but wondered al as matters of marvel they can not. But to return to
the purpose, to kneel for reverence of the mysteries is nothing else but to
worship the mysteries.

Wheresoever the public intent of a Kirk is to worship the Sacrament, every
private man following that intent, is formally an Idolater. If his private intent
be diverse from the publik, yet he is still materially, and Interpretatiue an
Idolator. If a man receive the Eucharist in the papisticall Kirk on his knees,
howbeit he kneel not upon the supposed conceit of transubstantiation, but his
own private intent, he is materially guilty of their gross Idolatry. Ismenias
stouping down before the King of Persia to take up a ring, which he let
purposly fall, was not excused* because this stouping in common use, was the
adoring of the King of Persia.

Kneeling directed to the bread and wine in the hands of the Minister, is
idolatry, howbeit the inward motion of the mind and affection of the heart be
directed only to God, or his Son Christ, as the only object of adoration. This
immediate convoy of worship to the principal object, is nothing else but that
finer sort of Idolatry and relative worship, which Durandus, Holcot, Mirandula,
Alphonsus, Petrus Cluniacensis, and others, give to their images. They say
Images are not otherwise adored, then that before them and about them, are
exhibit the external signs of honor: the inward affection is directed only
to the principal object: as the services done at a funeral show, to one
empty coffine, as if the corpse were present. See Bellarmine De iimaginibus
cap. 20
and Swarez in Aquin. Tom. 1. disp. 54. sect. 3.
when it is said therefore to varnish this second intent that the elements are
not Objectum quod, the thing it self that is worshipped, nor objectum in quo,
or, per quod, in the which, or by the which, but objectum a quo significative
the object or sign moving us upon the sight thereof, to lift up our hearts to
the spiritual object of faith. This kind of relative worship will not be
found different from the relative worship of Durandus and the rest: For
Bellarmine and Swarez draw Durandus and the rest from In illa, et per illam
Imaginem, in and by the image, to Circum and coram, about, or before the Image.
Swarez says ibid. disput. 53. sect. disp. 54. sect. 4
that the image is neither the formal, nor the material, the total, nor the
partial object of adoration in their opinion; but that only at the presence of
the images the principal called to remembrance by the image is adored, that the
image is an occasion, amids, a sign stirring up a man to adore the principal.
Their adoration then was also abstract from the object, as they pretend theirs
to be. The bread and wine or any other creature whatsoever, differs not in
this present case, for howsoever they were ordained of God to be signs and
seals of his graces, yet they are not in statu accommodato ad adorandum; they
have no such state in the service of God, as that by them, or before them God
or his son Christ should be adored. Next If this kind of relative worship
were to be allowed, then all the holy signs both in the old and New Testament
should have served to the same use. Then they who are far distant from the
table should kneel, for the Elements are to them, objectum a quo significatiue.
Then at the sight of the sun or any bewtifull creature, we should kneel
seeing they put us in mind of Gods incomprehensible beauty. And seeing many of
them do allow the historical use of images, we may fall down before the
Crucifix, providing the action of the mind be abstracted from the image.
Thirdly all the parts of Gods worship ought to be direct, and not oblique.
Perkins Idolatry. p. 677.678
says, it is idolatry to turn, dispose, or direct the worship of God, or any
part thereof to any particular place or creature, without the appointment of
God, and more specially, to direct our adoration to the bread or the place
where the bread is, what is it less then Idolatry.

Kneeling before the elements referred directly to Christ. is, either a gesture
signifying the humble submission of the mind in general, whereby we make
obeisance, as if he were bodily present: or else it signifies more
particularly our humiliation In prayer: this is but a special, the former was
a general; The like reasons serve against both. It is true we can not kneell
to God in prayer, but there are many things before us, a Kirk, a house, a wall,
a tree, a star, etc. But we set them not before us purposly; we are by no
direction tied unto them, they stand only before us by casual position,
neither can we choose otherwise to do. It is true, likewise, that God directed
his people under the Law to bend and bow themselves toward the Ark, and the
Temple wherein the Ark was, and the Mountain whereon the Temple was situate:
partly least that rude people should turn their worship another way; partly
because of his promise to hear them when they should pray toward the Temple, or
the Ark; partly because of his singular manner of presence in the Ark: he was
said to dwell between the Cherubines, the Ark is called his footstool? and
sometime the face of God; the glory of the Lord. It is reason, where God is
present after an extraordinary manner, as when he spoke out of the bush, and the
cloud, that odoration be directed to the place of his extraordinary presence.
The Altars; the offerings and other holy things wanted the like presence, and
the like promise. The Ark and the Cherubines upon the Ark, were not seen: and
therefore could not be readily abused to idolatry.

The Sacramental elements have neither the like presence, the like promise,
nor the like commandment. Worship is tied no longer to any certain thing or
place on earth. Ioh. 4.21.22. Adoration is tied in the new Testament to the
manhood of Christ, the true Ark and propitiatory: and is carried to that place,
in which we certainly know the said manhood to exist substantially says
Perkins, Idolatry page 677.678.700 701.
and therefore it is, that we lift up our eyes to the heavenes, where he is,
and direct our very external worship unto him.

It is objected, and said, that we may pray in the act of receaving; therefore
we may kneel in the act of receaving. Answer. This objection insinuates that
kneeling is the proper and only commendable gesture of prayer, and therefore
the Bishop of Rochester exponeth the standing of the publican Luke 18.11.13. to
have been kneeling, because (says he) the Jewish custom was to pray
kneeling. But if he had remembered the Lords own saying Ierem. 15. though Moses
and Samuel stood before me etc. he might have understood that they prayed
standing as well as kneeling. Drusius observes, In Mat* 6.
that of old they prayed standing, that therefore prayers were called stations,
or standings. And Rabbi Judah had a saying, that the world could not subsist
without statio^s or standings Sine stat^^nibus non subsisteret mundus.
And where it is said, Abram stood before the lord: Manabem, an Hebrew Rabine
expounds it, he prayed before the Lord. Next the prayer meant of, is either
some public prayer uttered by the Minister, or the mental prayer of the
communicant. As for the prayer of the Minister in the act of distribution, it
is flat against the institution, as I have already said. The Minister is
ordained by the institution to act the person of Christ, and pronounce the
words of promise. This is my body: as if Christ himself were pronouncing these
words, and not change the promise into a prayer. Fenner in his principles of
Religion Page 95.
lays this down as a ground, That in the second commandment we are forbidden
the practice and use of any other rite, or outward means used in the worship
or service of God, then he has ordained, Ioh. 4.22. 2 King. 18.4. and that by
the contrary we are commanded to practice all those parts of his worship, which
he in his word has commanded, and to acknowledge only the proper use of every
rite and outward means which the Lord has ordained. Deuteronomy. 12.32. 2. King.
17.26. Further, we are forbidden by the second commandment to pray by
direction before any creature, This public prayer is but a pretended cause of
kneeling, as the Ministers of Lincoln make manifest in their abridgement: for
no Canon of our neighbor Kirk has directed any part of this kneeling in the
act of receiving, to be assigned to the said prayer. In populous congregations,
where there is but one Minister, the communicants sit a quarter of an hour
before the Minister repair to them with the sacrament. And last, the prayer is
ended before the delivery of the elements. As for our Kirk, no such prayer is
ordained to be uttered by the Minister; therefore no such prayer can be
pretended. In the late Canon it is said, That the most reverent and humble
gesture of the body in our meditation and lifting up of our hearts, best
becomes so divine an action. Meditation is not prayer, and the heart may be
lifted up by the act of faith and contemplation, as well as by the action of
prayer; so that neither public nor mental prayer is expressed in our act. But
let the words be interpreted of mental prayer, even mental prayer is not the
principal exercise of the soul in the act of receiving the sacramental
elements: the mind attending on the audible words, the visible elements, the
mystical actions, and making present use of them, men should not be diverted
from their principal work and meditation, upon the Analogy betwixt the
signs and things signified. The soul may send up in the mean time some short
ejaculations and darts of prayer to heaven to strengthen her own weakness,
and return to her principal work of meditation and application of the
benefits represented. These short ejaculations of the mind are only
occasional, as a Christian feels his own present estate, and are incident
to all our actions both civil and religious: In the act of receiving our
earthly food, in going out the way, in hearing the word. If a man be moved
inwardly, when he hears, that the word was made flesh, shall he kneel as
they do in the Roman Kirk? If a man should kneel at every inward motion of
the mind, when he hears the word, what confusion would there be in the
congregation? A man looking occasionally to a crucifix, may remember Christ,
and send up some ejaculations, shall he therefore kneel? The three children
prayed mentally no doubt when they were brought before the golden Image, but
lawfully they might not kneel before it. Perkins destinguisheth notably
betwixt public, private, and secret worship: Idolatry page 70^.
the secret and mental worship must be yielded to God, and the signs thereof
concealed from the eyes and hearing of men, as Nehemiah when he prayed in
presence of the King, Nehem. 2.4. In a word, the Institution, and the second
commandment hinder kneeling at this time, suppose mental prayer were the
principal exercise of the soul. I hear there is alleged a third sort of
prayer, to wit, that the very act of receiving is of it self a real prayer.
Is not this as much as to say, that craving and receiving is all one?
Bellarmine De Missa* l. 2. c. 4.
says, That prayer of i^ self, and of the own proper office, does impetrate,
and that a sacrifice has the force and power of obtaining, or impetrating:
because it is, Quaedam oration realis, non verbalis, a certain real prayer,
not a verbal. We may forgive him to say this of the sacrifice of the Mass,
where there is an offering of a sacrifice to God. But Bellarmine was never so
absurd as to call the act of receiving from God, a real prayer to God.

Their other objection that we may praise God in the act of receiving;
therefore we may kneel, may be answered after the same manner. There is no
public thankesgiving ordained to be made at the delivery of the elements:
mental praise therefore must be meant. Mental praise is no more the
principal work of the soul, then mental prayer; what was said of the
ejaculations of the one, let it be applied to the short e^aculations of the
other. The name of Eucharist given to this Sacrament, helps them nothing: for
it is a name given by Ancients, and not by the Scripture. Next, as it is called
Eucharistia, so it is called Cyril. ep^ 10. con. Nestor. in co^^cil. Ephesin^
Eulogia: for the words, he gave thanks, and he blessed, are indifferently
used by the Evangelists. Some parts of this holy celebration stand in
thanksgiving, as the beginning and the end: and therefore is the whole action
denominated from a part, says Exercit. page 517.
Causaubon. Eulogia and Eucharistia utraque vox a part una totum Domini
actionem designat. It follows not that all the parts of this holy
ministration are actions of thankesgiving.

Object. What we may crave of God upon our knees, we may receive on our knees.

Ans. It is false, I may on my knees, Give us this day our daily bread; but I
may not receive it on my knees. The people of Israel prayed for food, yet they
were not esteemed unthankful, for not kneeling when they received the Manna.

It is again objected, that in the act of receiving, we receive from Christ an
inestimable benefit, ought not a subject kneel when he receives a benefit
from a Prince to testify his thankfulness? Answer, this relation from Christ to
the Sacrament, as between the giver and the gift is common to all the
Sacraments both of the old, and new law, ordinary, and extraordinary. Next we
receive the mystical pledges, not out of the hands of God himself or his Son
Christ immediately, but out of the hand of the Minister. The person who
receaveth the gift from the King, is supposed to receive it immediately: and
suppose mediatly, yet ceremonies of Court, and mediate civil worships, are not
rules of religious adoration; which should ever be immediate. Thirdly the
manner of delivery of the gift and the will of the giver, are to be considered.
If the Prince call his Nobles to a banquet, it is his will that they sit at
table with him, as Iohanathan and David sat at King Saul's table. Christ hes
declared by the Institution, after what manner he would have us receive these
mystical pledges. Kneeling cannot agree with the actions and precepts of the
Institution.

The second breach of the second commandment made by kneeling, is, the show of
conformity with the papists. The Lord forbade his people to be like the
Gentiles, Leuitie. 18.3. and 19.27 and Deuteronomy: 12. the christians were forbidden
to decore their houses with bay leaves, and green boughs, because the paganes
used so to do, or to rest from their labors, those days that the Paganes
did. If conformity in things not haueing state in Idolatrous service, but only
glanceing at the honor of the Idol, be condemned; far more is conformity in
the grossest act, wherein the life and soul as it were of their Idolatry
stands, Such as is the gesture of kneeling among the papists. And for this
cause Hooper On Jonas ^n. 6.
in his sermon before King Edward, for the same cause condemned this gesture.
This outward conformity tickleth the papist, and offends the godly.

The third breach of the second commandment made by kneeling is, the reteining
of a monument of vile idolatry. All humane inuentiones polluted with
idolatry, except they be of necessary use, ought to be removed from Gods
service. This gesture had a spot of profanation from the beginning, being at
the first birth in this act dedicat to Idolatry. The brazen serpent set up at
Gods own command, was not spared when it was abused. We detest the very garment
of a these, or a whore, though it be innocent. Biza Epist. 8.
says, many things may be tolerate for the weak, which may not be restored
after they are taken away. He commends them, who have abolished kneeling
amongst other things tanquam apertas Idolomanias.

The fourth breach of the 2d commandment made by kneeling, is, the continual
occasion and danger of idolatry. We are forbiden all occasions and
provocations of idolatry. There is a natural pronnesse in all men to idolatry;
great ignorance in the common people, and Superstition rooted in the hearts of
men: Papists daily increase, the idol of the bready God is still in great
account in the Roman Kirks round about us, and in private corners amongst us:
and yet men are not ashamed to say, that all memory of former superstition is
past, and no peril is to be feared again. The virgins in Cyprians time
granted they walked with young men, talked with them, went to bed with them, but
when it came to the act they absteined. Cyprian Lib. 1. ep. 11.
answers, Nou est locus dandus diabolo: nemo diu tutus periculo proximus. i.
Place should not be given to the devil, no man is long safe who is near the
point of danger. The Belgic Kirks in their Synods permitted not liberty of
kneeling, for the same respect of bread-worship as may be seen in, the harmony
of their Synods, set forth of late by Festus Homius Cap. 13.
, Liberum est stando, sedendo, vel eundo caenam celebrare non autem geniculando
ob artolatreias periculum. If a lawful use could be devised yet this danger
cannot be eschued. Information by preaching is a sufficient remedy: meat does
not nourish so fast as poison does corrupt. The watchmen are some time
ignorant, or negligent, many want doctrine. It is better to fill up the pit,
then to set one beside it to warn the passengers that they fall not in, such
ceremones ought to be appointed, which by their goodness and edification may
help the preaching of the word, and not such as the word must daily have need
to correct. The strength of many poor Christian souls should not be tried by
bringing them to the very brink of danger.

The fifth breach of the second commandment made by kneeling, is, a show of
wisdom in wil-worshipe and humility, Coloss. 2.23. a worship is set up by man's
voluntary devotion in a principal part of Gods service, under color of
humility. We ought to come indeed, and receive with humility these mystical
pledges: but is there no reverence and humility, but in kneeling? Swarez Tom.
1. Disp. 51. sect. 1.
says that humility and adoration are distinguished, in their proper motives
and respects, in propriis honestatibus et motivis. It was not manerly for the
disciples to use any gesture they pleased at Christ's table. It was his honor to
command, and their humility to obey. Sitting was not pomp, glorious pride, or
profane gesture, as men are not ashamed so to call it; because it was
obedience to the Lord. This their pretended humility, is a natural humility;
like unto Peter's, when he refused that Christ should wash his feet. Obedience
is better then sacrifice. Fenner in the doctrine of the Sacraments. Page 130
has a notable saying, [that the whole honor of the Sacraments is, that they
remain unto the Church of God in that simplicity he left them; and that no
action here is worth any thing, but by reason of Gods word, which is sanctified
to a profitable use, and made an instrument of the working of the holy Ghost.]

Object. There is no new worship appointed, but an action already appointed for
Gods service is applied to the said Supper. Answ. The parts of Gods worship may
not be applied to other when comlines, commodiousnes, institution, and command
will not suffer. A man may not kneel all the time of the Sermon; he may not
read in the act of receaving; baptism may not be ministered in the midst of
the communion, and many such instances might be alleged. Aquinas says, 2.2.
quest. 81. ad 5.
Superstuum in his quae ad divinum cultum pertinent esse potest no secundum
substantiam quanti, sed secundum alias circumstantias, puta quia cultus divinus
exhibetur cui non debet exhiberi vel qua^do non debet vel secu^dum alias
circumstantias prout non debet. That superfluity in things pertaining to the
worship of God, is to be considered, not according to the quantity, for we
cannot worship God exceedingly enough: but is to be considered according to
other circumstances, viz. when the worship of God is not exhibited to whom it
ought to be exhibited, or when it ought not, according to other circumstances,
as it ought not to be exhibited. By superfluity he means excess, a vice in
all moral virtues. To be short, a rite Sacramental, devised by man,
pretending humility, and shouldring out other rites instituted by God, cannot
be but presumptuous will worship. Such is the gesture of kneeling, as we have
already proved.

Object. The Eucharist is a part of Gods worship, therefore we ought to kneel
in the act of receiving.

Answ. In a large sense every act whereby God is honored may be called the
worship of God, as oaths, vows, sacrifices, etc. But adoration is the worship
of God in a strict sense. Kneeling is the gesture of adoration, but not of
every part of Gods worship. Receiving, eating, drinking in the sacrament, are
parts of Gods worship, but they are not gestures of adoration. All the
Sacraments both of Jews and Christians, were parts of Gods worship as well as
the Eucharist, and yet they kneeled not in the act of participation.

Object. The Eucharist is a sacrifice, and congeries sacrificiorum, a heap of
sacrifices, a commemoratiue sacrifice, a sacrifice of a broken and contrite
heart, of praise, of prayer, of alms, therefore this Sacrament should be
received with kneeling, says the B. of Rochester Discourse. p. 84.
: and therefore the gesture of kneling is rightly applied to such a kind of
worship.

Answer. The actions aforesaid are called sacrifices, only by analogy and
metaphoricallie* they are not proper sacrifices: the invisible Sacrifice by the
which a man offers himself by contrition, inward devotion, mortification is
the daily Sacrifice of a christian. Romans 13.1. we offer our selfs to be
sacrificed when the word is preached. Romans 15. we kneel not when we give
alms. These improper and metaphorical sacrifices, are not acts of adoration.
Swarez. tom. 1. disput. 51. sect, 2. Est autem ridiculum dicere Elecmosynam
esse actu^ adorationis.
The paschall lamb was slain in the manner of a real sacrifice, and yet
notwithstanding of this immolation, they kneeled not at the eating of the
paschall lamb. The Sacraments of the old and new Testament were alyke in
representation, significatition, and exhibition. Of prayer and praise we spoke
before in particular.

Kneeling not practiced in the ancient Kirk.
THE former two breaches are sufficient of them selves, howbeit kneeling were
otherways warranted by the practice of the Kirk: but as it had no warrant from
Scripture, and reason, so likewise it wants the warrant of antiquity. When
the Arrians denied Christ's true divinity, the orthodoxe Kirk acknowledging his
divinity, kneeled not in the act of receiving which was expedient if it had
been lawful: because the Arrians debased the Son of God. It was the custom
of the kirk to stand in time of public prayer upon all the Lords days in the
year, and every day from Easter to Pentecost, as witnesses Tertullian,
Cyprian, Basilius, Jerome, Augustine, Hugo de sancto Victore, Anselmus, the
Council of Nice, the 6. Council of Carthage, The Council of Constantinople,
Quinisextum, the Council of Turone. The testimonies are set down in the B. of
Rochester his discourse. Bellarmin closes all up in one general, to wit, that
in his time five hundredth years were not past, since the rite to pray standing
and not kneeling on the Lords day had ceased. De cultis sanctor. c. 11
If they kneeled not in the time of prayer where this gesture is most requisite
by their own confession, because of the joyful memory of Christ's resurrection,
far less did they kneel in the act of banketting and receiving the inestimable
gifts offered unto us in this sacrament, a matter of great joy. Wherefore
served the signification of standing in prayer, if it was controlled with the
gesture of an humble penitentiary at the sacrament? The testimony alleged by
the B. of Rochester Page 177
out of Tertullian, that they that were to be baptized, must pray with often
prayers, and fastings, and kneelings, and watchings, proves neither kneeling
on the Lords day in time of prayer, or the act of baptism, but only declares
what were the exercises of preparation on the days preceding baptism. In the
assembly holden last at S. Andros, standing or kneling in time of publik prayer
was left to every man's liberty. In the Assembly holden at Perth, they have taken
away this liberty in the act of receiving. They left liberty in the act of
public humiliation, and hes taken it away in the act of mental meditation. Let
any man therefore judge of their intention. The authors above rehearsed make not
all mention of prayer, when they speak of standing: but generally they speak
against kneeling on the Lords day. Tertullian De Coron. milit.
says generally de geniculis adorare, to adore upon the knees upon the Lords
day is unlawful. He says not orare, but adorare. Hierom Contra Luciferanos.
his testimony also is general against adoration on the knees. Pope Alex. the
3. has their words. Quonia^ diebus aute^ dominicis and alijs praecipuis
sestivitatibus suis inter pascha and Pentecosten genuum flexio nequaquam debet
fieri: Decretal. lib. 2. tit. 9. de ferijs cap.
nisi aliquis ex deuotione id velit facere in secreto. In consecrationibus
aute^ Episcoporum and Clericoru^ ordinationibus consecrans and consecratus
tantum genua flectere possunt secundum quod consecrationis modus requrit. Upon
the Lords day and other cheese festivities, and between Ester and Pentecost
there ought to be no kneeling, except one will do it in secret of devotion. In
the consecration of Bishops and ordination of clergymen he that consecrateth
and he thet is consecrated, may only bow their knees, so far as the form of
consecration requires. If this was the only exception, it follows that in no
other case, they did kneel on these days. Exceptio firmat regulam in casibus
non exceptis. They received the communion usually upon the Lords day: and
therefore it was called the day of bread Chrysostom. hom. 5. de resurrectione.
. Yea and in some places only upon the Lords day, as Jewel observes Artic. 1.
Divis. 25.
out of an Epistle sent from the council of Alexandria in the defense of one
Macarius. Tertullian expressly affirms, that the manner was to stand at the
receaving De orat.
. Dionysius Alexandrinus writes to Xistus concerning one who standing at the
table had often received the holy food in these words. Nonne solennior erit
statio tua si ad aram Dei steteris accepto corpore Domini. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap 8.
Chrysostom Homil. in Encenijs.
says, Stemus trementes and timidi demissis oculis renata autem anima gementes
sieve jubilantes cord. Let us stand trembling, etc. The Alyssines receive the
sacrament standing even to this day, as also the Muscouites, howbeit drowned
otherwise in great superstition, receive the Sacrament standing.

Oject. the Ethincks objected to Christians that they did honor Bacchus and
Ceres; and Averroes, that they adored that which they did eat. Theodoret says
Dialog. 2.
the mystical signs are adored. Augustine in psalm. 98
no man eats that flesh before he adore it. Ambrose Lib. 3. cap. 12. de
spirit. sanct.
we adore the flesh of Christ in the mysteries Chrysostom says, Homil. 24 in
1. Cor.
let us imitate the Barbarians, thou beholdst him not in a manger, but on an
Altar. And again, Homil. 7. in Mattheum
they are like Herod, who adore not the Eucharist.

Answ. It follows not they adored, therefore they kneeled. The Ethnicks did
mistake the reverend and grave behavior of Christians at the receiving the
Sacrament, as they did many other things both in Jews and Christians: they
gave out that they were worshippers of the clouds, of the Son of the cross,
of the head of an Ass, of the slaughter of infants. Augustine says. A Cerere
and Libero paganorum dijs long absumus quamvis panis and calicis sacramentum
nostro ritu amplectimur. Contra Faustum.
We are far from Ceres and Bacchus the Gods of the Pagans, howbeit we embrace
the Sacrament of the bread and the cup after our rite. When Theodoret says the
mystical signs are adored, Obedience- p. 534.557.
he means by adoration, reverend and religious handling, as becomes so great
mysteries: and so Bilson: exponeth Theodoret, and to this purpose alleges the
gloss of the Canon Law, De consecrat. did. 3. venerabilis.
In hoc sensu possumus quamlibet rem sacram adorare, id est reverentiam
exhibere. Anastasius says, De consecrat. did. 1. Apostolica.
Dominica verba attente audiant, and fideliter adorent. Let them diligently
hear, and faithfully adore the word of God. The word adoration is sometime
taken in a large sense for veneration; so do all our Divines expone Theodoret,
or else his phrase were absurd: and indeed none of the Fathers used that phrase
but he. Chrysostomes Homilies on Matthew are a supposititious work. The rest of
the testimonies alleged make mention of adoration, not of the Sacrament, but
of Christ in the Sacrament: and they are to be understood of spiritual and
internal adoration, common to this sacrament with other sacraments. Augustine
says, The flesh of Christ is adored either in the sacrifice, or otherwise by
faith Fulk. 1. cor. 11. sect. 18.
. The adoration is as the eating, the eating is spiritual and by faith.
Augustine speaking of the veneration of this sacrament, says, Epist. 118.
Contemptum solum non vult cibus ille. That meat misliketh only contempt, as
Manna did lothsomnesse. Ambrose speaks of all the mysteries of Christian
Fulk. 1. cor. 11. sect. 18.
Religion. Chrysostom is to be understood of spiritual reverence Fulk ibid.
: and therefore he uses emphaticall speeches of ascending up to the gates of
heaven, even of the heaven of heavens, like Eagles. For the same Chrysostom
says, Hom. 14. in Marcum.
that we adore Christ in Baptism. None of all the testimonies alleged
expresses any gesture of the body, let be kneeling.

Object. For an humble gesture are alleged Origin Homil. 15 in diverse. locos.
: Thou therefore humbling thy self, imitate the Centurion, and say, Lord I am
not worthy, etc. Cyrillus of Jerusalem In cateches. mystugogic.
, Then after the communion of the body of Christ, come also to the cup of his
blood, not reaching out thy hands, but falling on thy face in manner of
adoration and worship, say Amen. Nazianzen in Epitaph. Gorgonia.
says, his sister fell down before the Altar, and called on him who was
worshipped on the Altar.

Answ. Origin directs the words to be said as well when the preacher enters
into our house, as when we receive the sacrament. Bilson, Obedience. p. 540.
Further, Possevinus a learned Papist, acknowledges that work to be
counterfeit Riveti specimen critici sacri. lib. 2. cap 13.
. The Catechismes attributed to Cyrill of Jerusalem is a book newly sprung up,
and unknown to the Ancients. It was not to be found in Hardings time, but in
writing. See Moulins translated Part 2. page 65.
. This counterfeit Cyril says not, Cade pronus, fall down on thy face; but,
accede pronus, come inclining, or bowing thy body; as men use to do when they
make courtesy. Nazianzens sister was sick in body, and sick in mind: her
fact was private, and in the dark of the night, she was not in the act of
receiving the sacrament, she blubbered with her tears the fragments of the
sacrament received before. Christ is honored at the Altar, or communion table,
by the administration of the sacrament celebrated to his honor and worship, in
remembrance of him: his mercies are there laid forth in the mysteries. Ye see
no testimony can be alleged for geniculation. The Council of Constantinople
holden under the Emperor Basilius, has these words: Jesus Christus panis
substantiam mandavit apponi, ne scilicet humana effigy figurata idolatria
introduceretur. For eschewing of Idolatry, the Lord commanded the substance of
bread to be set on without any humane shape. The proofs already made for
standing upon the Lords day, for 1000. year in the Kirk, do evince that
geniculation had no place in the act of receiving all that time. It was
therefore followed upon bodily presence and transubstantiation.

Kneeling not practiced in the reformed Churches.
THE Lutheran Kirkes do acknowledge real presence by way of consubstantiation:
it is no wonder therefore that they approve kneeling. The reformed Kirks as
they have damned bodily presence, so have they rejected this gesture of
kneeling in the act of receiving. The Kirk of Bohemia has retained this
gesture since the days of John Husse. In their confession exhibited to King
Ferdinand, An. 1535 it is thus said, Cap. 15.
Ministeri vero Dominicae caenae verba referentes plebem ipsam ad hanc fidem
hortantur, ut corporis Christi presentiam adesse credant. The Ministers are
willed to stir up the people to believe that the body of Christ is present: the
poorer sort amongst them, as they have rejected the error of real presence,
so depart they from this gesture. In our neighbor Kirk some of their defenders
of kneeling will not have us inquisitiue of the manner of Christ's presence in
the sacrament. Hooker Eccles. polic. lib. 5. sect. 67.
And the Bishop of Rochester commends the simplicity of the Ancients, which
disputed not whether Christ was present Con, sub, in, or trans, in this Supper.
Discourse. page 35.
Sutton in his Appendix to his Meditations on the Lords Supper, condemns
likewise this diligent search of the manner of Christ's presence. If the manner
of Christ's presence be not determined, there can arise no other but a confused
worship of such a confused and determinate presence. The Papists acknowledge
that there ought to be no adoration but where there is acknowledged a bodily
presence in the sacrament. Hence it is that they prove mutually the one by the
other.

It will not follow that we may change sitting into kneeling, because the
ancient Kirk and some reformed Kirks have changed sitting into standing;
because kneeling makes so many breaches both in the institution, and in the
second commandment, and is no ways a table gesture. By standing we
accommodate our selves to a table to participate of the dainties set thereon,
standing was never abused to idolatry as kneeling has been. We are not bound
to imitate other kirks further then they imitate Christ. Our sitting is not
Scottish Genevating, but a commendable imitation of the Apostolical Churches,
and obedience to Christ's institution.

They flee up at last to the Kirk triumphant; and allege for kneeling the 24.
Elders falling down before the Lamb, but how conclude they this, that they
that are called to the Supper of the lamb kneel at the Supper of the lamb?
and seeing the blessed souls shall not be clothed with their bodies before the
resurrection, how can they conclude, material geniculation of the blessed
Saints in heaven? all creatures in heaven, in earth, and under the earth; are
said to bow their knee at the name of Jesus, that is, to acknowledge his
soverain authority, howbeit the celestial Angels, blessed souls, and
infernal spirits, have not knees to bow with. The everlasting felicity of the
children of God, is the Supper of glory* do they drink continually of that
felicity upon their knees? thousand thowsands stand before him, many shall come
from the East, and from the West, and sit at the heavenly table with Abraham,
Isaak, and Jacob: may we not then conclude sitting and standing, as well as
they do kneeling, if we look to the letter of parables, visions, allegories
and prophesies? But Symbolicall Theology is not argumentatiue. Last, how will
they prove evidently that the falling of the 24. Elders before the lamb, is to
be interpreted of the Kirk triumphant, rather then of the Kirk Militant?

REASONS AGAINST FESTIVAL DAYS.
FRom the beginning of the Reformation to this present year of our Lord 1618.
the Kirk of Scotland has diverse ways condemned the observation of all holy
days, the Lords day only excepted. In the first chapter of the first book of
discipline penned anno. 1560. the observation of holy days to Sancts, the
feast of Christmasse, Circumcision, Epiphanie, Purification, and other fond
feasts of our Lady are ranked amongst the abominations of the Roman
religion, as having neither commandment nor assurance in the word. It is
farther affirmed that the obstinate maintaineres and teachers of such
abomination should not escape the punishment of the civil Magistrate. The
book aforesaid was subscrybed by the Lords of secret Council. In the general
Assembly holden at Edinburgh anno. 1566, the latter confession of H^lv^tia was
approved; but with special exception against some holy days dedicated to
Christ; these same very days, that now are urged. In the Assembly holden anno
1575. complaint was made against the Ministers and Readers beside Aberdine,
because they Assembled the people to prayer and preaching upon certain patron
and festival days. Complaint likewise was ordained to be made to the Regent
upon the Town of Drumfraies for urging, and convoying a Reader to the Kirk
with Tabret and Whistle to read the prayers all the holy Days of Yoole, or
Christmas upon the refusal of their own Reader, Item an article was formed to
be presented to the Regent, craving that all days heretofore kept holy in
time of Papistrie beside the Lords day such as Yoole day, Saints days, and
other like feasts may be abolished, a civil penalty appointed against the
observers of the said days. Banqueting, playing, feasting, and such other
vanities upon the days foresaid is condemned. In the Assembly holden in April
anno 1577. it was ordained that the Visitor with the advice of the Synodal
Assembly, shall admonish Ministers preaching or ministering the communion at
Easter and ^hristmas.
Pasche, Yoole, or other like superstitious times or Readers reading, to
desist, under the pain of deprivation. Dedicating of days was abjured in the
confession of faith penned anno 1580. An Article was formed in the Assembly
anno 1581. craving an act of Parliament to be made against observation of feast
days, dedicated to Saints, and setting out of bone-fires. In the Assembly
holden in February anno 1587. it was humbly moved to his Majesty, that Pasche
and Yoole was superstitiously observed in Fyffe, and about Drumfrets. In the
Assembly holden anno 1590. his Majesty in open audience of the Assembly praised
God for that he was borne to be a King in the sincerest Kirk in the world:
sincerer then our neighbor Kirk of England: for their service was an
evill-sayd Mass in English: Sincerer then Geneva it self: for they observed
Pasche and Yoole. In the Parliament holden anno 1592. the act of King James the
third anent the Saturday and other vigils to be kept holy from Even-song to
Evensong was annulled. Item, the act made by Queen Regent granting license to
keep Yoole and Pasche. In the Assembly holden anno 1596. when the covenant was
renewed, superstition and Idolatry breaking forth in keeping of festival
days, setting out of bone-fires, and singing of Carrols, is reckoned amongst
the corruptions which were to be amended. The Pulpits have sounded continually
against all festival days. The Censures of the Kirk have been put in
execution in all due form against the observers. In the pretended Assembly
holden at Perth in August last past, it was concluded, that hereafter every
Minister shall make commemoration of the inestimable benefits received from
God, by and through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, his Birth, Passion,
Resurrection, Ascension, and sending down of the Holy Ghost upon the days
appointed for that use. That they shall make choice of several and pertinent
Texts, and frame their Doctrine and exhortation accordingly. This their
conclusion was ratified and allowed by act of Council, and proclamation was
made thereupon, commanding cessation and abstinence from all kind of labor
and handy-worke upon the five days above written, that every one may the
better attend the holy exercises which are to be kept in the Kirk at these
times. But first we will premit the proper description of a festival day.

The description of a festival day.
PIscator describes a Festival day in this manner, Galat. 4.9 10.11.
Festum proprii loquendo est publica and solennis ceremonia mandata a Deo, ut
certo anni tempore cum singulari loetitia obeatur ad gratias agendum Deo pro
certo aliquo beneficio in populum suum collato. A feast in proper speech is a
public and solemn ceremony commanded by God to be celebrated a certain
time of the year, with singular gladness to give thanks to God for some
certain benifit bestowed on his people. Hooker entreating this argument
intituleth the subject festival days. He makes festival solemnity to be
nothing else, but the due mixture, as it were, of these three elements; Praises
set forth with cheerful alacrity of mind: delight expressed by charitable
largenes more then common bounty: and sequestration from ordinary labors.
Policy. lib. 5. sect. 7.
By these descriptiones we may see that the sabbath day is not properly a
festival day. The ordinary sabbath is weekly: the festival is anniversary. We
may fast upon the ordinary sabbath, but we cannot fast and mourn upon a
festival day. Nehem. 8.10. for that were to confound fasting and festival
days. The Council of Laodicea inhibited to celebrate the feasts of martyrs
in Lent, for the same regard upon the ordinary sabbath all the parts of Gods
worship may be performed as occasion shall offer. Upon the festival days we
are bound to the commemoration of a particular benefit. Proper texts,
Epistles, Gospels, Homilies, and sermones are framed for the mystery of that
day. So that the ordinary sabbath is moral and for the worship of God in
general, the festival is mystical. Esentialia festi, the esse^tiall parts of
a festival day are cessation from work: hearing of the word: participation of
the sacraments. Commemoration of divine mysteries may be performed upon the
ordinary sabbath, but to make up a festival day Bellarm. De cultu sanctorum.
lib. 3. cap. 10
requires a determination of a day, signification and representation of the
mysteries wrought on such days. Scaliger Addenda prolegomeni^ in lib. de
emendat. temp.
observes that the ordinary sabbothes were never called Chaggim as the
anniversarie solemnities were.

1. Reason against festival days.
Six days shall thou labor and do all that thou have to do.] These words
are either a command to do the works of our calling as many both Jewish and
Christian divines do interpret: or else a permission, as others do interpret.
If they contein a command, no countremand may take it away. If a permission, no
human authority may spoil men of the liberty that God has granted unto them,
as long as they have any manner of work to do for the sustentation of this
life. The Muscovits therefore say very well: that it is for Lords to keep
feasts, and abstien from labor. The Citizens and Artificers amongst them upon
the festival days after divine service, do betake themselves to their labor,
and domestic affairs, as Gaguinus reports. Cod. lib. 3. ^it. 12. l. 4.
It may be objected that Constantine the Emperor made a law that none but the
Prince may ferias co^dere, erect an idle day: the Prince then may inioyne a day
of Cessation. Answer. The Laws of the ^od. are not rules of theology. A
Prince may not inioyne Cessation from Oeconomicall and domestic works but for
weapon showing, exercise of arms, defense of the country or other public
works and affairs. But that is not to injoyne a day of simple Cessation, but
to inioyne a politic work in place of the oeconomicall. Every particular
member ceassing from their particular work exercises another work serving for
the preservation of the whole body. The curse that Adam shall eat with the
sweat of his brows, is mitigated by the permission of six days labor. The
Lord permits unto man six, lest he devour the seventh day which is
sanctified. What if the Kirk representative injoyne a weekly holy day, as
another sabbath, ought the Kirk to be obeyed? what power has the Kirk
representative, to inioyne an anniversary day more then a weekly or hebdomadary
holy day. If a day of simple Cessation from all manner of work Oeconomicall and
political may not be enjoined, a festival day may not be enjoined. I say
further that the poor craftsman can not lawfully be commanded to lay aside his
tools, and go pass his time, no not for an hour, let be for a day as long
as he is willing to work, and perhaps urged with the sharpnes of present
necessity. And yet farther that he ought not to be compelled to leave his work
to go to divine service except on the day that the Lord has sanctified.

The second Reason.
It is the privilege of Gods power to appoint a day of rest, and to sanctify
it to his honor, ] as our best Divines Perkins, Gal. 4. Willets Synops. page
50^ and Romans 14 controvers. 4 Kuchlinus in ^atechis. Holland. de diebus ^estis.
maintain. Zanchius In 4. p^ae^ept. col. 655
affirms that it is proper to God to choose any person or any thing to
consecrate and sanctify it to himself, as it belongs to him alone to
justify, Catechismus Hollandicus says no wise man will deny that this
sanctification belongs only to God, and that it is manifest sacrilege to
attribute these things to men, which are only of divine ordination. Willet
says: It belongs only to the Creator to sanctify the Creature. In the
book of Ecclesiasticus, cap. 33.7.8. it is demanded, Why does one day excel
another, when as the light of every day of the year is of the Sun? It is
answered, By the knowledge of the Lord they were distinguished, and he altered
seasons and feasts. Some of them has he made hie days, and hallowed them;
Some of them he has made ordinary days. The common tenent of the Divines was
acknowledged by the pretended Bishop of Galloway in his Sermon at the last
Christmas. It may offend you, said he, that this is an holy day. I say there is
no power either civil or Ecclesiastical can make an holy day: no King, no
Kirk: only the Lord that made the day, and distinguished it from the night: he
has sanctified the seventh day. The like was acknowledged by M. P. Galloway in
his Christmas Sermons. If the special sanctification of a day to an holy use
depends upon Gods commandment and institution, then neither King nor Kirk
representative may make an holy day.

The observers of days will say they count not their anniverserie days holier
then other days, but that they keep them only for order and policy, that the
people may be assembled to religious exercises. Answer. The Papists will
confess that one day is not holier then another in its own nature, no not the
Lords day: for then the Sabbath might not have been changed from the last, to
the first day of the week. But they affirm that one day is holier then
another, in respect of the end and use; And so do we. They call them holy
days: and so do we. They use them as memorial signs of sacred mysteries
whereof they carry the names, as Nativitie; Passion; Ascension. etc. And so do
we. The presence of the festivitie puts a man in mind of the mystery,
howbeit he have not occasion to be present in the holy Assembly. We are
commanded to observe them in all points as the Lords day, both in the public
Assemblies, and after the dissoluing of the same. Yea it is left free to teach
any part of Gods word on the Lords day; but for solemnity of the festival,
solemn texts must be chosen: Gospels Epistles, collects, Psalms must be
framed for the particular service of these days, and so the mystical days of
man's appointment, shall not only equal, but in solemnity surpass the moral
sabbath appointed by the Lord. Does not Hooker say that the days of public
memorials should be clothed with the outward robes of holiness, They aledge for
the warrant of anniversary festivities the Ancients, who call them Sacred and
mystical days. If they were instituted only for order and policy, that the
people may Assemble to religious exercises, Wherefore is there but one day
appointed betwixt the Passion and Resurection? forty days betwixt the
Resurrection and Ascension? Ten betwixt the Ascension and Pentecost? Wherefore
follow we the course of the Moon as the Jews did, in our moveable feasts
making the christian Church clothed with the Sun to walk under the Moon, as
Lib. 2. Did. 4. unmer. 48.
Bonauentura alludeth? Wherefore is there not a certain day of the month kept
for Easter, as well as for the nativitie? Does not Bellarmine give this reason
out of Augustine that the day of the Nativity is celebrate only for memory,
the other both for memory; and for sacraments. De cultu sanct. Lib. 3. Cap. 12.
Ille celebratur solum ob memoriam, and ideo semper die 25. Decembris: at l^fe
celebratur ob memoriam and sacramentum, and ideo variatur. If the anniversarie
commemorations were like the weekly preachings, as the two forenamed preachers
made the comparison, why is the husbandman forced to leave his plough at the
one, and not at the other? Why has the one proper service and not the other?
Why did not M. Galloway curse the people for absence from the one, as well as
from the other? Whey are the days of the one changeable, and not the other. To
make solemn commemoration of Christ's nativitie upon any other day, then upon
the putatiue day of his nativity, would be thought a great absurdity; siclike
of his Passion, Ascension. etc. And last, how could M. Galloway affirm that
the evidence of Gods Spirit appeared in the Christmas Sermons that are extant,
more lively then in any other Sermons?

Next it may be objected that the people of God might have indicted days of
fasting at their own determination, and an interdiction of all kind of work.
Answer. They had a general warrant from God. Joel. 2.15. to proclaim a
general fast, according to the occurrence of their calamities and other
affairs of the kirk. The light and law of nature leads a man to this
observation of an occasional fast: nature teaches him presently to withdraw
his hand and heart from worldly affairs, and to lift them up to God to
deprecate his wrath when his judgment is above our heads. The like may be
said, by analogy, of thanksgiving, that we ought to praise God in the mean
time when we receive the benefit. But to make of the occasional days of
fasting, or feasting, aniversarie and set festival and fasting days is
without warrant. It remains therefore that it is the Lords sovereignty to
make or ordain a thing to be holy. God first sanctifies by commandment and
institution: man sanctifies thereafter by observation, applying to an holy use
the time sanctified by God. It was a part of the Idolatry of the golden calfe
to proclaim a holy day. It is numbered among one of Ieroboams sins that he
ordained a feast after the devise of his own heart 1. King. 12.33^ Musculus,
Loci. communes praec. 4.
says If any man shall attempt to make holy at his pleasure the things that
God has not Sanctified, is not only Superstitious, but challenges unto
himself, that which belongs only to God. When God blesses and sanctifies a
day, then may man look for a blessing in sanctifieing it

The third Reason.
We come from privilege to fact. As de jure none may, so de facto None did,
appoint holy days under the law but God, and that either by himself, or by
some extraordinary direction. Therefore none can be allowed under the Gospel
without the like warant. Seeing the times under the Gospel are not so
ceremonious, as the times under the law. Against this reason two instances are
commonly alleged the one of the days of Purim instituted by Mordecai: the
other of the feast of dedication instituted by Judas Maccabeus, and graced with
Christ's presence, as is alleged, Ioh. 10. But the answer is easy.

The days of Purim were simply called the days of Purim: not the holy days
of Purim. They are neither called Chag, nor Mogned, nor Gnatsarah as the other
anniuersarie feasts are called in the old Testament. No mention is made of holy
conuocations on these days nor divine service proper to them, notwithstanding
of their return to the temple, and promise that the memorial of the days of
Purim should not fall from among them, nor perish from their seed Ester
9.27.28, It is true that now a days they read the book of Ester. And
therefore call it the feast of Megilla, after the reading whereof they spend the
rest of the time in revelling, more mad then the Gentiles were in their
Bacchanalis. This reading was not the first institution, but an addition of the
later Jews, The days of Purim were instituted only for civil days, and the
ordinance required no farther, but that they should make them days of feasting
and joy, and sending of portions one to another, and gifts to the poor Ester
9.19.22. to be documents and testimonies of their fasting and crying, that is
in remembrance of their fasting and prayers, by which they obtained that
deliverance. At the instant time of their deliverie, it is said they rested,
but in the Edict when the days were made anniversarie, rest from all kind of
work was not forbidden: therefore Hospinian De origin sestorum I^daicorum,
says, In festo Phurim operari prohibitum non est: they were not forbidden to
work. And Willet compares it with the fifth of November, Synopsis controversy
of holidays.
and affirms the like. Next, it is to be considered, that Mordecai is thought
to be the penman of the book of Ester, and consequently a Prophet. He was one
of the 120. masters of the great Synagogue, amongst whom were both Priests and
Prophets, Ezra, and his society, Daniel and his companions, Zachary, Malachy,
etc. Thirdly, it appears, Ester 9.28. that it was an order to endure, as long
as the feast days appointed by the Lord himself, and in no case to be altered.
Holy days of Ecclesiastical constitution are not of such a nature, as Against
the Rhemists Apoc. 1.10.
D. Fulk acknowledges. Whatsoever therefore was the quality of these days,
whether holy or civil, the warrant was more then ordinary.

The feast of Dedication, whereof mention is made, John 10. some take for the
dedication of the Temple in Zorobabels time, as the Cent. 1. Col. 244.
Magdeburg Centuries. So likewise Chrysostom, Theophilactus, Cajetanus,
Abulensis, Euthymius, and others, as Comment in Evangel. Tom 3. lib. 4. cap. 16.
Barradius reports. But let it be meant, as is alleged: If the feast of
dedication in Solomon and Zorobabels time was anniversary, then the Maccabees
did follow the example of these who had Prophetical direction. If they were
not anniversarie, as indeed In Ioh. 10
Toletus leaves it as uncertain, then this annual memory was an addition of
the Pharisees, who enlarged the glory of this feast, as they did their
Ph^lacteries. Iunius Ioh. 10
relates out of the Talmud, that the wise men decreed that the eight days of
that feast should be yearly days of joy. By the wise men are meant the
Pharisees, who were called Sapientes Israelis. The renewment of the Altar, and
of certain other decayed places, was honored by them with an annual memory,
whereas the whole Temple, with all the implements and furniture thereof in
Solomon and Zorobabels time had not the like honor. Neither do we read that
any annual memory was instituted by Hezekias after the profanation of the
Temple by Ahaz and Prias: nor by Josias, after that it was polluted by Manasses
and Amon. Christ's walking in Salomons Porch, makes nothing for approbation of
this feast. He had remained in Jerusalem from the feast of the Tabernacles, and
came not up of purpose to keep that feast. He takes old of the present
opportunity to thrust his sickle into a thick harvest.

We have to consider for a general answer to all instances alleged from the
Jewish Kirk, first that they had extraordinary directions which we want. They
had prophets by office, or commission, who ended in Malachi. They had prophets
who were only prophets by the Spirit as Daniell, David, and Solomon, who
endured after the days of Malachi, as Drusius in 2. Pet. ^ 21.
afirmeth They had Vrim and Thummim under the first Temple, and in place
thereof, a slender voice sounding from the heaven, called Bathkol, under the
second Temple, as Tremellius in Act. 12.22.
has observed. Next the Pharisees and degenerating Jews filled their Calendar
with fond feasts of their own invention, as the festivities of the
Equinoctial and festival days, other ways called the feasts of the
Tekuphas: or converted any ancient order into a solemn feast, as the day
appointed for carrying wood to the Temple to maintein the fire of the altar
Nehem. 10.34. they turned into a feast called the feast of Xylophoria. A holy
day is to be observed not by a few but by all: but all were not appointed to
bring wood, but those only who were designed by lot. It is no wonder therefore
that they took the like course with the days of Purim. But we are not to
imitate the Pharisees, and fond Jews.

The fourth Reason.
The observation of anniversarie days pertained to the ceremonial law: but so
it is that the ceremonial law is abolished. The anniversarie days were
distinguished from the moral sabbath. Many were the preheminences of the
ordinary sabbath above the anniversary. 1. It was more ancient, given to Adam
in the state of innocence. 2. uttered by Gods own mouth. 3. Written with Gods
own finger in durable stone. 4. The Lord himself in a manner rested on it,
when as he rained not Manna that day. 5. It was more strictly observed, then
the other holy days, therefore some say it was called Shabbath, Shabbathon.
Therefore likewayes the Jews measured unto it a sabbath days journey. 6.
Other holy days were celebrated either in remembrance of a bypast benefit,
or to signify something to come. It excelled them in both, faith De cultu
sanctorum, lib. 3. cap. 11
Bellarmine. 7. Other holy days gave place unto it The Jews made a Canon,
that two Sabbothes should not concur together propter olera and propter
mortuo^, that is, because they could not keep in that hot region their sodden
meats two days together; nor the bodies of the dead unburied for stink, and
putrefaction. Therefore they transferred this sabbath of extraordinary
solemnity immediately proceeding the ordinary sabbath to the ordinary sabbath.
They were drawn to it, it was never drawn to them, See De exercitat. p. 482.
Causabonus. In a word, the Jews held it in greater estimaton, then the rest.
They called it. The Queen of the holy days, and the secret of the living
God. The three solemnities called Regalim were Temple feasts. They were bound
to celebrate them at the Temple the public theater of all the Jewish
ceremonies The Apostle calls them Weak and beggarly elements Galat. 4.9.10.
The elements of the world Coloss. 2.20. Shadows of things to come Coloss.
2.16.17. The Apostle says not the observation of Judicial days, but
simpliciter, the observation of days served to the people of God for a
typical use, and a rudiment of religion. If the observation of some
anniversary days was prescribed to the Jews, as elements and rudiments for
their instruction; it follows that the observation of anniversarie days is
of it self a rudimentary instruction; otherwise the Apostles reason will not
hold. The Apostle condemns difference of days as he condemns difference
of meats. To esteem some meats clean, and some unclean is Judicial, howbeit
we observe not the same difference, that the Jews did. Days and meats are
parallelled together, to esteem one day holier then another, not so discerned
by the Lords commandment must be also Judicial. The Kirk under the Gospel
has past the rudiments; and therefore the observation of anniversary days
does not beseem her. To substitute other days in place of the Jewish, a
Christian Pas^^e and Pentecost for the Jewish, is but to substitute rudiments
and elements to the Jewish, and not to chase away, but to change the Jewish
holy days, as Bellarmine does De cultu Sanctorum c. 10.
Non est sublata sed mutata significatio ^et discretio dierum. The Jewish
frankincense was a perfume: the Popish is a simple frankincense without any
other ingredient. The Jewish lights were of oil: the popish of wax and yet we
charge them with Iudaizing. The Jews had no anniversary days, but such as
were abrogate, They were abrogate not only as shadows of things to come, but
also as memorials of bygone benefits. Even as they were days of remembrance
they belonged to the pedagogy of the law. Converted Jews may not lawfully
observe the Jewish festivities, even as remembrances of bygone benefits. In
every respect all their anniversary days are abolished, and they had none
other, but such as were abolished. Therefore in every respect they belonged to
the ceremonial Law. The observation therefore of anniversary days even in
respect of remembrance was to the Jews pedagogicall, rudimentary and
elementary, and counsequently ceremonial. The Bishop of Chester Defense of the
ceremonies page 64.
confesses that all the solemn feasts were of a ceremonial nature. If the
Jews had no anniversary solemnities to endure after Christ's coming when they
should be converted to Christianisme, how can the observation of anniversary
days be taken up by Christians.

The fifth Reason.
The prerogative belonging to God in the old Testament, was transferred to
Christ, God and Man, the lawgiver in the new Testament, one that was faihfull
in all the house of God. But so it is, that Christ neither by his own
commandment, nor by direction of his spirit inspiring the Apostles, instituted
any other day but the Lords day. If there had been any other days dedicated to
Christ, the Apostle spoke unproperly and obscurely when he said, he was
ravished in the spirit upon the Lords day. If there had been a day for his
Nativity, another for his passion, he should have said, he was ravished in the
spirit upon one of the Lords days. Seeing John outlived the rest of the
Apostles, It follows that there was no other holy day observed in the
Apostolical times. Neither was the institution of the Lords day so much a new
institution, as a change of the ordinary Sabbath. The extraordinary Sabboths
were in every respect ceremonial. The ordinary Sabbath had both substance and
ceremony. By reason of the substance it was changed into the Lords day
answering analogically to it. The moral use of the ordinary sabbath was for
the service of God in general both private and public. The mystical use was
to be a memorial of things bypast, and a shadow of things to come. The moral
use indureth, the mystical uses are evanished. Christ appeared the first day
of the week, and every eighth day thereafter until he ascended, says In
Genesin c. 2.2.
Iunius. And that therefore the Apostles delivered to the Kirk the observation
of this day from Christ's example and institution,, which he confirms with the
judgment of Cyrillus and Augustine. The blessing of the seventh day was
translated to this day instituted by Christ, because all sanctification flows
to Christians from Christ. But it is sufficient that the Apostles inspired by
his Spirit, have recommended this day to the Kirk.

There is another reason to prove that there were no other days appointed in
the Apostles times. The Apostle had occasions to treat of holy days, reasoning
against the observation of Jewish days, they direct them to no other as the
purpose required. The Apostle condemns not only the observation of the
Jewish days, nor the Jewish observation of the Jewish days to a typical use.
For the converted Jews did not observe them as shadows of things to come, for
then they had denied Christ: but he condemns observation of days as a Jewish
custom and rite, as a pedagogicall and rudimentary instruction not beseeming
the Christian Kirk. Zanchius In 4. praecept. p. 171
speaks to this purpose after this manner: Magis consentaneum est cum prima
institutione and cum scriptis Apostolicis ut unus tantum dies in septimana
sanctisicetur. It is more agreeable to the first institution, and the writings
of the Apostles, that one day of the week only be sanctified.

Against this Argument is first alleged, that the Apostle compares with the
observation of days, Romans 14.5.6. Answ. The Apostle bears with the infirmity
of the weak Jews, who understood not the fullness of the Christian liberty.
And the ceremonial law was as yet not buried. But the same Apostle reproves
the Galatians, who had attained to this liberty, and had once left off the
observation of days. Next, the Judicial days had once that honor, as to be
appointed by God himself: but the anniversary days appointed by men have not
the like honor.

It is secondly objected, that seeing the Lords day was instituted in
remembrance of Christ's resurrection, the other notable acts of Christ ought
likewise to be remembered with their several festivities. Answer. It follows
not that because Christ did institute in remembrance of one benefit, therefore
men may institute for other benefits. 2. Christ's resurrection was a benefit
including the rest, as an accomplishment of the work of redemption, and
answered anagogically to the common benefit of creation by the beginning of a
new creation. 3. We deny that the Lords day was appointed to celebrate the
memory only of Christ's resurrection. For then the Lords resurrection, the
proper subject of all Homilies, Sermons, Gospels, Epistles, Collects, Hymns
and Psalms belonging to the Paschall service should be the proper subject of
divine service every Lords day. Then the Lords day should be a festival day:
and it were unlawful to fast on it. It was instituted for the remembrance of
all his actions, and generalie for his worship. Athanasius, says Homilia de
semente.
In Sabath^ conuenimus ut Dominum Sabathi Iesum adoremus. We conuene on the
Sabbath, that we may adore Jesus the Lord of the Sabbath. Augustine De verbis
Apostol. sermon. 15.
says Domineus hic dies id^irco dicitur, quia eo die Dominus resurrexit, vel
ut ipso nomine doceret illu^ Domino consecratum esse debere. It is called the
Lords day, because the Lord rose that day, or that the name might teach us,
that it ought to be consecrate to the Lord. It is called the Lords day, either
becase the Lord did institute it: as the days of Purim are called Mordecaies
days, in the second of the Maccabees, and the communion is called the Lords
Supper: Or else because it was instituted to the Lords honor and worship. The
Jewish Sabbath was the Sabbath of the Lord our God. The Christian sabbath is
the Sabbath of Christ our Lord, God and Man. The name of Lord was more frequent
in the mouths of Christians in the Apostlick times, then the name of Christ as
Rhenanus In Tertul. de corona militis.
has observed. When it is called commonly the Lords day, it is all one, as if
it were commonly called Christ's day, Changeing the title but not the purpose.
If the ordinary sabbath be Christ's day appointed by himself or his Apostles at
his direction, for the remembrance of all his actions, and for his worship in
general; to divide his actions, and appoint anniversary and mystical days
for their remembrance, is superstitious will worship, and a Judicial addition
to Christ's institution. Christ's day answers analogicallie to the moral
sabbath. It may be applied to the remembrance of Christ's resurrection seeing he
rose that day and in some sort to b^ a sign of the heavenly rest. But that is
typus communis and factus. A common type fitted to resemble such things: But
not typus distin^^us appointed by God for that end. It rests then that
Christ's day, or the Lords day is the Christian sabbath, a continuation of the
moral sabbath, and to be observed in a moral manner for all the paise of Gods
worship in and through Christ, and not in a mystical manner, for the joyful
remembrance of Christ resurrection only.

It is thirdly objected that Paul kept the feast of Pentecost, Act. 20. and 1.
Cor. 16. I answer. It was the Jewish Pentecost, whereof mention is made in
these places, Paul needed not to have traveled to Jerusalem, for he might have
observed the Christian Pentecost every where Bellarmin himself will not be so
bold as to affirm that it was the Christian Pentecost, Francolinus De horis
canonicis cap. 84,
puts it out of doubt, and says, it is against the common exposition of the
interpreters, for says he, Tune temporis non erant celebres christianorum
festivitates cum Euangelium non esset ad huc plene promulgatum, the festiuities
of Christians, were not as yet celebrated, for the Gospel was not yet fully
published.

It is fourthly objected out of the Epistles of Policarpus and Pollycrates,
extant in the history of Eusebius and out of Beda following Eusebius, that the
Apostles kept the feast of Easter. Answer. Beda was but a fabler, and a
follower of fabulous reports: Eusebius was little better treading unknown
footsteps, as himself confesses in the beginning of his story. The Epistles
alleged are counterfeit: for it is said in these Epistles that John was a
Priest and bare on his forehead the Patalum that is the golden plate like that
of the high Priests Exodus 37.36. But no man will grant, says Scaliger,
Elenth. Triheres. c. 25.
Neutrum concedit, quisciverit nullam Christi Apostolum sacerdotem fuisse, and
nulli preterquam Summo Sacerdoti Petalon gestare licuisse. That either John or
James bare it, who understand that none of Christ's Apostles was a priest: and
that it was lawful to none, but the hie priest to bear the golden plate. And
yet these Epistles are the eldest records that Eusebius can ground upon. The
Bishop of Elie in his sermon takes needless pains to prove the antiquity of
Ester. But when he proves it to be Apostolical, he shoots short. His eldest
antiquity is the counterfeit Epistles before alleged. His proof out of
scripture Psalm. 118.8. and 1. Cor. 5.7.8. are very weak For the first
testimony is applied to every Lords day, and is not to be restrained to Pasche
day. Christ crucified and refused of the builders was demonstrate to be the
corner stone. For that day he was demonstrate to be the son of God by his
resurrection according to David's Prophecy, To day have I begotten thee,
applied to the resurrection by the Apostle Act. 13.33.

The Lords day is the day that the Lord has created, let us exult and rejoice
in it. Christ instituted it; David prophesied of it. Psalm. 110. where it is
called the day of the Lords Assemblies. Many memorable things were done under
the old Testament upon this day, to declare that it should be an excell^nt day
under the new Testament, specially Circumcision was commanded on the eight day
as a sacrament of that day, says Iunius, In Genes. 17.12.
Quia Sacramentum fuit diei illius octavi quo dominus Jesus Christus
resurrexit, following in this conceit the Ancients, Cyprian, Ambrose etc. If it
be true that is affirmed by the Council of Constantinople Conc. Constant 6.
Can. 8.
it would appear that the Lord has of purpose heaped his wonderful works
upon this day: for there it is said that Christ was born on it: The star shined
to the wise men on it: Christ fed 5000. with 5 loaves and 2 fishes on it:
Christ was baptized on it, rose on it, sent down the H. Ghost on it: one it the
light was created, Pope Leo likewise says, Dies dominica tantis dis^^nsationu^
mysteriis est consecrata, ut quicquid insigne admodum est constitutum in
terris, in hujus diei dignitatem sit gestum: id est. that the Lords day is
consecrate with so many mysteries dispensed on it, that it appears that
whatsoever potable thing was done on earth, was done to the honor of this day.
So if the prophey of David should be aplied to any precise day, it should be
applied to the Lords day. But seeing the words are to be understood, as well of
David as of Christ, the day is taken for the time indefinitely, wherein David
was made King, and the Corner Stone of Gods people. The other testimony
imports not the celebration of Ester feast upon any anniversary day, but
rather the Apostle teaches us to celebrate this feast of the Passover all the
year long, with the unleavened bread of sincerity and turth. Doctor Fulk in
his answer to the Rhemists upon the same place cites Augustine, referring this
feasting not to the celebration of Ester, nor to the receiving of Pasche
communion, but to our whole life. It is therefore only the Bishops conjecture
that the incestuous person was cut of against the feast of Ester, that a little
leaven might not leaven the whole lump. His last proof is taken from the
custom of baptism and the Eucharist ministered upon Pasch day, as if they had
been ministered only on that day. It was the decree of Pope Innocentius in the
Lateran Council that all should communicate at Ester. The Christian Sabbath
was called the Lords day, the day of light, and the day of Bread. The day of
light because of baptism ministered ordinarily on the Lords day: for the
Ancients called baptism, Light, or illumination. The day of bread because of
the administration of the Supper ordinarily upon the Lords day, as Iunius In
Genesin c. 2.
proves out of Chrysostom* baptism was tied of old to Pentecost, as well as
Ester. It was an evil custom disallowed both by ancient and modern Divines.
It was not so in the Primitive Kirk, as Cassander bears witness. Expositio de
author. consue. bapti Infant. adulti.
Apostolorum doctrinae consentientes nullo temporum aut locorum delectu statim
post fidei professionem ab Apostolis vel Apostolorum discipulis baptismi
sacramento in Ecclesiam Christi captabantur. I will now frame an argument
against this conceit of Apostolical tradition and observation of Pafch. The
Apostles were led all their life time by the infallible direction of the
Spirit. If they had accorded on the observaton of Ester they had not disagreed
on the day. But their most ancient records, the bastard Epistles above
mentioned report that Philip and John kept the fourtenth day of the moon, as
the Jews did, and Peter the Lords day following the fourteenth day of the
moon. It is well said in the preface to the harmony of confessions; that the
old contention about the celebrating of Ester tossed very hotly the space of
two hundred years or thereabout, betwixt the Greeks and the Latins, was long
since of us thought worthy of laughter. Whitaker says, De scriptura quaest. 6
c. 9.
Magnam quidem de hoc re olim fuisse contentione^ sed sine causa: ut miru^ sit
de re tantilla, et pene nullius momenti tantas et tam graves fuisse
dissentiones, wondering at their frivolous contention. The golden number
invented to find out the new moon, for observing the right day, after that
they accorded upon one day has often failed, and notwithstanding of all the
rules set down by the Council of Nice for uniformity in keeping the day, it
has been differently observed through mistaking, as Bellamine himself De
cultis Sanctorum. ^.12.
confesses. So God suffered the Christian world to wander, notwithstanding of
their golden number; to let the world see such customs had not his allowance.
He suffered not the Jews to wander in such incertainties, after he had
appointed them unto the keeping of their Passover.

Lastly, they reason with Augustine, Epist. 118
a posteriori, that seeing the Lords Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and
coming down of the holy Ghost, is celebrated with anniversarie solemnity,
through all the world, they must needs have been ordained either by the
Apostles, or by general Councels. But so it is, that those days were solemnly
kept before there was any general Council. It must follow therefore that the
Apostles ordained them. Answer. Augustines dis-junction is not necessary: For
many customs crept in, and prevailed thereafter universally, which were
neither ordained by the Apostles, nor general Councels. Socrates in his
History says, Lib. 5. c. 22.
I am of opinion, that as many other things crept in of custom in sundry
places, so the feast of Easter to have prevailed among all people of a certain
private custom and observation: insomuch that not one of the Apostles has any
where prescribed so much as one rule of it to any man. The success and event
has manifestly declared unto the world, that of old it was observed, not of
Canon, but of custom. And a little after, They that keep Easter the 14. day
of the month, bring forth John the Apostle for their Author. Such as inhabit
Rome, and the West parts of the world, allege Peter and Paul for themselves,
that they should leave such a tradition: yet there is none of them that can
show in writing any testimony of theirs for confirmation and proof of that
custom. Thus far Socrates translated by Doctor Hanmer a formalist, See
farther in Socrates in the same chapter.
for answer to Augustines rule. In the days of Justinius Martyr, that is, in
the midst of the second age after the Apostles, there is no mention made of any
other holy day then the Lords day. In his second Apology he seems to
affirm, that the Christians had only two times of public meetings: the one
ordinary upon the Lords day: the other extraordinary and uncertain, viz. when
any was converted to the Christian faith, and baptized. As for the questions
extant among Justinius works, the learned do not acknowledge them for his. In
Augustins rule there is no mention of the nativity day. As for the other four
days mentioned, put the case they were universally observed in Augustines
time, that is, in the fifth age after the Apostles, yet except they were
perpetually observed, Augustines rule will not help them. If If they cannot
prove Pasche to be Apostolical, how will they prove the Penticost, the
Passion, Ascension day to be Apostolical? There is Sermons extant amongst
Cyprians works upon the Passion and Ascension days. But Bellarmine himself
confesses these Sermons of Christ's cardinal works to be De scriptoribus
Ecclesiasticis. page 93.
suppesitions. The observing of the passion day brought into the kirk, set
days of fasting, the Friday fast, Lenton fast, and a number of superstitions
accompanying the said fastings together with the opinion of merit by fasting.
Set anniversary fasts are condemned by our Divines. The right manner of fasting
is to fast when some judgment is imminent, some great work to be performed.
And as for the private man, when he is greatly tempted to sin, and cannot
overcome his tentation, then is it fittest time for him to fast. The Paschall
fasts were also abused for the Paschall communion following, as if Easter
communion required greater preparation then any other communion in the year.

The sixth Reason.
If it had been the will of God, that the several acts of Christ should have
been celebrate with several solemnities, the Holy Ghost would have made known
to us the day of his Nativity, Circumcision, presentation to the Temple,
Baptism, Transfiguration, and the like. For it is kindly to remember Opus di^i
in die sua, the work of the day in the own day. This was the custom of old
under the Law. Hooker says, That the wondrous works of God advanced the days
and times, wherein they were wrought. Bellarmine says, That Christ's acts did
consecrate the days and times wherein they were wrought. If the principal
works of God advance some days above other, all the days of the year should
be holy. If we should honor the memory of Christ's acts, all days likewise
should b^ holy, because every one of them is full of his miracles, as Le^
says, Epistol. 4* c. 4.
Christ by his actions did no more consecrate the times wherein they were
wrought, then his body did the Mang^r, or the Cross. Not Christ's action on a
day, but his institution makes a day holy. If Christ's actions advance and
consecrate the days whereon they were wrought, the days ought to be known.
Otherwise it will fall out that we shall keep the days holy that were never
advanced no^ consecrated either by Christ's action or institution. But so it is,
that the day of Christ nativity, and consequently the other days depending
upon the calculation of the same, is hid from mortal men. That Christ was born
the 25. day of December, is grounded upon an erroneous conceit that Zachary the
father of John Baptist was an high Priest, when as he was a Priest of one of
the 24. orders, that is, of the order of Abijah. The Ancients made John the
Baptist to be conceived the 24. of September, when Zachary as high Priest
should have offered up incense. And from the conception of John they counted
six full months to the conception of Christ, that is, to the 25. of March,
when as they should have counted but five full months. This opinion of Christ's
nativitie on the 25. day of December was bred at Rome. Scaliger says, De
emendat temporum lib. 6.
Post seculum Constantini, Romae haec observatio instituta and tempore
Chrysostomi Constantinopolin derivata est, That this observation was instituted
at Rome after Constantines time. Chrysostom in his Homilies upon the Nativity
says, That ten years ago before the making of the said Homily, the 25. day
of December, was made known to the Oriental Kirkes by the Occidentall, to have
been the day of Christ's Nativity. Epiphanius testifies, that he was ignorant,
that the Occidentall Kirk had ordained the 25. day of December to have been the
day of the Lords nativity, a little before he made his book against heresies.
All the Kirkes of the East, and of Egypt, observed one day, for the nativity
and baptism of Christ upon the Epiphany day. Ambrose is the most ancient, who
makes mention of the 25. day of December, Canon Isagog. lib. 3.. Page 301.
says Scaliger. The diversity of the Ancients observing some the 6. of
January. Some the 19. of April. Some the 19. of May. Some the 25. of December,
argues that the Apostles never ordained it. Bellarmine nor no other can
produce a writer for 300. years to testify that the Nativity day was keept.
Clemens Constitutions are known to be counterfeit and late, as Scaliger proves
in the same place. Because they make mention of the 25. day of december which
was not received in his time, namely, in the Oriental Kirk. By the same
argument may the counterfeit Epistle of Theophilus be rejected, for it makes
likewayes the nativity to fall on the 25, day of December, as a matter out of
all doubt. Cyprians sermon on the Nativity is acknowledge by Bellarmine himself
to be suppositious as I have said before. Ye se then as God hid the body of
Moses, so has he hid this day and other days depending on the calculation of
it, wherein he declared his will concerning the other days of his notabl^ acts.
To wit that not Christ's action but Christ's institution makes a day holy.
Bellarmine says, De cultis Sanctorum cap. 11.
Dies dominica refert nobis memoriam natalis Christi et resurrectionis ejusdem,
et adventus Spirit us Sancti, nam Christ us die dominica not us est, Christ was
borne upon the Lords day. If this be true, what needs us an anniuersarie day
after a Jewish manner. They will not suffer the ordinary sabbath, that is
Christ's day, serve in a moral manner for unknown days: but they will set up a
mystical day uncertain and unknown, and equal it with the Lords day, that is,
the true Christ's day institute by himself. Why should we follow antiquity
blinded in this point, and fost^r a gross error of Zacharius hie priesthood
against the express word of God? He was a Priest of the eight order: every
order kept their course and station about the Temple from sabbath to sabbath 1.
Chron. 9.25. None of them incrhoched upon other, but kept the order set down by
David* and to that effect was made a severe Cannon Every Priest or Levit, that
meddled with the function of another let him die the death as Scaliger reports
out of their ancient laws Canon Isagog. lib. 3. page 298.
Omnis sive Sacerdos sive Levita qui sese immiseuerit function alterius, capite
luat. This order was so observed, that if any of the 24. families had failed
either by famine or by the sword, the daily sacrifice ceased in the time of
their function, and no other family would supply the room. But from the
instauration and dedication made by Judas Maccabeus the 22. day of November,
when the first family began to keep their Station, there was no intermission
of the daily sacrifice, no interruption of the courses, till the destruction of
the Temple, as Scaliger proves in the end of his De eme^^ dat temporum.
book. By the calculation from the 22. of November at the dedication made by
Maccabeus, he makes John the Baptist to be conceived after the 28. day of
July, and consequently Christ's birth to fall out about the end of September, an
hot time of the year, when the Shepherds were watching in the field. Casaubon
Exercit. 1. page 163.
says, That the custom of the Kirk of Alexandria does wonderfully confirm
the calculation of Scaliger. The day of the week when Christ was borne, can no
mortal man know, says the same Canon Isagog. lib. 3 page 300.
Scaliger. They who were of one family divided the services among themselves,
as it fell by lot: some fell to offer Incense, some to dress the lamps, some
to order the wood on the Altar, 1. Chron. 23.28.29.30.31. And the book of the
Jewish Liturgies testifies the same. So you see how it fell Zachary to offer up
incense, and that he was not high Priest. If antiquity erred so grossly in
the matter it self, that is, in taking the 25. day of December for the day of
Christ's nativity, might they not have erred as grossly in appointing any day
at all? Nay let us utter the truth, December-Christmas is a just imitation of
the December-Saturnall of the Ethnicke Romans, and so used as if Bacchus, and
not Christ were the God of Christians.

It is commonly objected, that we may as well keep a day for the nativity as
for the resurrection of Christ. We have answered already, that Christ's day or
the Lords day, is the day appointed for remembrance of his nativity, and all
his actions and benefits, as well as for the resurrection. Next, the one is
moral and weekly: the other is mystical and anniversary. The Lords day it
self is no longer to us mystical, but moral, says Synops pap of holy days.
Willet: and therefore Pas^h-day is a mystical Sabbath, and anniversary:
whereas the Lords Sabbath should be only moral.

It is still objected, the benefits of God ought to be remembered, specially
Christ's notable benefits. Answ. It is one thing to remember, another thing to
remember with solemn festivities. To remember is a moral duty and
perpetual: for we ought to keep not only an anniuersary, but also a weekly
and daily remembrance. But to celebrate an anniversary solemnity, and to keep a
sabbath of rest in remembrance, it is a pedagogicall ceremony of the Jews.
The Lord helped there understanding with types and figures, their affections
with instruments of Music. Their memories with frontelets and Phylacteries to
put them in mind of Gods Law. But we are to keep says lerome Ad Celanthiam
Epist. 14. c. 1.
not a literal by outward signs, but a spiritual memory of Gods law. Every
thing set up for remembrance of God is not acceptable to him: for so the
Lutheran shall defend his images. As often as the Gospel is preached, Christ is
remembered. When the word is preached, Christ is crucified, and by the same
reason, he may be said to be borne, to rise again, to ascend, etc. When the
sacrament is ministered, Christ's death and Passion is remembered, and that with
solemnity. We cannot worship Christ privately or publicly, but we must
remember his birth and his passion. Pope Alexander 3. Decreta^. lib. 2. Tit. 9.
cap.
gave this reason, wherefore the Roman Kirk kept not a holy day to the
Trinity, Quoniam Ecclesia Romana in usu non habet quod in aliquo tempore
buiusmodi celebret specialiter festivitatem: cum singulis diebus gloria Patri
and f^^io, and Spiritui Sancto, and coetera simitia dicantur ad laudem
pertinentia Trenitalis. because faieth he, Glory to the father, and to the
Son, and to the holy Ghost, and other such like things belonging to the
praise of the trinity, are uttered daily. The Popes reason is grounded upon
this rule. Whatsoever is entreated or remembered in the ordinary divine service,
ought not to have one special holy day to celebrat the memory of the same,
beside the day already discerned by the Lord. We assume, Christ's nativity,
death, resurrection, etc. Are not only the continual meditation of a Christian
in private; but also are remembered, and entreated in the ordinary and public
service. Every communion sunday is a passion holy day. Every sabbath that
Christ's nativity is preached, is a time of remembrance of his Nativity. But to
ordain an anniversary day, or hour of rest for commemoration of his nativity,
or passion, and specially upon a week day is a Jewish rudiment, and a
prejudice to Christian liberty.

As for the 5. day of November it is not an holy day. It is not a day of
cessation from work, which is one of the chief elements of an holy day. The
bonefires set out in token of joy are no part of Christian sanctification of
the day. Bellarmine tells us, De reliquijs c. 4.
Ignis accendi solet ad letitiam significandam etiam in rebus prophanis, that
fire uses to be kindled, even in civil and profane things. Scaliger De
Emendat tempor. lib. 7. page 713.
calls the candels and torches lightened upon Midsomer even, the foot steps
of ancient gentility. Anniversary commemoration of a benefit, with a
cessation from work, suppose for a part of a day is Jewish. To praise God with
public thankesgeving in the instant time of receiueing the benefit was our
duty, But to appoint an anniuersary hour of cessation and public
commemoration, is not competent to the times of the new Testament. Willet
compares this day to the days of Purim. Be it so, But these days were of a
ceremonial nature, as we have said.

The seventh Reason.
Grant the keeping of holy days to have been at the beginning a matter
indiffrent, and setting aside all the former reasons, yet ought they to be
abolished, because according to the rule of the Fathers, commended to us by
Zanchius, Non male igitur fecerunt qui omnia praeter diem Dominicum
aboleverunt, In 4. praecept. Col. 678
Things indifferent, when they are abused and polluted with superstition, ought
to be abolished. In this rank he places holidayes, and therefore infers,
that they have not done evil, who have abolished all other holidayes but the
Lords day. When he says, They have not done evil, it is all one as if he had
said, They had done well: for they have done according to that laudable rule.
Sure it is, that in former times holidayes have not only been abused to
i^lenesse and licentiousness, but also polluted with the opinion of worship,
merit, necessity, and Judicial conceit, that the Devil did not tempt on these
days, as he did on other days. Therefore the same Zanchius faith in the place
aforesaid, If any feasts were celebrate before religiously and holily, but
thereafter were contaminate with superstition and Idolatry, Col. 678.
that worthily they were taken away by our Reformers, who imitate herein the
example of Hezekias brusing to powder the brazen Serpent when it was abused to
idolatry. And again he says, The number, the abuses, the superstitions, the
false worships, the will-worships of feasts so increased, that there is nothing
in the Kirk so unsavory to God, See farther in Zanchius in Coloss 2.
so pernicious to men, as to sanctify such and so many days. We pretend that
we place no part of Gods worship in the observation of days. But how can we
observe a day to the honor of Christ, and not worship him by that observation?
That were to make his honor no honor. We use to reason against the Papists
after this manner. To dedicate days to Saints is religious worship. Is it not
then religious worship to dedicat a day to Christ? yea surely, and will worship.
And so they were not only polluted with will worship, but are at this hour of
themselves a mere will worship.

The 8. Reason.
That which lawfully has been abolished by civil and Ecclesiastical laws,
and by consent and uniforme practice in the contrary without interruption, and
beyond the prescription of time allowed to things moveable (put the case holy
days were things moveable, and indifferent) and has been borne down by
sermons of all the most reverent Preachers since the reformation, corrected
with censures, and abjured by public oaths of Preachers and professors, cannot
lawfully be received, and put in practice again. Hooker and Saravia urged for
maintenance of their ceremonies, Law, custom, prescription, and craveth that
the impiety and unlawfulnes of their ceremonies be proved; or else that the
non-conformists conform. May we not plead after the same manner for our former
order so long established, and that they prove it was impious, and unlawful
before we make a change. And so much the rather, because we have sworn. Our
oath by it self binds more then Law, custom, and prescription: far more
when it concurreth with them. The assumption is evident by that which I have
already set down in the beginning. If Zanchius aproved the abolition of holy
days in some Kirks where they were, because they have been poluted and
grossly abused: much more would he and other divines knowing the truth of our
case think it unlawful to reinduce them amongst us.

The judgment of the Reformed Kirkes.
Of the ancient Kirks I have spoken before. Some excuse the Ancients with good
intention, because to win the Gentiles they converted their days into
Christian holy days. Others excused them with the circumstance of time, that
dwelling among Paganes, they made profession before their eyes of Christ's
birth, Passion, resurrection etc. by observing such days. But the wisdom of
their intention has proven folly, as the 7. reason makes manifest. The like
circumstance of time is not offered: Therefore we may not be excused. It is
gross ignorance to say that holy days were so many hundredth years before
Papistry. For Papistry has been in the Kirk ever since the days of the
Apostles: yea the mystery of iniquity was working in their times. The errors
of the Orthodoxe Kirk were the beginnings of Papistry, at length they grew to a
great mass. So how beit the whole lump was not formed, till the Antichrist
came to his full strength, yet many particulars were entered before, and like
brooks came into the great river. As the Antichrist was borne and did grow in
years, so did Papistry. As for the reformed Kirks, except our neighbor Kirk,
they have abandoned days dedicate to Saints. Some admit days dedicate to
Christ, some two, some five: But not with the full consent and good liking of
the learned, But either forced by the authority of the Magistrate, or wilfulnes
of the people, or because remaining in the midst of their enemies, they are not
permitted otherwise to do. Farrellus and Viret removed all holy days out of
the Kirk of Geneva, as Calvin testifies. The same decree which banished
Farellus and Calvin out of Geneva brought in other holy days. Epist. 118.
They were all again abrogate except the sabbath day. Howsoever after came in
the keeping of Pasche and the Nativity. Calvin was so far from liking of holy
days, that he was flandered of intention to abolish the Lords day. The Belgic
Kirks in their Synod holden at Do anno 1578. wished, that only the Lords day
might be celebrate. Yea Luther himself in his book de bonis operibus, set
forth anno 1520. wished that there were no feast days among Christians, but
the Lords day. And in his book to the Nobility of Germany, he says,
Consultum esse ut omnia festa aboleantur, solo Dominico die retento. It were
expedient that all feast days were abrogate, the Lords day only retained.
Howsoever foreign divines in their Epistles and Councels speak sometime
sparingly against holy days, when their advice was sought of Kirks newly risen
out of Popery, and greatly distressed: they never advised a Kirk to resume
them where they were removed, neither had they leisure to consider narrowly the
corruption of every error, that prevailed in their time, the work of
reformation was so painful to them. I wish therefore that the judicious Reader
would ponder the reasons set down in this treatise. As for our neighbor Kirk
standing in the midest betwixt the Roman and reformed Kirks as Bucerus once
said is more liberal in their feasts, Brightman. In Apocalypsen. cap. 3. De
festis lib. 1. c. 2.
as in other ceremonies, then the other reformed Kirks as Gretzerus the Jesuit
has observed. Calvino-Papistae Angli ut in aliis quae ad ritus et ceremonias
pertinent, long liberaliores sunt quam puritani in Gallia, Germania, Belgia:
ita et in festis retinendis long largiores. They observe not only the five
holy days already mentioned, but other days also dedicate to Christ. The
feast of circumcision was not remembered in the Kalendars, but within this 500.
year. Nazianzen is the first that makes mention of the Epiphanie day. Neither
was it institute at the first for the wise men. There is no homily of any
farther extent for the feast of purification before the days of Justinian. The
feast of the Trinity was not keept at Rome it self in the days of Alexander
the 3. They keep also a number of Sancts days: so that their days in number
are more, then the Jews themselves observed. The reasons already alleged
against days dedicate to Christ, may serve also against days dedicate to
Sancts and Angels. We may look assuredly that the five days presently urged
will bring in all the rest, to make up our Conformity with our neighbor Kirk,
which to us is not lawful. They were never removed from amongst them: we have
abandoned and abjured them. If the Apostle reproved the Galatians so sharply
that beginning in the spirit, they returned to the flesh, that is to the
ceremonies of Moses Law, some time ordained by God, what reproof deserve we
after we have begun in the Spirit, and run so well, and so long, if we
return to human traditions and superstitions. To conclude then, to esteem one
day above another in respect of any mystery certainly known, or commonly
reputed to have been wrought upon that day. To testify this estimation by
cessation from work. To devise a particular service to be done upon it
accounting that form or part of service acceptable to God, because it is
performed on that day: is to observe a day: and in this manner do we observe
anniversary days. The same consideration may be applied to an anniversary
hour.

Of Confirmation.
Imposition of hands, was a ceremony used in personal prayers and blessings
before the Law, under the Law, and under the Gospel, Jacob imposed hands on
the sons of Joseph when he blessed them Genesis 48. Moses laid his hand upon
Joshua his successor; Numb. 27. The elders that were admitted to be
Councillors in the great Synedrion, were admitted with imposition of hands.
The Rabbis were promoved to their high degree of doctorship, by imposition of
hands. In the new testament we read, that Christ laid on hands on the children
whom he blessed; Math. 19.13. The Apostles gave the gifts of tongues,
Prophesying, and working of miracles, by imposition of hands: Act. 8. the
faithful endued with the gift of healing, and casting out devils, laid on
hands on the persons cured. Mark. 14. office-bearers in the Kirk were received
with imposition of hands. Act. 6. 1. Tim. 4. Paul and Barnabas when they were
sent forth in a special embassage, were commended to the grace of God by
imposition of hands: Act. 13. when the Chatechumenists were thoroughly
catechized, they were admitted to the society of the communicants by imposition
of hands, Heb. 6.

Imposition of hands used in so diverse actions, civil and religious, was no
Sacrament, for who will admit, that the inauguration of Magistrates and
Doctors, or admission of rulers to be Counselors, is a sacrament? it was only
a simple rite, and sign of limitation or restraint, specifying, or setting
forth, the party, on whom we desire God to power his blessing: that is, it was
only an indicant and demonstratiue sign of the person on whom the blessing was
powered, and not a significant or declaratiue sign of the blessing or grace it
self bestowed. A signification may indeed be devised, as some divise this
analogy betwixt it and the thing signified; that the imposition of the hand,
does in some sort resemble the hand of God streatched forth for the protecting,
assisting, and safe keeping, of the party: and so it may be signum factum, a
sign, made and accommodate to signify such a thing: but it is not signum
destinatum, a sign instituted by God to signify such a thing, for we have no
warrant for such a signification in all the Scripture.

The imposition of hands mentioned. Act. 8. was not ordinary, but extraordinary
and temporary. The Apostles gave the extraordinary gifts, of tongues,
prophecy, and such like, for they were seen of them that stood by, and served
for a general confirmation of the truth of their doctrine. The gift of
sanctification and strength against all temptations of sin, and assaults of the
Devil, is a grace invisible, serving for the confirmation of every Christian
in particular, and bestowed only upon the faithful; whereas the former gifts
called gratiae gratis datae by the Schoolmen, might have been bestowed upon
persons unsanctified, this place makes Cap. 11.
nothing for confirmation. The confession of Wirtemberge has these words, Of a
temporal and personal fact of the Apostles, a general and perpetual
sacrament cannot be ordained in the Kirk without a special command of God. By
the Spirit then bestowed, is meant, not the sanctifying Spirit, but the
extraordinary gifts of the spirit: for no doubt the Spirit was given when
Philip preached and baptized, except we will believe that the Eunuch was
baptized by Philip without the spirit. Hieron ^dvers. Lu^iser.
Nisi forte Eunuchus a Philippo Diacono sine Spiritu sancto baptizatus fuisse
credendus est. Peter and John bestowed the spirit in another manner, to wit, in
an extraordinary manner: These extraordinary gifts of the Spirit are called
simply the Spirit, not only in this place, but also Act. 19. and John 7. The
Spirit was not, because Christ was not as yet glorified.

The Imposition of hands mentioned Heb. 6.2. is exponed by Theophilactus to be
that wonderful imposition of hands by the which they received the Spirit to
prophecy and work miracles. Others expone it to be the imposition of hands
ordinatory, or consecratory of Ministers in their office. A third sort take it
for an ordinary and common rite, whereby the catechized were initiate, and
entered into the society of the communicants. Let this third interpretation be
admitted as the greatest ground of confirmation, it will not serve their turn.
The Apostle opponeth the doctrine of the beginning, that is, the catecheticall
doctrine of repentance from dead works, faith, and resurrection of the dead,
and eternal judgment, to the doctrine of perfection. The Catechumenists were
either Infidels of perfect age, converted to the faith, or else the children of
Christians come to perfect age. The first sort were tried of their sufficient
knowledge in the Catecheticall doctrine, before they were baptized and admitted
to the communion. The second sort were tried before they were admitted amongst
the number of communicants. They were before in Ecclesia foederatorum, in the
Kirk of the covenant: they entered in Ecclesiam adultorum into the society of
the elder sort, after trial of their sufficient knowledge, by a recommendation
of the Kirk; the ceremony whereof was imposition of hands. Beza antithesis
papismi and christianisin^ c. 70. Zanchius and Pareus i^ He^ 6.
The ancient Kirk received penitents within the bosom of the Kirk by
imposition of hands: and it was called Impositio manuum reconciliatoria.
Siclike Heretics and Schismatickes were received with imposition of Council
Arelat. c. 8.
hands. And this was done before the Conail. Laod. c. 7.
communion: whereby we may see that imposition of hands was nothing else but a
gesture of personal prayer, and blessing, whereby they entered or re-entred
into the society of the communicants. Bellarmine De confirmat. c. 7.
acknowledges that the imposition of hands reconciliatory, was not a
consecration imprinting a character; but a ceremony furthering prayer, or a
prayer upon the person. As it was nothing else but a gesture of prayer in the
re-entry, so was it only a gesture of prayer in the entry. The reformed Kirkes
observe the same order in admitting to the Lords table, either the children of
Christians, or strangers from other parts: they admit them not but with
prayers, and after due examination of their knowledge, and personal profession
of the known truth. The Kirk of Scotland at the first reformation ordained,
that children should be examined for the first time, at the ninth year of their
age; for the second, at the twelft; for the third at the fourteenth: and since
has practiced continual examination in the Catecheticall doctrine, with
prayers reiterate, for their growth in knowledge and Sanctification; and
without sufficient trial they were not admitted to the Lords table. And this
was thought sufficient, to unite the baptized with the society of the
communicants. The gesture of imposition of hands other reformed Kirks, and ours
also, have omitted: because it was a rite indifferent: for it was but an
indicant sign of the person admitted: and because it has been, and is still
abused to make up a bastard Sacrament; the Sacrament of confirmation, which we
have condemned, not only in the confession of faith, but also in the confession
of Helvetia approved in the general Assembly holden at Edinburgh Anno 1566.
And thirdly, because this gesture of personal prayer is omitted in other
cases, as reconciling of Penitents, Schismatiks, and Converts, even where
Confirmation is used, that the world may see, it is not used by them in
confirmation as a gesture of personal prayer and blessing, but to a further
intent.

Imposition of hands was not called Confirmation until it was turned into a
sacrament. This name of Confirmation was given of old, not only to the action
of anointing the forehead of the baptized with chrisme in the form of a
cross: but also, to the giving of the cup to the communicants. Cassandri
liturgica page 228.
. But at this day it is used only in the first sense. and howbeit the oily
cross be removed, yet the corruptions which came in with it, remain still
with the imposition of hands, the only sensible matter, that is, the essence of
this Sacrament in the opininion of many Schoolmen.

It is said, that hy imposition of hands and prayer, the baptized receive
strength and defense against all temptations to sin, and the assaults of the
world and the devil, in confirmation. And again, that it is a sign to
certify the confirmed of Gods favor and gracious goodness toward them is it
not then a seal, let be a sign indicant, or a simple gesture of praer;
Bellarmine makes Imposition of hands and prayer, but one sensible sign in the
Sacrament of confirmation, does not Mr. Hutton say likewise, that Imposition
of hands is one of the external means by the which the H. Ghost is given? and
howbeit that prayer have the chief force, yet Imposition of hands has some
also, otherwise, says he, What needed Peter and John to have traveled to
Samaria? they might have prayed in Jerusalem for the holy Ghost to the
Samaritans.

The grace received in confirmation, is called strength, and defense against
all temptations to sin, and the assaults of the wo^ld and the devil. In
baptism the grace received is for the f^rgiu^nes of sins. Do not the
papists distinguish after the same manner betwixt baptism and confirmation that
the holy ghost is given in baptism, to remission of sins, life and
Sanctifi^ations and in confirmation for force, strength, and corroboration to
fight against all our spiritual enemies, and to stand constantly in confession
of our faith even to death, in times of persecution, either of the heathen or
of heretics, with great increase Rhemists act. 8.17.
of grace. Hooker says, Ecelesiast. polici^. l. 5. page 354.
that in baptism infants are admitted to live in Gods family, but in
confirmation they are enabled to fight in the army of God, and bring forth the
fruits of the holy Ghost. Doct^r Hackwel Sermon. of confirmation.
says that as in baptism they believe remission of sins unto justificatio^, so
in confirmation, they are imboldned to make open profession of this belief
unto salvation does not his opposition between baptism and confirmation jumpe
just with the opposition made by the Papists who make the principal grace of
confirmation, strengh to profess the faith in time of persecution? The Papists
say, the comforter promised by Christ to his Kirk, was bestowed in the
Sacrament of confirmation. Is not the like said in the prayer before
Confirmation; The papists say, that in confirmation they receive the seven fold
grace of the holy spirit: wisdom, counsel, strength, knowledge,
understanding, godliness, fear: is not the like said in the prayer before the
laying on of hands; D. Hackwell Sermon. of confirmation.
says that which the grace of the spirit has already begun in baptism, is
confirmed and perfited in confirmation. Is not this just the popish opinion,
that he is not a perfect Christian who is not confirmed? That Novatus because
he was not confirmed, had not all his Christendom: that the vnuction of
confirmation is the perfitting unction. and are not all these oppositions
derogations from baptism and the Lords Supper; Christian valor and courage to
resist the divill, and to profess the truth, is it not a part of that life,
and Sanctification given in baptism; are not the gifts of the holy spirit
given after baptism, as a continual performance of the promise of Gods
assistance sealed up in baptism; In baptism we put on Christ and all his
benifits, we enter into Gods army as well as into his family, abrenuncing the
world and the devil. Concilium Mileuitanum. m says. Qui dicit baptismum in
remissionem peccatorum dari tantum, non etiam in adjutorium gratiae anathema
sit. Let him be anathema, who says that baptism is given to the remission of
sins and not to the help of future grace. Chrysostom says, Homil. ^. in
Coloss.
the baptized was anointed as one that was to enter into a ^ace. Is not the
Lords Supper the true Sacrament of confirmation of our faith, as well as
confirmation of Charity;

If imposition of hands were only a gesture of prayer, for strength, then it
might and ought to be reiterate according to Augustine saying, Lib. 3. de bapt.
cap. 16
Manus aute^ impositio non sicut baptismus repeti non potest quid enim est
aliud nisi oration super hominem. For we have often need to be strengthened. The
Papists say, that impositions of hands in confirmation, is an effectual sign
of grace, imprinting an indeleble charactar, and therefore it may not be
reiterate, neither do they reiterate it.

In the catechism before confirmation, it is said, that there are two only
Sacraments generally necessary to salvation. Is there other Sacraments beside
howbeit not necessary; Estius In lib. 4. did. 7.
says, that the custom of the universal Kirk, does prove sufficiently that
confirmation is not necessary to salvation; otherwise the godly and careful
mother the Kirk, would not neglect to see this sacrament Ministered to the
baptized at the point of death.

The Sacrament of confirmation was given of old immediately after baptism to
all of whatsoever condition, or estate, Swarez. tom. 3. disput. 35. sect. 1.
even to infants, and when the little ones were confirmed they had godfathers
and godmothers, as they have yet in papisticall Kirkes. Aug. Tract. 6. in 1.
canonicam Iohannis.
says, Quando imposumus manus is it is infantibus altendit unusquisque vestrum
utrum linguis loquerentur. When we laid hands on their infants ye waited
whether they would speak with tongues. The Papists themselves will not imitate
this toy of antiquity and yet they are little better in deferring confirmation
only to the seventh year of their age. Our late act. made at the last
pretended assembly, ordeineth children of eight years of age to be catechized,
and presented to the Bishop to lay hands upon them. We must be like our
neighbors, whether there be reason or no. Is it time to enter the Society of
the communicants and doctrine of perfection, as soon as they can rehearse like
parrots, a little catechism? we must have godfathers and godmothers in
confirmation, also well as our neighbors.

When the neoterick writers speak of confirming the catechized by the rite of
Imposition of hands, they take imposition of hands for a sign, of the Kirk
confirming them in their possession by her approbation, and not for a sign and
seal of the spirit confirming and strengthening.

Of Bishoping.
WE have abjured Episcopal government, and therefore we can not lawfully admit
Episcopal confirmation, giving and not granting their office were lawful, and
that they have gotten a lawful calling by the Kirk to the said office: thirdly
that we were free of our oath: and fourthly that confirmation were to be
allowed, whether as a ceremony, or as a sacrament, yet it is damnable
presumption to appropriate unto themselves the duty that belongs to all
Pastors.

They allege some similitudes for their purpose: it appertains to the
Captain to take up the role of the soldiers, and furnish them with armor, the
shepherd should mark his own sheep etc. As if every Minister were not a
Captain in the Lords Army and a shepherd feeding the flock concredite to him
Bonaventura In lib. 4. did. 7. number. 17.
confesses In talibus nempe rationibus and convenientijs magis locum habet
congruitas quam necessitas quia institutio necessitatem facit precipue. That
there is no necessity, but congruity in such reasons, and that institution
chiefly makes necessity. as for the congruities they agree as well to simple
Ministers as to Bishops. Bellarmine himself says De confirmation^.
Non necessario id requirit natura rei quasi aliter sieri non posset, sed quia
voluit Dominus hac re honorare episcopalem dignitatem. That the nature of the
thing it self does not necessarily require it, but only that the Lord will
honor Episcopal dignity by it, they are forced therefore to forsake their
reasons and congruitie as unsufficient: and to take them to the will and
institution of the Lord.

Our first reason then against them, is, the want of institution or example in
the Scripture. They can allege no other place Act. 8. where Peter and John are
sent to Samaria to impose hands on those who had bin baptized by Philip. If
Phillip might have done it, what needed the Apostles to have traveled to
Samaria for that purpose? none but Apostles imposed hands: Bishops are the only
successors of the Apostles. Answer. giving and not granting that Bishops are
the Apostles successors, first it is untrue that the Apostles only imposed
hands, when the holy Ghost was bestowed: for Ananias laid hands on Paul Act.
9.17. he not only cured him of his blindness but also said the Lord has sent
me unto thee, that thou may be filled with the holy Ghost. 2. Peter and John
were sent, not only to impose hands, but generally to advance the work begun
by Philip. 3. There is no imposition of hands mentioned in that place, but
extraordinary, and only extraordinary effects are reckoned, as has already
been said. They exercised this extraordinary power not as Bishops, but as
Apostles. Bishops are not their successors in their extraordinary power, for
then they might give the gift of tongues and prophesying. 4. Admitting that
imposition of hands to have been ordinary, and accompanied at that time with
miraculous gifts, as accessory to the strengthening grace of confirmation; it
follows not that the Bishops succeed only to the Apostles in the said
ordinary part of their power: because the Apostles being both Bishops and
Presbyters, the text makes not manifest, whether they imposed hands as
Presbyters or as Bishops as Durandus Durandus in lib. 4. Did. 7. Quest. 3.
says Ex illo textu non est clarum an Apostoli confirmaveri^t tanquam Episcopi
vel tanquam sacerdotes: sacri etiam canones hoc cl^^e non determinant.
Augustine Quest. veteris et nov^^ testamenti. 101.
says plainly they did it as Priests. 5. Philip the Evangelist could not do
it, and will Bishops presume that they can do more then Philip the Evangelist,
the truth is it was an extraordinary and wonderful power exercised by the
Apostles.

Next confirmation belongs not to the power of jurisdiction, but of order.
Bishops and Presbyters are equal in the power of order, as not only many
schoolmen of old but also some of our opposits of late do acknowledge. If they
will say that they differ only in the exercise of rhis power; it may be easily
answered, that a power granted, and never permitted to be put in execution
agrees not with the wisdom of Christ as Swarez says, In Aquin part. 3.
quaest. 27. Si presbyteri ex vi sua ordinationis haberent sufficient ^m
potestalem ordinis ad hoc sacramentum ministrandum sine causa in universum
prohiberentur illud confer.

Thirdly, they may impose hands in ordination, therefore they may do it also in
confirmation. Armacanus reasons after this manner out of 1. Tim. 4.14.

Fourthly, they may minister the Lords Supper, therefore they may minister it
also, for it is not more excellent then the Sacrament of the Supper. Hierome
reasons after this manner Epi. ad rusticum Narbonensem.
.

Fifthly the Sacraments that are for the vtility of the people ought not to be
reserved, to the Bishop, because it may often fall out that the people depart
without this benefit, which they might easily have had at home.

Sixthly, we have the testimony of the ancients. Hierome Ibid.
says it was the custom in the orient, in Ilyricum, in Italy, in Africa, and
in all places in the Apostles time. Ambrose in Ephesians. 4
says Apud Egiptum Presbyteri consignant si presens non sit Episcopus. that
the Presbyters consigned, that is, confirmed in Egypt, if the Bishop was not
present. Augustine says the like Quest. veteri and novi ^^stam. 101.
in the decretales Lib. 1. tit. 4. cap. 4.
it is said that simple Priests at Constantinople according to the custom, did
minister the Sacrament of confirmation. Turrianus reports that the Grecians
reprove the Latins because they inhibit Priests to anoint the foreheads of the
baptized with chrisme, as Swarez testified in the place above cited. And the
Councile of Florence Sess. 25.
says Apud Grecos sacerdotes non Episcopi chrismant. that the Priests make
Chrisme: to make Chrisme is more then to confirm with Chrisme. Hierom Adversus
Lucifer.
says, If the holy Ghost should come down only at the prayer of the Bishop,
th^se were to be lamented which in prisons, or Castles, or in far places, being
baptized by Priests and Deacons, die before the Bishop visit them. The
Armenians affirmed that it was lawful to any Priest to confirm the baptized
Armaehanus de question. Armanorum. lib. 11. cap. 5.
If Bishops did confirm in respect of their Episcopal, and not their Preistly
consecration, then the Pope can not dispense in this case and give a simple
commission to that effect: but so it is that the Pope has dispensed in this
case. Gregory excuses him self to Ianuarius with the custom of his own Kirk
for discharging the Priests in the I Will of Sardinnia, to confirm; but he
recalled his discharge, when he perceaved that offense arose thereupon. Rural
Bishops and Abbots did sometime confirm, if we speak regularly; rural Bishops
and Abbots were but simple Priests. Hooker Eccles. po^^ page 353.
confesses that baptism and confirmation went commonly together. I demand
then if the Bishop was present at the baptism of every one within his diocese.

Our opposits are forced to confess, that it is not the proper and essential
part of a Bishops office, but it was given them for honor of their preisthood,
according to the saying of Hieromie neither was this universal in Hieromes
time, for he says Multis in locis id esse tantum factum reperimus ad honorem
potius sacerdotij quam ob legis necessitatem. In many places, not all places it
was so Advers^^ Lucifer.
their honor proved prejudicall to the will of the Kirk. Balthazar Lydius
says Notae in disp. Taboritarum. p. 28.
it was untolerable superstition that the Priest might anoint the breist and
the shoulder, but all behooved to abstein from the forhead, except only the
Bishop. Beda in psalm. 26.
says Confirmatio propter arrogantiam non est concessa singulis sacerdotibus
sicut et multa alia. That for the arrogancy of Bishops, confirmation and many
other things were not permitted to Priests. This appropriation of confirmation
to Bishops has made confirmation that is my Lord Bishops baptism, to be
preferred to the Lords baptism, parents must bring their children to them many
miles, as if the holy Ghost could no where breath but from their fingers. they
will scarce once in three year go to them, and so great numbers depart this
life without confirmation. They vilipend in their deeds, that which they
magnify in their words, and the solemn entrance into the society of the
communicants which should be made at home in presence of their own
congregation, is taken away with their Lordly Bishoping. I end with the saying
of Tindal, Obedience page 152.
After that Bishops had left preaching then sained they this dumb ceremony of
confirmation, to have somewhat at the leastway whereby they might reign over
their Diocese. They reserved unto themselves also the christning of bells, and
conjuring, or hollowing of Churches and Churchyards and of alters and
superalters, and hallowing of chalices, and so forth whatsoever is of honor or
profit, which confirmations, and the other conjurations also, they have now
committed to their suffragans: because they themselves have no leisure to
minister such things for their lusts and pleasures and abundance of all things,
and for the cumbrance that they have in the Kings matters and business of the
Realms. One keeps the privy seal, another the great seal, the third is
confessor that is to say a privy traitor and a secret Judas he is presedent of
the Prince his Council, he is an Ambassador; an other sort of the Kings secret
Counsel. Woe is unto the Realms, where they are of the Counsel, As
profitable are they verily unto the Realms with their Council, as the woules
unto the sheep, or the foxes unto the geese, thus far. Tindall.

Of the Administration of the Sacraments in private places
IN the ninth head of the first book of discipline, it was thought expedient,
that baptism be ministered upon the ordinary days of preaching: not that it is
unlawful to baptize whenever the word is preached: but to remove a gross
error wherewith many are deceived, thinking that children be damned if they die
without baptism, and to make the people hold the administration of the
Sacraments in greater reverence. In the order of baptism set dovn before the
Psalms in meter, it is said, that the Sacraments are not ordained of God to be
used in private corners, as charms or sorceries; but left to the Congregation
and necessarily annexed to Gods word, as seals of the same. In the Assembly
holden at Edinburgh anno. 1581. in October, it was ordained that the sacraments
should not be ministered in private houses, but solemnly, according to the good
order hitherto observed, under the pain of deposition, In the confession of
faith the cruel judgment against infants departing without the sacrament, and
the absolute necessity of baptism are damned. This lawdable order hitherto
observed, was altered in the late pretended Assembly holden at Perth. where was
made an act anent the administration of baptism in private houses, when
necessity requires. Item, an act anent the administration, and giving of the
holy communion in private houses to sick and infirm persons.

A Sacrament is a public action, to be performed publicly, by public
ministers: neither can any necessity or sufficient cause be alleged, wherefore
any sacred and public action, should pass in private: Because Gods ordinance
is to us a Supreme law and necessity, which we ought to obey rather then
foster popular ignorance and infirmity. These are Tilenus words. Syntag. pars.
2. page 700.


The Sacraments were appointed, not only to be signs and seals of invisible
graces, but also to be testimonies before the world of our piety and
thankfulness toward God, and badges of our profession, distinguishing true
Kirks from false. All Sacraments are certain kinds of protestations of our
faith says Aquinas. part. 3. quest. 7. act. 5.
They ought therefore to be conspicuous and public.

We have spiritual and invisible fellowship and communion with the whole
Kirk. Outwardly we profess the same faith and kind of worship, but we do not
communicate with the whole Kirk in the public exercises of religion and
ministration of the Sacraments, except only mediatly in some particular
congregation. Visible communion in the holy things of God, is the end of our
union and consociation with a particular Kirk. That which we may not attain to
in our communion with the whole Kirk militant immediately? we do it mediatly in
our communion with a particular congregation. This communion ought not to be
violate.

The minister in ministration of the Sacraments, has not the only and chief
interest, but together with the minister, the kirk witnessing, consenting,
approving, and concurring with prayer and thanksgiving. He is the mouth, but he
is not all. The keys of the sacraments are given to the Kirk, howbeit the
exercise and dispensation of them be concredited to the pastors. Chrysostom.
lib. 3. de sacerdotio.
All other actions which concerned the whole Kirk, were done with consent, and
in presence of the Kirk: as elections, ordinations, excommunications. By the
same reason ought the Sacraments to be ministered with consent, and in presence
of the Kirk, seeing they are works of public nature, and public fruit
belonging to all.

Sacraments ought to be preserved from contempt, neglect, and corruption. The
Sacraments are irreligiously handled, when they are ministered in private
places: The Imperial constitution in Justinian Novel. 57
discharges that holy things be ministered in private houses. Not only are the
Sacraments ministered irreligiously in private, brought in contempt, and the
publik use neglected* but also heretics take occasion to corrupt the pure
administration of the Sacraments by these privy practices,

The Sacraments are not tied to the material Kirkes made of dead stones, but
the Kirk made of lively stones. If therefore the congregation be in a wood,
a house, or a Cave, the Sacraments may be ministered in a house, a wood or a
cave. But then the Sacraments are ministered, not in private but in public
because they are ministered in the sight of the whole Congregation.

Christ's promise to be in the midst of two or three conuened in his name,
cannot be extended to the administration of the Sacraments: for then where two
only are convened, the communion might be ministered, and so the private mass
defended. Christ reasons only from the less to the more. If he will hear
the prayers and ratify the censures of two or three, far more of the whole
Kirk.

Baptism is a ceremony initiatory of our entrance into the bosom of some
visible congregation, or as Calvin says Epist. 185.
It is a sacred and solmne introduction into the Kirk of God, and is a
testimony of our heavenly burgesship, unto the which those are written up, whom
he adopteth to himself, It ought therefore to be public.

Baptism is a sign of Christian profession before the world; it is called
therefore the stipulation or interrogation of a good conscience. 1. Peter. 3.
it ought therefore to be public.

The Congregation should make fruit of the ministration of Baptism, in
remembering their own baptism, and the promises made in baptism repeated unto
them: it ought therefore to be public, seeing the comfort and benefit in some
respects should be common.

Not only the parents, but the Kirk presents the infant before God and
concurreth with the minister in prayer for the salvation of the infant, as
Tertullian says, vt manu facta ambire gratiam pro baptizando possumus. It
ought therefore to be public.

Private baptism has sprung of the opinion of the necessity of baptism, and
does still foster the same damnable opinion. In the ancient Kirk two solemn
times were appointed for baptism, to wit, Pasche and Pentecost, whereby many
died without baptism. Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 21.
many delayed baptism till their latter age. The Clinicall baptismes, that is
baptismes in the bed were not of that account that public baptism had. When
the opinion of the necessity of private baptism prevailed, then followed many
absurdities, the defense of baptism by women, baptism by a pagane, baptism
with puddly water, and disputation whether the mother should be baptized for
the safety of the infant in the mothers belly, that is, whether they should be
renati antequam nati, get the sacrament of the second birth, before they get
the first birth.

In private baptism the doctrine of baptism is omitted, for have to save the
soul of the infant, as is thought, and so the Sacrament is not ministered
according to the dignity of it: and this has bredd a negligent and careless
ministration of baptism in public. The Trullian Synod Can. 59.
decreed, that baptism Nullatenus, in no case be ministered in a private
oratory if it be done otherwise, let the Clergie-man be deposed, the laikes
excommunicate, If in no case, where was then the case of necessity?

Private baptism has bred a new kind of baptism, that is, a baptism by
supposition. For if the child baptized in private convalesse they baptize it
over again, in case they doubt it was baptized in a right form, saying, If
thou be not baptized, N. I baptize thee in the name of the Father, etc. What if
the child was already baptized? is not the public baptism rebaptization?
but the decree of Alexander the third is warrant sufficient for this
conditional baptism.

Baptism was solemn in the primitive Kirk, as we may read of John baptized in
Jordan, and Christ's Disciples baptizing, and the new Converts in the Acts:
some were not baptized in any visible Kirk, because they had not the occasion,
as the Eunuch, and the Centurion. No man will deny but in the infancy of a
Kirk, a private baptism may be tolerated: but we speak of a Kirk
constituted. When the Kirk of God was in families, no wonder that circumcision
was ministered in families: but after that the Kirk was constituted among Gods
people, the ministration of circumcision was public, and is at this day
ministered in the Synagogue, where a Synagogue is to be had. The Lord appointed
a precise day for circumcision, which might not be prevented. It was no wonder
therefore if they had not ever opportunity of a solemn convention. There is no
precise day set down for baptism. The mark of circumcision howbeit secret, was
permanent, and easily tried, baptism is not so. The Kirk therefore ought to be
assured of the baptism of such as are reputed fellow-heires with whom they
must have the communion of Saints and visible communion of holy exercises. As
any particular member is cut off from their fellowship by excommunication with
consent, and in the presence of the Kirk, 1. Cor. 5 4.5. so ought every
particular member be received in their fell. lowship with their knowledge and
consent convened together.

The Lords Supper ought to be public, we have a spiritual union with the
whole Kirk; but because it is not possible to celebrate a sacramental
communion with the whole Kirk militant, the Lord has appointed us to celebrate
a sacramental communion with some particular Kirk. We that are many, are one
bread, and one body, because we are partakers of one bread, 1. Cor. 10.17. We
cannot then be one body sacramentally, except we be partakers of one bread.
Other feasts may be private in private houses, but the Lords Supper ought to be
public, 1. Cor. 11.12. When ye convene to eat, tarry one for another, 1.
Cor. 11.33. Synaxis a word signifying as much as Synagogue, was one of the
names given of old to this sacrament.

This sacrament is a bond of love, a sinew of public assemblies, a badge of
our public profession. The Kirkes interest, the dignity of the sacrament, and
other general reasons before mentioned, may be applied in particular to this
sacrament, to prove that the ministration thereof ought to be public.

The communion was sent to the sick in the time, or immediately after the
action in Justinius Martyr his time. It became afterward to be reserved for the
use of dying persons. Augustine who misconstrued Ioh. 3.5. for the necessity of
baptism, did also misconstrue the words of John 6. Except a man eat the
flesh, etc. for the necessity of the Eucharist. This erroneous opinion of the
necessity of the Eucharist, made the ancients to give it not only to aged
persons departing this life for their Vi^ticum, that is, their voyage uictuals,
but also to infants and babe^, and that for the space of six hundred years:
yea some put the Eucharist into the mouths of the dead, lest they should want
their voyage victual. Such horrible prophanations of the holy Sacrament
proceeded of this opinion of necessity: and yet in all antiquity we read not
that the communion was celebrated at the sick man's bed side. The consecrated
bread was only sent to him.

Clinicall communions have not only bred, and still do foster the opinion of
absolute necessity, but also of opus operatum, of a preposterous confidence in
the last voyage victual, of coldness in the public service of God, when we
are in health, of distrust of our salvation, if we want it at that time. Calvin
says, Epist. 361
Difficillimum est hic cavere ne alios superstitio, alios ambitio and vana
ostentatio ad petendum sollicitet.

They say the sick should not be left destitute of comfort. This reason arises
of the opinion of necessity, as if there were no other means to comfort the
sick,, or as if the comfort of the public communion endured only for the
present time, and not for the time to come. There is a fair occasion offered,
Iam. 5. of private communion, and yet there is no mention made of it in that
place. If the vow, and desire of baptism may supply the want of baptism, then
may also the vow and desire of the Eucharist do the like; seeing the Rh^mists
On John 6. sect. 8.
acknowledge, that they do eat the flesh and drink the blood of Christ, which
join in heart, and desire, with the partakers of the Sacrament. To communicate
spiritually and mystically, is necessary, but not sacramentally, when it cannot
be done conveniently, and without breach of order.

Some Divines condescend thus far, that the communion may be sent to the sick
in the time of the public action. But Tilenus says, Syntag. part. 2. page
722.
Whatsoever necessity be pretended, scarce any sufficient cause can be rendered,
wherefore the public action should pass in private, because the ordinance of
God is of supreme necessity. The comforts of the infirm ministered out of
order, does rather foster the public infirmity of the Kirk, then heal the
private infirmity of the sick.

FINIS.

