THE RE-EXAMINATION of two of the articles abridged: TO WIT, Of the
communicants gesture in the act of receaving, eating, and drinking: And The
observation of Festival days.

Printed anno 1636.

TO THE READER
YE have here, good Reader, the re-examination of two articles abriged, to
wit, concerning the Communicants gesture in the act of receaving, and
observation of festival days, for the information of such, as either have not
leisure to peruse greater works, or are of weaker judgment. The other three
articles, bishopping, private baptism, and private Communion are not pressed,
and therefore it was needless to proceed any further. Accept of this
information without prejudice of your standing to the liberties of the Kirk.
We need no other exception against all the five articles, but that they were
not concluded by plurality of voices of such as were authorized with lawful
commission, and consequently not by a general assembly: But a number of
Barons, pretended bishops, and ministers usurped the place of voters, and
carried the business. I pass by terrors, circumveening, and unformall
proceeding, howsoever others take liberty to practice and reason contrare to
the order established in former times, as if we had never had a kirk, yet let
this be your judicial defense. But because that alone is not sufficient to
uphold your conscience, ye have here as much as may serve to confirm you in
the truth, and to settle your judgment in the matter it self.

OF THE COMMUnicants gesture in the act of receaving.
BY the second head of the first book of discipline, drawn up in the first year
of public and universal reformation, we may perceive that our first reformers
preferred sitting not only to kneeling, but also to standing and passing by,
because they approached not so near to Christ's action, and rested upon sitting
not only because of the abuse of kneeling in former times, as is alleged, but
because most agreeable to the pattern, which reason serves for all times: Yea
Master Knox in his admonition to England, printed anno 1554. ranketh kneeling
among the superstitious orders, which profane Christ's true religion: and in a
letter directed from Deep to Mastresse Anna Lock, anno 1599. he calls the
cross in Baptism: and this kneeling diabolical inventions. In the general
assembly, holden anno 1562. it was ordained, that the order at Geneva, that
is, of the English Kirk at Geneva, where Master Knox had been sometime
Minister, be observed in the ministration of the Sacraments: And anno 1564.
Ministers are referred to the order set down before the Psalms in Meeter,
which order is the order of Geneva, mentioned in the former act. This order was
ratified by act of Parliament, anno 1567. and 1572. An act was likewise made
anno 1567. that in times coming the King at his coronation give his oath to
maintain the true religion then professed, and in special the due and right
ministration of the Sacraments then received. This act was ratified anno 1581.
and again 1592. No other gesture then sitting was used til the meeting above
mentioned. We are then to defend the gesture of sitting, and to impugn
kneeling in the act of receaving.

We have the example of Christ and his Apostles at the first supper, to
warrant communicants to sit in the act of receaving: After the ordinary
washing of their hands they fate down to the first course of the paschall
supper, thereafter they rose again to the washing of their feet, then they fate
down again to the second course of the paschall supper. Now while they were
eating and consequently while they were sitting, Christ institute the Sacrament
of the supper, and this is acknowledged by Baronius the Cardinal, in his
annalls, an. 34. number. 44. The Jesuit Baradas, in concord. Evangelist. tom. 4.
lib. 2. Ancient and modern writers, popish and Protestant have received this
collection as certain truth. It was the mind of the whole church of old, as we
may see by the Ecclesiastical hymns, where Christ is brought in sitting with
his disciples at table, when he institute the Sacrament.

Whereas some allege that Christ and the Apostles kneeled: I answer, there
is no likelihood at all: Christ fate when he brake bread, and gave thanks at
Emaus. He blessed the bread when he fate with the multitude which he fed with
five loaves and two fishes. We never read that the Jews kneeled when they
blessed their meat. Master Paybodie grants, that Christ and his Apostles used
that same gesture in blessing and giving thanks, which they did in receaving.
Bellarmine acknowledges that they were sitting at table, when Christ said unto
them, Drink ye all of this. We may gather from some circumstances and the
form of the celebration, that they fate for they could not stand upon beds, or
between the tables and the beds, for their neerenesse to the table. If there
had been a change from sitting, which was the ordinary gesture at the
paschall supper, into kneeling a gesture of adoration at the Evangelicall
supper, some of the Evangelists would have made mention of it, for they make
mention of other changes. If there had been such a change, then kneeling
should have been institute, which none of our opposits have ever maintained:
for to what end should the change have been made, if not that that gesture
might be observed afterward. Christ spoke not prayer ways to the apostles, and
the elements were carried from hand to hand, and divided by the Apostles among
themselves, which is not compatible with kneeling, when man is directing
worship to God. We conclude then with Master Mouline, writing on the Lords
supper, 1 part. page 136. that the apostles continued sitting at the table, to
the very end of the action. It is true, Christ and his apostles sitting were
not altogether upright as ours, but as a man may stand upright, or stand
leaning, so he may sit upright, or sit leaning. The Hebrew doctors call it
sitting in beds: the English translators express it by sitting, and not by
lying. Doctor Mortoun confesses it was a kind of sitting gesture. Master
Paybodie, page 69. protests, that he holds the gesture of sitting at the
Lords table in it self lawful and commendable. What a madness is it then to
drive poor souls from a sure, to a dangerous and doubtsome way?

The example of Christ and his disciples sitting at the first supper, is
exemplarie for examples in setting down a pattern, serve ordinarily for direction
in times to come, if there be not some singular occasion to hinder him that
sets down the pattern to do otherwise. Bishop Mortoun in his late work of
the institution of the Sacrament, says, that Christ's example should be a
rule for us to observe, except in some circumstances, which only occasionaly
and accidentally happened therein: and therefore taxes the Jesuits, making
light of Christ's example, as if the example of Christ were no argument of proof
at all. Mowline in his heavenly alarm, page 56. says, Christ and his apostles
sat at the table without any kind of adoration, and that the first institution
was given for a pattern; whereunto we ought to conform. Now the washing of the
disciples feet, the putting off, and on of Christ's upper garment were ended
before they sat down to the second course of the paschall supper, and
consequently a good space before the institution of the last supper. Time and
place are commoun circumstances to all actions. The particular time and place
when Christ instituted this Sacrament were occasional. They might not eat the
paschall supper but at evening, and therefore the Evangelical supper, which was
to succeed to it, behoved to be celebrate that night, seeing Christ's suffering
was so near at hand. They behoved to eat the paschall lamb in a chamber in
Jerusalem, and consequently the supper behooved to be instituted in a chamber,
after the paschall supper. The number of such as did eat the paschall lamb,
behooved to consist of few, betwixt ten and twenty, and therefore they
behooved to be so few that night at the institution of the supper. Their
manner and kind of sitting was a form observed among the Jews at their
commoun feasts, and at the paschall supper. Put the case that they stood at the
first Passover in Egypt, as it can not be prooved, it were then
extraordinary, and for that night only, to signify their hasty departure out
of Egypt. Sitting was the ordinary gesture used at all religious feasts: The
Heathnicks sat at their feasts, made of the remainder of the sacrifices
offered to their idols, Amos 2.1 Cor. 8.10 to profess their communi^^ and
society with their idol, or fellowship with devils, as the Apostle calls
it, 1 Cor. 10.20. Our Lord instituting his supper to be the only religious
feast to be used in the Christian kirk, observed the same gesture which was
used at the paschall supper, and other religious feasts. Christ might easily
have changed sitting into kneeling, and very commodiouslie, seeing they fate
upon beds, yet would he retain the same gesture which they used at the paschall
supper. Time and place are mere circumstances, and the particular time and
place were then only occasional: But the gesture is more then a mere
circumstance, as Master Paybodie, page 34. confesses. This supper was
institute in form of a banquet, to represent not only our spiritual nuriture,
but also our society, and familiarity with Christ, who is to sup and feast
with us. The Polonian Baroun Ioannes Alasco maintains further, that our
sitting, eating, and drinking at the communion table, is a figure and
representation of our sitting at the heavenly table. So does Musculus upon
Matthow 26: and Aquinas part. 3. quest. 60. make the Lords supper a type and
fore-shewing sign of our glory to come. Christ himself expresses our peaceable
fruition of the joys of heaven by sitting with Abraham, Isaac, and Iaakob in
the kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 8.11. and by Lazarus resting in Abraham's bosom,
Luke 16. that is, sitting at the heavenly table, and leaning upon Abraham's
bosom, after the same manner that John lay on Christ's bosom when he fate at
this table, John 16. and Christ himself at the institution promised to his
Apostles, that they should eat and drink at his table in his kingdom, and sit
upon twelve thrones, Luke 22.30. Yea, this Polonian Baroun affirms, that they
have slender affection to the glory of Christ, or our eternal felicity, that
would abolish out of the kirk that image of our eternal felicity in the
celestial glory to come, which is so much recommended to us by Christ
himself, by the symbol of sitting at a banquet, to the unspeakable comfort of
all the faithful. We see that at civil banquets, the time, the place, the
number of persons, and other things are variable, but no other gesture has
been used but sitting, after one form or other, according to the custom of
the nation. Even when men are invited by a king to a feast, they are honored
with sitting, in token of his familiar intertainment.

It appears by the practice of the Apostolical kirks, observing still this
gesture, albeit other circumstances of time and place, and other things which
fell forth occasionally at the first supper were not regarded, that the
gesture of sitting is still to be retained. Christ himself, Luke 24, 30.
sitting at table in Emaus, took bread, blessed it, and brake it. This place is
interpreted by sundry ancients and modern writers of the ministration of the
Sacrament: And Master Paybodie himself, page 86. is of that same judgment. The
apostle, 1 Cor. 11. makes not mention of sitting, because he presupposed a
lawful Minister, a table, and sitting at the table, and rehearses only
Christ's actions and his words, uttered to communicants sitting at the table.
Nor yet all his actions, and his words, as giving of the bread, blessing of the
cup, either severally or conjunctly with the bread, and the precept to drink
all of it: His chief purpose was to correct the abuse of the Corinthia^s, for
not staying upon other: for the Lord that night he was betrayed, said to all
his disciples conveened together, Take ye, eat, ye, etc. The love feasts and
the Lords supper went together, the love feasts in these times preceding, and
the Lords supper immedialy following. Doctor Bilson in his book of obedience,
page 653. says, that whether they went before or after, they could not divide
themselves each from other, but they must offer the same abuse, and disdain of
the poor at the Lords supper, which was ministered to them as they sat at their
tables, immediately before or after their usual or corporal refreshings.
Master Paybodie page, 86, and 94. thinks, that together with the institution
itself, after supper were grounded the love feasts, by continued occasion,
whereof his disciples might possibly for a time use sitting in the very act of
receaving. Doctor Downam in his second sermon, page 61. confesses sitting to
receave the Sacrament, to have been used in the kirk in the apostles times.

Sitting in the act of receaving was continued at sometimes in the Christian
kirk, eve^ to our times. Mornaeus in his first book of the mass, 1 cap. and 5
reports, that the Monks of St. Bennets order communicate sitting, for three
days before Easter. Bullinger in his book de origin errorum, page 46
reports, that not only in their monastries, but also in cathedral kirks they
communicate sitting upon that day.

Now it was the custom of old, not only for the Monks, but also other
Christians to communicate upon this day, and no doubt after the same form. The
two thousand soldiers who were reconcealed to the Emperor Mauritius, about
the year 1590. by the travel of Gregorius bishop of Antioch, received the
Sacrament sitting upon the ground, as Euagrius reports, lib. 6. cap 13.

Doctor Lindesay in his defense, page 53, 54. alleges the like done by the
Scottish army at Bonnokburn, in the days of King Robert Bruce. Socrates in
his history, lib. 5. cap. 23. reports of the Egyptians, who dwelt near to
Alexandria, and the inhabitants of Thebais communicated in the evening, after
they had refreshed themselves with commoun meats upon other days also: it is
likely then they also sat. Alexander de Hales in the second part of his
tractat. concerning the mass, says, the Pope communicates sitting, in
rememberance that the Apostles at the Lords supper communicated sitting. The
Waldenses, who are justly called the pure seed of the ancient kirk, and have
continued since the days of Pope Sylvester, or as some thought, from the days
of the Apostles, says Rainerius the inquisitour, and their enemy, celebrated
the communion sitting, See Master Fox first volumn, page 209 edict. 1610. and
their apology against one Doctor Augustine, which is extant in Lydii
Waldensia. Luther exponing the epistle upon Saint Stevins day; says, Christ
so instituted the Sacrament, that in it we should sit at the Sacrament: but all
things are changed, and idle ordinances of men are come in place of divine
ordinances.

Zuinglius in expositione sidei Christianae, setting down the form of
celebration used at Berne, Zurick, Basile, and other neighbor towns,
reports, that they communicated sitting. The kirks of strangers at London, in
Alascoes time communicated sitting: so do other kirks in the Lowcountries, even
to this day. In Pol, such as adhered to the confession of Helvetia communicated
sitting, as we may see in consensus Poloniae.

By the gesture of standing is pretended more reverence, and thereby the
gesture of sitting is indirectly taxed* and that lively representation of our
familiar society with Christ taken away, seeing it is not the usual and
ordinary gesture at civil feasts.

As for kneeling in the act of receaving: First we have not a warrant from the
example of Christ and his Apostles, or the practices of the Apostolic kirks
after, and therefore they who receave adoration, they are secure, they have the
example of the Apostles, whom we read not to have adored prostrate, but as
they were sitting, they received, and did eat: They have the practice of the
Apostolical kirks, where it is declared, that the faithful did communicate,
not in adoration, but in breaking of bread, says Calvin, Institut. lib. 4.
cap. 37. sect. 33. Beza in his dispute against Iodocus Harchius, So like, as
when the Lord truly to be adored as God and man, at table did institute this
holy supper, that the Disciples arose, to the end that falling upon their
knees, they might receave that bread and wine out of his hand. And so like as
the Apostles were ignorant, how to deliver to the kirks the manner how to
celebrate these holy mysteries, it is known well enough that the love feasts
could hardly or scarce at all admit geniculation. The Waldenses in the apology
abovementioned, say, that Christ gave the Sacrament to his Disciples, and his
successors for a long time made no reverence, meaning adoration.

This holy action is denominate the LORDS table, and the Lords Supper: The use
of a table is not only to set meat on it, but also for the guests, or persons
invited to sit at, and about it, and to partake of the meat set upon the table.

We require not of necessity an artificial table of timber: a Bul-hyde, or a
plot of ground may serve in time of necessity, and answers analogically to a
standing table, as the plot of ground did, whereabout the multitude sat in
rows, by fifties and fifties, Mark. 6. Neither do we stand upon the fashion,
whether it be long or round; but we require that the Communicants always sit
table-wayes, so that they may observe the form of a feast or banquet: For in
that this holy action is called a supper, it is imported, that it was celebrate
in the form of a feast or banquet, as Piscator observes in his observations
upon Matthew. 26. We do not require all the forms used at commoun feasts, but
these which Christ the institutour, and Master of the feast thought sufficient.

Kneeling is not a gesture suitable with the form of a banquet, or use of a
supper table.

The terms, supper, and table of the Lord, very familiar with the Apostle
Paul, seem to require sitting rather then standing, kneeling, or passing by,
says Alasco. Kneling is not a gesture which has been used at feasts or
banquets, but rather a gesture of supplicants. Plessie in his fourth book of
Eucharist says, that of old this holy Supper was celebrated in the form of a
banquet, whereat they did sit, a footestep whereof remains among the
Benedictines. If these terms, the Table of the LORD, the Supper of the LORD,
and breaking of bread had been retained, and other new names not invented, as
Sacrament Eucharist, then might easily have been perceaved how harsh it were
to use these phrases, They brake bread together kneeling, they compassed the
table of the LORD kneeling, they celebrate the Supper of the LORD kneeling,
which seems not so harsh, when we say, they received the Sacrament or
Eucharist kneeling. Therefore the ancient Doctors, says Mowline on the LORDS
Supper, part. 1. page 8. had done better, if they had hold themselves to the
terms expressed in Gods word, etc.

The distribution of the elements by the communicants amongst themselves
admits not kneeling in the act of receaving. Can the communicant be both
adoring GOD upon his knees, and at the very instant be reaching the elements
to his brother likewise kneeling and adoringe. Ye have heard out of Calvin
before, that the faithful in the Apostolical times did not communicate with
adoration, but breaking of bread, as if adoration and breaking of bread could
not consist together: But so it is that the Communicants ought to distribute,
and reach the elements to other. Christ reaching the cup to his Disciples,
commands them to divide it among themselves, Luke 22.17. This cup which he
commanded them to divide, was the Evangelicall cup, or, which is all one, the
last paschall cup changed into the Evangelicall. Luke applies Christ's
protestation, that he will drink no more of the fruit of the wine, etc. to the
cup which he commanded them to divide amongst themselves: but that
protestation is applied to the com^^^on cup by Matthew. and Mark who make mention
only of this cup, in the verses immediately preceding the protestation. If
Christ was to drink incontinent after this protestation of the com^^^n cup, how
could he protest, that he would drink no more of the fruit of the wine^ When
the Schoolmen would prove, that wine was one of the elements at the
Evangelicall supper, they can not find a proof in all the Evangelists, but in
this protestation. Christ in this protestation alludeth to the canon or custom
of the Jews, forbidding to taste any thing after the last cup, which was
called the cup of praise. Now the last cup was the Evangelicall or communion
cup, or the last paschall cup, changed it into the Evangelicall. Further Christ
gave thanks when he took the cup in his hand, which he commanded them to
divide: and therefore Luke makes no mention of this thanksgiving, when he
makes mention of the cup the second time, because he had made mention of it
before. Luke then by way of anticipation brings in Christ, protesting in the
17. verse, that the protestation of not drinking more, may be joined with the
protestation of not eating more, preceding in the 16. verse: therefore when
he comes to the order of the institution, verse 20. he omitteth the
protestation and thanksgiving, which are recorded by other Evangelists, because
he made mention before of them, verse 17. and 18. This anticipation, or
inversion of order in the Evangelist Luke was observed by Augustine, and
Euthymius, Ba^adius, and Suarez, Jesuits. Mewshius observes other inversions
in the same chapter. Christ gave ^ot the cup to every one out of his hand,
which had been sufficient for dividing of it, ^f no further had been intended.
To drink of one cup represents fellowship in one commoun benefit, but not
that communication of mutual love and amity which is represented by reaching
the same cup to other The guests at ci^ill banquets of old, intertaining other
courteously, reached a cup of wine to other, which cup they called philotesia,
metonimically, because it was a symbol of love or friendship, which name any
man may justly impose upon the cup of the holy supper of the Lord, says
Seuekius antiquitarum convivialium, lib. 3. cap. 10. If there were no more but
reaching the cup from one to another, it were sufficient to exclude kneeling:
for what reason were it to kneel at the receaving of the bread, and not at the
receaving of the cup? Were it not also absurd to see the communicants reaching
the cup to other, and the Minister to walk along to give every one the bread?
Analogy requires that the bread should be distributed among the communicants
as well as the wine. Christ said in the plural number, Take ye, eat ye, as
well as drink ye, divide ye, and nor take thou, eat thou: therefore not only
Piscator, Tessanus, and Hospinian, but also Estius a popish writer, upon the 1
Cor. 10.16. gather, that they divide the bread as well as the cup. Beza says,
that the manner of their sitting could not permit Christ to give every one the
bread. Mouline on the Lords supper, 2 part. page 97. maintains, that Christ
could not deliver the bread to every one of the disciples hands, especially
considering that the parties lying half along upon beds at the table, took up
more rowme then they do now adays. This distribution of the bread, as well as
of the cup is confirmed by the custom observed afterward. Master Paybodie,
page 92.101, 104. acknowledges, that the Communicants at the first supper did
communicate the bread and cup one with another: as also in the Apostles times,
page 95. Bullinger in the place above cited, reports, that in the Monastries
of S. Bennets order, etc cathedral kirks they communicated upon
Maunday-thursday, panem azymum frangentes, and calicem invicem propinantes, and
in tatum vetexis coenae vestigium preferentes; that is, breaking unleavened
bread, and reaching the cup to other. This was a footstep of the order observed
universally before upon the anniversarie day, called the day of the Lords
supper, which is now called Maunday-thursday. Friar Rainerius reports, that
the Waldenses participate mutually, as was done at Christ's supper. Bullinger in
his 6. decad, sermon 9. that the supper of the Lord is then rightly celebrated,
when the communicants distribute the bread and the cup among themselves.
Gualter homil. 118. in Marcum, setting down the best form of celebration,
requires, that they break the bread to other, and distribute the cup. Tindall
in his tractat upon the Lords supper, requires, that every man reach, and
break to his neighbor. The latter confession of Helvetia, which is approved by
many reformed kirks, and by our own, recommendeth this breaking of bread. The
Lords supper was denominate breaking of bread, from that rite or ceremony of
the breaking of the bread, Acts. 2. it is said, the disciples continued in
breaking of bread, and Acts. 20, that the disciples conveened to break bread,
which is clearer then the former speech, and imports, that the disciples, or
the faithful themselves brake bread. Estius, a popish professor in Doway,
writing upon 1 Cor. 10.16. says, that in the primitive kirk they had the
breaking of bread, which was first done by the Presbyteri^^ and deacons, and
after them in smaller pieces, by the faithful to whom it was given, that they
might distribute the same among themselves. The Apostle 1 Cor. 10.16. says,
The bread which we break, is not the communion of the body of Christ? that is,
the bread we break, distribute, and eat: For the breaking alone by the Minister
is not the communion of the body of Christ. The Apostle rehearsing the words of
the institution, says not, Take thou, eat thou, but in the plural number,
take ye, eat ye: Yea, Durandus Rational. lib. 4. cap. 1. says, that the
apostles celebrated as Christ did.

The breaking of the bread serves for two uses: first, for the representation
of Christ's sufferings; as also the pouring of the wine represented mystically
the effusion of his blood. Bullinger says, decad. 5. sermon. 7. We break the
bread of the Lord with our own hands, for we our selves are to be blamed, that
he was bruised: our sins wounded him, we crucified him, and we believe, that
not only he suffered for others, but specially for our selves. Gualtor in his
homil. 295. on Matthew, says, That every one when they break the bread,
acknowledges themselves to be the authors of his death and passion. The other
use is for distribution, and reaching to other, to testify mutual love and
amity. If two should drink out of one cup, and yet not teach to other, it
might well be thought there were no great kindness between them. To divide
the bread, and to eat together, in token of love and benevolence, was a custom
observed in the oriental countries, and yet still in sundry countries of the
West. Serranius in Iosuam, cap. 9. Of this use the reader may find more in
Bullinger, Decad. 5. and Gualter 118. in Marcum. Zuinglius in his exposition of
the Christian faith, reports that some sitting together casuallie, and
participating after this manner, were reconcealed, who before had been at
variance, and that this fell forth often.

If none must give the sacramental bread but the Minister, because he acts
the person of Christ who gave his own body, by the same reason they may not
reach the cup to other, as the Apostles did at the first supper, where they
represented the faithful, and communicated not as Pastors, but as disciples,
as guests, as other Christians, as all our divines hold: and among the rest,
Musculus cited by Doctor Lindesay, page 59. This Doctor confesses the cup
may be reached from one to another, the Minister still acting CHRIST'S person
in his own place, page 61.62. If none but the Minister must give the elements,
because he represents Christ's, person, then might not the Deacon in the
ancient kirk do it, because he represented not Christ's person. Vasquez
confesses, that it is not forbidden by divine law, that the Sacrament be
ministered, or carried by a lay man, and applied to the hand of another
Communicant, but by humane law. I would ask when the Minister comes from his
own place, and goes along to deliver the elements, how does he act the
person of Christ, the Master of the feast? There can be no other reason of
this guise, but to nourish a superstitious conceat, that it is holier to
receave it out of the hand of the Minister, who perhaps is a Judas, then out of
the hand of a faithful brother, as if his hand profained or polluted it. Are
not the peoples hands as holy as the Ministers, says Master Paybodie, page
313. Superstition increasing at last, the communicants might not take the
Sacrament in their own hand, to put it in their mouth, but it behooved the
Priest to put it in their mouth: Such superstitious conceats condemn Christ
and his Apostles, and the godly, who in their time distribute to other, and
deprive of the profitable uses of fraction, or breaking of bread. Neither is
the representation or form of a feast or banquet observed: it is rather like a
dole of meat then a supper. Further, this giving of the elements to every one
severally, brings in confusion of actions, and private communions in the
public assembly. For while the Ministers are giving the elements to every one,
the people is in the mean time exercised in hearing the word red, or singing
Psalms, and hear not what the Minister says to the Communicants, nor do the
Communicants understand what is read, or sung in public. Yea, sometimes two
Ministers will be speaking at once to sundry communicants: so the
communicants communicate apart, and might as well go aside, or to an I Will of the
kirk to communicate, yea, and far better. The exercise is dead and cold, and
they are forced to reading and singing in the mean time, to drive away
tediousness, and so bring in confusion of actions. If Christ spoke in the
plural number, Take ye, eat ye, when the communicants were so few, what
would he have done if there had been a great multitude present? If the
distribution of the communicants had been observed by the ancients constantly,
and at all times, as sometimes it was, kneeling had not entered in the kirk,
the words outered by Christ at the deliverie of the elements had not been
changed, confusion of actions, and a private form of communicating had not
taken place, and the form of a feast had been preserved. Therefore suppose
the distributing by the communicants were not recommended to us, nor had any
other profitable use, but that it is a bar to hold out so many corruptions, let
us stand for distribution. Our Lord was wise, and could devise the best form:
Who can devise a better, says Bullinger, decad. 5. sermon. 9. then the Son of
God himself? the supreme high Priest of his kirk: Yea Bellarmine says, de
Eucharist. lib. 4. cap. 7. that it can not be doubted, but that is better, and
to be done which Christ did.

Kneeling in the act of receaving the sacramental elements is scandalous, and
therefore to be avoided. The papist is confirmed in his vile idolatry, by our
conforming with him in that gesture. Do they not vaunt, that we are coming
home to them? The Ministers of Edinburgh in the instructions given to Master
William Levingstoun, subscrived also by them, when he was sent up to Court,
have these words, The Papists seeing us in that gesture having some external
symbolizing with them, are thereby confirmed in their error, as though that our
practice were an approaching to them, and an ingrease to their idolatry and
bread-worship. Now we ought not to keep conformity in the worship of God with
idolaters in things otherwise lawful, if they be not of necessary use, and
have been abused. The Lord took this course with his own people of old, he
forbade them to round the corners of their heads, or mar the corners of their
beard, or wear linsey-woolsey, or sow their field with mingled sead, or plant
any groaves of trees near the altar of the Lord, that they might be unlike
the Gentiles. The Priests were forbidden to make their heads bald, or shave off
the corner of their beard for the same cause. The ancients for the like reason
rejected many customs of Ethnicks, Jews, and heretics, but were not constant
in this course. As for the sun, the moon, the stars, and other creatures,
howbeit they have been abused, and adored, yet because they are Gods creatures,
and of necessary use, they are still to be used. Gold, silver, temples are
profitable helps unto the necessity of man's life. The gold, the brass, and
iron of Jericho taken into the Lords treasury, were the civil goods of
idolaters, and had no state in their idolatrous worship, as this kneeling has.
We should shun conformity with papists in special, because the pope their
head is the great Antichrist: and we are more troubled with rites, abused and
polluted by him, then by any other: We dwell nearer to papists then to any
other idolaters, and they dwell or converse among us. The equity of this
direction for not conforming with idolaters, appears, first, in that we show
not as we ought our hatred and detestation of idolatry, when we retain any
monument or memorial of it. The brazen serpent it self a monument of Gods
mercy, and benefit received 700 year before, was broken by Ezekias in pieces
when it began to be abused and polluted with idolatry: far more ought the
monument and memorial of idols or idolatry be abolished.

It is true, kneeling of it self is not a humane invention, but in some kinds
(...) may be lawfully used, as in prayer: but kneeling in the act of receiving
the sacramental elements was never Gods ordinance, and therefore ought to be
forborne, seeing in that act it has been abused to the vilest idolatry that
ever was, to the worshipping a piece bread, which the worshipper esteemed to
be his god. To retain it therefore is to retain a memorial or monument of
that vile idolatry, because we use that same gesture in that same very act,
and without necessity. Next, in conforming with idolaters, we keep a stumbling
block in the kirk, and both hardens the idolater in his idolatry, and lay a
stumbling block both before our self, and our own brethren, by retaining such
allurements and provocations, to commit the same kind of fornication or
idolatry. Woe be to him that gives offense, it were better that a milestone,
etc. They ask what aptness^ there is in this gesture, to intise us to
idolatry? We answer, it is the same form and fashion that idolaters used in
that same very act, and for reverence as they did. We are more prone to
idolatry by nature then any other sin: therefore the greater diligence is to
be used in avoiding of it. Doolefull experience has taught us how dangerous it
is. The kirks in the Low Countries in their synods ordained, that the communion
be not celebrated kneeling, for the danger of bread-worship. The Polonian
synods, holden anno 1573. and 1583. were grosely mistaken, in alleging that
none but Arrians or Anabaptists did sit: when as it is well known that this
gesture of sitting was in use in sundry kirks in Europe, of which we have
made mention before: yea, and Alasco before these times wrote more earnestly
for sitting then any man else. But these Polonian synods were mixed, and
consisted partly of Lutherians, partly of such as adhered to the Bohemian,
partly of such as adhered to the Helvetian confess on: Yet they confess, anno
1578. that it is neither the will of God, nor the custom of the purer kirk to
smite men with Ecclesiastical discipline, for external rites. Our opposits
pretend the remedy of preaching, and information of the people, to direct
their adoration aright. But it is better to fill up the pit in the way, then to
set one beside, to warn the passengers that they fall not in. Watchmen are
sometime negligent, sometime blind and ignorant, or corrupt and perverse: time
should be better spent, then in leading poor souls through dangerous ways,
which may be forsaken. All are not alike capable of information: appearance of
evil works more powerfully oft-times then the doctrine.

They allege that the command of the Magistrate, in things indifferent,
takes away the scandal. I answer, Can the supreme magistrate take away that
aptness and fitness that any thing has, to intise and provoke men to sin.
The magistrates countenance makes the scandal the greater, and he
strengthens it by authority. Court-clawbacks tell us, we should rather offend
the people then the supreme magistrate: but better offend, that is, displease
him, nor offend, that is, give occasion to the poorest soul, let be many
thousands to fall into any sin, let be so heinous a sin, as is the sin of
idolatry. The magistrate is not in danger of stumbling, or spiritual falling
into any sin: for (ye put the case) he esteems the matter indifferent. The
Apostle had rather never eat flesh, nor offend a weak brother, for eating flesh
offered to the idol, and sold in the mereat. And yet he had greater
authority in such matters, then any prince, or general assembly. The Belgic
synods would not take so much upon them, but forbade kneeling, for fear of
idolatry. If the kirk to whom the rule for directing the use of things
indifferent, in matters of religion, are laid down, to wit, that all things be
done decently, in order, to edification, without offense, may not presume so
far, far less the magistrate.

We maintain that kneeling in the act of receaving the sacramental elements
was not in use, or at the least authorized, till the great antichrist
dominited. There can not be an authentic testimony alleged before the
opinion of real presence and transubstantiation began to spread: or to come to
a more certain date, for the space of a thousand years after Christ. There are
some testimonies bearing the word adore, but the testimonies are either
counterfeit, or to be understood of inward adoration, or of adoration in time
of prayer, before they communicate: Or adoration is taken only for veneration:
but of kneeling in the act of receiving we hear of no authentic testimony as
yet alleged. Doctor Burges is very confident, that the communicants kneeled
in Tertullians time, that is, about 200. year after Christ: for says, he the
people shunned to come to the communion table on the station days, because
they might not kneel in the act of receiving, but it behooved them to stand on
these days: and therefore, says he, Tertullian inviteth them to come, to
(...) the bread standing at the table publictly, to reserve it, and carry it
home, and there receave it kneeling, and so both duties should be performed,
the receiving of the Eucharist, and the tradition on these days observed.
Tertullians testimony is cited out of his book, de oratione, cap. 14. But the
Doctor translated these words, Quod statio solvenda sit accepto corpore
Domini, Because station or standing is then to be performed in receaving the
body of the Lord: whereas he should translate thus, because the station or
fast is then to be broken, after the receaving of the body of the Lord. For
the word statio in Tertullians language is taken for fasting, or rather for
some kind of fasting days. Wednesday and Friday were called station days, on
which they fasted until the third hour afternoon, and was distinguished
from the other fasting days, whereon they fasted of their own accord, as
Pamelius observes out of Rabanus Maurus; or rather as a late popish writer
Albaspinaeus, bishop of Orleance, in his observations observes, were
distinguished from other fast days, which endured till the evening. The
meaning of Tertullian is this, they were in an error who thought that if they
had received the Sacrament, their feast should be broken, which should have
continued to the set hour: Nay, says Tertullian, Nonne solemnior erit statio
tua, si and ad aram Dei steteris? Shall not thy fust or station be the more
solemn, if thou stand also at the altar of God, that is, tho comu^^on table,
for so both are safe, both the participation of the sacrifice, and performance
of thy service, that is, of the fast, says Plessie in his answer to the
Theologues of Bourdeaux: and in his answer to the bishop of Evereux, page 225.
he says, that Tertullian would remove that scruple, that as soon as ever
they had communicated, they thought their fast was broken. Albaspinaeus seems
to come yet nearer to the sense, and says, Tertullian would reprove these
that would break the station or fast, as soon as ever they had received the
Eucharist', and not stay any longer in the kirk, howbeit the time was short,
and some few prayers were outored after the deliverie of the Eucharist, for
they communicated about the ninth hour of the day, which was the third hour
after noone, about the end of the fast on these station days: for on other
fasting days which endured to the evening, they received not the Eucharist. As
for standing at the communion table upon these station days, it was not
because they stood only upon these days, when they received the Eucharist: Nam
accepta Eucharistia, non licebat ex little institutis, and ex veteri disciplina
de geniculis orare, says Albaspinaeus, that is, It was not leasome by the
ordinances, and old discipline of these times to pray upon their knees, when
they received the Eucharist. Further he proves, that upon these station days
they stood not always, but kneeled at their prayers: for the whole time was a
time of mourning and afflicting of their bodies, but in these times it was a
sign of joy, not to adore upon their knees. Erat apud antiquos, and nascentis
Ecelesiae Christianos quaedum inum unitas, and quoddam genus goudiide geniculis
non aderara, see page 52, and 49. The ancients in these times thought kneeling
not suitable with such an action, as the participation of the Lords supper,
because it was an action of joy and delight.

Ye see then howbeit they kneeled other ways upon the station days, because
of their fasting and mourning, yet at the end, a little before their dissolving
they stood at the comm^un table. Now the reason why these days were called
station days, was not according to his observation so called, because of the
gesture of standing, but only by way of allusion to military stations, and
watches at the gates of Princes palaces, that as they stayed in their watch,
whether sitting or standing, so the Christians stayed in the kirk mourning, and
praying, in these times of persecution, for peace and safety to the kirk, till
the third hour afternoon, at which time they communicate. It was the custom
of the kirk, for a thousand year to stand upon the Lords day, and yet the Lords
day was not one of their station days, which should have been, if the gesture
of (...) only should make a station day, as Doctor Burges would have it. It is
gross ignorance in the Doctor, to affirm that the station days were these
days, wherein they stood in prayer, and at all the solemn worship of God, and
to deny that they were set days of fasting. Further is nothing more evident,
then that Tertullian in sundry other passages speaks of stations, or station
days, as days of fasting. Where as in the Re-examination it was given, and
not granted, that they stood on these days, in time of divine service or
prayer, now being induced by the observation of Albaspinaeus, We deny that
they stood in time of prayer upon these days, and therefore the argument is
the more forcible for us; that notwithstanding of their humiliation, and
kneeling upon these days of mourning and fasting, yet at the end, when they
were near dissolving, and ending their fast or station, they stood at the
table of the Lord, and received the Sacrament standing. Howbeit this was not
the right gesture, yet it is clear they kneeled not when they received the
Sacrament. Tertullian makes no mention of receiving the Sacrament in their
houses kneeling. For a thousand years they stood even in time of prayer upon
the Lords day, and therefore it can not be imagined that they kneeled, when
they received the Sacrament.

But say our opposits, they used the same gesture in the receaving the
Eucharist, which they thought fittest for prayer. I answer, they thought nor
standing the fittest gesture for prayer, but kneeling, and stood upon the Lords
day, to signify their joy for Christ's resurrection, which was a conceat taken
up by them, not known to the apostle: for they kneeled not for the like reason
betwixt Easter and Pentecost, and yet we see in the 20. of the Acts, the
Apostle Paul kneeled. The custom yet observed to this day in the oriental
kirks, to communicate standing, notwithstanding that other custom has ceased,
declares, that they intended never geniculation in the act of receiving. If
ever kneeling in the act of receiving had been in use among them, it had not
been left off, considering man's pronnesse to idolatry and superstition. It
rests then, that kneeling is only found in the kirks which were subject to
the pope.

Howbeit this idolatrous gesture prevailed under the reign of the great
Antichrist, yet there wants not faithful witnesses to stand out against it,
as the Waldenses, and the Picardi. If at any time we should not seem to have
communion with Antichrist we should most of all at this holy supper, which
sets forth our communion with Christ and his kirk.

Ye see then, suppose that kneeling in the act of receiving were indifferent,
yet in respect of the scandal, the danger, and inconvenients fall upon it, we
ought to oppose it. But we are now to prove, that it is not indifferent, but
idolatrous, and therefore a heinous sin, whether we consider it as it is
injoined by the act of the pretended assembly at Perth, or as the action may
be considered simply in it self.

We are directed by the act of Perth to kneel, in reverence of the Sacrament,
which is idolatry: for we are directed to kneel, in due regard of so divine a
mystery, to wit, as is the Sacrament, or as is the receiving of the body and
blood of Christ, to wit, in the sacramental manner. Ye may also take up the
intent of the act, by the intent of the English prelates, and their adherents,
for conformity with them is intended. Doctor Mortoun says, that their kirk
thought it fit, by outward reverence in the manner of receiving the Eucharist,
to testify their due estimation of such holy rites. Master Hutton says, they
kneeled, to put a difference between the ordinary bread and wine, and the
sacramental, to which they gave the more reverence, because it is more than
ordinary bread and wine. Some of the formalists pretend, that they kneel
because of the prayer outered at the deliverie of the elements: but that short
bit of prayer, or wish, is ended before the minister offer the bread to the
communicante, and bid him take it, and yet the communicant is injoined to
continue still upon his knees. Nor is kneeling injoined to them by statute, or
their service book, in regard of prayer, but in regard of the Sacrament it self.

Master Paybodie page 334. does freely confess, that their prayer is not the
principal respect of their kneeling, nor the principal respect upon which
their kirk injoined it: And page 299. suppose their be no prayer used in time
of receaving, he thinks never the worse of the gesture of kneeling. Doctor
Mortoun, and Master Hutton, as ye have heard, profess they kneel, to testify
their due estimation of such holy rites, and more reverence to the elements
then ordinary bread and wine. Now to testify more reverence to the elements
by kneeling, is to testify by adoration, which is idolatry. Neither are we
directed by the act of Perth, to pray in the act of receiving, but to use that
kind of gesture in the act of receaving, which becomes meditation, and
lifting up of the heart, which also may be done without prayer. But prayer can
not consist with the act of taking, eating, and drinking. Wheresoever the
publict intent of a kirk is to kneel, for reverence of the Sacrament, every
communicant following her direction, is an idolater interpretative, and so to
be construed both before God and man, whatsoever be his own private intent.
If any man receave the Sacrament upon his knees at Rome, or any other popish
kirk, whatsoever be his private intent, he must be interpreted to kneel,
according to the intent of that kirk.

But setting aside the act of the assembly at Perth, which is only a null and
pretended assembly, we shall consider the action it self, we will prove that
it can not be done but for reverence of the Sacrament, or sacramental elements.

The first reason shall be this, The communicant is tied, whether by direction
of others, or his own resolution, all is one, to kneel with reverence before
dead and senseless elements, when they are presented to him by the hand of the
Minister. We can not kneel to God in prayer, but there are many things before
us by casual position, neither can we choose to do otherwise. But if we be
tied to kneel with reverence, when we are to do any religious exercise,
suppone prayer, before such a creature, suppone but a tree, and is not likewise
tied when we pray before any other creature, our gesture of adoration can not
be without respect to the tree. God himself never appointed any creature to
be an object to the eyes of man, when he was to adore him upon his knees, but
only directed his people to kneel toward a certain place, where he was
present himself, in an extraordinary manner, or bound himself, by promise to
hear from thence, as was the Arc, and Temple, where the Arc was. The
Sacramental bread is not a place of Gods extraordinare presence, or of the
existing of Christ's manhood substantiallie, or of promise to hear us from
thence. It is idolatry, says Perkinse, to turn, dispose, or direct the
worship of God, or any other part thereof to any particular place, or creature,
without the appointment of God, and more specially to direct our adoration to
the bread, or the place where the bread is.

The uncovering of our heads is a gesture of reverence only, and that only
amongst some nations, but not of adoration. Kneeling is a gesture of adoration,
either civil or religious, amongst all nations. I will not kneel civilly to
every one, to whom I uncover my head civilly. Every one that stands with his
head uncovered, in presence of the king, is not adoring, as he is who is
presenting his petition to the king upon his knee in their sight. Further our
heads are no otherwise uncovered in the act of receaving, then in the rest of
the time of the celebration, when we are not near the elements, The Scripture
is read, the words of Christ which he outered at the institution are still and
often repeated, his actions which are divine and holy are reiterated; and
sometimes we are singing psalms. But adoration upon our knees can not consist
with such variety of actions.

The people 1 King. 18. fell on their faces, after the fite had consumed the
burnt sacrifices, and the wood, and licked up the water, and not in the mean
time: for it is not likely that they fell down, till they had seen what the
fire had wrought. What suppose they had fallen down in the meantime, that they
saw the fire fall down upon the sacrifice? Is it any wonder, that men amazed
with Gods majesty in a miracle, fell down as astonished, to worship God?
Charles the fifth after his farewell to the wars, saluted the Spanish shore in
such an affectionat and prostrat manner, as his meanest vassal could not
ordinarily have saluted either him or it, without just imputation of gross
idolatry* Doctor Iackson (...) If there come into the kirk one that believes
not, and one that is unlearned, and hear one after another prophecy, and
finding himself convinced, and the secrets of his heart made manifest, were it
any wonder, if he fell down on his knees, etc. 1 Cor. 14. yet if he fell down
before them ordinarily, were it not idolatrous?

When it is said, 1 King. 8.54. that Solomon kneeled before the altar of the
Lord, when he prayed at the dedication of the temple. The altar is not set
down there as the object, toward which he directed his countenance, when he
was kneeling, but only as a circumstance of the place where he was, when he
prayed at that time. He kneeled upon the brazen scaffold, which was over
against the altar, and spread his hands toward the heavens, not toward the
altar. And suchlike, 2 Chronicles. 6.13. it is said, That he fell down upon his
knees, before all the congregation of Israel, that is, in their sight and
presence, and spread forth his hands toward heaven: It is not said, that he
turned his face toward the altar. They turned their face ordinarily to that
part where the Ark was, the place of Gods extraordinary presence, which
therefore in Scripture is called sometime God, sometime the Lord of hosts, the
king of glory, the face of the Lord. Doctor Burges, page 7. says, that the
altar was not already dedicated, but was in the doing. Likewise Micha 6.6.
when it is said, Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and how my self before
the high God? means, that they bowed themselves before the high God, sitting
between the Cherubins, not toward the Altar.

When they had offered their oblations, what if they had bowed toward the
place where the Ark was, when they were offering to God? when we are in the
act of receiving eating and drinking, we are receiving, and not offering.

They pretend the sacramental elements are only as objectum a quo
significative, that is, an active object moving them to worship the thing
signified or God. Put case that were true, it will not help them. Durandus,
Holcot, and Picus Mirandula, and other papists profess, that they adored the
prototype or samplar before the image, which put them in mind of the samplar,
and spoke in as abstract a manner of their worship, as the formalist does,
when he pretends the purest intent he can, in the manner of his adoration.
And yet were accounted by other papists good catholics. Vasquez proves, that
these Doctors made the image obiectum quod, the very object passive of
adoration, and that both the samplar and the image were adored together: For
they used the same respect to the images, that other catholics used, they
uncovered their head to them, they bowed toward them, kneeled before them, and
kissed them. And this he defends to be the right manner, when the image and
samplar are adored with one adoration, the inward motion, and submission of
mind being carried to the samplar, and outward sign of submission to the
image, being transmitted by the spirit, or in thought and desire to the samplar.

This Jesuit reports, that in the time of the seventh synod, their were some
enemies to images, who were content that images were brought into the kirk, not
only for decorement, but also to stir up the remembrance of the samplar, that
before them they might reverence only the samplar, but exhibit no sign of
honor or submission before the image, for that (they said) was idolatry: and
therefore they would neither kiss them, nor bow before them; but standing
upright before them, being stirred up to the rememberance of the samplar, they
were carried only in their mind to it. These were called semiprobi, as we
would say mangrels. Ye see then that taking the image only as objectum a quo
significative, as instruments and means to stir up their remembrance, these
mangrals would not kneel before them: for then, says Vasquez, they should
have adored them, which he in his popish judgment thinks they should have
done. So if the elements be used only as obiectum a quo significative, to
stir up their reverence, why kneel they before them. Nay, why are not the
elements lifted up, as among the papists, after they have said, This is my
body, (for, say they, it is made then a sacrament) that the people being
stirred up at the elevation, with the sight of the signifying object, may kneel
in whatsoever part of the kirk it be.

If our formalists used the Sacramental elements, only as an active object to
stir them up, they would not kneel before them in the mean time, more then
when they are stirred up by the word, or works of God, by a toad, an ass, or a
fly.

But say they, there is a great difference betwixt images, which are the
inventions of men, and the work of God, or the Sacrament. But we say, In the
case of adoration there is no difference. If the historical use of images be
lawful, as some of them do now maintain, what does the presence of the image
hinder to fall down and worship, if their reason be good. And if the use of
images to this end be forbidden, so are also the creatures. We esteem indeed
more of the works of God, then of the work-man-ship of man. We owe more
reverence at the hearing of the word, decent and comely usage in the
participation of the Sacrament, which we owe not to images. Gods word and
works are ordained by God for our instruction, and so are not images: But God
never ordained them to this end, that in them, by them, or before them we
should adore him, or any other thing we are put in remembrance of by them. The
brazen serpent was set up upon a pole, that these who were stigned with the
fiery serpents, looking upon it, might be cured. Yet says the Jesuit
Vasquez, God commanded them to look upon it, standing upright, without any
adoration, or sign of submission. The people of God of old kneeled not before
their sacraments nor heard the word read, or exponed kneeling. God works are
the book of nature, to teach us many things concerning God: But we must not
therefore fall down before the Sun, or Moon, before every green tree, an
ass, a toad, when they work at the sight of them upon our minds, and move us
to consider Gods goodness, wisdom, and power. When I am beholding a tree, an
ass, a toad, and considering in them the goodness, power, and wisdom of God,
I am reading upon the book of nature, contemplating, and gathering profitable
instructions. I can not still be contemplating, and in the mean time adore,
kneeling in prayer, or praise, for that were a confusion of holy exercises. Nor
yet after my contemplation, and preparatorie work to worship is ended, must I
tie or set my self before that ass, toad, or tree to kneel, for then I should
kneel for a greater respect to that creature, then to any other beside for the
time, before which I might have kneeled casually without respect, and so the
moving object shall participate of the external adoration, my kneeling being
convoyed by it to God, to whom it is directed by my spirit or affection, as
Vasquez has descrived the manner of adoration of images.

Where it is objected, that men bow before the chair of estate, or the Princes
seal, which are dead and senseless creatures. I answer, Civil worship is
conveyed ^^mediatly to the person of the Prince, by bowing before such
senseless creatures, because men think it expedient to uphold the infirmity
of Princely majesty by such means. But God needs none such, nor will have
none.

Next, There is civil ordinances of the estate for the one, but their wants
divine ordinance for the other. Francis Whit in his reply to Fisher, page 228.
says, Civil and religious worship are of diverse beginnings and forms, and
every thing that is possible, lawful, and commendable in the one, is not so in
the other. Augustine de civitate Dei, lib. 10. cap. 4. says, That great
humility, or pestiferous flattery, may be the original of many honors
given to Princes, borrowed from the forms used in GODS worship.

Our next reason, Considering the action in it self, without respect to the
act of Perth, to prove it idolatrous, is this, To adore upon our knees, when
we are performing an outward action, which is not directed to GOD immediately,
and in that action are occupied about an external object, is idolatry,
unless that whereabout the action is employed, be worthy of divine honor.
Our taking, eating, and drinking the bread and wine at the Lords table, is not
an action directed to God immediately, as prayer, and thanksgiving is, not yet
as Vasquez the Jesuit says, is it an outward sign of adoration.

We bless and sanctify the meat upon the table for our commoun use, but then
it is object passive, not of adoration* but of blessing and sanctification for
our use. Next, We bless sitting, or standing, but are not tied to kneeling:
Yea, we read not in Scripture, that any blessed the meat upon the table
kneeling. Christ himself blessed sitting.

But to come nearer to the purpose, It were strange to see, after the meat is
blessed, every one who is present to sit down upon his knees, with his
countenance fixed upon the bread upon the table, or in the hand of the Master
of the family or feast, and to take, eat, and drink. Nature and custom
teaches us, it were rather a mocking of God, then a reverent adoration of him.
But you will say, The sacramental elements are holy bread and wine, the other
commoun and extraordinary. There ye betray your self, ye kneel then in
taking, and eating the sacramental bread, because it is holy. Now to kneel
in respect of the holiness of bread, and wine, is idolatry. And the true
cause of your religious respect, and bowing before it, is the holiness of it.
We are prone to conceat too highly of things set a part to holy uses, as if
they were of greater worth then our selves; for whose use they were instituted.

The papist thinks he takes and eats the body of CHRIST, which by reason
of the concomitance of the Godhead he adoreth. Neither would any reasonable
man be so absurd, as to take, eat, and drink, adoring; unless he believed,
that which he were taking, eating, and drinking, were worthy of divine
honor. It were absurd to kneel before an earthly king, and still to be eating
and drinking. But it may be our kneelers be gross enough in the opinion of
the real presence, and we hear too much of it.

They say, We may pray mentally in the act of receaving, eating, therefore we
may kneel or adore in the act of receiving, etc. I answer, first, We may not
pray when we are bound to another exercise. In the act of receaving, eating,
and drinking, we should attend upon the audible words, the visible signs, and
rites, meditate upon the analogic between the outward signs and rites, and
the things signified, take, eat, drink mentally, and spiritually by faith. Our
desires in the mean time are not prayers: Prayer is more than desire, it is a
manifesting of our desires to God. The soul may send forth short
ejaculations, like darts, in every ordinance, and these ejaculations may be
incident to all our actions, even civil, let be religious, even when we are
eating and drinking our ordinary meat and drink. But a set and continued
prayer can not consist with other actions. In sudden ejaculations no other
gesture is required, then that wherein the motion of the Spirit of God shall
find them. If mental prayer might be permitted, it is secret before the
Lord, and the signs of it before men should be concealed. Thirdly, What
necessity is it to pray kneeling in this act, more then at other prayers at
which ye do kneel. It is clear then, ye kneel not in regard of that
pretended prayer, but because ye are before such a creature. The like may be
said of thanksgiving. Ejaculations of thanks may agree with the proper exercise
of the Soul, in the time of receaving, eating, and drinking, as it may also
with our ordinary eating, and drinking at our tables, but not a set
thanksgiving, which should require the attention of all the powers of the
soul, and can not be done without diverting the Soul from the exercise
proper for the time.

Prayer is a craving, our taking, eating, and drinking is not a craving, but a
receaving. Thanksgiving is properly directed to God, so is not our act of
taking, eating, and drinking. The Sacrament was called the Eucharist by the
Ancients, not for the act of taking, eating, and drinking, but for the
thansgiving preceding, which was but a part of the action. The showing forth
of the LORDS death, by the act of eating and drinking, is but only a
representation. The showing forth by word, is only a declaration o^
commemoration. Representation, or commemoration are to men, and not GOD,
resemble preaching, and not prayer, or thanksgiving. The celebration of the
action it self, is a profession of thankfulness before man for a great
benefit, but not thanksgiving directed to God. God is honored by preaching,
prayer, singing, swearring, praising, and not by adoring only. To honor is
more general than to adore. It is yet objected, that in the act of receiving,
we receave an inestimable benefit. Ought not a subject to kneel, when he
receaveth a benefit from his Prince, to testify his thankfulness? I answer,
If we were to receave a gift, suppose but a morsel of bread, out of Gods own
hand immediately, we ought no doubt to adore upon our knees, but not, if by the
hand of the creature. The person who receaveth the gift from the King, is
supposed to receave it immediately from the king: or suppose he kneel
receaving from his servant, mediat civil worship is not a rule for religious
adoration, which should be directed to God immediately. Now we receave the
Sacrament out of the hand of the Minister, not out of Christ's own hand. Yea,
the Apostles at the first supper adored not on their knees, when Christ
himself ministered the Sacrament, howbeit upon occasion, and at other times
they adored: Nor did they adore God the Father upon their knees, for the
benefit they were receaving. The inward benefit Christ's body and blood, is
not the outward object, is received by the soul, not by the body, by the godly
only, not by all that receave the Sacrament, by faith embracing Christ present
by his Spirit in the soul. Now the act of faith, or believing, is not an act
of adoration, nor is it expressed outwardly by kneeling. We receave, eat, and
drink Christ's body and blood, as soon as we are effectually called, and
begin to believe, and as often as we believe the promises of the Gospel, when we
hear them read or exponed. CHRIST body is far absent from us at the
receaving of the Sacrament. We are united with Christ, and made members of his
body, before we come to the Sacrament, and do not receave his body at
every communion, as if we had lost it since the former: and yet there is but
one body received at all the times. We are said then to take, eat, drink
Christ's body and blood at every celebration of the Lords supper, because we
put forth our faith in act at that time; and renewing the act of faith, we
take, eat, and drink by believing, that same body and blood, which we did
before, our faith being strengthened by the outward signs and seals to that
end, and so grow by faith in union with Christ. Further, the manner or form of
receaving a gift, should be answereable to the manner of the offering, the
nature of the gift, and the will of the giver. If a King call his Nobles to a
banquet, it is his will that they sit at table. Howsoever then otherwise, and
at other occasions we behave our selves as supplicants, we are now according
to our Lords will and pleasure, to observe that external form of a feast,
which he has left to his kirk, and to act thereat in our outward carriage age
the persons of guests, and friends, as he calls us, John 15.15. Therefore
howbeit the inviter be a great person, the manner of invitation is familiar,
to assure us of our preferment, and fellowship with him, howbeit there be
great inequality between us and him. Again, if we should kneel, because
we are receaving a gift, by this reason we should kneel, when we receave
any gift or benefit from GOD: As for example, When we are eating and drinking
our ordinary meat and drink. If ye will say, the one is holy, the other
commoun, then ye confess ye kneel, because of the holiness of it, and that
is idolatry. If ye will say, ye receave a greater gift, then when ye
receave your ordinary food, that is not more, but that then is a greater
motive. Yet if it be called a gift, then whenever, or whatsoever gift ye
receave, ye ought to kneel. God deserves thanks for the least of his
benefits, because bestowed upon us by so great a Lord, and for his own
excellency, which is the reason upon Gods part, that moves us to adore him.

It is frivolous which is alleged, that what we crave upon our knees, we may
receave upon our knees: For we crave our daily food, raiment, and other
necessars upon our knees, and yet we receave them not, nor use them upon our
knees. It is as frivolous, That what we crave of GOD upon our knees in publict
worship, we may receive upon our knees. For we may crave in the time of
public worship upon our knees, things necessary for this temporal life, and
so we do, when in the Lords prayer we pray, Give us this day our daily
bread. By this kind of reasoning, what I crave in private worship upon my
knees, I may receave upon my knees. But it is not the diversity of the time
and place where we crave, or receive the benefit, more then the diversity of
the benefit it self, that is the ground of adoration, but Gods excellency,
as we said before.

They consider not that these three things ought to be distinguished,
blessing, or sanctifying the creature, or mean GOD has appointed, either for
our temporal or spiritual life, before the use of it, the use it self, and
thanksgiving after the use, the blessing before meat, the use of meat in
receaving, eating, drinking, and thanksgiving after, blessing before the
reading, preaching, or hearing of the word, the act it self, reading, hearing,
preaching, and thanksgiving to GOD after, blessing before the receaving the
sacramental elements, the receiving and participation it self, and
thanksgiving after.

They ask if humility and reverence be not requisite in the act of receiving
the sacramental elements. I answer, Yes, in all religious exercises, hearing
of the word, reading of the word, etc. But it follows not, that there should
be humiliation upon our knees, because humility of mind is required: nor
adoration, because reverence is required. Is there no reverence nor humility,
but in kneeling before dead and senseless elements? Humility is an habit,
adoration is an act. The act of humility is immanent, whereby any one rests
content with his own rank, and does not conceat greater worth in himself
then there is, specially in comparison with GOD. Adoration is a transient act,
whereby a man goes out of himself, as it were, to direct some homage, and
worship to GOD. Reverence is commoun to all the parts of GODS worship, and is
not a distinct kind of worship, as is adoration. The pretense of reverence can
not be a sufficient reason, for the altering the ordinance of Christ, and the
opinion of reverence has often been the dame and nource of manifold
superstitions, says Bishop Mortoun upon the Lords supper, page 63.

Seeing kneeling in the act of receiving the Sacramental elements, eating, and
drinking is idolatry, and can not be used but idolatrously, it follows,
that kneeling in the act of receaving brought not in artolatrie, or
breadworship, as some mistaking counterfoot works of old writers for genuin^
have imagined. The corrupting of the doctrine, with the opinion of the real
presence, the receiving in at the mouth from the hands of the priest, and many
other superstitious conceats, together with the worshipping of images, brought
in kneeling. But it was ever idolatrous from the first beginning and birth of
it, and can not possibly be purged of idolatry.

FINIS.
OF FESTIVAL DAYS.
THE observation of festival days has been rejected by our kirk, from the
beginning of the^^ reformation, in the explication of the first head of the
first book of discipline, in the assembly holden anno 1566. where the latter
confession of Helvetia was approved, but with special exception against these
same days which are now urged. In the assembly holden anno 1575. the
assembling of the people to preaching and prayers, upon festival days w^^
censured. An article was likewise formed to be presented to the Regent,
craving, that all days heretofore kept holy in time of papistrie besides the
Lords day, be abolished, and that a civil penalty be inflicted upon the
observers.

By ordinance of the assembly, in Aprile 1577. Ministers were to be
admonished, not to preach or minister the communion at Easter or Christmas, or
other like superstitious times, or readers to read, under the pain of
deprivation. The pulpits have founded from time to time, against all show of
observing these days. But at the pretended and null assembly, holden at Perth,
a number not having power to vote, presumed to bring in a contrare practice.

Our first reason against these holy festivities, God has only power to
sanctify a day, and make it holy, that is, to separate it from commoun use to
holy exercises yearly. God has given liberty to man to work sex days. No man
ought to be compelled to keep them holy, but when GOD himself makes
exception, as he did by the yoke of some anniversarie days by the law.

The second reason, None appointed holy festivities under the law, when the
times were more ceremonious, but God himself. The days of Purim were called
simply the days of Purim, not the holy days of Purim, or feast of Purim. No
peculiar sacrifice was appointed, nor any holy convocation of the people
injoined. The ordinance required but fasting, joy, and sending of portions to
other. The memorial days of the dedication were called the days of
dedication, not the feast of dedication. They were not holy days, or festival
solemnities, consisting of Hookers three elements, praises set forth with
cheerful alacrity of mind, delight expressed by charitable largeness, more
then commoun bounty; and sequestration from ordinary works. The times were
corrupt, when these days were appointed. As for Christ's conference in the
porch of the temple, in the days of dedication, it proves not that he
honored that feast, as they call it, with his presence, only the circumstance
of time is pointed at, when Christ had this conference. Christ come up to the
feast of the tabernacles before, and stayed in Jerusalem. In the mean time the
days of dedication fell forth, and he went away immediately after his
conference.

The third reason, Neither Christ nor his apostles appointed festival days to
be observed by Christians, but rather inhibited the observation of them, and
changed only the old sabbath into the first day of the week. The anniversarie
solemnities were not changed, but altogether abrogated. The apostle having
occasion to teach upon this subject, condemns observation of days
ceremonial, or of ceremonial nature. They were a rudimentarie instruction of
old, which beseems not the state of a Christian kirk, and clear light of the
Gospel. Yea, the very days of Purim, and the days of dedication were of a
ceremonial nature, says Doctor Mortoun in his defense, page 64. To celebrate
the memory of a particular act of Christ, at a set time in the year, with
cessation from work, sermons, gospels, epistles, collects, and hymns belonging
thereto, with joy and gladness, without admitting a fast at any time, is not to
observe a day morallie, but ceremoniallie. If there had been other festival
days, which might have been observed by Christians, the Apostle having so
fair occasion, when he was treating of the observation of days, he would not
have spoken so generally, but directed Christians to the observing of these. If
other days had been dedicat to Christ then the Lords day, they should all have
been called the Lords days, but the scripture makes mention of one day,
called the Lords day. Socrates in his history says, He is of the opinion,
that as many other things crept in of custom in sundry places, so did the
feast of Easter prevail among all people of a certain private custom and
observation. If the Apostles had appointed it, they had agreed upon the day,
seeing they were directed infalliblie by the Spirit.

Our fourth reason, If it had been the will of God, that the several acts of
Christ should have been celebrated with several solemnities, the holy Ghost
would have made known the day of his nativitie, circumcision, presenting to the
temple, baptism, transfiguration, and the like. But it is confessed, that the
day of Christ's nativitie, and consequently of the rest depending thereupon, are
hid from mortal men. And this is sufficient to declare the will of God
concerning other notable acts, which were known, that not the act or action
upon such day makes a day holy, but divine institution. No man denies but the
nativitie of Christ should be remembered, and so it is, whersoever the gospel is
preached. But we deny that the memory of it must be celebrated with the
solemnity of a festival day, with cessation from work, feasting or
forbearance of fasting, and a proper service.

Our fifth reason, Suppose observing of holy days had been at the first a
matter indifferent, yet seeing they have been abused, and polluted with
superstition, they ought to be abolished. And therefore Zanchius approves them
who have abolished all other days, but the Lords day. Sure it is, that in
former times holy days have been abused, not only with licentious ravelling
and surfitting, but also with the opinion of worship and merit, and a Judicial
conceat, that the devil is not so bold to tempt men on these days, as at other
times. Suppose observation were free of these abuses, yet it may degener after
the same manner, as before: but the observation is not, nor can not be free of
abuse and superstition. They say, they esteem them not holier then other
days, but only keep them for order and policy, that the people may be
assembled to religious exercises, and instructed in the mysteries of religion.
But both are false. The papist confess themselves, that one day is not holier
then an other, in the own nature, no not the Lords day, but in respect of the
use and end: And so do our formalists esteem our festival days holier then
other days, and call them holy days. And as for worship, If the observing of
a day holy, for the honoring of a Saint, be a worshipping of the Saint, the
observing of a day to the honor of Christ cannot be without opinion of
worship. They are called mystical days, and appointed for the solemnity of
some mystery of religion, and are ordered according to the known and supposed
times, when such things fell forth, to wit, Christ's nativitie, passion,
ascension, etc. If only for order or policy, wherefore is there but one day
between the passion and the resurrection, forty days between the
resurrection and ascension, and then again, but ten betwixt the ascension and
whitsonday. May not, and are not Christians instructed in the mysteries of
religion, without the solemnities of days, and appropriation of service to
them, after the Jewish manner? Do we not appropriate to the day of Christ's
nativitie a peculiar kind of service, of epistles; gospels, collects, hymns,
homilies, belonging to Christ's nativitie, and think it absurd to perform the
like service upon any other day, with cessation from work. To observe days
after this manner, is not like the appointing of hours for preaching, or
prayers on week days, or times for celebrating the comunion, according to the
policy set down by every particular congregation. We use time then only as a
circumstance, and for order, and do not appropriate these divine exercises to
these times. Howbeit Christ rose upon the Lords day yet was it not appointed to
be observed after the Jewish manner of observation of their festivals, for then
every Lords day, the matter of sermons, collects, hymns, gospels, etc. should
have been only Christ's resurrection. But ye see the use and end is moral and
general, for the instruction of the people of God in all mysteries of religion.

FINIS.
A passage of Master William Covvper pretended bishop of Gallovvay, his sermon
delivered before the Estates, anno 1606. at which time he was Minister at
Perth. On 2 Corinthians. 6.3.4.
AS to the giving of offenses, our Savior has forewarned us, that there will
be offenses, but he has pronounced a fearful woe upon them by whom offenses
come, It were better, says our Savior, that a milestone were put about his
neck and he cast in the midst of the sea. And by the law of Moses he was
accursed, that laid a stumbling block before the blind. The equity of that
law yet remains under the gospel, binding the Christian, that no man put an
occasion to fall, or a stumbling block before his brethren, but most of al a
Christian preacher, his office is to edify others in the most holy faith, and
to strengthen the brethren, he being converted himself. It should therefore be
far from him, to give any that are weak an occasion to stumble and fall:
generally he may do it by his evil life, for hardly can weak ones believe
that the religion is good, where the life is evil: yea, by it they take
occasion to blaspheme the truth of God, and to speak evil of his name. A
preacher is compared by our Savior to a candle, to shine to others; and
again, to the salt of the earth, that should season others. A candle once
lighted, if it dies out, smells worse then if it had never been lighted,
and salt that is made by concoction of salt matters, if again it return into
water, becomes more unsavorie, and unpleasant to the taste then any other
water: so, a preacher once separate by God, chosen out from the world, and
entered into a holy calling, if again he return to be a worldling, if in his
life he become profane, and suffer the light that is in him become darkness,
falling away from his first love, of all the men in the world he becomes the
greatest offense, and the latter end of that man shall be worse then his
beginning. These are the words I spoke the last time, wherewith ye were
offended, and now I repeat them, that others may see no cause of offense is in
them. More specially a preacher gives offense, by doing any of these two
things: First, when a preacher of greater gifts and knowledge, howsoever he do
it of a good intention, draws on a weaker brother to follow him in a cause
wherein he has not a warrant from God. A notable example whereof we have 2
King. 13. where a prophet of Judah being sent to Bethel, to denounce the
judgments of God against Jeroboam, for his idolatry, was commanded neither to
eat nor drink in Bethel. Jeroboam could not beguile him, for he gave the king
this answer, If thou would give me the half of thy house, I would not goin with
thee, nor eat bread; nor drink water in this place, for so I was charged by the
word of the Lord. But an old prophet deceived him, saying, I am also a prophet
as well as thou art, and an angel of God commanded me to bring thee into my
house, and cause thee eat bread. Thus the authority, the age, the pretended
light of an other prophet draws either prophets in an evil course, whereunto
otherwise they would not be easily induced. Hereby we that are of mean
gifts in the ministry are admonished, never to depart from that immediate
warrant of doingin our calling: we have of the word of God, for any mediat
warrant brought out of the promptuarie of man's wit, suppose it were covered
with never so fair pretenses: yea suppose an angel would come from heaven, and
bring an other doctrine then that which is delivered us in the word, we are
not to credit him, far less an earthly man that speaks, but contrariwise to
hold him accursed.

The other thing wherein the preacher may give offense, is, if he alter or
change in any point of his calling, either in doctrine or discipline, departing
from that which once he maintained. This rule is given us by the apostle, Gal.
2.18. If I build again these things I have destroyed, I make my self a
transgressour. This is a rule by which ye can not refuse to be tried, and which
necessarly binds you to stand to that truth of doctrine and discipline ye have
once embraced, unless ye would be found trespassers, and such as give just
cause of offense that our ministry should be reprehended. If ye have any new
light ye had not before, communicate to other brethren, that we also may follow
you. If not, I beseech you walk not in that course, wherein the light of GOD
does not allow you.

FINIS.

