The Complete CAPTAIN, OR, An Abbridgement of CESARS wars, with observations
upon them; Together With a collection of the order of the Militia of the
Ancients; and A particular Treatise of modern war: Written By the late great
General the Duke of Rohan:

Englished by J. C.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by ROGER DANIEL: Printer to the University: And are to be
sold at the Angel in Popes-head-alley in London. 1640.

April 24. 1640.
Imprimatur per Typographum Academiae Cantabrigiensis,

Jo. Cousin, Procan.

To his worthy friend Captain Cruso upon his excellent translation of the Duke
of Rohan's Le parfaict Captain.
CAesar, whose brain contrived at once the fate
Of his great self and of the Roman State,
With mighty action caused, where-ere he stood,
The trembling place to sweat forth humane blood.
Who tamed rebellion so, as in that sin
His own contrivance had the traitor bin.
How nimble-ear'd! and with what piercing sight
He could discern advantage! and then fight.
Cold, waves, winds, hunger, watching, labor, war
Were accidents through which he often did dare.
How patient for his ends! How quickly he
Unthought of could defeat his enemy!
Whose expedition, as an engine hurled
Him from one side to the other of the world;
Whose way of victory begot the fame,
That he but went, and saw, and overcame.
Dark stratageme, quick action, and the all
Of him built up a mighty General.
And to make wonder gaze more, he could be
The Historiographer and the History:
As if his mighty acts to vanquish men
Had been on purpose done to try his pen.
Oblivion so threw dust upon what he
Most fairly wrote unto posterity.
And thou, brave man at arms, great Roan, have taken
His lively portraict out of Mars his fane,
And armed thy self by him: yea, shown to all,
Thou knew'st to write, and be a General.
See with what art the Chemist deals, and how
Spirits from bodies he extracts, so thou.
How smart he gives his stratagemes, and where
Their hidden virtue lies he makes appear!
Mark with how curious hand he those does try
And fit unto our times, and so apply.
The Grecian tacticks Caesar brought to Rome,
And this brave Duke to us, as from their tomb.
What weapons and what forms may fit again
He well revives which seemed before but vain.
If ever Pythagoras were right to hold
A transmigration, he does it unfold.
But view his own directions, quick and wise;
He makes towns strong, but strangely does surprise:
He rouzeth lazy minds, and seems to write
Men into field, and teach them how to fight.
Mirror of manhood, that art here, though gone;
Then Virtues self a better tomb there is none.
And Thou, my Friend, that freely do discover
So rich a jewel, and have brought it over,
Merit'st no mean applause. Me thinks, I see
Each noble mind admire thy industry,
And cherish thy rare worth; since few there are
That for the public undergo such care.
Mount still in thy endeavors, and shine bright:
His glorie's great that lends to others light.
To the right worshipful, Sir John Hobart Knight and Baronnet, Sir Thomas
Woodhous Knight and Baronnet, Sir John Holland Baronnet, Sir Hamon le Strange
Knight, Sir Edward Waldgrave Knight, Sir Charles le Gros Knight, Sir Robert
Kemp Knight, Deputy Lieutenants of Norfolk and Norwich; And Clement Corbet,
Doctor of the Civil law, Chancellor, and Deputy Lieutenant of Norwich.

Right Worshipful,
A Great book is a great mischief (as it is in the Greek Adagie) and therefore
it was well said of Seneca, Magni artificis est clausisse multum in exiguo.
Such an Artist the late great General the Duke of Rohan has here proved
himself, in his excellent abbridgement of Cesars wars, with his own
observations upon them; and his Militia of the Greeks and Romans. His work is
like fruits which are dried in the sun; contracted to a small bulk, but full
of substance and virtue. The transcendency thereof moved me to communicate it
to our Nation in these times of action. May it please you to afford it your
Patronage, and to accept it as a testimony of all due respects from

Your most humble Servant, J. C.

The complete Captain, OR An Abbridgement of Cesars wars. The I. Book.
CAESAR having the government of the Gauls for the space of five years, the
first war that he made there was against the Suisses, Helvetii.
caused by the ambition of Orgetorix, who was a rich, noble and powerful man
in that Nation: He persuaded this people (which were hardy by nature, and
exercised in arms by the wars which they had with their neighbors) to
enlarge themselves into Gallia, a country more spacious and better then their
own. For this effect (resolution being taken) they take three years space to
make their preparations: In which time they furnish themselves with wagons and
horses of burden, taking order that all their country be employed to all sorts
of grain to make their provision of victual, and name Orgetorix to be their
General and Conductour, who for his part imployeth that time in fortifying
himself by the assistance of his neighbors, Sequanus.
persuades Casticus a Burgundian to make himself Lord of his country as his
father had been, Aeduus.
draws in Dumnorix of Autun, brother to Divitiacus to the same design, the
most powerful man of his city, and gives him his daughter in marriage. But
the Suisses, being ever jealous of their liberty, and perceiving that
Orgetorix aspired to bring them under subjection, seized on his person; and
during the contestations about his trial (having a great train of kinsfolks
and partakers) he died in prison. This abated not the design of this people;
which on their appointed day having taken as much victual as would serve them
for three months, burnt the rest of their corn, and all their cities to the
number of twelve, and 4. hundred villages, and having persuaded those of Basil,
Rauraci. Tulingi. Latobrici.
Distalingen, and Clacky, their neighbors, to do the like, they depart and
march toward Geneva, there to pass the Rhosne. Caesar having intelligence
thereof goes speedily to Geneva, assembleth what forces he can, causes a
bridge to be broken down which lay upon the Rhosne, Rhodanus.
and makes a ditch and rampire of eighteen miles long from the lake of Geneva
to the hill Jura, to hinder their passage over the Rhosne. Which the Suisses
understanding send deputies to him to desire passage: he holds them in
suspense, and promises them answer at another time; mean while he prepares to
hinder them: and they (after refusal, and having attempted the passage in
vain) take their way through Burgundy which Dumnorix procured for them. Which
Caesar observing, leaves Labienus at Geneva, goes and levieth new Legions,
follows them, and lighting upon them at the passage of the Saosne defeateth
the fourth part of their troops, Arrar.
which were not as yet passed over. After that, he makes a bridge over the
river, and pursues them: but his victual beginning to fall short, and
perceiving that Dumnorix hindered those of Autun from affording him such
provisions as they had promised, he acquainteth Divitiacus with it, being his
great friend and brother to Dumnorix; who confesses it, intercedeth for him,
and obteineth his pardon. After that, having learned that the Suisses were
encamped at the foot of a hill, he causes it to be viewed, and finding it to
be of easy access, he sends Labienus thither (causing him to march all
night) to gain the top of the hill: and in the morning, having put his forces
into battalia, he dispatcheth Considius to discover; who, having taken the
allarm of Labienus, returns to Caesar that the enemy had seized the top of the
hill, which stayed him that day from defeating the Suisses. The day following
he takes the way of Beaulne to distribute corn to his army: which the Suisses
perceiving, Bibracte.
follow him. Caesar seeing them coming possesses himself of a hill,
embattelleth his army about the middle of the descent, and on the top he
quartereth two new levied legions and all the baggage, alighteth and sends
away his horse, and causes all the rest to do the like, to show them that they
must overcome or die. The Suisses charge him; he defeateth them and pursues
them hotly, forbids those of Langres to assist them with victual, Lingones.
and in the end constrains them to submit to his discretion: He disarmeth
them, receives hostages, and forces them to return to inhabit their country,
and reedifie their houses. And of three hundred sixty eight thousand persons
(whereof there were ninety two thousand bearing arms) there returned in all
but an hundred and ten thousand.

Observations.
THe resolution of this people, which seems to be barbarous, and which for
the bad success is universally condemned, has nevertheless the same
principles which all Conquerours have, namely, the desire of command and
enlarging themselves: and they are remarkable in their forecast of three years
preparation, in their constancy for not deficting from their design after the
death of their General; and in the execution thereof, burning their goods and
houses to the end they might leave themselves no hope of safety, but only in
the sharpness of their swords. Whence we may gather, that we ought not to
undertake any great design timorously, nor to look to the means of escape but
rather of overcoming. For if in the beginning of a dangerous design you make
known a way of escape, the impatience or natural timorousness of men makes
them find out that way upon the least accident that befalls. And if the
Suisses had not met with the incomparable virtue of Caesar, who by his valor,
industry, diligence and good fortune stayed their fury, they might have
atteined the scope of their enterprises.

In the managing of his war Caesar has showed (as in all other) that that
which has made him fortunate in his exploits has principally been his
invariable order of encamping strongly, always entrenching himself, that so he
might never be compelled to fight but when he pleased, and that he might lay
hold on such occasions as offered themselves to defeat his enemies; also his
providence in taking care that his provision of victual failed not; and his
continual keeping of his soldiers in exercise and in breath, to make them
able to execute his designs readily and in good order.

The pardon of Dumnorix is observable: his natural clemency induced him to it,
suffering himself to be overcome by the entreaties of his brother Divitiacus
whom he loved: Nevertheless he caused heed to be taken to his deportments,
that so he might receive no new inconveniences by him afterward.

The error of Considius shows how much it concerns to send men of
experience to discover an army: And the commanding of the Suisses to return and
reinhabite their country was an act of prudence, thereby hindering the
Germans (being a most powerful nation) from preoccupation thereof, and by
that means their neighborhood to Provence.

The second war.
THe subject of the second war was this: The division of the Auvergnats and
Autunois puissant people in Gallia had called in the Germans, Averni and Aedui.
by the help of which the first had overcome the other; nevertheless they all
found themselves oppressed, and the conquerours much more then the conquered:
for these were discharged for some tribute and hostages, and from the other the
Germans took away the greatest part of their lands, insomuch that all seeing
themselves subdued, they hold an assembly of States by the permission of Caesar
to desire his aid, which he promises. But having sent to Ariovistus, the
General of the Germans, to this end, he received replies so insolent, that at
last they fell fowl; where Caesar defeated him, and chaced both him and all the
Germans out of Gallia, forcing them to pass the Rhine again.

These two wars were finished in one summer.

Observations.
Whereby we may observe how dangerous such auxiliarie succors are, especially
when you require them of a people more powerful then your own. Caesar has
indeed driven out Ariovistus, but the Gauls have done nothing but changed
master. He embarked himself in this war for two reasons: the first, because be
suspected that this puissant nation, taking footing in Gallia, might come to
gain upon Provence, and so draw near to Italy; and the other, that thereby he
insinuated himself insensibly into the conquest of the said Gauls. Which
business he managed so dexterously by enterteining their divisions amongst
them, that by the aid of the one he conquered the other, and in the end subdued
all.

We must further observe his diligence (so much recommended in all his actions)
to possess himself of Besancon, having prevented his enemies, and by this
means provided for the nourishment of his army. There it was that a panike
fear seized upon his soldiers, which began by the volunteers: who desiring to
depart discouraged the rest, that so they might cover their own shame by the
general delinquencie of the army: which is a most dangerous thing, and
whereof a General of an army ought to take extraordinary care, never to hazard
any battle until he has recovered his soldiers spirits again; which Caesar
did at this time by making an oration to them, wherein he excelled. He further
helped himself (as many other commanders, especially Marius) by encamping
strongly before this terrible army, and making his soldiers know by small
skirmishes that their enemies were not invincible nor more valiant then
themselves; and causing them to conceive that joining order and military
discipline to the prudence of their General, they were their superiors. For
the Romans have never conquered other nations by their great number, nor by
their valor, but by their knowledge in war, (which they always exercised)
by the observation of their order, and entrenchment of their camp. Whereupon we
must consider that Ariovistus being encamped between Caesar and the place from
whence he had his victual, and that Caesar not being able to draw him to battle
in five days, after that he had well fortified that camp be goes with all his
army in battaglia to fortify a small one, in a place of advantage, two miles
distant from the first, and which favored the way for his victual, making the
third part of his army to work whilst the other two thirds stood in battaglia,
which repulsed the troops which Ariovistus sent to hinder the said
fortification: which being made he leaves two legions there, and leads away
the rest into his old camp. The next day Caesar puts himself into battaglia
between the two camps, but being retired, Ariovistus assaulteth the small one,
and is repulsed. Caesar having thus reconfirmed the courages of his soldiers,
sallieth out with his whole army in battaglia, and goes up to the very
trenches of Ariovistus, provokes him to fight; who sallieth out, and is
defeated.

The third war. The II. Book.
CEsars third war was against the Belgae, the third part of Gallia, and at
that time the most warlike. The principal causes were, that, seeing the rest
of the Gauls in peace with the Romans, they feared an assault; besides they
were solicited by certain Gauls discontented, or ambitious: the one of which
took as little pleasure to see the Romans as Germans in their country; and
the other apprehensive that during their abode they should not be able to
possess themselves of any principality or dominion. The number of their
forces amounted to two hundred eighty and one thousand fighting men. Caesar,
having understood these great preparations, Bellouaci.
causes those of Beauvais to be assailed by Divitiacus and those of Autun; and
being assured of those of Rhems, which declared themselves for him, he goes
and encampeth upon the river Daisne near to Soissons, relieveth Brenne, Axona.
Suessones. Bibrax.
and (the enemy attempting to pass that river) he opposes and kills a great
number of them. After that, victual growing short for so great an army, and
they of Beauvais understanding that Divitiacus harried their country, they
resolved to return every man to his own home, and be in a readiness to relieve
the first that should be assaulted: But they retreated in such disorder, that
Caesar had leisure to overtake them; who charging on the rear, routed them,
where he made a great massacre; Noviodunum.
and in pursuit of them he besieges and takes Noyon. All these submitted,
except they of Tournay, Nervii.
esteemed the most valiant of al; who having disposed of their old men, women,
and children, resolved to defend themselves. Caesar goes to them: who assault
him so furiously as he was going to his quarters, that they had like to have
defeated him: so that he confessed, that in this conflict his good fortune had
equal share with his valor and industry. Nevertheless he defeated them,
after which he finds no more resistance; the renown of whose victories made
him dreadful even as far as Germany, and gained him all Normandy and
Bretain, which Publius Crassus one of his Lieutenants subjected to the Romans
with only one Legion.

Observations.
WE must here observe the judgment of Caesar, who by his diligence assured
himself of those of Rhems, by his industry and affability held them
faithful, and by his foresight prepared a diversion against those of Beauvois,
(a bold and stout people) which redounded much to his profit. Further it is to
be considered that an army of thirty or forty thousand men trained and well
disciplined, is able (with patience well intrenching and encamping it self) to
discomfit the most numerous armies, which for want of victual destroy
themselves; and if they fight (provided that you avoid being surrounded on all
parts) their disorders and confusion will also break them. The wars of the
Romans do prove this true; who have never defeated their enemies but with
lesser number; nor were ever forced to sallie out of their retrenched camp, to
give battle against their wills: and particularly this present, wherein Caesar
has had more to do against one Province ^lone of the Belgae then against all
the rest together, having very particularly described the battle which he had
against those of Tournay, as one of the most dangerous which he ever had;
wherein there be diverse things worthy consideration.

The first, That those of Tournay being advertised that Caesar caused every
Legion to march with its baggage after it, they resolved to lay an Embuscado
and to fight with them, truly judging that the baggage separating the Legions
in an enclosed country, they should not be able to relieve each other, and
that otherwise they might (with all their forces) set upon each Legion apart.

The second, That they found themselves deceived in their presupposition;
because that though Caesar commanded his army to march so in a country of
security for the commodiousnesse thereof; nevertheless when he was in a
suspected country, he caused six Legions to march together, then all the
baggage, and in the rear of that two Legions newly levied. And it was in this
order, and upon his encamping, when they charged him.

The third is the confession of Caesar: who freely acknowledges that his army
was assaulted so unexspectedly and courageously, and in a country so enclosed,
that it was neither his customary order which saved him (for he had no leisure
to embattel) nor his exhortations, nor his appearance in all parts (for he was
forced to fight in the place he then was in) but he attributed the safety
thereof only to the continued discipline of his soldiers, which knew of
themselves to range where they ought, and to that that he ever made all his
officers exactly observe the performance of their duties, whilst the
intrenchment of the camp was a making; so that in all parts were found some
ready to command, and others to obey; which made good the resistance, and
hindered the affrightment.

The fourth, That a rash resolution is oftentimes to be feared; and to avoid
it, must never be omitted whatsoever depends on military discipline.

And the fifth, That the treason which those of Bolduc (whom he had besieged in
the best of their fortresses) would have committed against him after they had
yielded themselves, Aduatici.
should teach us that we should always distrust an enemy, and keep our selves
so much the more upon our guards, the nearer we are to overcome.

The fourth war. The III. Book.
THe first exploit of arms was against Servius Galba one of Cesars Lieutenants,
who having sent him with a Legion and some horse into the countries of Aelen,
Antuates. Veragri. Seduni. Allobroges Lacus Lemanus.
Valias, and Sion (which extends from Savoy to the lake of Geneva) to assure
the traffic of merchants, after some successful combats, made peace with
that people, received their hostages, and having left two companies in the
country of Aelen, he goes with the rest of the Legion to quarter at the town
of Martanach situated in a valley, Octodurus.
and divided into two by a little river called the Branse: on the one side
whereof he intrencheth his camp, and on the other he quartereth the Gauls which
were with him. The small number of soldiers which he had in his camp (as yet
not in good defense) emboldned those people to revolt; hoping that they should
at the first assault defeat him. For it was insupportable unto them that he
should have their children in hostage: and they feared also that the Romans
would annex those places to Provence, which was near at hand. So that he saw
himself assaulted on all parts, before he had leisure to understand the danger
he was in; and finding his affairs in great extremity, having neither victual
to subsist nor men to make a long resistance, despair made him follow the
counsel of Publ us Sextius Baculus first Centurion of that Cohort, Tribunus.
and of Caius Volusenus Colonel of a thousand men, which was to sally out from
all parts upon the enemy: which they did so violently, that they which thought
they were not able to defend themselves in their trenches defeated them in open
field. That done, he makes use of their discomfiture to retire his Legion into
a place of safety.

But the occasion of the fourth war was this. Publius Crassus one of Cesars
Lieutenants having sent diverse Tribunes to make provision of corn necessary for
the feeding of his army, into the countries of Perch, Cornoaille, and Vannes;
Vaelli. Curiosilitae. Veneti.
they retained them contrary to public faith, in hope thereby to recover their
hostages. By this example their neighbors did the like, and all sent word to
Crassus that they would not deliver them up unless he restored their hostages.
Caesar, having heard of this combination, prepares diligently for a war,
truly considering that if he suffered this he should open a gap to a general
revolt; for he well knew the readiness of the French to take arms, loving
their liberty and abhorring servitude. He provideth in the first place to
hinder the increasing of the league; to this end he sends Labienus into the
country of Triers with the cavalrie, Trevori.
giving him order to visit those of Rhems and the Belgae; Aquitania.
Publius Crassus into Gascongne with 12 Legionarie ensigns, and good store of
horse; Quintus Titurius Sabinus with 3. Legions into Perch, Allencon, and
Lysieux; Lexobii.
gives the command at sea to D. Brutus, and himself with the landforces
resolves to charge those of Vannes, the chief cause of this war. Their
country is maritime, of difficult approach, and strong in shipping; insomuch
that when with much labor he had brought a place to the extremity of being
taken, the inhabitants embarked themselves with their goods, and removed to
another: so that what he did was little worth, until his navy being arrived
he gave them battle, and defeated them: after which they yielded themselves to
Caesar, who put to death all the Senate, and caused the people to be sold. At
the same time the Lieutenants which Caesar had distributed amongst the Gauls had
their hands full: Q. Titurius Sabinus was set upon by Viridonix, commander of
several nations, with strong forces; but by his patience and subtlety he drew
him on to assault him in his camp, and overcame him; which reassured all that
country. P. Crassus on the Guyenne side defeated the Sontiates, besieging them
in their city, and took it. After capitulation Adcantuannus their Governor
made a sally with six hundred of his trustiest soldiers, and attempteth to
master the Roman camp; but being repulsed, Crassus nevertheless holds
himself to the capitulation before agreed upon. During the time of this siege
the people of Spain and Gascongne about the Pyrenean hills make a league
together, and choose their commanders out of those Captains which had been
trained under Sertorius, Crassus assaulteth them: they entrench and cut off his
victual, in so much that he is constrained to fight with them within their
trenches, wherein (as good luck served) he found some defect, by means of which
he defeated them. This victory caused all that people to submit. Caesar seeing
none in arms but only those of Terovenne and Gueldres, Mori^i. Menapii.
though the summer were far spent, marches thither; where he finds a new
way of warring, the people holding themselves within, he goes to find them
out, and being near approached, as he was fortifying his camp they assaulted
him, and were repulsed: after which, Caesar advances into the forest it self,
causes the trees to be cut down, and made use of them in stead of a rampart;
and by an incredible labor and diligence he was already advanced to the place
where they kept all their cattle and last baggage; but the season grew so
stormy and wet that he was constrained to draw his army into their
winter-garrison.

Observations.
SO ended this war: where we will observe first the profitablenesse of the
intrenchments of camps, which in entire countries serve for a bridle, as
citadels to cities; the Romans having never been able to have held so many
conquered States under their obedience, but only by that means: For armies
garrisoned in sever all towns may by being so separated be defeated totally, or
in part, by conspiracy; besides, the delicacies of cities do overthrow all
military discipline, and abase all generous courage. Howsoever if there be
more fortresses then can well be maintained, you must demolish them, to the end
that nothing may be able to resist the army: which being always in an entire
body, opposes it self against all combinings of conspiratours; it being most
certain, that not only for the keeping reliefs out of a conquered Province,
but also for the conservation of your country against greater forces then your
own (giving order that there be no want of victual) it is to be done by
intrenching strongly: for whosoever puts himself wholly upon the defensive,
and shuts himself up in walled towns, must in time necessarily perish,
unless he receives foreign reliefs: for that by two or three years spoil of
the increase of the champains the cities must of necessity starve, and thereby
know your inabilitie to preserve them; so that they will rather yield to your
enemy then perish.

In the second place we will consider how Crassus was put to it, when he had to
do with commanders which had been trained under Sertorius, and which (according
to the custom of the Romans) could make benefit of the advantage of grounds,
fortify their camp, and cut off their enemies victual: for by such a manner
of warring they had brought the said Crassus to such a pass that he was
constrained to assault their camp; which albeit he forced (whether by having
better soldiers, or by finding some part of it ill fortified) yet it is
certain that he undertook that task out of despair rather then judgment, as
being in danger to perish for want of victuals.

We will further observe that Caesar in all these actions by no diversity of
making war was ever astonished, whether he were assaulted in open field or in
his camp, whether surprised, or whether his enemy retired into places
inaccessible; always finding them out in all places, and that without omitting
one only point of military discipline. For though our enemies sometime do
actions which have show of fear, the better to circumvent us; yet must we not
therefore disesteem them: no profession being like to that of a soldier,
wherein one fault can never be repaired, and wherein one hour causes the
loss of that reputation which has been thirty years acquiring.

To conclude this discourse I will only add this, That the cruelty which
Caesar used toward those of Vannes ought not to blemish his clemency
manifested in the whole course of his life; but we must rather believe that he
forced his disposition in this severe action to chastise the violatours of the
law of nations, in that they imprisoned those which (under promise of safety)
went to negotiate with them; and also to give a terror to all that people so
subject to revolt, by letting them taste the sweetness of a mild government
while they kept within the lists of obedience, and by using them rigourously
when they departed from it.

The fifth war. The IV. Book.
THe Germans of Francfort and Hessen, Usipetes. Tenchtheri
to the number of four hundred thousand souls, finding themselves persecuted
by the Suevians (the most puissant and hardy people of Germany) abandon their
native homes; and after, wandering through diverse countries, they approach the
Rhine about the Provinces of Gueldres and Gulick: out of which they drive the
inhabitants, and possess themselves of their territories on both sides of the
river. Caesar (which knew the humor of the French to be turbulent and ready to
shake off the yoke of servitude) resolved not to suffer the Germans to settle
themselves on this side the Rhine. And though he well perceived that they had
begun a treaty with them, he dissembled it, and (anticipating the time which
formerly he used for his going into the field) hastneth directly to fight with
the foresaid Germans: Which (being astonished at this diligence) send
Ambassadors to him to treat of peace. He gives them fair audience and
courteous answer, but holds on his march still toward them: at last they
come to accord, conditioning with Caesar to remain where he was three days; he
grants them one: whereupon his cavalrie (to the number of five thousand)
advancing to forage, encountreth with eight hundred Germane horse; which
charge them bravely, rout them, and chase them even to the Roman camp: but the
next day sending all their principal commanders to Caesar to excuse this
action, and to make appear unto him that it was by mere accident. He reteineth
them prisoners, marches with his army toward the Germans, surpriseth them,
and cutteth them all in pieces. Which done he makes a bridge over the Rhine,
goes into Germany, relieveth the city of Cullen, Ubii, or Colonia Agrippina.
grants peace to such as would deliver hostages, burns and wastes the
rest, and at the end of eighteen days breaks down his bridge and returns
into France.

Observations.
WE must here observe Cesars wise conduct, who by his ready and unexpected
march dissolved the practices which were in agitation between the Germans and
Gauls; by his dissimulation toward the Gauls (pretending not to know their
plottings, and testifying his confidence of them) held them in fair quarter and
hindered them from precipitating themselves into a league with the Germans; by
his industry delayed them by treaties, whilst he still marched toward them;
and when occasion served took his advantage to take them in disorder and
destitute of commanders, making them believe they had first broke the treaty.

Next we must consider, that upon the fame of this great defeat he caused the
Roman Eagles to fly on the other side of the Rhine, to strike a terror into
the Germans, and be a means to retein them for the future from further
attempting: Besides, he would not pass over the Rhine by boats, as a thing too
full of hazard, but he made a bridge, which he caused to be fortified and
guarded on both sides of the river: neither stayed be longer in that country
then was necessary for the reputation of his army; and at his return brake
down his bridge, taking away by that course the means from the Germans of
making use thereof.

I add further, that the defeat of five thousand Roman horse, by eight
hundred of the Germane cavalrie, and the day after, the defeat of four hundred
thousand Germans by thirty or forty thousand Romans, shows plainly that
it is not the natural valor of one nation above another, nor the greater
number above the smaller, which gives the conquest; but the exact observation
of military discipline, and the continual exercise of arms: which instructs
men not only to fight well, but also to take advantages, and to know when to
fight and when not.

The sixth war.
CEsars sixth war was against the Britains, because the inhabitants of that
Island did oftentimes assist the French against him. To this end he enquireth
of merchants which trafficked there, what nations did inhabit it, what their
manner of warring, under what laws they lived, and which were their best
havens. Then he dispatched C. Volusenus to discover the coast: Then sent for
his shipping, which he had used in his war against those of Vannes, and
prepared all things necessary for his design. The noise of this preparation
gave occasion to many cities of Britain to send Ambassadors to him, to promise
obedience, and to offer him hostages; which he returned with fair language, and
with them Comius (whom he had made king of Arras) under which pretext he might
the better discover the country: Nevertheless, Atrebates.
Comius, not daring to trust himself amongst the Britains, stayed only five
days upon their coasts, and then returned to give an account of what he had
discovered. Mean time Caesar makes peace with those of Terovenne, Morini.
that so he might leave no war behind him, takes two Legions and part of his
cavalrie, sends the rest of his army into the country of Gueldres, Menapii.
under the command of Q. Titurius Sabinus, and Arunculeius Cotta, gives the
guard of the Port from whence he imbarqued unto P. Sulpitius Rufus, and puts
to sea. He arriveth safely upon the coast of Britain (with his Infanterie
only) which he finds all in arms; he attempteth to land there, where finding
too much difficulty, he goes and does it eight miles further, and yet not
without danger: Nevertheless he so affrighted the Britains that they sent to
him to desire peace. But a tempest arising, which battered many of his ships,
and drove a-ground all those which carried his horse, gave them new courage;
and in stead of giving him hostages, they armed all the country against him,
ill entreating one of his Legions which went to forage; which he relieveth,
and brings safely off. In these extremities Caesar takes care for the
repairing of his navy, for provision of victual, and for the securing of his
camp; and being again assailed by the inhabitants of the Island, he gives them
combat, and defeateth them: Which forces them afresh to desire peace: he
grants it, takes hostages of those that would readily deliver them, and
carries back his army into Gallia safe and sound; only two ships with
three hundred soldiers, which landed a little lower, were set upon by those of
Teraenne; which Caesar being informed of, hastneth thither with his cavalrie,
rescueth them, and defeateth the enemies.

Observations.
IT is to be observed, that to begin a war in autumn, without apparent
advantage, in a country undiscovered, not having any intelligence there, and
the Ocean to pass, is an enterprise (in my opinion) well worthy the invincible
courage of Caesar, but not of his accustomed prudence. Nevertheless, this
escape must be attributed to his good fortune, which he had subjected to his
will. For in this design, where it seemed that men and elements were conjured
against him, the earth refusing him victual, the sea battering his ships, the
air furnishing tempests, and the country where he landed conspiring his ruin,
he constantly resisted all this; opposing against famine his providence of
making provis^^n for his army; against the wracks of the sea, his diligence in
repairing his vessels; against the assaults of his enemies, his armies to
resist them, insomuch that he constrained them to beg for peace: and so he
returned gloriously from a bad country, where any else would have suffered
extremely. Let us also consider, that before he departed from France he took
care to provide what was necessary to keep it in obedience, and for the
security of his return. Let us further note, how abundant Caesar was in his
inventions, for the advantageous taking of his time, in the very occasion it
self: for perceiving that his soldiers (not accustomed to sea fights) were
distracted at their landing* he (in the very action) changes his first order,
and with his galleys approaches nearer the coast, and in spite of his enemies
landeth; and they (seeing a kind of vessels they knew not) were affrighted, and
betook themselves to their heels. Also we ought to admire in Caesar two things
which he had to perfection, and which render a commander excellent; namely that
he forecast and provided for all things which might either further or hinder
this design before he undertook it; and that in the very execution be sailed
not to take his advantage when occasion presented it, or to remedy upon the
instant such unexpected accidents as befell; wherein he has been inimitable.

The seventh war. The V. Book.
Caesar not satisfied with his first voyage into Britain imployeth the winter to
cause such equipage to be prepared as was necessary for his passage thither
the second time, and according to his custom goes into Lombardy, from whence
(before his return) he passes into Sclavonia to quiet some seditions which
were there befallen: Illyricum.
afterward returns to his army, finds all in good order, commends every
man for their diligence in getting all things in readiness. But before his
departure he goes to Triers, a very powerful people, about a division fallen
between Induciomarus and Cingentorix, the two great men of the town: The last
comes to him and promises him all obedience: the other prepares for war;
nevertheless, fearing to be abandoned, yields himself; Caesar receives him,
but diminishes his authority, and augmenteth that of Cingentorix, whom he
believes best affected to him: which done, he continues his design, takes
along with him the principal men of Gallia in this war. Dumnorix of Autun
makes difficulties; Caesar presses him, he excuses himself; then attempts to
seduce the Gauls, at last he flies; Caesar sends after him, but refusing to
return, Iccius.
is slain. He imbarkt at Calice, where he left Labienus with three legions and
two thousand horse; he passes into Britain, and landeth without resistance: he
fortifieth a camp to guard his vessels, leaves Q. Atrius there, and passes
further; forces the camp of the Britains not far distant from thence. The
next day Atrius sends him word that the tempests had shattered the greater
part of his navy; he returns thither, imployeth ten whole days about
repairing them, draws them on shore, causes the camp to be well fortified,
commands Labienus to cause n^w ships to be built, then advances toward
Cassivellanus, declared General for the Britains, who dares not assail him but
when he goes to forage, which causes him to go strong and in good order; and
after he had trial of his manner of fight by some skirmishes, he defeated him
by C. Trebonius one of his Lieutenants, who went thither with three legions and
all the cavalry. After this defeat there appeared no more enemies in gross;
and Caesar, being come to the river Thames passes it at the only place where
it was fordable, in despite of the Britains, who endeavored to their utmost to
hinder him: which so astonished Cassivellanus, that all his care was to hide
himself in the woods; and seeing that diverse towns had yielded themselves to
Caesar, he also sent to him; who received him, giving hostages, imposing a
certain tribute upon the country. The^ seeing the season much spent, and
fearing some tumults in France, he repasseth the sea, bringing back his army
gloriously, which (contrary to his custom) he was constrained (by reason of
the barrenness of the year) to separate into diverse garrisons to keep it
alive. But before he could go into Italy, Ambiorix and Cativulcus instigated
by Induciomarus take arms, assail Sabinus and Cotta two of his Lieutenants,
defeat and kill them as they were removing from their camp; from thence they go
and assail Cicero in his camp, another of his Lieutenants, which defends
himself with much difficulty; Caesar relieveth him, and defeateth the Gauls. The
report of the defeat of two Roman legions inciteth the other Gauls to revolt;
insomuch that Labienus is assaulted in his camp by Induciomarus: he
withstandeth the assault, afterward conquereth and kills him. As the first
defeat of the Roman legions moved all the Gauls to revolt, so these two last
overthrows made them lay down their arms.

Observations.
IN this second voyage of Caesar into Britain, though he went thither with
greater forces and better prepared then at first, having supplied those defects
which were wanting before; nevertheless going into a country which he could
not come to but by sea, where he had no intelligence, and going from another
newly conquered, subject to revoltings, and which grudgingly endured
subjection, he rather therein satisfied his own ambition, then that he added
any great profit to the Romans. Wherein we will first observe his dexterity
and prudence, in that he carried along with him (as voluntaries) all the
stirring spirit^* amongst the Gauls, which served as hostages for him. But it
appears, his natural clemency made him commit an error, in contenting himself
to have diminished the authority of Induciomarus, when indeed he should have
ruined him; whereof he found the inconvenience afterward.

Secondly, that he never was moved at any unexpected accidents, for which he
was prepared as if he had foreseen them, which he made to appear to good
purpose in this great tempest, which shattered all his ships, and would have
driven any but himself to desperation.

Thirdly, though he were renowned for the Captain which best knew how to make
use of his victories, and which has pursued them homest; he would not do it
here, because he was in an unknown country, and his camp not as yet well
fortified.

Let us consider also, that howsoever the scarcity of corn compelled him
(contrary to his custom) to cause his army to make their winter-garrisons in
several places, and not all together, to the end that they might with more
facility be furnished with victual; yet he did it with such judgment, as that
the places where they quartered were not so far distant, but that they could
easily relieve each other; nor so near, but they held diverse States in
obedience. Nevertheless the success shows us evidently, that it is not so
good as to be quartered in an entire body, because it is easier to assail a
small troop then a great; which gave encouragement to the Gauls to revolt and
to assail the camp of Sabinus and Cotta: where the artificial oration of
Ambiorix persuading them that the revolt was so general, that at the same
instant all the other camps were assaulted, and could not relieve each other,
put them into such a confusion in matter of counsel, that fear made them choose
the worst, which was to forsake their camp and retreat. Whence we may learn,
That he never speedeth well that follows the counsels of an enemy; and, That
a retreat in view of the enemy is the most dangerous action that can be
undertaken.

Cicero his resistance ^ithi^ his camp, which refused to follow his enemies
counsel, and resolved to defend himself within his trenches, proved for his
safety and great glory; and gave time to Caesar to relieve him: wherein there
be two things remarkable; The first of Caesar, who having understood that the
Gauls came toward him to give him battle, finding himself weak makes choice
of an advantageous place, fortifieth it, makes his camp very small, to the end
he might the better defend it, and make his enemies believe that he was
exceeding weak; whom (after they had many times provoked him to fight) they
began to disregard, which begot a neglect of all order amongst them; so that
they assaulted him ever after disorderly: having thus lulled them asleep, on a
day he charge them so furiously, that he defeateth them without resistance
And Lab^enus one of his Lieutenants by a like stratageme did the like to
Induciomarus. The second of the Gauls, who not being able to force the camp of
Cicero, shut him up by a retrenchment which contained ten miles in circuit,
made in three hours, and by men which had nothing to dig with but their
swords, and nothing to carry earth with but their clothes: which argues they
were a great multitude, and shows what may be done by armies well regulated
and well provided.

The eighth war. The VI. Book.
Caesar, perceiving the affairs of the Gauls to incline to war, fortifieth
himself by three Roman Legions, and as many other soldiers as he could get;
which fell out very happily for him: for after the death of Induciomarus the
Trevois put their government into the hands of his kindred, which made league
with all that would revolt, and particularly with Ambiorix; whereof Caesar being
advertised, joins four legions together in winter, surprises those of Tournay,
forces them to yield and deliver hostages. And in the spring following causes
the Gauls to assemble at Paris, Lutetia.
from whence, on the same day that the assembly brake up, he goes and
assaulteth those of Sens, Senones. Carnutes.
then those of Chartres, who (finding themselves surprised) yield. From thence
he prepares to set upon Ambiorix and those of Triers, but first he labors
to draw away from them their allies: To which end he discardeth all his
baggage, which he commits to Labienus (who was in the country of Triers) with
two legions to guard it, and himself with five goes to assail the Gauls. For
execution whereof he divided his army into three parts; for that he well knew
they were not able to dispute the champain with him, and so burnt and pillaged
their country, that he constrained them to yield, to deliver hostages, and to
forsake Ambiorix. At the same time they of Triers assail Labienus; who making a
show of fear, and retreating as if he had fled, draws them in disorder into
places of disadvantage, where he defeateth them, and takes the very city of
Triers. This expedition being finished, Caesar makes a bridge over the Rhine,
and passes it: they of Cullen adhere to him; he fortifieth his camp, and
makes provision of victual, attempteth to compel the Suevians to battle; but
seeing them retreat into vast and deep forests, he forbeareth to pursue them;
repasseth the Rhine, cutteth off (on the Germane side) only 120 foot of his
bridge, makes a good tower on the end thereof, at the other end on the side of
Gallia he builds a fort, leaving twelve cohorts to guard that and the said
bridge. (In this place Caesar makes a description of the manners and customs
of the Gauls and the Germans) That done he goes to continue the war against
Ambiorix; and the better to surprise him he sends L. Minutius Basilius
before, with all the cavalrie, forbidding him the making any fire in his camp
to the end his approach might be undiscovered, by which means he thought to have
seized upon Ambiorix; who saved himself miraculously by flying from one place
to another, and Caesar (the better to follow him) conveys again his baggage into
a castle of the Liegeois called Vatucca, Eburones. Wachtendonck.
for guard whereof he left Q. Tullius Cicero with one legion, commanding him
for seven days (the time which his expedition would take up) to look carefully
to his guards, and not to stir out of his trenches. Then divided he his army
into three parts to harrasse all that country; who meets with nothing in the
form of an army to oppose him, insomuch that his greatest care was to prevent
that his soldiers (covetous of booty) straggled not too far abroad, for fear
of being cut off by the enemies, which lay hidden in forests and boggs. The
report reached presently to the other side of the Rhine, that Caesar exposed the
country of Gueldres to pillage; Menapii.
which occasioned the Westfalians to participate of the booty: Sicambri.
they presently get together two thousand horse, pass the Rhine, pillage
without resistance, and are so well pleased with taste thereof that they resolve
to set upon the Roman camp; when by misfortune, that day being the seventh
from Cesars departing, Cicero (which had observed his command very exactly, and
having no news, nor suspecting an enemy) suffered himself by the importunity
of his soldiers to give way to them to forage, and at the same instant was
(unexpectedly) assaulted by the Westfalians, against whom he had much ado to
defend himself; until that his soldiers returning from forage, part of them
made their way through the enemies, and regained the camp; but the rest were
cut in pieces. Nevertheless this relief bereft the enemies of all hope of
forcing the camp; and so they returned to their country with their booty. A
while after arrived Caesar, who rebuked Cicero for transgressing his command.
Then he resolves afresh to expose the country of Gueldres to fire and sword,
and to pursue Ambiorix, who had yet escaped: after that he sends his army to
garrison, which he supplieth with corn, and then goes into Italy.

Observations.
IN this war Caesar had no great resistance, all fleeing before him, having
nothing to do but to pillage and burn the country; notwithstanding there be
very good observations to be made thereupon: for though you learn not hence how
to fight a battle, or to expugne fortresses, yet you may here learn how to deal
with such as save themselves by flight and by retiring into inaccessible
places: wherein many Commanders have failed for the not observing of three
principal things, which Caesar did: First, to prevent the enemy by such
extraordinary diligence, as to surprise them before they be able to retire
themselves or their victual into the forests; so that by this means you may
constrain the one to yield, and the other to perish through famine. The second,
to divide your army into as many parts as you can with safety, that so
assayling a country in several places all at once, the inhabitants thereof
will be doubtful to what part to retire unto. And the last is, to hinder the
soldiers from disbanding when they go to pillage, for fear they be cut off by
the enemies. By which oversight many great inconveniences have often befallen
conquering armies; which should teach us never to slacken the severity of
military discipline, though we believe our selves far from an enemy, and in
great security. The example we have in this book of Q. Cicero is excellent in
that kind, who received a great loss, and had like to have been utterly
defeated, by suffering himself to be persuaded by the importunity of his
soldiers, which (contrary to Cesars command) would needs go out of their
trenches to forage.

We (...) further see the difference between old soldiers and new, who (for
want of experience) knew not how to choose what was for their safety and
honor, but retreated to a hill and there were cut in pieces: but the other,
knowing there was no safety but by recovering the camp, made their way with
their swords, and saved both themselves and their camp. Here we may observe how
ingenious sear is to seek out subjects to augment it self; for because this
place was the same where Titurius and Cotta had been defeated the year before,
they took it for an ill omen.

Let us further observe, that Caesar (when he would make an expedition for seven
or eight days, wh re was diligence required) discharged himself of his
baggage, which in truth is a mavelous impediment in a champain; and it is
impossible to conduct an army well, if (according to occasions) you do not
strongly entrench your camp, or march without baggage.

Let us also admire the good intelligence Caesar had by spies; a thing of such
utilitie, as that a Prince or General ought to spare no cost for, it being the
most powerful means to undertake brave designs, and to avoid great ruins.

Neither must we forget his dexterity in dividing those which were entering into
a combination against him, and his assaulting them severally, nor his customary
d ligence in surprising them; having atteined to the end of the most part of
his great designs by these ways.

We will conclude the observations of this book with the stratageme of
Labienus: who, desirous to fight with those of Triers before the G rmanes were
joined to them, resolved to make it publicly believed that he was afraid of
them, and that he would retreat; knowing right well that there were Gauls in
his own army which would discover it to them; and in the mean time gave order
secretly to retreat with a great noise, and making show of much fear: whereof
they of Triers having intelligence, without staying for the Germans,
conceiving they ought not to let slip the occasion which offered it self unto
them, passed the river, and came disorderly as to an assured victory: but
Labienus turns upon them in good order, and defeateth them. Yet would I not
counsel you at any time to attempt such a stratageme with new-levied soldiers,
which usually are fearful when they see men running toward them and without
order; which (on the contrary) assures those which are experienced.

The ninth war. The VII. Book.
THe affairs of Gallia quieted, Caesar goes into Italy, according to his
custom: where he hears of the death of Piso, and the garboils of Rome; which
gave new occasion to the Gauls of revolting. Chartres began, the Auvergnats
followed, and at length many others. Vercingetorix an Auvergnat is chosen
General for all. Caesar hearing this comes away in the depth of winter,
Gaballi.
passes the mountains of Genaudan covered with snow, and appears in Auvergne
before it was known that he was come from Jtaly: which caused many to hold for
him, and startled those which were revolted. With the same diligence he passes
into Burgundy and Champaigne, where he assembleth his army, comes to Berry,
and besieges it; Bituriges.
and takes Vellaudunum (from whence he takes 600 hostages) then forces Gien
(or Orleans) where was made a great slaughter: Vercingetorix, Genabis.
seeing the success of his enemy, and conceiving his army insufficient to
deal with him in the field, endeavors to conquer him by taking away all
means of subsistence; and to this purpose burns more then twenty towns,
Avaricum
preserving only Bourges (and that too against his advise,) Caesar besieged it,
where he suffered much, and found himself in great difficulties and
necessities; at length having overcome them, he takes the town, puts to the
sword forty thousand men, and there refreshes his army. During this siege he
attempted to surprise Vercingetorix his camp, but was repulsed yet was not
discouraged at all with all this ill success, but continues the war with
much resolution and prudence; and Vercingetorix, to hinder his enemy from
passing the river of Alier, Elaver.
breaks down all the bridges: nevertheless Caesar making show to pass in one
place, takes advantage to do it in another; then goes and besieges
Clairmont. Gergobia.
Vercingetorix encampeth on the other side, where were many assaults and brave
combats: nevertheless Caesar is constrained to quit the siege, whether for that
he made doubt of taking the town, or whether to prevent the revolt of the
Autunois artificially procured by Litavicus; who having procured himself to be
chosen Commander of a relief sent to Caesar, being but ten leagues from him,
pretended to have received news from the army, that all the Autunois there were
put to the sword; which news he presently conveyeth to Autun, so that both
there and in his camp all that was Roman suffered the like, with the loss of
their goods to boot, but chiefly the corn which they carried to relieve the
army withal: Whereof Caesar being advertised by Eporedorix, without
consultation takes four legions and all his cavalrie, marches day and night,
overtaketh Litavicus with his forces, makes known his fraudulent dealing to
the soldiers, and without striking stroke reduces them to obedience, and with
great diligence sends to those of Autun, to give them knowledge of what had
happened; and with the same celeritie returns very opportunely to his camp,
which he relieveth, finding it strongly assaulted and hardly put to it by
Vercingetorix. That done, he takes his way again toward the river of Alliers
and passes it; mean time Litavicus (who was fled toward Vercingetorix)
procures a league of the Autunois with him; Noviodunum.
Eporedorix and Viridomarus seize upon Nevers, where Caesar had left his
hostages, corn, and public treasure, which they pillage and burn: Which drove
him into great straits, because that Vercingetorix always coasted him, and cut
off his victual. At last he resolved by great marches to gain the river Loyre,
Ligeris.
which he passed over to join with Labienus, to whom (in the beginning of this
war) he had given four legions to go toward Paris. Whilst things passed in
this manner, Labienus was much distracted by the garboils of all these revolts:
Melodunum.
notwithstanding having possessed himself of Melun, he gave jealousies to his
enemies in many places, insomuch that by this trick he passed the river Seine,
Sequana.
and before that all these revolted people could join forces, he defeated the
first which opposed themselves, took Prouvins, Agendicum.
and from thence joined with Caesar. At the same time the Gauls renew their
conspiracies and intelligences, they hold an assembly, where almost all the
Gauls are present, they again choose Vercingetorix General, who makes
provision of great store of cavalrie to the end he might disaccommodate the
Romans by cutting off their victual. On the other side Caesar makes his
provisions, pays his Germane cavalry; but Vercingetorix being carried away
with good opinion conceived of his cavalry, adventureth a battle with Caesar,
where he was defeated. After that he retireth himself to Alexia, whither Caesar
follows him and resolves to besiege him: Vercingetorix perceiving his
design gathers together all the victual of the town, causes it to be
distributed by measure, and judges that by well managing thereof there would
be enough for near upon two months, discharges his cavalry, sends every one
into his country to procure him relief in time, and he with eighty thousand
fighting men shuts himself into Alexia: which Caesar surroundeth with double
and treble trenches, then makes a second circumvallation, to keep out reliefs
from without, with an incredible labor and diligence, and makes a provision
of victual sufficient to make the besieged consume theirs; which suffer great
extremity. At length relief comes under the conduct of Comius, to the number
of two hundred and fifty thousand; he makes three strong assaults at diverse
times, two in the day and one in the night, is repulsed, and retreateth:
whereby they of the town are constrained to yield themselves to the discretion
of Caesar, who retained the Autunois and Auvergnats, to regain those towns which
were necessary for him, and distributeth the rest amongst his soldiers. After
this, all the rest submitted. Thus ended this war, the greatest and most
dangerous of all that Caesar had in Gallia.

Observations.
ALl Cesars other wars in Gallia have been made by divided parts, having made
use of their divisions to ruin them; but this, by a general consent of almost
all: they chose one supreme Commander, great in prudence and courage, who, well
perceiving that the good discipline of the Romans and their knowledge in the
art military, made them invincible by way of battles, changed his own way of
making war against them, and by prolonging time without hazarding a general
battle, finding himself superior in horse, and the country to friend, not
ready to supply their armies with victual, made just account to have ruined
them: whereupon we may make very good observations.

First, upon Vercingetorix, who having been by a general consent chosen
General of diverse States (which had emulations one toward another) has known
so well how to govern them, that what adversity soever he met with in his
affairs, he has always maintained himself in great authority and aw amongst
them; not sparing to be severe where occasion required (fear being the most
powerful means to keep men in order:) ill successes never being able to deject
him or diminish his confidence. Even at that time when he was accused to have
had intelligence with the enemy, he so boldly defended himself by an oration,
that he came off more authorized then before. Also it is an efficacious means
to continue several people in a fair obsequencie, to parle often with them
upon such affairs as happen. He had the power to make them set fire on above
twenty cities to discommodate their enemies, which argued his great judgment,
for it was the only way to have overcome the Romans (stronger then they in
battle) to have fought with them by famine. And in such affairs all moderate
counsels, or but half executed, are ruinous: as the taking of Bourges serves
us for a memorable example, for the saving of it from burning preserved it for
the benefit of the Romans; which (by taking thereof) found therein such
commodious things as they stood in need of. His great credit is very
remarkable: for to a free people at the beginning of a war, before they had
tasted of bad success, and in their hope to be able to overcome without being
driven to so smart remedies, he prevails with them to fire their houses and
goods, for the conservation whereof war is for the most part made. It was a
very hard enterprise, for that the loss of things certain and present which we
see and feel, is preferrable (with the ignorant) to things whereof the events
are uncertain, and the benefits remote; and no man can well apprehend this
difficulty that has not experimented it in the government of the people. He
has besides showed his constancy even to the end, and made no scruple (being
the chief of so many several nations) to be shut up in a city, where he did
all that a provident and brave General ought to do, and has surmounted hunger
and the discommodities of a siege, having held out even until his relief was
repulsed and defeated; but because histories make not but for the victorious,
we see usually none had in esteem but the sons of fortune.

Now let us examine Cesars carriage in this war, which brake out he being in
Italy, in the depth of winter, his army dispersed in several countries, far
distant from each other, and the revolted States so in his way, as it was
almost impossible for him to unite his legions. In so great difficulties he
finds no other means but to surmount them by incomparable labor, wherewith
he makes way over the mountains covered six foot thick with snow, and
affrighteth his enemies more appearing in the midst of them (when they
believed him still in Italy and out of possibility to get to them) then by his
great forces. He also added to this astonishment by industry, causing his
cavalry to show it self in several places at one and the same time, to cause a
belief that he was very powerful.

Let us further consider that Caesar seeing the fashion of the war changed,
and that the enemy avoided battle, applies himself to sieges, wherein he
shows himself no less a master then in his other actions of war. For all
that which the most excellent modern Generals put in practice, is drawn from
his actions: and whatsoever we admire of Ostend, Breda, The Busse.
^ Bolduc, and many other sieges of the late Prince Maurice (who has surpassed
all others in that matter) is infinitely inferior to the two circumvallations
of Alexia, where the industry, the labor, and the short time in which they
were finished, far exceeds all that has been done elsewhere. I am not
ignorant that the invention of powder and of artillery has changed the manner
of fortifications, of assaults, and of the defense of towns; but not in such
sort, but that the principal foundations whereupon they are established are
particularly taken from Caesar, who in that has far surpassed all the Roman
Generals.

He is also admirable in his inventions and stratagemes, and in the
undauntednesse of his enterprises, who when he intended an assault upon the
trenches which were about Clermont, he put a jealousy into them by a body
which he made of the horse-boyes and baggages of the camp, which he caused to
march in their sight toward that part which he meant not to assault, but not
at so near a distance that they might discover what kind of people they were;
and having laid a legion in embuscado in the nightime, and caused some
selected soldiers to convey themselves into the little camp which was nearer
to the town, he assaulteth them so at unawares that he made himself master of
all their trenches.

When he would have passed the river of Alliers, which Vercingetorix attempted
to oppose, he caused some legions to lie in ambush near to a bridge which had
been broken, and with the rest of the army (which he made show as if it had
been entire) he passes along the river, as if he had sought some other
passage, by which means he so deluded the enemies, as that he caused the bridge
to be repaired before it could be taken notice of, and so passed over without
any hindrance.

When Vercingetorix (in the time of the siege of Burges) was gone out with his
cavalry, he departed by night, and went and assaulted his infantery within the
camp, and wanted little of defeating it.

When at the siege of Clermont he understood of the revolt of ten thousand
Autunois which came to his relief, he takes four legions, marches day and
night to overtake them: which he does, and took them all, and returns time
enough to defend his camp, which was assailed by Vercingetorix. Whereby we may
observe by the way the benefit of having a camp always well fortified, to the
end we may be ever in a readiness to attempt upon the enemy as occasions shall
offer themselves.

I cannot forget his great modesty. Comius (whom he had favored, raised to
wealth and honor, and on whom he much trusted) he rather excuses then blames
for revolting; alleging that he was forced to comply with the general
resolution for recovering the liberty and glory of all Gallia.

Let us speak a word or two of Labienus, one of his Lieutenants; who finding
himself in a strait with four of Cesars legions, in this general revolt,
encircled on all parts with enemies, and being to pass the river Seine upon
boats, to join himself to Caesar, opposed by strong forces which increased every
hour, in this extremity be imployeth both his courage and industry, divides
his troops into three parts, makes great appearance of passing over in two
places, where indeed he intended it not; by which means having separated their
forces into diverse troops, not knowing where to attend to oppose him, he
passes over by night with three legions, or less, with which he fought with
the first troops that came against him, and defeated them; insomuch that having
passed the rest of his troops at their ease, joined them (without further
inconvenience) to Caesar. Whereupon I will make this observation, namely, That
he which is not very careful and diligent in the guarding of a passage of a
river or mountain, is for the most part circumvented: because he which has the
possession thereof sleeps securely upon the advantage he has; and he which
would have it searches out all possible means (and at last finds them) to
remove all obstacles.

The tenth war. The VIII. Book.
THe Gauls desirous to make one attempt more to shake off their yoke of
servitude, diverse towns conspired together to revolt: whereof Caesar being
advertised, surpriseth them so unexpectedly, as that he continued those in
their fidelity which were not as yet revolted, and reduced the rest. Eighteen
days after his return to his winter-garrisons, they of Bourges gave him
knowledge that they were assaulted by those of Castres; he goes to relieve
them, and (notwithstanding the unseasonable weather) brings them to
submission. After that those of Rhems desired his assistance against the people
of Beauvois, the most powerful and valiant of Gallia, led by Corbeius and
Comius two brave Commanders; he marches thither, takes care to get
intelligence from them, encampeth himself before them, where his soldiers
receive an affront going to forage; but after that Corbeius had charged his
camp, and better fortified his quarters, he understood that he had laid an
embuscado for his soldiers which went to forage; whither he goes so strong
that he defeateth and kills him. This victory obliged those of Beauvois to
yield themselves. But Comius fled, not daring to trust himself amongst the
Romans, because that a little before Labienus would have caused him to have
been made away by Vollusenus contrary to public faith. This war thus ended,
Caesar goes and wastes Ambiorix his country, to procure him hatred amongst
his own people, under the command of Fabius one of his Lieutenants; he
relieveth Limoges which was assaulted by Dumnacus, Lemovicum.
whom he pursues; and as he hasted to gain the river Loyre to put himself into
safety, he defeateth him. Then subjugated those of Chartres and Bretagne with
great promptitude and alacrity. Under the command of Caninius he besieges
Drapes and Luterius in the city of Cadenac: Uxellodunum.
who sallying out to provide corn for the town, Luterius going about to convey
it in is defeated; and at length Drapes is assaulted and taken in his camp.
After this, he really formed the siege, whither Caesar came in person, who found
means to hinder them from water, so that this poor people yielded themselves
to his discretion; with whom he dealt rigorously, causing their hands to be cut
off which had born arms; which so went to the heart of Drapes (then their
prisoner) as that he wilfully starved himself: and a few days after Luterius
was taken and brought to Caesar. At the same time Labienus defeated those of
Triers, and the Germans, and took all their Commanders.

After so many happy victories of Caesar, obtained by himself or his
Lieutenants, he finisheth that summer by visiting the towns of Gallia, the
better to assure his conquest, especially in Gasconie, where he had been but
little, and disperseth his army (composed of ten legions) into such places as
he conceived most advantageous; which served him for a strong support to
maintein himself in the civil broils of his native country, which he was going
into.

Observations.
SOme attribute the so frequent revolts of the Gauls to their changeable and
impatient humor, which cannot endure to be lorded over by strangers: and
others, to the too great clemency of Caesar. I grant that clemency apt to pardon
emboldens to revolt; for that we easily forget all benefits which do not
entirely establish our liberty; but if cruelty causes them less frequent, yet
it renders them more dangerous; for that when despair drives men thereunto,
and that the hope of safety rests only in victory, the revolted become all
valiant, obstinate, constant, and faithful to the end; which never falls out
where there is hope of the enemies clemency. We have here plentiful examples
thereof. Caesar in the greater part of the revolts of the Gauls has often found
great facilities to reduce them to his obedience, by reason of his clemency;
which has been a powerful means for him to make divisions amongst themselves,
and to prevent obstinacy in their revolts: and if sometimes it has so happened
that he has used severity, it has been occasioned by fowl and unworthy acts;
as when they of Vannes under public faith imprisoned the Roman officers which
came to them to buy corn for the sustenance of the army, (but I cannot excuse
that of Cadenac.) On the contrary, the cruelties of the King of Spain executed
by the Duke of Alba drove poor fishermen so into despair, that they have
shaked off his insupportable yoke; and with an admirable constancy have
maintained and enriched themselves, and are grown so potent as that they are
able to resist him by land, and by sea take from him his treasure in the Indies.

Caesar shows us also by ^^s care and industry to get intelligence of the
enemies proceedings (whether by taking prisoners in the field, or by having
good spies) the advantage which may be made thereof; many of his successful
designs having been founded thereupon, there being great advantage in the
attempting them; for that he which assaileth has more courage then he which is
assailed, and always believes the assaliant to be the stronger, not knowing
what part he will assail, and ever jealous that he has some secret
intelligence. Briefly, all that a well exercised and well disciplined army is
able to do in such a case, is to defend it self; but where are new-levied
soldiers fall out great disorders: which was the reason he took so much care
to fortify his camp very strongly, to the end he might defend it and all his
baggage with a few men, and might without danger execute many brave designs,
being always assured of his retreat. Let us further take view of the siege of
Cadenaci which Caesar judging to be impregnable by force, and knowing it to be
well provided of corn, undertaketh by a great and dangerous labor to keep them
from water, which was from a fountain without the town, from whence they were
only supplied: which the besi^ged perceiving, having set fire on Cesars works,
by a salley they hindered him from quenching it. Caesar not being able to repulse
them by reason of the advantage of the place, resolves to make an assault upon
the town; which apprehension caused them to retreat.

The Abbridgement of the civil wars of Cesars Commentaries. The I. Book.
THe true cause of the civil war between Pompey and Caesar was, because the
one would have no companion, and the other could not endure a superior: but
that which appeared, was the refusal made to Caesar of admitting his
solicitation for the Consu^ship being absent (though it had been promised him)
or else because they would have him alone disarm, and that they which were his
declared enemies should continue still armed: a forced resolution, and contrary
to the will of the Commons; insomuch that the Tribunes of the people were
constrained to quit the city, and to go find out Caesar: Who taking occasion by
the forelock, of his private cause he makes a public; declaring to his
soldiers that he is not in arms to other purpose but to restore the people
(now oppressed by the Senate) to their liberty; and having well encouraged
them thereupon, he departs from Rimini, Ariminum.
which was yet part of his government, and possesses himself of all the
marches of Ancona; which caused a great astonishment at Rome. Pompey and the
Consuls forsake the city, and dare not gather their gross nearer then Capua:
mean time Caesar continuing his march besieges Domitius Aenobarbus within
Corfinium: who with all the Senators which accompanied him were delivered unto
him by his own soldiers, which adhere to Cesars party. He gave leave to
Domitius and the Senators to dispose of themselves where they pleased, causing
all to be restored that belonged unto them. Following his design he besieges
Pompey in Brundusium: who unwilling to sustein the siege, crosses the seas
with his army, which he could not do but at two times, for want of shipping;
yet used he much art and precaution to conceal his retreat from Caesar, and to
prevent those of Brundusium from giving means to his enemy to entrap him.
Caesar, not being able to follow him for want of vessels, sends Valerius into
the Island of Sardinia, and Curio into that of Sicilia; Cotta abandoned the
one, and Cato the other; complaining that Pompey had very inconsiderately
embarked them in this war, and so went into Africa. Mean while Caesar comes
to Rome, justifies his actions, and offers to condescend to a reasonable
peace: but seeing that his enemies protracted time, he passes into Gallia, to
strengthen his army with Gauls. M^ssitia.
Marseilles refuses him entrance; he besieges it, and in the mean time
sends C. Fabius to possess himself of the passages of the Pyrenean
mountains; which he does bravely. Then approaches to Petreius and Afranius,
which had their camp below Ilerda, and encampeth on the river Segre, Sicoris.
where he makes two bridges. At first there passed only slight skirmishes
between them, until that two of Fabius his Legions being gone to forage by
that bridge which was furthest from the camp, it happened to break; whereof the
enemies being advertised, they go with four Legions and all their cavalrie to
give on upon them; but being retreated to a hill of advantage, and Fabius
misdeeming something, going to relieve them, delivered them out of that danger.
While these things were a doing, Caesar having left C. Trebonius Lieutenant
General at the siege of Marseilles, and D. Brutus commander of his naval
army, arrived in his camp; where being, he would encamp himself between Ilerda
and his enemies camp; bu^ after a long fight (whereof either of them made
advantage) both the one and the other retreated into their camp. Presently
after, the continual rain carried away both these bridges, and made the river
altogether unpassable, which drove him to extreme necessities, not being able
to supply himself with victual, nor receive those new forces which came to him
out of Gallia, nor repair his bridges by reason of the violence of the waters,
and the hindrance which his enemies gave him, which were on the other side of
the river: At last he caused boats to be made, and whilst the Pompeians busied
themselves to entrap certain Gauls which came to join with him, he carries
boats on wagons twenty miles from his camp, puts them into the river,
causes some soldiers to pass over to the other side, and without losing time
conveyeth thither two legions more, by favor whereof he makes his bridge: and
by that means recovereth his way, and safe passage for his victual, and
receives those troops which came to relieve him. This action reassured his
army, astonished the enemy, and gave so much reputation to his affairs (with
the news which he received at the same time, that Brutus had defeated the
Marseillians at sea) that five good cities yielded themselves, and diverse
others came to parle. But following this good success, he makes diverse
trenches to cut off the water from his enemies camp, and to make the Segre
fordable. Afranius and Petreius, fearing the prosperity of his designs,
resolved to gain Octogesa, sited upon the river Iberus, whither they had
beforehand sent to have a bridge made: To this end they depart at midnight;
Caesar causes them to be pursued by his cavalrie, which he makes to ford over,
because his bridge was a great way off: afterward (leaving his baggage within
his camp) he follows with his Infantery, and pursues them so hotly that he
overthrows their design, hindering them from going whither they intended, and
returning from whence they came, insomuch that he drove them into such
extremity of hunger and thirst that (without striking one blow) they were
constrained to yield themselves to his mercy. He dismisseth them all, and
wins them by incredible courtesies, never used elsewhere toward enemies.
Thus he remains master of Spain, sending away his enemies laden with
disgrace, and also with obligations to publish (though unwillingly) his
clemency and valor.

Observations.
IT is a most dangerous thing for a people, a General of an army, or an army
it self, to be surprised with fear for that it is always seconded with
perverse and ruinous accidents: which all Leaders and Commanders of armies
ought to foresee and carefully to prevent. There be three not able examples in
this book on this subject; The first, when Caesar passed the Rubicon; for before
that they declared him enemy to the weal-publick. Pompey undertaketh with a
stamp with his foot to raise an army to him; that at his approach Cesars own
soldiers shall deliver their General into his hands; neither does he think
him worthy consideration; such as dare but name Caesar are driven out of Rome;
briefly, he is proceeded against as a criminal offender. Notwithstanding so
soon as he had but set the first step to declare the war, and though he did
the same at Pezaro which he did at Rimini, having not the fourth part of his
army, every man was amazed; Pompey and the Consuls betake them to their heels;
the care of leavying of soldiers is cast aside, and Rome it self abandoned.
The causes of this great change proceeded from this, that Pompey never imagined
that Caesar durst have undertaken so high a design; grounding upon a
presumption which his virtues and good fortune had added unto him; which made
him rather thoughtfull how to maintein his party in the city, then provide
for defense thereof: Insomuch that when he saw things go otherwise then he had
published, he stood amassed. It was therefore no great wonder if an ignorant
people (which took assurance or fear from the good or bad countenance of him
into whose protection they had delivered themselves) did the like. Whereupon I
will say, that in affairs of such importance we ought (in imitation of Caesar)
before we enter into them, to consider maturely the worst that can befall, so
that evil success dismayeth us not; but when we are embarked, we must not
check at whatsoever happens, but with constancy go on to the end.

The second example is, when Domitius Aenobarbus (being out of hope of being
relieved by Pompey) took a resolution to save himself within Corfinium, where
he was besieged: but for that his countenance was sadder then usual, his
speeches less resolute then the time required, and by some neglect of the
necessary works for the common defense, he discovered to his soldiers that
which he would have concealed from them, so that (preventing his flight they
delivered him unto Caesar. It is a fair lesson for a commander, to teach him
that in greatest danger he ought to show most resolution; for his soldiers
become courageous or fearful according to that they observe in his countenance.

The third is, when Caesar discovered the fear of Afranius and Petreius
soldiers, in that they seconded not each other, that they scarcely had
received the brunt of the cavalrie but their ensigns were all on a heap, that
they made not good their ranks nor distances, and that they stirred not from
the field of battle where they could not subsist for want of water. And
howsoever in these times armies approach not so near each other as then they
did, by reason of the canon; nevertheless, experimented Captains will make
profitable use of such judgments. I have seen Henry the Great chase eight
hundred horse with less then two hundred; judging they would not dare to
combat him because of their confusion and not observing distance^ which fell
out as he had foretold it.

And howsoever to retreat from a besieged city by a port of the sea seems to
be no very hard matter, nevertheless the precautions which Pompey used to
retire himself into Brundusium, was that which saved him. For having to do with
a people which he abandoned, and an enemy vigilant, he had been lost if he had
not walled up the gates and barricadoed up all the entries into Brundusium,
except only two (which were covert enough) by which his men issued to the
haven; because when his last men departed from the walls, the inhabitants at
the same instant of time cause^ those of Cesars to mount them; for which reason
in all kinds of retreats a captain cannot take too much care t^ make it safe
and orderly: and though he may do it when he pleases himself, yet must he do
it in so good time an^ so readily as that he be not engaged to fight. In this
place I will relate a dispute between Afranius and Petreius; the one being for
retreat by night, the other by day: They which were for the night alleged that
they should gai^ the mountains and places of safety before they should be
discovered: but the others judged that having to do with Caesar, and he strong
in cavalrie, they should never be able to get off from him without fighting,
and in such a case the day was to be preferred to the night, which always
causes disorders in retreats; which opinion prevailed, but not at all to their
advantage. For my part I hold the other opinion the better: for besides that it
is a most dangerous thing to retreat in the day time, in the presence of an
enemy; a well advised Captain will never engage himself to pursue an army by
night; for that it is hard for him to prevent falling into an ambush.

The second Book.
Whilst things passed thus in Spain, Caius Trebonius continues the siege of
Marseilles; to the relief whereof Pompey sends L. Nassidius, who joining his
navall forces with those of the Marseillians, gave battle to Brutus, where he
was beaten. The loss fell upon the Marseillians, because they fought more
obstinately then the rest, as being more interessed, having to conserve both
goods and liberty; and that which afflicted them most was, that they had
conceived too great hope of deliverance; howsoever they forbear not to continue
a resolute resistance. Nevertheless, the industry of Trebonius was such, that
with mantilets and other engines he approached a Tower, which he sapped, Vincae.
and overthrew part of it: which so affrighted the Marseillians, as they
promised to yield themselves so soon as Caesar should return, and desired a
truce till then: Trebonius grants it; whose soldiers negligent of their
guard upon confidence of the truce, on a very windy day the Marseillians make a
sudden salley, and burn all the engines of the Romans. Trebonius was but
little discouraged for all this, and diligently repaireth them, whereby
Domitius was forced to save himself by sea, before Cesar's arrival, who
(though the affairs of Italy called upon him) would not leave Spain until it
was all at his devotion. There only remained M. Varro, who at first spoke of
Caesar with great respect; but when he conceived his affairs stood doubtful, he
alienated himself and those of his party from him: in so much that after the
defeat of Afranius and Petreius he found himself engaged to sustein the war.
But Caesar having called an assembly at Cordova, Corduba.
all came thither to attend and acknowledge him, and diverse towns forced from
them Varro's garrisons: who found himself so far forsaken, that of two
Legions which he had, the one fell absolutely from him, insomuch that he was
constrained to have recourse to Cesars mercy as well as the rest. That done, he
left L. Cassius Longinus in Spain, and passes to Marseilles, which yields to
him; then goes to Rome. At the same time Curio passes from Sicilia into
Africa with two Legions only and five hundred horse, encampeth himself in a
place called Cornelius camp, near Vtica, where Petreius Accius Varus had his
camp; against whom he had an advantageous battle with his cavalry.
Nevertheless, upon some discourses which one S. Quintilius Varus had with
Curio's soldiers, there grew a panike fear amongst them; which taken away by
an oration he made unto them, he went and presented battle, and beat Varus
again, and drove him to retreat into Vtica; where (with help of the ill will
the inhabitants bore him) he put him hard to it; and understanding that king
Juba was coming to relieve him, Curio retireth himself into his camp, with
resolution there to attend the coming of the rest of his army which was in
Sicilie. But having intelligence that king Juba came not in person and that he
only sent a weak supply under the command of Saburra, it caused him to change
that so good a resolution. Then puffed up with his former victory, and having
been more exercised in making orations to the people of Rome then in commanding
their armies, he marches night and day to encounter this relief: his cavalrie
in the night meets with some of the Numidian horse, and beats them. This
success heighteneth him more and more, insomuch that he marches as if he had
pursued a victory; but thus wearied and in disorder, he meets with a fresh
and complete army, which defeateth him: whereupon he concludes it his best
course to expiate his rashness by his death, and so died a better soldier
then commander.

Observations.
IT is a maxim held by all, and neglected by most, That in the time of truce
there ought to be a better guard then at any other time. We have here a notable
example thereof: Trebonius by a mavelous labor had brought the Marseillians
to the last gasp, when during the time of a truce (which out of pity he had
granted them) his soldiers so neglected their guards that they invited the
enemy to their ruin, and he saw in one hour burnt what had cost him the
labor of many months. Which should teach us in war never to slacken the
severitie of military discipline, though the soldiers grumble never so much:
for you ought rather to content them by any other means then that; and when
they shall see their commanders share the dangers and labors of the war with
them, they will undergo them cheerfully. For we may read that by the exact
observation of military discipline many commanders have surmounted great
difficulties and obtained glorious victories, and that many others for
disregarding it have been shamefully defeated; but it has never been read that
the observation thereof has been the cause of the loss of one battle or of
the overthrow of any one enterprise.

A great courage without experience is likelier to commit a great error in
war then a more temperate one: for the first is usually accompanied with
presumption, and is more incapable of counsel then the other; especially when
he has made his entry into armies by some happy success. Curio is a fair
example thereof, who of a Tribune of the people seeing himself a General of an
army, committed many errors, and those not small ones: for after that he had
the good hap to beat his enemies, to shut them up into Utica, and upon the news
of king Juba his coming to resolve for the best, which was to retreat into his
camp on the seaside, well fortified and well provided of munitions, there to
attend the rest of his army; upon the first news that was brought him that the
relief was weak, and that Juba was not there in person, without staying for
confirmation thereof, refusing to advise with, or give credit to any, he
crosses his first resolution, and goes to give them battle; after which his
cavalrie meeting with some of Juba's horse, of which four were brought
prisoners to him, he asked who commanded them; they answering that it was
Saburra, he presupposes that Juba was not there; so confirms himself in the
first error, and marches so fast and so far as that he finds himself five
and twenty miles from his camp, in a country which he knew not, with part of
his forces (the rest not being able to follow) much hurried and in disorder:
which was the cause that Juba easily defeated them. Which shows us plainly,
that neither a great courage alone makes a good commander (however it helps
well thereto) nor the reading of books, nor ability of discourse; but it must
be atteined by long experience, and the being present at many overthrows as
well as victories: for he that has not had his share therein, is not able to
imagine what belongs thereto, the bravest soldiers sometimes doing the
poorest actions, as it happened here; where (though the residue of this army
was retreated into a well-fortified camp, and not assaulted, yet these embarked
themselves so confusedly and disorderly as that a great part of them were
drowned. Therefore I conclude that it is much better to make less haste and to
know whither to go then to be forced shamefully to run away or perish.

The III. Book.
Caesar being chosen Dictatour provideth for the affairs of the city of Rome,
causes himself to be published Consul with P. Servilius, gives over his
dictatourship at the end of eleven days, and after imbarketh himself at
Brundusium, whither he had sent seven legions to attend him; but found not
shipping enough for half his army; insomuch that he was constrained to pass
over with fifteen thousand foot and five hundred horse, leaving Marcus Antonius
there with the rest, to whom he promises to send back the shipping. Pompey
(who had all the year to prepare himself) had gathered together great store of
men, victual, and shipping, so that Caesar passed over not without trouble and
danger; and instantly sent back his vessels to Antonie: but Bibulus, chief
Commander of all Pompey's navy, took a squadron of thirty of them, which he
fired, and put to death all the mariners to the end to deter the rest from
undertaking that passage; and did so obstinately continue his design
(notwithstanding the winter-season) as that he hindered Antonie from passing
over. At the same time M. Octavius (Pompey's Lieutenant) besieges Salones in
Dalmatia, which defends it self so courageously as (without help of any) it
compels him to raise his siege, and by a sallie beats him shamfully from
thence; from whence he retireth to Pompey at Durazzo. Dyrrachium.
On the other side, Caesar having possessed himself of diverse towns upon the
shore, hindered him also from refreshing himself. At last Bibulus dies: and the
sea not being so exacty guarded, Antonie passes over; where the winds so
favor the good fortune of Caesar, as that they change in the just instant to
put his navy into safety, and to cast away that which pursued it. This news
coming both to him and to Pompey at one and the same instant, (because they
were encamped near each other) the one goes to join himself to Antony, which
he does; and the other to oppose him; which though he might have done, yet
returns to encamp himself at Asperagne, Asparagus.
belonging to the territory of Durrazo, and sends to Scipio to bring his
forces, and join with him. Caesar seeing that the war was like to be drawn out
at length, sends part of his army into Macedonia and Thessaly to make
provision of corn; because that Pompey having the command of the sea, he was to
expect none from out of Italy. But Scipio in his passage meeting (at the same
time) with an opportunity, thought to have cut in pieces L. C. Longinus, with
some of Cesars legions; which he had done had not M. Favonius (whom he had left
to guard his baggage with eight cohorts) sent to him that unless he made have
to relieve him, Domitius was coming to defeat him: So he desisted from than
purpose, and arrived oportunely for the relief of Favonius. At the same time
young Pompey having understood that Caesar (now the third time) was sending his
shipping to Brundusium, and having left some few at Oricum under the charge of
Caninius, with three cohorts he came and assailed them, and either took or
fired them all. That done, Caesar goes and encampeth himself between Durazzo
and Pompeys camp, to hinder him the benefit of Durazzo: but Pompey encamped at
a place called Petra on the seaside, where being a small haven, by means of
his shipping he receives some benefit by it. Then Caesar attempteth to enclose
him by trenches, and Pompey by other trenches enlarges himself as much as
possibly he could; who finding himself the stronger in forces assaileth the
trenches, and in two encounters had the best ont, and hoped to have defeated
him. Caesar, not being able to abide here longer, retreateth toward Apollonia
and Oricum, where having mustered his army, and taken order for those two
places, he passes into Thessaly to join with Domitius his army. Pompey
follows him, who also joyneth Scipio's forces to his own. The two armies
(whereon the decision of the whole Roman Empire depended) encamp themselves in
sight of each other. Caesar sought all occasions to fight, and Pompey evaded
them; at last he suffered himself to be overruled, first by the revilings of
his soldiers, and afterward by the valor of Caesar, who pursued him so
fiercely after the victory of the battle of Pharsale, Pharsalia.
as he gave him no leisure to rally his forces, arriving in Egypt almost as soon
as himself, where king Ptolomee, violating the right of hospitality, and
forgetting the benefits which his father had received from Pompey, caused him
to be murdered, thinking by this wicked act to gain the victours favor; who
revenged it, as we shall see in the book following. At the same time Cassius
General of the forces of Syria, Phenicia, and Cilicia set on fire the shipping
which Pomponius kept in the port of Messina; and Lalius took a little island
before the port of Brundusium, as Libo had done in former times. But the news
of Pompey's defeat overthrew all the designs of the Lieutenants.

Observations.
IF the clemency and liberality of Caesar be so much recommended in all the
course of his life, it seems that in this civil war he has outdone
himself. To refuse to defeat whole and entire armies in Spain by the sword, and
having reduced them to yield to his mercy, to let them go with their
Commanders, not so much as binding them from making war against him any more:
To satisfy his enemies their stipends, whilst he borrows money of his
captains to pay his own soldiers; restoring to Domitius Aenobarbus a hundred
and fifty thousand crowns at a clap, which Pompey had given him out of the
public treasury to make war against him: To release all the prisoners he
took without ransom, and even to cause all to be restored which belonged unto
them, whilst Bibulus, Labienus, and others, put to the sword as many of his as
they could take; are actions in my observation rather to be admired then like
to be imitated, especially in an age whose practice is much contrary to this
generosity, and even to that which he used in Gallia: where (sometimes) he
practiced great severity. Therefore searching into the reasons which caused in
him this blind clemency, who seemed cruel to his own, I conceive we ought to
distinguish the designs. In Gallia he was a conqueror, in such sort as when
they abused his first and natural clemency, he used severity; to keep those in
aw through fear which by affability could not be made pliant. But here is a
civil war, wherein (under pretext of mainteining the liberty of the people)
he intends to bring both people and Senate into subjection. For this end he
depresseth all passions to attein the height of his designs. The m^^e cruel
his enemies are toward him, the less he spleeneth them: insomuch that they
which make war against him, fear him not but in battle, and not despairing of
pardon, become the more inclinable to yield upon the first reverse of fortune
which befalls them. It is not so in a civil war, which we make not but for
the defense of our person or religion: for then having no design to possess
your self of the State, you are obliged to repel cruelty by cruelty, otherwise
you should find none to take part with you. But when you fight for rule and
domination, you must (to attein it) appear such a one as that they may not
suspect either revenge or cruelty in you, and that they believe you to abound
in liberality and all other sorts of virtues: for no man at any time desires
change of condition, but to better his own. So by this liberal resolution and
clemency, not continuing his Dictatourship above eleven days, doin nothing but
by the usual order, always justifying his actions as a Protector of the
Commonwealth, showing himself so much the more affectionated to peace by how
much Pompey held off from it, that so he might the easilier work the
indignation of his citizens and soldiers against him, and by that means go the
better through with the wars, he atteined the end of the highest and most
glorious design that ever was undertaken by man.

Caesar having drawn all his forces together, attempteth to fight with Pompey:
and not being able to draw him to it, he undertaketh a high design, namely, to
besiege him in his camp, though he were the weaker of the two. This was near
Durazzo, where he goes about to enclose him with trenches, helping himself
with the advantage of little hills of difficult access, which in my opinion
induced him to this design. The reasons which he alleges are, that being
weak in cavalry, and wanting corn, he could not get it if Pompey's horse were
at liberty; from which he should also take away the benefit of forraging, and
render it unprofitable to all the offices of war. Besides, it was a way to
diminish the reputation of Pompey throughout the whole Empire, and increase his
own, when it should be reported that Caesar kept him besieged, and that he durst
not fight with him: a matter of great consequence, for that men usually turn to
that side which is strongest. On the other side, Pompey, being unwilling to
quit the seaside or Durazzo where he had made his Arcenall and Magazine,
resolves not to budge: and seeing that his cavalry might suffer too much if it
were hindered from forage, he makes an enclosure of trenches of fifteen miles
compass on his side. So both Generall^ omit nothing that makes for their
designs. In the end Pompey finding himself discommodated by being thus cooped
up, sets upon one of the angles of Cesars trenches; where he had such
advantage in two encounters which fell both in a day, that Caesar confessed, if
he had known how to have prosecuted his victory he had defeated him. By this
may be seen how necessary retrenchments are, and how by means thereof may be
prevented to fight with an army one is fearful of: one may also reassure
affrighted forces, and famish a more potent army then ones own. For the art of
war consists principally in not fighting but when men are willing; and to
this end you must take good order for your victual, you must well exercise
your soldiers in the use of their arms, and in the observation of all orders,
and know very well how to make their retrenchments. And if Caesar had had to do
with any but Pompey, who shut himself up from the very beginning, he had either
ruined his army, or else compelled him to fight.

Caesar seeing that he could not continue Pompey longer in that strait, nor stay
so near him without a great discommodity for want of victual, he undertaketh
to make a long retreat and for many days. To this end he causes all the
baggage to be sent away overnight with one legion, about midnight all the rest
of his army saving two legions, and his cavalry (wherewith himself marched) at
break of day. Pompey follows him with all diligence, finding him quartered
where he had been encamped before, and lodges himself also within his own old
camp close by him. But upon Cesars making show of sending his cavalry to
forage (causing them to return secretly into the camp again) Pompey sends
out his horse to the same purpose in good earnest; and then also the greatest
part of his soldiers being returned to their old camp to look for baggage
which they had left behind them, Caesar departs suddenly in the same order as
the day before. Insomuch that Pompey, not being able to pursue him for the
present, and he continually marching by great journeys in the same order,
leaving him no possible means to overtake him, at the end of four days gave
over his pursuit. This is a fair lesson to teach us how dangerous it is for
armies to retreat in view of an enemy; besides, how carefully we ought to avoid
fighting when we retreat, and what order ought to be given that we be not
pestered with the baggage; and that also a retreat is better made with a part
of the army then with the whole. For if Caesar were afraid to retreat in the
view of Pompey, with an army so ^ell exercised and accustomed to overcome,
being redoubted by Pompey himself; what should then the captains of these times
do, which command armies newly levied, without order, without obedience,
overlaid with baggage, the soldiers not knowing how to use their arms, nor the
captains themselves to teach them? Yet nevertheless they would think it a
blemish to their honor to make a private retreat. Certainly presumption and
ignorance are two bad counselors in war.

At the battle of Pharsalia Pompey was twice as strong as Caesar, especially in
cavalry, whereupon he principally grounded his victory; but he had not an army
so well disciplined nor so exercised to fight as Caesar had: insomuch that
fearing that if his gave the charge they would do it disorderly, he commanded
them to attend the giving on of the enemy, with charge not to ^^rre from their
places. Caesar, disliking that course, commanded his soldiers to give on upon
the adverse army, alleging that this exciteth the courage of soldiers to play
the men, which ought rather to be increased then abated, not disapproving the
ancient custom of beginning the fight with a general shout. And experience
teaches us that in all actions of war, he which gives the charge redoubleth
his courage, and he which is charged diminishes his.

Touching Pompey's order of battle; Having a river on his right hand, he placed
all his horse on the left, promising to himself that after he had repulsed
Cesars cavalry, he should enclose his army. Caesar, judging his cavalry not of
sufficient strength to resist that of Pompey, str^^gtheneth it by foot, which
were fitted for that purpose, and mingled amongst them. Besides that, he takes
from every battalion one troup, whereof he composed a battalion to be as a
reserve, which he places without the ranks of the three orders of infantery,
and commands them not to stir to the conflict until he appointed: so that
when Pompey's horse had repulsed Cesars (which they could not do without
putting themselves into disorder) they met with this battalion, which put them
to a sudden stop, and afterward to show their backs, and wholly to abandon the
left wing of Pompey's army; by which means Caesar following his advantage easily
puts all the rest to rout. Whereupon we ought to observe two things: the
one, That we ought never to hazard all our troops upon one only charge, but
make a reserve of the one to relieve the other: and the other, That we ought so
well to observe the distances or intervalls, as well to the flanks as the rear,
that the first troops happening to be reversed, they reverse not those which
should relieve them; but to leave them a convenient space to fall back, and to
rally themselves again in the rear.

If Caesar knew how to conquer, he knew better how to prosecute and make his
benefit thereof, but in none like to this of Pharsalia; where he contented not
himself to force the camp, to besiege the rest of the army on a hill whither
they retired, nor to pursue Pompey's person certain days journeys, but with
three or four thousand men only followed him so close both by sea and land,
that he found him dead in Egypt, where he arrived almost as soon as the other;
never giving him leisure to recollect himself, or reinforce his troops. Which
serves to teach us to make use of occasion when it offers it self favorable
unto us, and not to defer that to another time which may be presently
executed: for the affairs of the world are subject to great revolutions. And
the affairs which Caesar yet had after the death of Pompey give us occasion
enough to judge, that if (in imitation of many great personages) he had
gathered the fruits of his victories before they had been ripe, or tasted of
repose before he had been secured, he might full well have repented thereof.

Of the Alexandrine war written by Aulus Hircius, or Oppius. The IIII. Book.
As Soon as Caesar was arrived in Alexandria with three thousand two hundred
foot, eight hundred horse, ten Rhodian galleys, and some ships of Asia, he
understood of the death of Pompey; and upon the bad quarter he perceived was
between the soldiers of Pompey and the people of the city he sent for new
Legions into Asia. Mean time he required to be informed of the testament of the
late king Ptolemee, who had made the people of Rome his executours; and to this
end ordained that Ptolemee the eldest son and Cleopatra the eldest daughter
should discharge their army, and come to him to give an account of their
rights. But Ptolemee's Counsel did not approve of this way of accommodation,
and underhand sends for his troops which were at Pelusium, under the command
of Achillas: whereof Caesar being advertised, and that the King himself had
intelligence with the said Achillas, he deteineth him, and prepares for
defense: he gives them the repulse at their first approach, then cantons
himself in one part of the city and the rest in the other part. Arsinoe the
Kings second sister causes Achillas to be slain, puts Ganymedes into his
place, and possesses her self of the authority, who continuing the former
design puts Caesar to great extremities, infecting his fresh waters; which
he readily remedied by digging great store of pits. He also sends for
soldiers, ships, and arms from all parts; and upon the news which he received
that the thirty seventh Legion with great provisions of victual and arms was
arrived on the coast of Africa, but could not get to him by reason of contrary
winds, he puts himself alone into a ship, takes all his shipping with his
mariners only, and puts to sea in the very face of them. The enemies,
knowing him to be without soldiers, assail him; he beats them, and without
other relief gets to his legion; then returns to Alexandria. This first
conflict affrighted the Alexandrians; nevertheless they make their naval army
stronger then ever, which Caesar defeateth the second time; where Euphranor
Captain of the Rhodian galleys behaved himself very bravely. There is an isle
before the haven of Alexandria built and inhabited, which sheltreth the town,
and is joined to the city by the peer, which is 900 paces long and 60 broad,
upon which there were two forts. Caesar thinks it necessary to take this
isle, that so he may have the sea at liberty. He takes it, then takes one of
the forts of the peer: but at the other he had a hot skirmish, and was repulsed
with so great disorder as not being able to hinder the soldiers from casting
themselves abord, he saves himself by swimming rather then to perish. The
Alexandrians, astonished by these brunts, betake them to their subtilties,
demand of Caesar their King, who delivers him to them, hoping it would be a
means to facilitate agreement. Whilst these things were in agitation
Mithridates a Pergamenian, a man of high descent, a great soldier, of great
valor and most faithful to Caesar, arriveth to his relief with goodly forces,
takes Pelusium in his way, and comes to pass the Nile at a place called
Delta. Whereof Ptolemee being advertised goes in person to oppose him; and
Caesar on the other side goes to relieve Mithridates, who, before the arrival
of either of them, had already encountered with and beaten Ptolemee's forces;
and Caesar also before he could come to Mithridates had defeated others. After
which he goes and assaulteth a small fort which was between his camp and that
of Ptolemee's, which he takes; and the day after he assaileth the camp, which
he also ^^^ceth; and the King attempting to save himself by water, is drowned.
After which returning victorious to Alexandria, all submi^ to him. Mean time
the provinces of the Empire rested not quiet. Domitius Calvinus Cesars
Lieutenant was defeated by Pharnaces, who possessed himself of the kingdom of
Pontus. In Illyricum Gabinius Cesars Lieutenant was defeated, and died at
Salona: And Octavius one of Pompey's party, intending to possess himself of
that province, found Cornificius to oppose him in that design. So did
Vatinius; who being a^ Brundusium and hearing this news puts to sea, meets
Octavius, gives him battle and defeateth him in Spain. Cassius Longinus, whom
Caesar had left there, had made himself hateful through his covetousness as
well to those of the country as his own soldiers. They combine against him
and sorely wound him, and believing him dead each one discovers his joy: he
recovering rigourously punishes the conspiratours; nevertheless that hindered
not the revolt of his army. And as he thought to have remedied it in one place
it breaks out in another, and by a general consent they choose Marcellus for
their commander, who encamped himself beneath Cordova, which was at his
devotion. Longinus sends to desire aid of the King Boguld, who sends him a
great recrute: nevertheless Marcellus mainteineth himself without fighting;
and Lepidus coming with fresh forces to labor a reconciliation between them,
Longinus mistrusteth him, and withdraws himself from them; but upon the
approach of Trebonius his successor in the government, he embarked for Africa
where Caesar had designed him, and was drowned at the mouth of the river Iberus.
Let us return to Caesar: who though he were much pressed to visit Rome, yet
would he first revenge the defeat of Domitius; he departs from Egypt with the
sixth Legion only, leaving the rest of his army for the guard of that
kingdom: and with those forces which he gathers together in Asia he gives
battle to Pharnaces, defeateth him, takes from him what he had possessed
himself of, and gives the kingdom of Bosporus to Mithridates the Pergamenian
as a recompense for the good service he had done him in the Alexandrian war:
then triumphantly after so many victories he returns to Rome.

Observations.
OF all the wars which Caesar has made I find not one less necessary, more
dangerous, and wherein he has showed less foresig^^ then in this. For having
understood the death of Pompey at Alexandria, to set down there with three or
four thousand men, and in this weak estate to attempt to force a young king to
make restitution of part of his kingdom in favor of his sister Cleopatra, was
an argument that he trusted much to his good fortune, or was very amourous. But
as this beginning was much short of his ordinary prudence, so the progress and
the end thereof surpasses all his other actions; and it seems that he has
not here erred but to make his virtues shine so much the brighter. This has
been a war without rule: for he has been put to defend cross ways of
streets, and to barricado himself there, to dispute the one half of the town
against the other, to remedy unthought of accidents, to reassure his soldiers,
to fight with a navall army without soldiers, and to beat them; and, as if he
were fallen into another world, to make a war after a new manner. Which
shows that he excelled in three things principally; namely, that he was never
left hopeless, that he was of great experience, and that he confounded not
himself in his commands.

This war finished, he goes against Pharnaces; wherein we will only observe
two things: the first, that howsoever he desired to finish this war speedily,
because his business required him elsewhere, yet he goes not to assault him
rashly, but always begins by encamping himself strongly; then (having left
his baggage in safety) he goes with all his army to make another camp near
to Pharnaces, leaving a great valley between both; to the end that if he would
hinder him from fortifying there, and assault him, he could not get to him
without great disadvantage. The other is to show the advantage which he has
that assaileth: for Caesar himself observes, that though Pharnaces assaulted
him rashly, yet his soldiers were struck with fear, and put into some disorder
upon their first approach. Which may serve to confirm that he which assaileth
has a great advantage, and that there is nothing more necessary in war then
retrenchments.

Of the Africane war, written by Aulus Hireius, or Oppius. The V. Book.
THe broken forces of Pompey's party being rallied in Africa under Scipio,
Cato, and king Juba, Caesar goes thither in the month of December, and
arriveth there at the beginning with no more then only three thousand foot and
some few horse. He presents himself before Adrumetum, but Considius seeing
him so weak stands upon his guard: and Caesar in his retreat was assaulted by
a sally from the town, and by the horse which were come to their aid, which he
repulseth: where it was observed that thirty French horsemen put above two
thousand Moors to the recoil. The fame of his arrival opened the gates of many
cities and castles, which furnished him with victual. He made choice of the
site of Ruspina to encamp himself, and there to expect the rest of his army;
but not having patience to attend, he goes to the port, imbarketh himself, and
goes to find them out; and as he was about to hoise sail a good part of them
arrive. After that he goes with thirty cohorts to look about for corn, and in
the way meets with Labienus, with whom he had a great skirmish, and had the
best on it, and so retired himself into his camp, which he fortified more then
ever, because he found himself weak. He drew two trenches from the town to the
port for his better security: then he dispatcheth into Sicilia, Sardinia and
Italy, for supplies of men and corn. On the other side Scipio and Cato,
desirous to fight with him before he should gather more strength, hasten Juba
to come with his army: but he, being on his march toward them, is constrained
to turn back the same way he came, by reason that P. Sitius Cesars Lieutenant,
and king Bogud assaulted his kingdom. Mean time Labienus joyneth with Scipio;
they come and encamp near Caesar: both sides attempt to take advantages, and
diverse skirmishes pass between them, yet without hazarding a battle. Cesars
necessities increased daily, which he supported with great constancy, and only
maintained the hopes of his own side by cheerful words and looks: he
dispatcheth others to hasten his troops and victual: some of his ships are
cast away; and hearing that others were chaced even into the port of Leptis, he
posteth thither with all speed possible, imbarketh, and with what he could
there gather together goes and relieveth his men, chaceth his enemies, takes
some of their ships, and recovereth his own which were taken. At last his
troops come from diverse parts, he begins with purging his army of some
seditious persons and libertines; then resolves upon a definitive battle. To
this end he goes and encampeth before Thapsus, which he environeth with
trenches, not doubting but Scipio would come and relieve the town: who having
caused king Juba to return again, they come and encamp near Caesar in three
several camps. And there was the battle fought, which Caesar gained with loss
of fifty soldiers only, and some few hurt: but on the other side were ten
thousand slain, and the three camps taken. Thapsus on the report of this
victory was yielded to C. Rebilius. Cato seeing he could not prevail with his
men to resolve to defend themselves kills himself. Vtica opens her gates to
the Victour: Adrumetum does the like. Zama shuts hers against her conquered
king, and calls in Caesar: all the rest of Juba his kingdom revolteth: he and
Petreius kill each other through despair. Sitius having defeated and killed
Saburra Juba's Lieutenant, and coming to Caesar, meets with Afranius and
Faustus Sylla, which were going for Spain: these he defeateth and takes
prisoners, who afterward in an uprore were both slain. Scipio and diverse
Senators, having embarked themselves for Spain, were by a tempest cast amongst
Sitius his fleet, where all perished or killed themselves. This was the sequel
of that battle, wherein all things concurred (as if by consent) to smooth the
way to Cesars absolute victory, who pardoned all that had recourse unto his
clemency, and after that returned to Rome.

Observations.
Caesar has done three things in this war which came near to rashness: the
first, to pass into Africa in the dead of winter with a small force, not
having any assured port there, for which cause he was not able to appoint any
Rendes-vous for his shipping; which thing was imputed him as a want of
foresight. Nevertheless after his passage his manner of proceeding was
altogether admirable: He makes choice to encamp himself near the city
Ruspina, which was within half a league of the port, which he joyneth to the
city and his camp, and fortifieth it exceedingly: for from thence he had one
foot on land and the other on the Sea, and could (as occasions should require)
act by either sea or land, and be secured from being shut up, whatsoever should
befall. This is a good lesson for such as enterprise upon a foreign country,
being weak at the beginning: for in this posture great attempts may be
withstood, and in all extremity a good retreat may be made. The second, to
leave his army near Ruspina, and without giving knowledge to any man to cast
himself abord to go seek his shipping. And the third, having news of the defeat
of his fleet, to leave his camp, to hasten in full carier to Leptis, to cast
himself into a ship, and to rally others, and assault the enemies: and although
he perished in none of them, there can be nothing said in his defense, but that
he trusted wholly to his good fortune, and that he never was wearied or
disheartened in the most dangerous or laborious designs.

It is observable that Caesar in all his wars has always been inferior to
his enemies in number; for which cause he has always helped himself by
fortifications, more then ever any other has done, which he made much the
better when he found himself not sufficiently strong to give battle, as he was
a long time in Africa; insomuch that Scipio himself wondered at his coldness:
nevertheless he always continued his soldiers in exercise, and himself
exercised new-levied men, and entered them by small skirmishes, wherein by his
industry for the most part he had the best; and always attempted something
upon his enemy. Which is an excellent maxim to give courage to your soldiers,
and secure you from being surprised.

The Spanish war against Pompey's sons. The VI. Book.
THe relics of the Africane troops reassemble themselves once more in Spain
under Cneus and Sextus, the sons of Pompey. Caesar goes thither: He finds
the one laying siege to Vlla, and the other in Cordova. He sends relief into
the first, and goes and encampeth himself before the other: which inforceth
Cneus to quit his siege to relieve his brother. Some skirmishes passed between
both armies: but Caesar, not being able to draw his enemy to battle, goes and
besieges Ategua, and after a bold resistance he takes it in view of Cneus.
Afterward both armies had diverse encounters and combats, but to little
purpose: at last they encamp themselves in a champain near Munda, both
resolving not to refuse battle: nevertheless ^neus took a high an^
advantageous ground for his field of battle, where Caesar making difficulty to
assail him was put upon it by the fury of his soldiers. The fight was long and
doubtful, even by his own confession, and with much ado he got the victory,
which was bloody. Thirty thousand on Pompey s part died upon the place, and a
thousand on Cesars: they which saved themselves into Munda were constrained to
yield themselves. Sextus Pompeius abandoneth Cordova: Cneus is swiftly pursued,
overtaken and killed. All places yield themselves to the victour. This was
Cesars last battle, and the deadly wound to Pompey's party.

The military order of the Grecians: and particularly of their Phalanx.
THe order of the Grecians is but obscurely to be found amongst their authors,
because the most part of the books which they have written thereof are lost,
and none have come to our hands but fragments, so that it is hard to collect it
very exactly. The Phalanx was formed after this manner.

Zugos, Jugum, signifies two men in front, and more joined together make a
rank; and so the word is often taken.

Stichos, Versus, signifies two men one behind the other, and more behind each
other make a file; and versus is often taken for a file.

Lochos, Decurio, signifies a file, which the Grecians made of several
depths, but never exceeded the number of sixteen, as being sufficient to
sustein the violentest charge: conceiving that to give a greater depth to their
Phalanx was but to employ men unprofitably; and that it was better to extend
the battalia into breadth, to prevent overwinging, and so to be charged on the
flanks, or else by this means to overwing the enemy, then to give so great a
depth to their Phalanx.

The Phalanx was compounded of hoplitae only (that is, heavie-armed) with
sarissas (that is, long pikes) and their bucklers: for the archers, slingers,
and other casting-weapons had their orders apart.

In a Lochos or file of 16 men, there were five which had command; namely, the
first, fifth, ninth, thirteenth, and sixteenth; as we may see by the figure
following, and their names.

The first figure.
Lochagos o File-leader. 1. Enomotarcha o 2. Enomotarcha o Half-file-leader. 3.
Enomotarcha o Vragos o Bringer-up.

They made the most valiant the File-leader, and the most prudent the Bringer
up.

Now to begin their order; They joined two files together, which made 32
soldiers; and those two files so joined they called Dilochia, and the
Commander of these two files they called Dilochites.

Then they doubled the number of those two files, which made four files and 64
soldiers; and this troup they called Tetrarchia, which had a Commander called
Tetrarcha.

After that they doubled the number of these, which made eight files and 128
soldiers; and this body was called Taxiarchia, and their Commander Taxiarcha.

Then they doubled those eight files, so made them 16: and this body was called
Syntagma, and the Commander of this body was called Syntagmatarcha.

To this body they appointed five general officers: An Ensign, a Lieutenant,
a Trumpeter, (for they had no Drum) a Crier, and a Sergeant.

The Ensign was placed in the middle of the first rank, as all will appear by
the figure following.

The second figure.
Syntagmatarcha. Taxiarcha. Tetrarcha. Dilochites.
diagram

The Phalanx was composed of sixteen bodies, like to the foregoing figure.

This body of 16 files they doubled, which made 32 files, and called it
Pentacosiarchia, and the Commander of it Pentacosiarcha.

Then these 32 files they doubled, which made 64; and this body they called
Chiliarchia, and the Commander Chiliarcha.

These 64 files being doubled made 128 files, and were called Merarchia, and
their Commander Merarcha.

And 128 files being doubled make 256, called Phalangia, and the Commander
Phalangiarchos; so that the Phalanx is composed of 4096 soldiers, and of one
Phalangiarchos, which commanded in chief, two Merarchas, four Chiliarchas,
eight Pentacosiarchas, 16 Syntagmatarchas, 32 Taxiarchas, 64 Tetrarchas, and
128 Dilochites, as the next figure shows.

The third figure.
diagram

Now according to the ability of their Commonwealths they augmented this army
by doubling the Phalanx, which was called Diphalangarchia, and the Commander
Diphalangarcha: or by doubling the Diphalangarchia, and this they called
Tetraphalangarchia, and the Commander Tetraphalangarchos: who then was the
highest Commander: And this they held to be a complete army, which afterward
has been called a Phalanx. Nevertheless it was always divided into four
bodies as four Phalanges, and was composed of 16384 soldiers.

The fourth figure.
diagram

This is the order of the Grecian phalanx for the heavy-armed, called hoplitae,
namely, of pikes and targets; which took up (allowing six foot for each
soldier, and without accounting the three intervalls) six thousand one hundred
forty four foot in breadth, and ninety six foot in depth.

To this army they joined half that number of light-armed soldiers, called
Psyllagi, which fought from afar off with flying and casting-weapons, and
were ordered into battalia behind the Phalanx in equal front (but that their
files were but eight deep) in the same order, and with the same officers: And
when they were to begin the battle, they passed through the intervalls and
assailed the enemy; when the armies were drawn so near each other as to come to
the shock, they retreated by the same intervalls into their places behind the
heavy-armed, and over their heads poured a shower of stones, darts, and arrows
upon their enemies, and fortified the depth of the Phalanx to sustein the
shock, being now of 24 men in depth.

The fifth figure.
diagram

Concerning the cavalrie, they always placed them on the wings: and whether it
were the cavalrie or the infantery, they changed the form of their order
according to the site of the places, or to the number of the enemies forces
with whom they had to do, or to the order wherein they were ranged into
battalia, enlarging the front by lessening the depth, and doubling their front
by the half files, as Cyrus did in the battle which he fought against Cresus;
for fearing to be overwinged, he made his files (which were 24 deep) but 12,
and so augmented the front of his army by the one half.

Besides they made use of several orders of battalia according to occasions;
as the Orb, and the light-armed in the middle, to sustein a strong charge on
all parts; or the Wedge, the better to enter into a battalion; or a Half Moon
to enclose or overwing; and others, which are of no great use in these times.

And that they might not confound themselves in such orders when occasions
served, they had public Schools, where all the younger sort of men went to
exercise themselves, which they called Gymnasia, and had Masters to teach the
use of arms and motions, called Tactici. Now to perform all the motions they
allowed to every soldier six foot of ground square; and for fight, three foot;
and to sustein a violent charge they serried them so as they took up but a foot
and a half.

By this means it was that so many small Commonwealths of the Grecians
maintained their liberties so long, and have performed so brave actions, having
repulsed so great armies with so small forces, and having even planted their
tropheys in Asia and elsewhere; until their divisions overthrew them: which
Philip dexterously laying hold on brought them to subjection; and after that,
Alexander his son with them and their Militia conquered a great part of the
world.

It is true indeed that the constitution of those Commonwealths was more proper
for a happy mainteining of their liberty then to increase themselves: for
howsoever they all addicted themselves to arms, so that none were exempted from
them, yet their poverty, and the small number of soldiers of every
Commonwealth apart by it self, hindered them from making any great progress; so
did their divisions; it being a hard matter that so many sovereigne
Commonwealths should agree together, unless it were in a common necessity, to
defend themselves, as they did diverse times against the Persians; but not for a
conquest, where men cannot agree, neither about places of command, nor about
sharing of what is gotten.

Concerning their retrenched camp, which they called Aplectos, they chose
rather strong sites, then that they fortified them by industry neither had they
any certain form, as the Romans had, but according to the advantage of places
they fortified one part more then another: and hereof there is nothing certain
to be found in writing amongst ancient Authors.

The Military discipline of the Romans.
CHAP. I. Of the election of soldiers, and their arms.
ROmulus having built the city of Rome divided it into centuries and military
orders; every body contained four thousand foot and three hundred horse: Now
because the most valiant were chosen, it was called Legio, which signifies as
much as a select company.

The city being more populous by the addition of the Sabines, the Legions were
doubled, which then became to be of six thousand foot and six hundred horse;
yet after that they have been of a greater number.

Tullus Hostilius third king of the Romans established military exercise, and
distinguished all the people into five Classes or orders. They of the first
Classis (as being the richest) were bound to mount and arm themselves to serve
on horseback. The three following Classes were employed on foot, and (according
to their means) were Hastati Principes, or Triarii, and were bound to arm
themselves according as their order required. The fifth and last Classis, as
being too poor, was exempt from going to the war. Nevertheless, after that the
Romans made war by sea, which was four hundred eighty nine years after the
foundation of the city, they chose out the ablest of this fifth Classis to
make them serve at sea; and yet they obliged them (in case of necessity) to
serve twenty years amongst the landforces.

None could attein to the office of a civil magistrate in Rome unless he had
served ten years in the war; nor by that could be capable of any such office,
unless he were twenty seven years of age: for at seventeen years of age they
were enrolled, and then entered into the war, and ended their service at forty
five years of age. They were obliged during these twenty eight years to serve
fifteen: and when they had accomplished their service, they were no more tied
to take arms, but only for the guard and defense of the city.

After that the kings were driven out of Rome, they chose every year two
Consuls in their stead: Then those Consuls chose twenty four military
Tribunes, but afterward the people would choose them: fourteen of them were to
have served already five years in the wars, and the other ten a longer time;
namely in the infantery, eleven years; and in the cavalrie, fifteen years:
which shows what esteem they had of their foot above their horse.

The Consuls every year called out of all the Tribes such as were from
seventeen years of age to forty five to the Capitole or to Campus Martius:
and such as dd not there make their appearance were rigourously punished; which
was easily discovered, for by the ordinances of Tullus Hostilius they kept a
register of all that were born, and that died: now they of the territory were
reckoned into the number of inhabitants as well as they which dwelt within the
city.

They always chose four Legions, two for each Consul; sometimes they levied
more, but very seldom, and that according to the necessity of their affairs:
And even in the time of Hannibal they had twenty three Legions, and yet every
Consul had but two, the rest being commanded by Praetors, Proconsuls, and other
officers. But after that the Commonwealth grew more powerful, and their laws
grew weaker, there have been under Caesar in the wars of Gallia ten Legions.

Before they proceeded to election of their soldiers, they divided the twenty
four Tribunes amongst the 4. Legions: namely, of the fourteen youngest of them
they gave four to the first Legion, three to the second, four to the third,
and three to the fourth: and of the ten eldest they gave two to the first,
three to the second, two to the third, and three to the fourth. By this means
there were six military Tribunes for every Legion, and in every one both old
and young ones.

The Tribunes being thus disparted and divided into four parts, the Tribes
were drawn by lot; and of the first they chose four men of a like quality as
near as could be: of these four the six Tribunes of the first Legion chose
one; the six of the second chose the second; the six of the third, the third;
and the six of the fourth had the fourth man Then they chose four more,
whereof the Tribunes of the second Legion began to choose the first; they of
the third, the second; they of the fourth, the third; and they of the first
Legion took the fourth man which was left And so successively they made their
cho^ce throughout all the Tribes: Insomuch that by this choice the soldiers of
the first Legion had no advantage over those of the last, but were all equally
formed.

After the election thus made of the Infanterie, the Censor elected the
Cavalrie.

Concerning the number of soldiers of every Legion, it has differed at diverse
times. For the Infanterie, it has been 3000, 3200, 4000, 4200, 5000, 5200,
6000, 6200, always following that proportion of number, for the convenience
which they found in it for the ready dividing them and forming of their
Maniples, Centuries, and Cohortes.

So in their Cavalrie, it has been at diverse times 200, 220, 250, 300, 320,
330, 350, and 400.

The election being thus made, the Tribunes of every Legion made them take the
oath one by one, (holding up their right hand, and raising up the thumb of that
hand) to obey and perform whatsoever should be commanded them by their
superiors.

At the same time the Consuls commanded the magistrates of Italy to make their
elections afte^ the same manner amongst the Allies of the Romans, amongst
which there was chosen a like number of Infantery, and double the number of
Cavalrie: so that in a Consular army there must be four Legions, two Roman
and two Auxiliars.

That done, they were suffered to depart, having a set day given them to meet
at a place appointed without arms, where the Tribunes chose the youngest and
the poorest to be Velites; the next, to be Hastati; the more vigorous, to be
Principes; and the elder sort, to be Triarii.

Then they were armed, and therein they sometime varied: but most usually the
arms of the Velites were a morion, a small target, darts, and a sword. Their
archers and slingers were called extraordinary, and were auxiliars. The Hastati
bare targets of four foot high, an headpiece, and a small breast of the
cuirace: The richer sort of them bare the whole cuirace, a sword on the right
thigh, (being short, broad, and sharp-pointed, and cutting on both sides) and
two darts to cast. The Principes and Triarii bare the like arms; only the
Triarii in stead of darts had javelins.

Concerning the Cavalrie; that was but ill armed at the beginning; but it
learned of the Grecians afterward to be armed with a cuirace, a buckler, and a
casting-javelin.

The Allies (as well horse as foot) were armed and disciplined as the Romans.

Besides the four bodies of Velites, Hastati, Principes and Triarii, the
ancient authors also make mention of Tirones, Rorarii, and Accenses, all which
were young soldiers, either Romans or Auxiliars, and (in my opinion) fought
not but with casting-weapons. And in effect there was no other body of the
Infanterie amongst the Romans but of those three orders, the Hastati,
Principes, and Triarii: for even the Velites had no body apart by themselves,
being both in the orders of battalias, as also in the encampings, entermixed
amongst the other three orders, and began not to be employed by the Romans but
at the siege of Capua.

The election being made, the soldiers armed, and the orders formed, the
Tribunes separated every order by Centuries or Cohorts, then made two elections
of ten men apiece: they of the first were the more honorable, assisted at the
counsel of war, and were as the Captains of our time; they of the second
represented our Lieutenants. Indeed all of them were called Centurions, but
they of the first election were called first Centurions, and the other, second
Centurions. After that, the Centurions chose their Vexillarii, which are the
Ensigns of our times, and there were two of them in every Cohort. Then they
chose twenty Tergiductores, which were Rear-commanders of the troops: so that
in every Cohort there were two commanders for the front, and two for the rear.

CHAP. II. The division of a Legion of 4200 foot and 300 horse.
A Legion was always divided into five bodies: namely the Infantery into four
bodies, called Velites, Hastati, Principes, Triarii; and the Cavalrie into one.
Every body was divided into ten troops, which amongst the Infantery were called
Cohorts or Maniples, and amongst the Cavalrie were called Turmes.

In the three first orders of Infanterie were 1200 soldiers apiece, each of
which make ten troops of 120 soldiers: and in the last, namely the Triarii,
there were only 600 men, which make ten troops of 60 men apeece.

The body of Cavalrie was of 300, which makes ten troops of thirty soldiers
apiece.

Amongst authors there is a diversity in the names of Cohorts, Centuries, and
Maniples, which here do signify one and the same thing; but in some places of
Titus Livius you may see the distinction from a Legion to a Cohort, from a
Cohort to a Centurie, from a Centurie to a Maniple. Which I conceive grew from
this, that when the Legions grew to be of 6000 and 7000 men, they then made
those subdivisions.

CHAP. III. Of marching.
WHen they were to march, at the first sound of the trumpet they took down
their pavilions, and packed up the baggage; at the second they loded it; and at
the third they parted away from their quarter: But none were allowed to take
down their pavilion, until the Consuls and Tribunes had taken down theirs. The
extraordinaries marched first; then the right wing of the Allies, and their
baggage in their rear; then the second Legion, and their baggage after them;
then the left wing of the Allies, and their baggage following them: the
cavalrie was in the van and rear, and sometimes in the flanks, thereafter as
the enemy was to be suspected.

Every Roman Legion with one wing of the Allies marched in the van by turns,
that so every one might have the commodity of arriving first at the camp.

If in the march there were greater suspicion on the rear then on the van, or
on the flanks, they strengthened themselves there accordingly. This was their
ordinary manner of marching; but I find in Caesar, that when he marched in an
enemies territories, and particularly in a country enclosed with hedges and
woods, he made all the Legions to march in one body, then all the baggage
together, leaving only some new-levied troops on the rear thereof to guard it.
When the army marched in three equidistant bodies, namely all the Hastati,
as well Romans as Allies, together, having their baggage before them, then the
Principes and Triarii in the same order, the extraordinaries and cavalrie were
to be on the flanks and on the van to secure the baggage, or at least on those
parts where the most danger was: And being so ordered, when an occasion of
fight befell, on what part soever it were, on a sudden all the troops could be
drawn out very easily (without being troubled by the baggage) to go and affront
the enemy.

When the army drew near to the quarter, the Tribunes and Centurions ordained
for that work marched before to consider of the site of the camp: Which being
made choice of, they first marked out the place for the Consuls lodging, or of
the General, with a white banner; then they distinguished his lodging from
others by a red banner; then with a second red banner they marked out the
Tribunes quarters; then with a third they divided and distinguished the
lodgings of the Legions from the forementioned ones: after that they gave to
every one their proportion of ground, which they marked with banners of other
colors: then with a line they quickly marked out and divided all the lodgings,
because they never changed the measures nor form of the camp; and that they
were exceeding well accustomed thereunto, by having always the same way of
encamping.

When the army arrived, every troup took notice of their lodging by the marks
and banners; so that all went to them without confusion, and without mistaking.

CHAP. IV. Of embattelling the Army.
THey quartered their four bodies of Velites, Hastati, Principes, and Triarii,
under the name only of the three last; and they divided and intermixed the
Velites amongst the three other bodies: as may be seen in that which follows.

Hastati 1200 Velites joined with the Hastati 480 1680 Principes 1200 Velites
joined with the Principes 480 1680 Triarii 600 Velites joined with the Triarii
240 840

The Romans allowed ten foot square of ground to lodge two soldiers; insomuch
that allowing 100 foot breadth of ground, and 1000 in depth, there was
sufficient to lodge 2000 soldiers: and so ten cohorts of Hastati, which made
but 1680 soldiers, were lodged sufficiently, and had room enough besides for
their baggage.

The same proportion of ground was allowed to the Principes, because they
consisted of the same number.

And the moity of that ground was given to the Triarii, because their number
was but the half of that.

To the cavalrie they allowed for thirty horses 100 foot square; and for 100
Turms 100 foot in breadth and 100 foot in depth apiece.

For the allies they allowed the same proportion of ground to their infantery
as they did to the Roman legions; but because the Consul took the fifth part
of the legions of the allies near to himself, they cut off also the fifth part
of ground in this place, which they allowed them elsewhere.

Concerning the cavalrie of the allies, it was always double to that of the
Romans: but the Consul taking a third part of the^ to lodge round about him,
there remained in the ordinary lodgings but one fourth part more of them then
of the Romans: and because the space of ground was more then sufficient for
them, their ground was not enlarged, but they had 100 foot in breadth and 100
foot in depth, as the Romans.

This quarter was divided by five streets, each of them of fifty foot in
breadth; and divided in the middle by a street called Quintana, of the same
length as the other.

At the front of the quarter there was a great street of 100 foot broad, next
which the twelve Tribunes were lodged, just over against the two Roman
legions; and the twelve Prefects were quartered just over against the two
legions of allies: there was 50 foot square allowed to each of these lodgings.
Then there was the Consuls lodging, called the Praetorium, which contained 200
foot square, and was placed in the middle of the breadth of the camp. On the
right and left hand of the Consuls lodging, there were two void places, the one
for the marketplace, the other for the Questor. On each side of these they
lodged the 400 horse and 1630 foot which the Consul drew out of the two legions
of the allies, as also the voluntaries: and besides that some lodgings were
reserved for the extraordinaries which might happen to come to the army, as well
cavalry as infantery; and these together made a perfect square.

After all the lodgings were appointed, there was a space left round about them
of 200 foot broad: then they made a retrenchment, whereof the moat was more or
less in depth and breadth, and the rampart higher or lower, thereafter as the
enemy was more or less to be feared.

It is to be observed that the infantery was always quartered the nearest to
the trenches, as they which were to defend them, and which were to shelter the
horse, which were lodged in the middle of the quarters. The figure following
will make all this more plain.

This figure in the Authors copy (by the Gravers mistaking) being very faulty,
I have rather used an other, being more perfect
The quartering of the four Roman legions.


A. The Pretory, which contained 200 foot square. B. The Treasury, 200 foot
long, and 100 foot in depth. C.D. The two Legates tents, the ground for each of
which contained 50 foot in depth and 100 in length. E. The Prefects over the
Allies, whose lodgings were square; each side having 150 foot: their tents were
twelve in all. T. The Tribunes of the two Roman legions: their lodgings were
square, of 150 foot aside, and 12 tents. F. The lodgings of the cavalry of the
Evocati amongst the Allies, having 80 foot to 125 in breadth. G. The Ablecti
amongst the Allies, having 120 foot to 112 in breadth. H. The quarter of the
foot of the Evocati amongst the Allies, having 80 foot to 238 in breadth. I.
That of the foot of the Ablecti amongst the Allies, containing 120 foot, upon
252 in breadth. K. The extraordinary cavalry, every lodging containing 80 foot
in depth, for 167 in length. L. The extraordinary Infanterie, having 70 foot
for 200 in breadth, every quarter. N. The quarter of 20 turms of the Roman
cavalrie, each having 100 foot square. O. The Triarii of the Roman legions;
the quarter of each Maniple had 100 foot in front and 50 in depth. P. The
Principes of the Roman legions; the quarter for every Maniple was 100 foot
square. Q. The Hastati of the Roman legions; each Maniples quarter was 100
foot square. R. The cavalrie of the Allies; the quarter for their turms was 34
foot in length and 100 broad. S. All the Infantery of the legions of the
Allies, every cohort having 100 foot in front and 200 Observe that from the
Decumane gate there runs a street which divides the two legions, which have
all their quarters facing outward, and their backs meeting at that street, both
fronting to their alarm-places X.
in depth. V. The streets, being 50 foot broad. X. The alarm-place, being 200
foot broad. Y. Z. Two streets, each of them being 100 foot broad.. The
Pretorian gate.. The right hand gate.. The left hand gate.. The Decumane gate..
Void places reserved to lodge strangers.
When the Consuls army was composed of more then four Legions, they were
quartered after the same manner, the one on the side of the other; so that in
such a case the camp was a long square. And when both the Consuls armies were
joined and made but one camp, they took up the room of two squares. Sometimes
both camps were near each other, but separated.

Here Polybius has omitted the number of the gates of the camps, and their
names, and where they were placed, how the enclosure of the camp was made, the
lodgings for the Consuls two Lieutenants (one for each Legion) of the Questor
(who was their Treasurer) of the Prefect of the camp (who was the fiscall or
marshall judge) of the twelve Prefects of the Allies, of the victual, the
arms, and the engines for war, of the apparel, and what the tents were made of;
which (with the help of some authors, and according to probability) we will
here supply.

First we find in several histories that the camp had four gates, placed and
called as is showed in the foregoing figure.

Concerning the enclosure of the camp, we read also that they made the rampart
of the earth which they took out of the moat; and to make the earth hold
together they planted two or three rows of stakes, about which they enterlaced
brush-wood, after the manner of hurdles.

For the lodgings of the Consuls Lieutenants, it is probable that they were
lodged about the Praetorium.

And for that of the Questor, who (besides the money) had charge of the arms,
of the engines for war, of the victual and apparel; I conceive that that
great and spacious place which was given him, was to lodge all therein.

Concerning the tents, we find that even to Cesars time they were made of the
hides of beasts.

CHAP. V. Of the orders and guards of the camp.
BEsides the oath which was required of the soldiers after their election,
they were made to take another in the camp, namely not to steal any thing, and
if they found any thing to carry it to the Tribunes. Polybius reports that it
was thus done between the hands of the Tribunes; and Cicero says that they did
it at the beginning of the election of soldiers between the hands of the
Consul.

That done, they divided the Cohorts of the Principes and Hastati as follows:
two to take care to keep clean the great street which was between the Tribunes
and the rest of the soldiers, and to cast water on it in summer, to avoid the
discommoditie of dust; for that was a place where every day a great part of the
army met: The other eighteen were divided to serve the Tribunes, namely three
for every Tribune; of which they took every day eight soldiers for the guard
of their lodging. The Cohorts of the Triarii made the guard for the Cavalrie;
and one Cohort every day kept the guard before the Consuls lodging.

The moats and the ramparts were made on the one side by the Romans, and on
the other side by the Allies. The Centurions made the soldiers to work at
them, and two Tribunes had the charge to see the work well done.

The authority of the Tribunes in the camp was very great, and two of them
together exercised it over their Legion for two months, after each other
successively.

Concerning the Word; a soldier of the last Cohort of the Infantery, or of the
last Turm of Cavalrie, was to come to the Tribunes lodging, and there to take
it upon a writing-tablet, where also was written the name of the soldier which
took it, and the place of his lodging; and this he delivered before witnesses
to the commander of his troup: That officer delivered it to the commander next
him; and so the tablet was delivered from hand to hand to the first Cohort near
to the Tribune, to whom it was brought back before night, so that by this means
he was assured that all the army had the word. And if any tablet were wanting
of being brought back again, it was easy to find where it had failed. It must
be observed that here only one Tribune is mentioned; which causes me to
believe that the two Tribunes which had the authority for two months time did
agree to command every day by turns. Concerning the guard, it was kept day and
night: and the four and twenty hours were divided into eight watches.

First the Consul was guarded by his ordinary Cohort; then every body made
their guard round about his lodging; and besides there were three guards kept,
one at the Questors lodging, and the two other at the lodgings of the Consuls
two Lieutenants.

The Tergiductours or Rear-commanders ordered the guards, which drew by lot
which should begin first: and they which were to begin were led to the Tribune
which then commanded, who gave them the order of the guard, and (besides that)
a little tablet with a mark; and all the guards were set after the same manner.
The rounds were made by the Cavalrie, whereof the chief officer commanded four
for the day and four for the night: the first went and took their orders from
the Tribune, who gave them in writing what guards they were to visit.

The relieving and visiting of the guards was done eight times in four and
twenty hours, at the sound of the trumpet, and the first Centurion of the
Triarii had the charge to cause them to march when occasion served.

When the trumpet gave them warning, the four forementioned soldiers drew
lots, and he to whom it fell to begin, took some of his friends with him, and
if in going the round he found the guards in good order, he only took from
them the mark which the Tribune had given them, and carried it him back again
next morning: But if he found the guard abandoned, or any sentinels asleep, or
any other disorder, he made his report thereof to the Tribune with his
witnesses: and presently a council was called to prove the offense and to
punish the delinquent according to his desert.

The Velites made the guard round about the retrenchment, on the outside and
inside of it, and at the gates. The Allies had the same order.

We find not in writing the number of their Corps-du-guards, how they placed
their Sentinels round about the camp, and how many a day were free from the
Guard.

CHAP. VI. Of punishments and rewards.
NOne but the Consul could condemn any to death, and he had this authority as
well over the principal commanders of the army as over the meanest soldiers
thereof.

The Tribunes administered military justice, which was rigourously practiced.
The manner of their ordinary punishing was thus,

So soon as the Tribune had touched the party condemned with a staff or a rod,
every soldier laid on upon him with cudgels, or battered him with stones, and
oftentimes before he could get out of the camp he was killed: but yet if he
escaped, he was not received into his country again, and none of his kindred
durst give him enterteinment.

He that opposed or neglected the orders given for the guard, or for the
rounds, or other service concerning the security of the camp; or falsely
pretended to have done some signal act; or had forsaken the place where he had
been placed; or had lost his arms in the battle; or had stolen any thing in the
camp; or born false witness; or else had forsaken his ensign, was punished
after this manner; as also he which committed smaller faults thrice.

If it happened that many Legions or one Legion, or a gross troup had run
away, they were punished two ways: the more rigourous way was to make them all
draw lots, and to punish every tenth man; or more or fewer according to the
exigence of the cause: by this means all were partakers of the fear, and a
small number of them were punished. The more gentle way was, to cause them to
lodge without the camp, and to give them barley in stead of wheat, which was a
mark of ignominy; which many troops have wiped out by performing valourous and
memorable acts.

Concerning their rewards, they excited those soldiers by honorable
acknowledgements and public commendations in presence of all the rest, which
had performed some valourous and extraordinary act. Besides that, to him that
had wounded an enemy in some light skirmish, or that voluntarily had gone and
assaulted him, they gave a dart: To him which had killed and disarmed him (if
he were one that served on foot) they gave a target: if he were a horseman, a
horse-furniture.

To him that (at the assault of a town) was first got up upon the wall, they
gave a crown, which they called Muralis: to him which had rescued a Roman
citizen, a crown called Civica, which was set upon his head by him which was so
rescued, whom he respected and honored all his life after as his father.

The commanders had also their shares of honor, by the several triumphs which
they obtained, according to the greatness of their actions and the felicity
of their victories.

CHAP. VII. Of their Pay.
COncerning their pay; It began not until three hundred forty eight years
after the foundation of Rome: before that every soldier armed and victualled
himself at his own charge, which was no hard thing in those times, because
their war was then extended no further then Rome: But when they began to go
out of Italy, it was necessary to give them pay, which at the beginning was
very small: afterward it increased as the Roman empire grew in greatness. I
will not trouble my self to make the valuation of it according to our money, it
being a thing of no utility: only I will say, that the soldiers pay must be
so proportioned as he may maintein himself well thereby. I will further observe
here, that the Romans charged themselves with the furnishing of bread,
apparel, arms, and tents for all their soldiers; and besides, barley for the
horsemens horses (abating these things out of their pay) which I find to be a
good order, and above all things necessary to make an army subsist: for besides
that the greater part of soldiers are bad husbands, and such (as if a care be
not taken) will never be well clothed nor well fed, it is impossible that a
soldier should everywhere find bread to be bought, and that he should carry
all things with him which he stands in need of.

CHAP. VIII. Of their order of battalia.
THere is a diversity of opinions about the order of battle of the Romans.
Some would have it that when the Hastati be not able to sustein the enemies
charge, in their retreat they should fall into the order of the Principes by
files; and both they into the order of the Triarii; and so to renew the fight
three times. Others will have it to be done by troops, whereof I conceive there
is much the greater probability, holding the first way not only impossible to
be put in practice but also most dangerous, and the other exceeding feisible
and profitable. For to fall one into another in that manner by files, the
Hastati must then fight at so wide a distance, that between two files they
might receive two other files, which shows the weakness of this first order,
which being so ranged in battalia could not be able to repulse nor sustein the
adverse battallion. And even the files, being at so wide a distance from each
other, were not able to keep themselves right in fight nor to observe their
distances; but in the other way there are many conveniences to be found. First
many bodies of a hundred and twenty men apiece (or thereabouts) assaulting a
battallion, they may very well defeat it; at the worst they may retreat without
disordering themselves or loosing their distances. And the second order, which
is embattelled behind the first, just over against their intervalls, may easily
fill them: as also (in case of necessity) the third body may supply those
distances which are reserved for them, renewing the fight three times. And that
which confirms us the more in this opinion is, that in reason it ought to be
so: next, the description of the battle of Zama which Scipio fought against
Hannibal, where it is said that Scipio to hinder Hannibals elephants from
routing his soldiers, caused the Cohorts of the Principes (which were placed
just over against the intervalls of the Hastati) to stand just behind them, so
to leave streets for the passage of the elephants: which shows plainly that
the order of battalia was disposed by Cohorts, and not by files.

I speak not of the Velites in this order of battalia, nor of all other
light-armed soldiers, because they fought not but with casting-weapons, and
afar off, and when the armies approached to give the shock, they retired
themselves behind the heavie-armed.

Now to form the said order, I will say that the file was always of ten men in
depth; that a Cohort or Maniple of a Legion of four thousand two hundred men
consisted always of one hundred and twenty soldiers, and consequently the
Cohort made ten ranks and twelve files, containing (at six foot square of
ground for every soldier) seventy two foot in breadth and sixty in depth: and
the moity of it when they were at three foot distance.

The first figure of a Cohort.
diagram This figure in the Authors copy has 13 files and 11 ranks, which I
conceioee to be a mistake


In each of the three orders, howsoever the Legions were weaker or stronger,
there were always ten Cohorts or Maniples; but the Cohorts were either
increased or diminished according to the proportion of the Legions.

The second figure of ten Cohorts.
diagram

The two first orders are of an equal number, and the last of half as many;
and by this example of one Legion, you may see how all the troops passed into
each other.

The third figure, of a Legion.
This figure (in my opinion) is not right. For first the Hastati are too close
to fall into the intervalls of the Principes; neither are those intervalls (nor
those of the Triarii) made fitly in a straight line, as they ought. Besides,
the Cohorts of the Principes should have as great a breadth as the Hastati; and
neither they nor the Triarii ought to have a greater depth then the Hastati,
which here are double that depth. Besides, the distance between the Principes
and the Hastati is here wider then that between the Principes and Triarii;
which should be to the contrary. See the figure in Praissac, page 187.
diagram

I conceive that between the Legions there was a far greater distance then
between the Cohorts, that so they might prevent confusion amongst them; which I
judge to be so necessary, as that without the observation thereof it was
altogether impossible to observe any good order.

Concerning the cavalry; seeing it was divided into the like number of troops
as the Infantery, it is like they fought in the same order; but the one half
were on the right flank, and the other on the left: Thus the army was composed
of six great bodies, namely four bodies of infantery, and two bodies of the
cavalry; and every body divided into small troops, as has been showed before.

The order of Battalia of a complete Army. The fourth figure.
diagram So in this figure; the intervalls should be 4 times wider, if the
bodies must be so large; but I conceive a general mistake in the figure, and
that in Praissac page 190. to be much better.


CHAP. IX. Of Sieges.
NO Roman Commander has made braver sieges then Caesar, nor described them
more perfectly. He has left examples for the assailing of all sorts of sites,
and to maintein a siege against all kinds of reliefs. At Brundusium, which is
upon the sea, he constrained Pompey to abandon it, for that he shut up the
haven by which that town was to be relieved. At Cadenac, which was a site
inexpugnable, he constrained the garrison to yield it, by taking away their
water. At Alexia, where were 80000 soldiers within the town, and which
expected two or three times as many, he so fortified himself before it, both
against the town and against the enemy without, as he famished it. And at
Bourges and Marseilles he took the first by assault, and constrained the other
to yield, when it was upon the point of being taken by assault. I will not here
particularize the engines which they then made use of to force places of
strength, because the cannon has taken away the use of them. Yet I will only
say that they approached to the walls by degrees, as much sheltred as they
could, and then attempted to batter them down by their engines, or by mines to
force an assault, or at least to lodge upon the breach: which I the rather
speak, to show that howsoever we have changed the manner of fortifications, the
better to make resistance against our new thundering engines, nevertheless the
ancient maxims for the taking of towns are the same, which we make use of at
this day. Concerning the siege of Alexia, it is the model by which the Prince
of Parma, the Prince of Orange, and the Marquess Spinola have directed
themselves to make theirs. And all these great works and circumvallations which
we admire, and by the help of which they have taken many great cities in sight
of greater armies then their own, which have not been able to relieve them, are
nothing in comparison of those which Caesar made at this siege of Alexia. To
conclude, they which come nearest to the manner of warring of the ancient
Romans, as well in sieges as in the field, are they which prove the most
excellent Commanders.

CHAP. X. Observations upon some battles of the ancients.
NOw that we have showed the ancient Militia of the Grecians and Romans, by
means whereof they have obtained so many brave victories, we must yet observe
two principal causes, which their most excellent Commanders have successefully
observed to obtein victories in battle: namely, to strive to overwing their
enemy, and never to cause their army to fight all at once. Cyrus, to keep
himself from being overwinged in the battle which he fought against Cresus,
doubled the front of his army by as many more as they were, by making the files
of his infantery but 12 deep, which before were 24: and to enclose his enemy,
he placed his best men on the wings; who having defeated the wings of the
adverse army, came to assault the body of the battle on their flanks and on
their rear. At the battle of Cannae Hannibal placed all his best soldiers on
the wings, and the meaner ones in the middle, that so the Romans finding but
little resistance there, might insensibly sink into them, and by that means
they found themselves enclosed on both flanks. At the battle of Pharsale, Caesar
sheltred one of the flanks of his army by a little river, and fortified his
Cavalry (which was on his other flank) by a body of Infantery, to resist
Pompey's horse, which exceeded his own by much; so that having routed it by
this means, he assailed the army on the flank, and easily defeated it. At the
battle of Zama Hannibal made a body of all his old companies of Italy, which he
divided from all his army, that so when all the rest (as well of the one part
as the other) should be weary with fighting, this body being fresh, might carry
away the victory. So that Scipio, after that he had defeated all that were
before him, found himself astonished to see a second army for him to fight with
afresh.

Here may be an objection made, that the armies might be so unequal in number,
as all these maxims might prove unprofitable; whereunto I answer, that when an
army passes a certain number of forty or fifty thousand men, the surplussage
serves for no other end but to famish the army: for it is an easy thing by
retrenching to avoid battle. And if you should resolve to give battle, if you
would observe the forementioned orders, there is no plain so smooth but you may
find something wherewith to shelter one of the flanks of your army; either by a
river, wood, hill, or a ditch; and the other with wagons: nor nothing that
shall be able to hinder you from having some body of reserve which shall not
fight at the beginning; nor from placing those troops on the wings which you
esteem to be your best soldiers. Which things if they be exactly observed as
they ought, they may avail very much for the obteining of victory.

CHAP. XI. A comparing of the arms and military orders of the Romans with
those of the Grecians.
THe arms of the Grecians were the buckler, the pike, and the sword. Their
order was of great bodies of battalions of 16 deep of the heavie-armed, and
then strengthened by eight in depth of the light-armed: so that the battalions
came to be 24 in depth, and fought all at once, making all one front.

The arms of the Romans were the target and the sword; their order was to make
small bodies of 150 or 200 soldiers at the most, which were only ten in
depth, and to make three orders of battalia, that so they might fight three
times, one after another.

Concerning the arms of the Grecians; it seems that their long pikes had a
great advantage of the Roman targets, because they reached far; and even at
this day we find no weapon comparable to the pike against the violence of the
horse: and for their order, those great bodies met with nothing that could
resist them. On the other side those great Roman targets covered the soldiers
so well as the pikes could not hurt them; and if once they came to join, they
made a great slaughter with their short and broad swords; for then the pike was
unusefull. Moreover, their small troops gave them this advantage, that they
brought more hands to fight at once. Concerning their disposing of their three
orders one behind another, to the end they might relieve each other, and to be
able to begin the fight again by all three, they had this advantage by it, that
all were not wearied nor disordered at once. In so much that oftentimes they
have carried away the victory after the defeat of their two first orders: for
that their third order being fresh, and having rallied all the rest, gave the
last charge against an army which was tired and in disorder, and so gained the
battle.

There be two discommodities more in those great bodies; namely, that they must
ever have a very smooth field for the battle, else they are not able to keep
their order; and that they cannot agitate on the right or left, but only fight
just before them. But the small troops weild themselves on all sides, and
continue their order in all places. It is true that the Romans sometimes
joined all their forces together, making but one body of all their army, in an
Orb; but this was but to save themselves in a retreat, and not to charge an
enemy: for as these great bodies are as it were unmovable and of little use in
assaults; so when they will only defend themselves, they are hard to be broken.

And yet they used not this last order bu^ when they were persecuted by the
arrows of a great Cavalrie, as that of the Parthians: for not being able to
come to hand-blows with them, they were constrained to put themselves into this
order, and to shelter themselves with their targets. So that I conclude that
the arms and orders of the Romans were better then those of the Grecians;
because small troops accommodate themselves better to all sites then great
ones, and fighting at several times they continue the fight with more
obstinacy then when all fight at once; and that it is more easy of many small
troops to make a gross readily and without disorder, then of a gross to make
many small troops.

A TREATISE OF Modern War; Written By the late great General the Duke of
Rohan:

Englished by J. C.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by ROGER DANIEL, Printer to the UNIVERSITIE, 1640.

To the right worshipful Sir Thomas Glenham Knight, one of the
Deputie-Lieutenants, and Colonel of a Regiment in the county of Suffolk.
Right Worshipful,
I Make bold (incited by your many favors) to present you with a short
Treatise of War. How well the Author has acquitted himself therein, Your
worthy self (by reason of your known abilities, both for Theorie and Practice,
in that profession) are best able to judge. And for my translation, your
studies and travels having made that language natural to you, I might justly
fear a severe censure; but that I know your candor such, as you will excuse

Your obliged servant, J. C.

A Treatise of War.
I Undertake not here to treat of all the functions of war in particular,
because so many have written thereof as it would be a thing superfluous. I
content my self to make general observations upon all those things which
depend thereon, and which may in these times be put in practice: being loath to
touch upon any thing but what experience has taught me, and in all to be so
brief as I may not weary the Reader.

CHAP. I. Of the election of Soldiers.
THe election of soldiers was by the Ancients and is by Moderns made after
diverse ways. The Grecians and Romans contented not themselves to enroll the
soldiers which of their own accord were willing to go to the war, but chose
out of them such as they judged to be fittest for that service; which is the
cause they had so good soldiers. The Carthaginians for the most part employed
strangers, and therefore had no worse soldiers then their own contrymen.
The Turks choose their soldiers, and train them. The Swisses make use of their
own men. The Venetians and Hollanders, in imitation of the Carthaginians, are
served by auxiliarie soldiers. The French and Germans abound in good
soldiers, and may well forbear auxiliaries. England alone, of all the States
of our time, may choose them, and take such as she pleases. Whereupon we must
consider the constitution of these States, on what maxims they be founded, and
what either of them may best do to have good soldiers. The greater part of
States at this time are more founded upon policy then upon war, and
endeavor rather to conserve themselves then to grow greater. Wherefore we see
that learning flourishes there, and arms degenerate; in so much that those
States which are founded upon war do devour the other.

The example of the Turk to the shame of the Christians, and that of the king
of Spain to the prejudice of Germany and Italy, are two manifest proofs. That
which causes this mischief is, that men of the gown have possessed themselves
of the government of almost all States, which (for that they hate soldiers)
cause them always to be ill dealt with, and do advise Princes to employ
auxiliars rather then their natural subjects: which is a most pernicious
maxim. But this being no fit place to treat of it, we will only speak of the
election of soldiers.

England, which has right by the laws of that kingdom to make choice of her
soldiers, may observe the form of the election of the Romans, which is very
good. The other kingdoms which have not that power must incite their men which
are ambitious of honor to cause themselves to be enrolled, as well for the hope
of being advanced to other honors by embracing the profession of war, as by
shutting up the means of atteining thereunto by any other way then that* For
example, not to bestow any office of the kingdom, nor of the kings house, nor
any charge amongst the soldiers, to any but such, as have served in the wars
a certain number of years; nor to make any man Colonel of horse which has not
been a Captain and other officer of the Cavalrie; nor any to be Marshall of the
field, which has not honorably born lesser charges; nor any to be General of
the army, which has not been a worthy Marshall of the field: briefly, that
none may be advanced to any office, which has not passed through the degrees
of war. And as the hope of advancement is a strong spur to encourage every
man to exercise the profession of arms; so the fear of finding ones self poor
and needy after long service is a sharp bit to keep men from ^^. Therefore I
would prevent that by establishing a foundation for men of that profession, so
that they might live out the rest of their days commodiously and honorably.
Those States which by reason of their form of government are fearful to arm
their own people (as Venice) or where their subsistence depends on traffic
(as the Low Countries) and which for these reasons are constrained to help
themselves in their wars by auxiliars, must principally be careful to choose
good Commanders; next, to have a certain body of well exercised and ^^sciplined
sould^ers always in readiness, sufficient as well to guard them from a
surprise as to give them time ^o assemble greater forces. For an army formed
and disciplined at leisure, though but small, is more capable to defend it
self, yea to conquer, ^hen those armies which assure themselves only in their
great numbers. And great conquests are almost always made by small armies, as
great Empires are always lost with their innumerable forces. For that they
which were to fight against such numerous armies, opposed them with an exact
discipline and good order; and the other, having neglected all discipline and
order, have endeavored to supply that defect by their great number of men;
which has brought upon them the greater confusion and has served them for no
other end but to make their loss the more disgraceful. Whence I conclude,
that the best means to have good soldiers is to choose such as are most fit
for war; the second, to incite men of ambition and virtue freely to enroll
themselves, by shutting the door of any other way to advancement; and lastly,
to entertein a body of an army* and to be careful (as well in peace as in
war) to keep them under an exact discipline, without relaxation One of which
three ways all sorts of States may make use of.

CHAP. II. Of Arms.
THe most usual arms of the Infanterie at thi^ present time, are (for the
defensive) the headpiece, the cuirace, and the tasses: and for the offensive,
the sword, the pike, and the musket which are rather the arms of the Grecians
then o^ the Romans. Whereupon we must observe, that ou^ muskets serve us as
the casting-weapons did the Ancients; so that the body of the battle consiste^
of pikes, which is a very fit weapon to resist the Cavalrie, for that many of
them joined together make a very solid body, and very hard to be broken on
their front, by reason of their length, whereof four or five ranks extend the
heads of their pikes beyond the first rank of men, and do always keep out the
squadrons of horse from them twelve or fifteen foot of. Maurice Prince of
Orange had a great desire to make use of the target, and having caused diverse
trials to be made thereof, has found that it has not only resisted the pike,
but that half the number of targets has always entered into twice the number
of pikes, and has routed them. Nevertheless, being but General of the armies
of a State, and not a sovereigne and absolute Prince, he durst not make so
great a change; whether it were that he feared the Cavalrie, which now-adayes
is exceeding well armed or else the reproach of some evil success; not being
ignorant that the people Judge of the actions of such as serve them rather by
the event then by reason. For my part, I would add this kind of arms to our
discipline, making always the principal body of my Infantery to be of pikes,
and to have for every battallion a small body separate of one hundred or one
hundred and twenty targets to charge on the flank, which would work a
mavelous effect on the day of battle; and this should be the true place of
volunteers, and of very brave Nobility, which often prove to be but
troublesome to an army. Concerning the offensive arms of the Cavalrie, there be
of five sorts; namely, the lance, the pistol, the sword, the carabine, and the
musket: the two first are given to the heavie-armed calvarie, which must have
for defensive arms the cuiracecask, vambraces, tassets, cuisses, and
guard-rein, and (not many years since) some horses have been armed with barbs.
Of the two other kinds, they which serve with carabines have the headpiece and
cuirace; and because they fight on horseback, they must be well mounted: but
they which serve with the musket have no defensive arms. Of these five sorts of
offensive arms there be but three much in use; namely, the pistol, sword, and
carabine. The Spaniards only have continued some few companies of lances,
which they keep rather for gravitie then reason; for the lance does no effect
but by the violence of the carreir of the horse, and besides there is but one
rank which can make use of it; so that their order must be to fight by single
ranks, which cannot resist the squadrons: and if they should fight in
squadrons, they would rather be troublesome then serviceable. And for
musketeers on horseback or dragones, they are also in a manner left off, for
that in the civil wars they ruined the Infantery, every man desiring to have
a nag, that so he might be the fitter to rob and pillage: nevertheless some
well-ordered troops of this kind in an army are of very great service; either
for executions, to gain bad passages, to guard the quarters of horse, or else
(on a day of battle) to cause them to dismount as forlorn hopes before the
squadrons of Cavalrie.

Now the Cavalrie must be proportioned with the Infantery; which may be
distinguished according to the situation of the country where the war is
made, or else according to the enemy against whom you are to fight. For if you
you be in a champain full of forage, and if ye be to make war against a
great Cavalrie, as that of the Turk, in such a case you must fortify your self
with the greater number of horse. But if the war be in a country enclosed,
either by mountains, forests, moors, or hedges and ditches, and that has
many fortified places, for that the war is rather reduced to sieges then to
battles and field-combats, in such a case you must strengthen your Infanterie.
And these two bodies are so necessary the one for the other, as an army cannot
be held to be good nor subsist unless it be equally provided of both.
Nevertheless, if I were not induced by some extraordinary reason, I would make
the proportion of my army for the open country of a fourth part of horse to
three fourth parts of Infantery; as to twenty four thousand foot, eight
thousand horse: in an enclosed country, of a sixth part of horse to five parts
of foot; as to twenty four thousand foot, four thousand horse. It remains
to give to these two bodies such arms as were before mentioned with the most
profitable proportion. The Swisses have many more pikes then muskets, and for
this they have made themselves to be much feared in a champain country; for in
a day of battle where you come to hand, the number of pikes has much advantage
of that of muskets. Other nations do equally divide the pikes and muskets; and
because the war in these times is reduced to sieges rather then battles, we
desire to have a greater number of muskets then of pikes. For my self, which
add the targets to them, my opinion should be to have the regiments of 1440
soldiers, namely of 600 pikes, 600 muskets, and 240 targets. For the Cavalrie;
I would proportion it after this manner: I would compose the regiments of 500
horse, whereof I would arm 400 with Cuirassiers arms; 50 with carabines, and 50
to be dragones.

But this is not all, to provide good arms for your soldiers, unless you
oblige them to wear them; it being an unsufferable shame to see their
delicateness in these times, and how they disesteem them: and to cover this
fault, they publish that it is want of courage to go armed, and that they will
go in their doublets into the most dangerous places, as well as they which are
armed. It is not enough to go into a place to cause ones self there to be
knocked on the head; we should go thither to conquer, and not to be beaten.
Besides this inconvenience grows of it, that if you use not your self to wear
your arms, you are so pestered with them as you cannot fight in them: on the
contrary, if you accustom your self to them, they are no more troublesome to
you, and you are at as much liberty in them as if you were in your doublet.
But the greatest mischief that comes of it is, that the ruin of military
discipline follows on it; which a good Captain ought to cause to be exactly
observed in every part. For if he slacken it in one, or in favor of some
persons, the consequences which follow on it by little and little will be such
as they will wholly overthrow it: and then he shall find himself without
obedience and without respect; which he shall never recover without incurring
the hatred of those whom he has too much spared; it being most certain that it
is easier to prevent a mischief then to help it when it is befallen.

CHAP. III. Of Military Discipline.
BEsides that which has been said to incite every one to take upon him the
profession of arms rather then any other, we must make other observations to
make a man worthy thereof, which consist in three things: namely in the
recompense of commendable actions, in the punishment of bad ones, and in the
continual and exact exercise of military discipline; for there is no
profession in the world which has more need of such helps then that of war,
where for the single pay (which hardly affords livelihood, and with which the
meanest artisan would not be contented) the soldier abandoneth himself to all
sorts of perils and labors: but none are instigated thereunto unless it be by
emulation of honor, or by license to do evil; and as the first aim is
virtuous, so you shall have good service of such as enter into it for that end.
But of the other you shall reap nothing but shame; for in stead of a good and
obedient army you shall find that you have no better then a troup of pillaging
rogues, which without order or obedience forsake you, either after a good
boot-haling, or in any eminent danger. For this reason the election of
soldiers is a better way of forming an army, then only to receive
voluntaries; where all the vagabonds and evil livers, and such as cannot live
but by robbing, cause themselves to be enrolled. Therefore to incite such as
are virtuous to well-doing, and to deter the vicious from doing evil,
recompenses and punishments are principally necessary. The Romans have made
very profitable use of these two means: and if we follow not their way we shall
never have good nor well-disciplined soldiers. It matters not though we use
not the very same remunerations and the same punishments they did; it suffices
that they be equivalent, that so we may receive the same benefit by them: and
these things are diversely done, according to time and custom. The principal
is to be an exact observer of them, that so the remunerations may excite brave
men to worthy actions, and the rigor of punishment may keep cowards from doing
basely. The manner of decimating the soldiers which the Romans had, is held
to be cruel: nevertheless there be sometimes so infamous actions committed, as
you are constrained to use great severity, to give a terror to all; finding it
very good to strike a fear into all those that have escaped by the means of the
lot, and to put but few to death. For you must imprint this belief into your
soldiers, that by base flight they escape not death, but they only exchange a
glorious death which they should have acquired by fighting valiantly for an
infamous one. After that the soldier be encouraged by the honor of being
esteemed valiant, and brought to a hatred of being held a coward, it must be
made a like degree of honor for every one to know how well to obey his
superior, from the private soldier to the Lieutenant general: for on this
obedience all the functions of an army depend, and without it you can keep
nothing in rule, nor do any thing that is good. This must be ingraffed into the
hearts of the soldiers, as being one of the principallest virtues required in
them. From hence grows order; by this military exercise is maintained;
briefly, by this brave designs are executed, and without this all goes to
confusion and ruin. I will not trouble my self here to speak of the particular
military exercises which the soldier is to be exercised in, because diverse
books are full of them, and that custom does always change something or other
in them. I will only say that there is nothing so profitable as to exercise
every soldier to carry his arms properly, to use them souldierlike, to keep
his rank well, and therein well to execute all the motions and charges which
are commanded him. So much concerning the soldiers: But concerning the
recompense of Generals of armies, I will say the same which I said for the
soldiers, namely, that according to the time, or the constitution of kingdoms
or commonwealths, such courses ought to be taken as the honor of such as have
done brave actions and great services be not diminished nor blemished: For that
the most generous spirits (which will easily excuse all want of other
recompense for their services) will never endure to be robbed of the honor due
to their brave actions, and will sooner stomach such a want of due honor then
any other thing whatsoever: whereupon very often great mischiefs have followed.

CHAP. IV. Of the obedience of soldiers.
NOw as the General of the army requires of the soldiers that obedience
which is due to him, so he must have a care to give them no just cause to
exempt themselves from it: to this end he ought to keep them in continual
employment, for that idleness engenders corruption of manners and discipline,
whence proceed luxury, neglecting of exercises and the guards, and disobedience
to superiors. It was the ease and idleness of Capua that destroyed Hannibals
army, and the delicacies of Babylon which corrupted Alexander himself, and from
whence he drew away his army to prevent the total ruin of it; there being no
means of greater efficacy to keep it in due order, and to prevent seditions,
then to employ it in war. It is therefore a maxim which must be exactly
observed, never to suffer your soldiers in any place to be idle, especially
when the army is brought together in a body; for if you employ them not in that
which is good, they will busy themselves in that which is naught. This course
must be taken as well in the time of securest peace as of open war;
particularly, to exercise them to use their arms well, and to observe good
order; and though there be no need, yet to use them to make retrenchments of
the camp, and to make their huts: that so they may be so accustomed to remove
the earth, that when necessity shall require, it may be no trouble to them. I
would further employ them to make fortifications and other works of this kind,
not only to keep them in exercise, but that also they may get (besides their
pay) wherewith the better to maintein themselves, and that they accustom
themselves to that which in time of war is as profitable to them as to fight
well, there being nothing impossible for twenty or thirty thousand men which
will work in the earth; for in eight days they will make fortresses which
shall be impregnable: And Caesar has made himself as much redoubted and admired
by the great works which he has caused his soldiers to make, as by his great
battles. Moreover, the General must take care that they be well clothed and
well fed; especially that (out of their pays) they be furnished with clothes
and shoes, otherwise he will soon find his army to decay, and diseases to rage
in it for want thereof. He must also have a great care of those which are sick
and hurt, and therein to spare for no cost; that so the soldiers may not
excuse themselves from going on upon dangerous services, or to undergo
laborious employments, because they are abandoned when they are sick or
wounded. The General ought also to take a particular care not to overlabour his
soldiers, nor to put them to extraordinary hard marches without great
necessity: but when need requires it, he must be the first to undergo the
labor; for the example of the commander makes all things easy to the
soldier. The examples not only of the greatest Captains amongst the Ancients,
but even of the greatest Monarchs and Emperors, should shame our delicate
Captains of these times, which are afraid to spoil their fair complexion in the
sun, and their goodly plumes in the rain, which would believe themselves to
be dishonored if they should march on foot at the head of their companies: and
those great men have not scorned to march at the head of their armies, and have
refused to quench their extraordinary thirst, because there was not water
enough to make all the army to drink; and so making themselves companions of
the dangers and labors of their meanest soldiers, have made themselves
masters of the greatest part of the world, and have gained an immortal glory.

CHAP. V. Of Marching.
THere are diverse considerations to be made upon the marching of an army; which
may be assaulted in the daytime, or at its dislodging, or even in the night
when it is lodged. If it be not encamped, but lodge in villages, you must (to
cause it to meet in one body) give it a Rendez-vous on the way which it must
take; which if the enemy learn time enough to be there first, or that he meet
with it there by chance, he will put the army to run a great hazard, which
comes to its Rendez-vous at diverse times and by diverse ways. The best means
to guard ones self from such an accident are, to keep your Rendez-vous very
secret, to have good spies amongst the enemies, and to send out many
discoverers for intelligence. When you encamp you are not subject to that
danger, because the army is always together. For the march you must consider
the country where you are, and the number of soldiers which you have. If you
march in great plains, you may (for the most part) march in battalia; or at
least with formed battaillons and squadrons: then it is very easy to put your
self readily into a good form to fight well, because you march not in a long
order. But when you march through a strait country, where but few can march in
front, then you must compute the discommodity of the way, and the time you have
for your march, with the number of soldiers whereof your army consists; for
10000 foot marching 10 in front, and 1000 horse marching 5 in front, with the
lightest baggage they can possibly have, and ten cannons, with equipage for
every piece to shoot 100 bullets, take up about 28000 foot of way in length;
whereby you may judge how much way in file 30000 foot and 6000 horse will take.
Therefore when so great armies find themselves in such a troublesome way, you
must of necessity divide them into several bodies, which may march one after
another, and lodge severally; or rather cause them to march by diverse ways,
some miles distant from each other; or howsoever, to make ways through the
fields for your soldiers to march in, leaving the great road for your cannon
and baggage. If there be a river to pass where you can make but one bridge, or
some passage over a mountain, moorish ground, or forest where you cannot make
several ways, then you must march one after another, and on several days. I
trouble not my self to show how you are to pass through such bad passages in
view of the enemy, because many have written thereof: yet when it comes to
execution, few will get off well, if they be charged home; but I will only say
that the best way is to calculate the time so well as you may avoid such
encounters. Concerning the march; I find it almost impossible that two armies
should meet each other, if one of the two Generals be desirous to avoid it,
especially in an enclosed country: but whatsoever happen, the best way is to
have the baggage wholly separated from the soldiers, leaving only on the rear
some few troops to keep it from disbanding: for if in time of alarm every body
have their baggage behind them, it causes a great confusion, and hinders the
soldiers from rallying themselves and helping each other. The time of lodging
is also a dangerous time to be assaulted in, because the army is then tired,
and every man (desirous to be lodged) hastneth to the quarter in disorder,
which is a thing hard to avoid, if (before you enter your lodgings) you cause
not your army to stand in battalia, and so cause them to lodge troup after
troup, without suffering any to lodge but by command, mean time sending out on
all sides upon discovery.

There remains the assaulting of a quarter, which is that which is more
frequently attempted, especially when the army is not encamped; because it
being lodged in several quarters, the enemy may attempt to surprise some one
quarter without hazarding a general combat: for which I do not find the
ordinary guard alone (how exactly soever it be performed) sufficien^ to remedy
such an accident; because it cannon give the alarm but at too near a distance,
and tha^ ofttimes you have not leisure to put your self in order to fight;
therefore you must be careful to send out discoverers every night, by diverse
small troops, which (if they do well perform their task) will not suffer you to
be surprised; for an army or a gross troup capable to assail a quarter of an
army cannot march so secretly that it be not perceived. And when you have to do
with a vigilant enemy, and that you fear such assaults in the night, there is
nothing so good as to prevent him, if it be not in earnest, at least to give
him alarms every night, that so he may be more troubled about keeping himself
upon his guards, then about assailing you. If it be in an entrenched camp,
where all the army is in one body, it is a high enterprise to assault it. And
this one chapter shows the security of an entrenched camp* which I will end
with this conclusion, That all the forementioned things to assure the quarters
must never be omitted, though you believe your self to be far off from any
enemy; for that, besides the profit you draw from hence in accustoming your
army to do their duties, there may such an occasion befall you as it may be the
safety of your army, of your life, and of your reputation.

CHAP. VI. Of encamping.
I Will not here describe the form of entrenched camps, but only the
profitablenesse of them, not being able to wonder enough that they have been
wholly discontinued. No people made so exact use of them as the Romans; and in
our time Maurice Prince of Orange has revived the use of them, or at least
has given them a great perfection. The entrenchment of a camp assures an
army, in that it is never dispersed in the villages, where some quarter or
other is ever in danger to be surprised, but lodges all in one body, and in
such fashion as being assailed it may fight with great advantage. The
entrenchment saves a great deal of trouble, because by it there is need of the
fewer guards by many, and those less toilsome, especially to the Cavalry,
which when they are lodged in open villages, are constrained to be on horseback
almost all night. The entrenchment encloseth your army as a walled city; from
whence you may march privately with such troops as you please, to execute all
sorts of brave designs, leaving your baggage in safety. The entrenchment
hinders the enemy from constraining you to fight, unless when you please. The
entrenchment causes you to be without danger at the head of the most dreadful
armies. The entrenchment causes you to take strong cities in the face of more
puissant armies then your own. Briefly, the entrenchment is less subject to
infection then the villages where you lodge, because you choose a wholesome
place to sit down in, and in villages you must take them as they fall out:
Also, because this is more ayrie, the lodgings are here better divided, those
things which may cause bad air are more easily removed; and in effect an army
encamped and entrenched will rather subsist three months in health in a camp,
then a forthnight in the best villages. Whence I conclude, that one of the most
necessary parts of war is, well to know how to incamp and entrench.

CHAP. VII. Of Battles.
OF all the actions of war the most glorious and most important is to give
battle: the gaining of one or two acquireth or subverteth whole Empires.
Anciently all wars were divided by battles, which caused such speedy
conquest: For the present, wars are managed more fox-like then lion-like; and
are rather founded upon sieges then combats. Neverthethelesse, there be diverse
nations at this day which decide the most part of their wars by battles, as
the Turks and the Persians: and even amongst the Christians we have seen of
late diverse battles given in Germany, whereof only one had almost inthralled
all the Protestant Princes. And an army well-disciplined, and which fears not
battle, has a mavelous advantage in all designs of that which fears it.
For this reason (howsoever the manner of warring at this time be not so
frequent in the hazarding of battles as in times past) the knowledge of them
must not be neglected. And a General of an army cannot be said to be a good
Captain, which knows not all advantages which may be taken on a day of
battle, and all disadvantages which ought to be avoided; that so he may well
disintangle himself. I will not speak of dust, the sun or rain, whereof it is
observed that many Captains have made use, driving them on the face of the
enemy by gaining the wind of them; because they are casual things which may
change in a moment, and which by consequence happen rather by hazard then come
by design; but of things more solid.

He then that will give battle must have regard to seven principal things. The
first is, never to suffer himself to be forced to fight against his will. The
second, to choose a field for the battle fit for the quality and number of his
soldiers: for if he fears to be enclosed by a great number, he must shelter
his flanks* or at least one of them, by the nature of the place; as by a river,
wood, or some other thing equivalent: and if he be weak in his Cavalry, he must
avoid the plains; as he must strait passages or enclosed places, if stronger.
The third, so to range his army in battle, as according to the quality of his
soldiers it may be within its own advantage, sheltring his horse by his foot,
if therein he be the weaker; and if the contrary, his foot by his horse;
disposing all his soldiers in such order as they may fight diverse times before
they be wholly defeated: for if we well observe the small troops of soldiers
which fight not all at once, and believe that a hundred horse in two troops will
beat two hundred in one entire troup, and have observed in our times that
diverse battles have been won by him which had made a troup of reserve, which
was not to fight until all the rest had fought, how much greater effect will a
second order of battle produce, which will come to the charge after that all
the adverse army has fought against the first order* and yet after that a
third, in imitation of the Romans, if the two former be defeated It is a
maxim, That every troup (how gross soever i^ be) which has fought, is in
such a disorder as the least troup that charge it, is able to defeat it
absolutely: so that that General which can reserve some troops to the last
without fighting, will with those bear away the victory: it being a long work
and difficult to go about to rally an army that has fought into good order to
fight afresh; some gazing about for pillage, others being vexed to return to
the danger again, and all being so distracted as they do not or will not
understand any command: on the contrary, such as have not as yet fought, are
under obedience, and ready to do whatsoever their General shall command them.
So that the knowledge of a General of an army is not so much to rally
disordered and defeated troops (which is properly but an action of courage) as
to make his troops fight to good purpose, the one after the other, and not all
at once: for he must consider that he cannot be well obeyed by his soldiers,
but only until the hour that he sends them to the combat. After that all
the orations of the world will not stay them when they fly; but this troup
which is in good order will easily do it. The fourth is, to have many good
commanders, it being impossible that a General should suffice for all places.
After that he has made a good choice of his field for battle, and put his army
into good order, it is altogether impossible for him (when it comes to blows)
to give order, more then in that part where he is present: so that if he be not
well assisted everywhere else, as well amongst the horse as foot, though he
should work miracles in that place where he himself is, he cannot make good the
ignorance of those officers which command in the other parts of his army.
Therefore there must be at least five principal commanders to make an army
fight well, namely for three bodies of Infantery, distinguished by vanguard,
battle, and rearguard, and two for the horse which are on the wings. The fifth
is, so to observe your distances in your order of battle, that the foremost
troops being put to recoil, may not fall upon those which should come up to
relieve the^, nor the second upon the third. The sixth is, to place the most
valiant soldiers on the wings of the army, and to begin the battle by that
wing which you think to be strongest; for if you once break one of the enemies
wings, you fall upon his flank and rear, and it is impossible for him to resist
you. The seventh and last is, not to suffer any to pursue the enemy, nor fall
to pillaging, until he be routed on all parts; and although it be good to give
him a hot chase, you must ever have some troops in order, which must not
disband, that so you may avoid all inconveniences. I will not speak of the
advantages which may be met with in a field of battle, whereof a good Captain
often makes use with great profit; because there can no certain rule be given
for it, by reason the diversity of situations is such, that you shall never
find two every-way alike.

CHAP. VIII. Of Fortresses.
BEcause the gain and loss of battles draws such consequences after it, as
it gives or takes away whole Empires at once, it has caused a resolution of
opposing the conquers by fortified places, to stay their first fury with few
men, and to ruin their armies: But since the invention of the cannon they have
been enforced to change their manner of fortifications; and even by reason of
the invention of petards we have been constrained to assure the gates of
cities by portculices, pallisadoes, draw-bridges, and other inventions; because
there was no place, how strong soever it were, which did not run a hazard to
be surprised by this new invention. Now the best fortresses against the cannon
are those which are made of earth; because (when they have a sufficient
thickness to make resistance) they are not subject to endamage the besieged,
as those fortifications are which are made of masons work, the shivers whereof
do much mischief. Nevertheless, when a Prince can be at the cost to line them
as high as the rampart, leaving the parapet upon it to be of earth
cannon-proof, it makes the work to last the longer.

In fortresses you must observe four principal things: namely, that the line
of defense be within musket shot; that the flanked angle exceed not ninety
degrees, nor be less then sixty; that the gorge of the bul-wark be not too
narrow; and that the flank be as great as may be. And these four general
maxims must be so proportioned amongst themselves, as that to make one of them
exceeding good you destroy not the rest. You must also avoid tenailles in the
principal body of fortification, unless the ground be so small as it will not
suffer you to make good flanks. For the interior angle of such a fortification
raised as it ought to be cannot be defended by any flank, and men may lodge
themselves at the foot of it without receiving any hurt, unless it be by
stones thrown over. This is the reason why tenailles are not used but in the
counterscarps. The moats are usually proportioned according to the earth
necessary to make the fortifications; and such as are full of water are best to
hinder a surprise, and the forts defend themselves the best against an assault:
their breadth must have a due proportion; for when they are too broad the
outworks are too far distant from the defense of the principal
fortification; but depth never spoiled a moat. The false brayes are joined to
the body of the fortification. It is anew invention and excellent to hinder the
approaching to the bulwarks by galleries. The counterscarp, half-moons,
ravelins, and horn-works are beyond the great moat; all the outworks (if it be
possible) must be commanded by the body of the fortification. These are in
gross the principal observations which are in fortifications in a place which
is level and approchable: the rest depends on the judgment of the Enginier,
which must make profitable use of the situation of the place which he is to
fortify, either in taking what serves for his advantage, or in avoiding
whatsoever is to his hinderance. I add further, that there be situations so
favorable, as nature it self defends them, and makes them more inexpugnable
then all the art in the world; as an inaccessible rock, a quagmire or a lake:
But every commodity has its discommodity; seldom you shall meet with such
situations on frontier-places, or upon any important passage, or capable to
contein a garrison of sufficient strength to give ^ealousie to an enemy which
would invade your country; or else they are found so easy to be blocked up,
as five hundred men without are able to besiege five hundred within.

They which desire to know the particularities of fortification, may find them
amongst an infinite number of books where they are described; but much better
in the exercise of war, where expe^^ence causes every day something to be
added.

CHAP. IX. Of defense against surprises.
NOw that we have spoken of fortresses, we must come to the way of guarding
them, and not suffer them to be surprised. It is most certain that men will
always attempt to take them by surprise rather then by open force; for that
thereby they save charge and time. But because surprises are grounded upon some
defects which they find in the place, or in the guard thereof, I will begin
with that which must be observed to defend your self against such surprises.

The Captain which shall have a place to guard must provide for six principal
things, whereon all the rest depend: namely, to see that the walls be out of
danger of a scalado; the gates not subject to the petard; the way for the
rounds easy and convenient; the sentinels well set; the guard very exact; and
to hinder intelligences and treacheries. For the five first, the way is beaten
for them, there be books full of instructions, and there be now so many Princes
orders in writing and in practice, as he must be very negligent which is not
careful therein. But for the last it is not so easy to give rules. Treachery
may be wrought by the townsmen or soldiers: the mingling of them together,
whether it be on the guards, rounds, or patroullies, may much hinder it; as
also the drawing all the functions of the guard by lot, the keeping a guard
without the town, and the having of spies amongst the enemies. You must double
your guards at times of fairs and markets, in harvest and time of ^intage,
because men use to spy out such times to frame a design. You must observe to
be in arms at the opening and shutting of the gates; and in whatsoever time of
peace it may be, you must never neglect the observation of any of these
particulars. There is also a way to avoid intelligences, namely, by making
double enterprises your self, feigning to discontent an officer, private
soldier, or townsman, who running over to the enemy, causes him to undertake
some design probably feisible and facil: for besides the profit which you gain
by it, by getting the boldest of them in a trap, you reap this advantage by it,
that your enemy dreameth on no other so long as he hops in that; for that
every one always undertaketh that which he believes will succeed most
assuredly. Whereby we may see how doubtful those enterprises are which are
grounded upon intelligence, either for that they may be double, or else by the
fault of traitors, which in the very point of execution may lose courage and
discover all; or by their indiscretions and not keeping secret their
negotiations. For these reasons in enterprises made upon intelligence both the
defendant and assailant must be very suspicious and exceeding diligent to
observe the words, actions and behavior of such as promise to serve them by
betraying their own side, and to omit no precautions to assure themselves of
their persons, so that they may not catch them; the hostages of women and
children being not always sufficient (as Montluc observes at the enterprise
of Darges) for that some traitors are so resolute as they will hazard all to
attein the height of their designs, and make account to release their pledges
by such prisoners as they intend to take.

There remains a word to be spoken of alarms. You may therein use two ways:
the first and usual way is to put your self in order in the allarm-place,
where the governor must be present, that so from thence he may lead to the
place of danger; the second is, for every company to repair to their colors,
and from thence to go and find out their squadron which is upon the guard. If
the garrison be weak, the scalado easy, and the place large, this last way of
going to the alarm is the best, because they go more readily to the defense of
the walls; but in this case they must have no suspicion of the fidelity of the
inhabitants.

CHAP. X. Of assaults by surprises.
THe enterprises of fortified places are made after several fashions, either
by petard, or by scalado, or by some holes in the walls, or by saucidges, or by
some such other ways and inventions which men seek every day to increase,
according to the measure of the remedies against such as are already invented.
But to make them take good effect you must be very careful of three things;
namely, intelligence, conducting, and execution: for for want of one of these
we see all enterprises miscarry; either by being prevented by the daylight, or
being discovered too soon, or for want of some petard or ladder, or by some
disorder in the execution. For the first, which is intelligence, they which are
employed in it must inform themselves exactly of the form of the garrison,
number of the townsmen, and of their affections. They must observe at the gates
whether there be a bridge dormant to come at them; whether it be of wood or
stone; and if of wood, whether they use not to take away some planks in the
nightime; whether this bridge has not rails: whether the moat be deep and
broad, and whether by a commodious descending into the moat you may escape the
drawbridge, which is usually made upon the bridge dormant: or whether by the
benefit of the moat the gate or draw bridge of the town may be petarded without
carriages or rolling-bridge. They must well observe all the hindrances which
may be before the bridge dormant, whether they be gates, bars, pallisadoes,
or portculices, there being usually a ravelin: and whether there be a corpse
du-guard kept in the night, either on the outside or upon the bridge dormant:
taking notice how many gates, bridges, bars, pallisadoes, portculices,
trap-doores, grates, iron-pinnes, chains, and other impediments whatsoever
there be from the field to the inside of the town, and how all these things are
fastened: how many paces of distance there may be from one piece to another,
and (as near as may be) the length, breadth and thickness of all those things,
and in what places they are: whether there be loopholes over the gate, or holes
in the roof of it: how many corpse du-guards there be, in what places they are,
and how situated; whether the entrance be straight on, or winding; observing
the place of the flanks, whether they be on the side before, behind, above, or
below; whether they keep any ordinance there, and how many; or whether they be
only for musketeers; what number may be lodged on them, and at what distance
they flank the ^ate; discovering the way by which you are to go from the town
you go from to that which you intend to assail: To spy out a fitting place
within half a league of it to alight, and to distribute the petards and other
instruments: they must also observe the places and streets within the town
which must be seized upon, all the corpse du-guards to be forced; and well
consider the condi^ion of the soldiers, and other necessary things, to
surmount all obstacles which might be met with. If it be to give them a
scalado, they must well observe the dvenues, the counterscarp and the moat; to
know whether you may come at it undiscovered, go down into the moat, and come
up out of it easily, especially over against the place where you would make the
scalado, or near it. For if you must go far about the town after you be
entered into the moat, the enterprise becomes much the more dangerous and
difficult. It must be known whether the moat be dry or frozen, or that the
water be but shallow, without mud and easy to pass; whether the wall be low
or weak, so as it may easily be scaled or pierced, or whether there be some
hole or drain or other means for the water to pass in or out which are ill
guarded or weak. You must judge what height your ladders must be of, and regard
how they may be set on sure footing, and whether there be a scarp or not;
whether the place where you mean to give on be far from guards or sentinels;
whether the place of scalado be capable to raise good store of ladders, and for
store of men to enter at once: as if it were very strait, you must see if the
first being entered can accommodate themselves upon the rampart to subsist so
long until the rest mount. You must also observe the distances of the wall to
enter into the town, and to go and set upon the corpse du-guard.

For the second, which is the conducting, it may be made two ways, by parts or
in gross: by parts, when they are designs upon places of importance, and
which are far within an enemies country, and whereof the enterprises are
held to be very f^isible in the execution; for they may not fail, without
putting all the soldiers which go on that service into eminent danger:
therefore there must be great prudence used, and none employed in it but
resolute men and secret, because they must either there overcome or perish;
which happens not in such enterprises where there is as great care taken of
the safety of retreating as of giving on. The Marshall of Brisac made one
(being in Piedmont) upon the castle of Millain, which was excellently well
conducted, and deserves to be here taken notice of, to serve for a lesson for
such as may desire to undertake the like. He made choice of eighty French men
and forty Italians, the bravest and resolutest soldiers of all his army, and
made Salvaison Captain of the French, and Peter Maria of Recuperat of
Bresignolle commander of the Italians, which two only knew whither they were
to go: then he caused them to come by five at once to his Secretaries lodging,
and caused twenty five crowns to be given to each of them, and to the chief man
of every five there was a note given, wherein was specified the way they were
to take, and the days journeyes they were to go, that so the brigadoes might
not meet each other. The first rendez^vous was at an out-house (or farm-house)
on the confines of Millanois, whither Lodowick Birague had conveyed himself
some days before very secretly in disguised apparel, to give such order to
this design as should be necessary. The manner of meeting at this farm-house
was thus; At the parting from the valley Camonica or Bergamasque, the first
five or brigado (and so by turns all the rest) found a countrey-fellow having a
straw-hat with two pheasants feathers on it; to whom the chief man of every
brigado was to say, O buon compagno, voi tu vender my quella capelina! that is,
Ho, good fellow, will thou sell me that hat? to which he was to answer, Messer
no, ne ho bisogno per me; that is, No sir, I must use it my self. That was the
watchword; which being so known, the chief (without speaking a word) followed
the countrey-fellow, which conducted him with his brigado to the farm-house
where Lodowick Birague was; and in this wise the Marshall of Brisac his hundred
and twenty soldiers passed very secretly to that place. From this farm-house
they were to get to the house of one of Sienna near Millain, who was the
plotter of the design: to this end they passed along as before, by five and
five together, and after they had passed the river Add at the haven of Vaure,
they had measured the time to arrive toward night at the bridge Navilio of
Millain, near the Monastery of Angels; on which bridge being arrived, the chief
of the brigado shaked a little bell, at the sound of which he was answered by
another like it, and presently there came (from below the bridge) the man of
Sienna (the author of this design) who conducted the brigado to his own
house, and continued after this manner every night, until the whole troup was
past: which is a matter worth the observing, to cause a hundred and twenty
soldiers to go by stealth from Piedmont to the very gates of Millain, without
being discovered, and not a man of them (except only Salvaison and Peter Maria
of Recuperat) until then, knowing whither they went or where they were.
Concerning the conducting in gross, which is the more ordinary, you must
measure the length of the way to the place upon which you have your design,
with the time which you must have to arrive at the just time to execute it:
wherein many deceive themselves very often, for that usually there befall
unexpected casualties which prolong the time; insomuch that what measures
soever you take (without great experience in such actions) you shall commonly
find the time too short, especially if you have a gross troup to lead. For to
make two thousand men to march by night in their long order, the Altes which
must be made at the head to stay for the rear, or those which a narrow or
troublesome way, or that is cut off by a river compel you to make, are such,
and cause you to lose so much time, that unless you be very diligent to make
them march, and that you have caused good intelligence to be taken of the way,
and provided for all these things, you will find you have not half time enough.
I speak not of the great showers of rain, nor of frosts, which sometimes happen
so unlooked for and extraordinary, that, what foresight soever you may have
used in all other things, it is impossible to overcome them. After that you
have proportioned the time with the way, you must provide your self of good
guides, and as many of them as may be: then you must form your order before you
depart, as it should be at the execution, giving to every man your commands in
writing of what he is to do, and keeping a register thereof. For if you defer
to do it until you come upon the place where you are to alight, and where all
the equipage is to be accommodated (which is usually about half a league from
the place) may hinder you therein, the place happily will not be spacious enough
nor commodious to make the order, contentions which may befall, jealousy of
honor amongst the soldiers, and diverse unthought-of accidents which arise, are
able to frustrate the design: which things being resolved on before your going
out, and there being nothing to be changed in your order, this (most certainly)
is the means to avoid such obstacles. I add this, That if it be a city from
whence you go out, you must keep the gates shut long before and after; and
cause the troops to march by day, that so you may see that not a man go out but
they of the enterprise. And afterward to cause the troops to make Alte, beyond
the gate or in some private place near hand. Concerning the order; you must
cause some horse to march foremost, whose scouts must have charge to ride far
enough before, and to seize upon all sorts of persons wheresoever they go, that
so they may hinder the giving of intelligence to the town which you intend to
surprise; especially if there be some bridge or passage by which unavoydably
you must pass, you must gain that. Then must fifty musketeers follow; next the
train, the petards or ladders, being followed by those men which are chosen to
carry them; whereof there must be a treble number, to ease and succeed each
other, in case any be hurt or killed: and these must be men of execution, the
most resolute and adventurous of the troup; for on these foremost usually the
good or bad success depends: you must also carry double equipage of petards,
because all work not that effect which you purpose they should; and often the
want of one petard has caused brave enterprises to fail, and so of ladders,
which are often broken by the enemies, or break by being too much laden. In the
pursuit you must not make any troup of above fifty soldiers, namely fifty
muskets, then fifty pikes, and so successively: for you must consider that the
first encounters are in narrow streets, and in the night; so that the gross
troops cause but disorder. And if you find streets that are broader then the
order which you have framed, you must join two troops together, that so they
may take up the whole breadth of the street. Every troup must have officers at
the front and rear of it, and the sergeants on the flanks, to keep them to
their duties, and to hinder them from straggling and pillaging. You must also
observe in the order you make (when you part from your quarter) that if you
make several assaults, the commanders, soldiers, and equipage must be
distinguished into so many troops as you will make assaults, and that they
march according to the order they should assail in. In all enterprises
(especially in those where the retreat is dangerous and long) you must more
regard to have good soldiers then many; for a small troup may come from
farther off, march more secretly, and retreat with less danger and confusion
then a gross troup. Besides, a small troup with good store of officers, is
more obedient in execution, and begets less disorder then a gross, I add
further, that in enterprises by night you affright an enemy as much with a
small troup as with a great one: for it is a maxim, That they which are
surprised and assailed fight in fear, always persuading themselves that you
assail them with forces sufficient. Briefly, if you overcome with a small troup
you get more honor then if it had been with a great, which ofttimes disturbeth
you both in fight, in march, and in their retreat: and if you be beaten, the
dishonor is the less. Concerning the third, which is the execution, all the
order must be given in writing, that so none of them which have any command in
the enterprise may excuse themselves by pretending they misunderstood you. If
it be by scalado, there must be 2 men to carry every piece of a ladder; and
because it is almost impossible to do the execution upon a place where there
needs more then five pieces of ladders in height, it is sufficient that there
be ten men for every ladder, and one man to command them: The men for every
ladder must be mentioned in a roll by their names and surnames, and of what
company they be. You must command them on pain of death to bring back their
ladders if you cannot get the town: for they seeing the danger and trouble of
bringing them back again, will rather desire to do their uttermost endeavor to
enter the town moreover you must command ten other men to enter after the first
ten, which must be led by an officer, and another to be on their rear to take
care to see them mount without losing of time and without making too much have:
otherwise the ladders will be so much laden as that they will break; after
this, ten more must follow, commanded and divided as the former: and every file
of ten must know by which ladder they must mount, and in what order, that so
al^ may be done without confusion. The first te^ which follow their ladder must
carry another, though they have no order to raise it; that so if any piece of
the first should break, there may another be raised in the stead. If it be by
petard, the petardier shall call him that is to carry the madrier or planchier;
then he is to call three for the petard (two to carry it, and the third to
assist in time of need) and if the planchier be fastened to the petard, the^
four men may carry it interchangeably by two and two: and those two which
carry not the petard with the planchier shall each of them have a great smiths
hammer. After these four, the petardier shall call two men, each of them
carrying a great ax; after them one with a crow-lever, then another with a
dark-lantern, then one with three or four pieces of lighted matches: besides
these there must be one to command them, which shall carry a piercing
instrument, or a coopers turrell, or some good hooks with steeled points, and a
weighty hammer. So that to attend every petard well there must be ten men; this
file of ten for the first petard shall be led by some brave Sergeant, which
shall have the name of every man of his file in writing, and shall also know
what every of them is to carry. The men must know the Mule which carries their
equipage, and so soon as they come to the place where they are to unlade, they
must place themselves about the Mule, that so each of them may receive what he
is to carry. If the second petard must be applied to a gate or bars, they
which shall carry it must be in the same order as they of the first petard: but
if it be for a drawbridge, the rolling-bridge or carriage goes foremost, with
seven or eight men which are employed as well to carry it as to push it
forward: after this the planchier and petard must be carried, after the same
manner as the first; then shall they follow (in file and in close order) which
carry the ladders and planks to cast upon the breach which the petard shall
have made upon the drawbridge; then shall they follow which carry ha^mers,
hatchets, pinso^s, instruments to pull out bolts and to cut chains; then some
with fire-lances and grenades, and some dark lanterns. The officer which shall
have the leading of them must take care that not a man lose his rank, and shall
divide them into files, and shall take care to cause the spare men to carry
such portions of the equipage as they did carry which shall happen to be hurt
or killed, which he shall only cause to be laid out of the way, without
suffering those which are to be employed about the service of the petard to
trouble themselves about carrying away any man that is killed or hurt. At all
the gates and bridges the men must be disposed in the same order. But when you
go against iron-grates or portcullices, you must cause those to march first
which carry the tresses or iron-hooks; then marches the planchier and the
petard; after which follow hammers, hatchets, crows of iron, and other
instruments which may be thought fitting: you must not forget to carry
fireballs, grenades, or fire-lances, if you have observed that you may make
use of them; every man must carry a hatchet at his girdle: you must rather have
a supernumerary number of instruments, then want one. Having thus put all into
order, and officers at the head and on the flanks of every file, you must have
besides some petards, planchiers, and other instruments for reserve, which must
be carried in the same order as the ^ther: For you must always have a double
equipage. When you come near the place where the execution is to be done, you
must distribute to every man what he is to carry. The Sergeant orders them in
file, and commands every one duly to follow his leader: then he causes them
to march forward to give room to those of the second petard; and so
consequently of all the rest, there being a guide for the first file to show
them the way. And that you may not be entangled, sometimes you may cause ten
cuiraciers to march before one foot, to discover whether the enemy be not on
the advenues; then follow three men bearing good targets, to shelter (amongst
others) the petardier; then march they which carry the petards and the other
train, in such order as has been said, which shall be followed by fifty
muskets led by a Captain, to give fire for their defense (if need be) with
large hailshot. He must look that no man stay by the way as they march; when
the enemy asks, Who goes there, they must hasten their pace, and then the
petardier takes the first petard with him, and the rest must follow very
close, that so when the first is fired the second be ready to be put into his
hands. The ten horsemen which have marched before all the equipage so far,
shall not advance further then the distance of pistoll-shot from the first
bars; then they shall fall back to the Captain which leads the fifty
musketeers. The first petard being fired, the officer shall cause his men to be
placed on the right and left hand, to give room for the second petard; then
that shall do the same, to give passage to the third; then that makes room for
the rolling-bridge, and they for the petards and other instruments, and
consequently all the rest. And they which are unladen must help the rest,
without making any noise. And if the petardier calls for any thing, he that
carries it must be ready to give it him, and no man upon pain of death must
stir out of the place where he was placed, but only to give to the petardier
what he calls for, or to supply some bodies place which in carrying something
to the petardier was hurt or killed. The officers must take care that the
petardier be presently served, and all be done without noise or confusion. The
ouverture being made, they which shall be commanded for the first attempts must
be ready to enter, and to force whatsoever shall resist them; they which are to
follow them must do the like, and so consequently all the rest which are to act
any thing: And when they are within, they which first entered must not scatter
themselves in the town (whilst they are yet weak) whether it be in pursuing
the enemy, or though they meet none: but they must make two bodies, the one to
act, the other only to be put into battalia to sustein the rest. This done,
they must march in good order, the one to force that whereunto they are
appointed, the other to go and embattel themselves in the streets and
marketplaces which you had resolved ought to be seized upon, by the plat or
draught of the town, by which the whole enterprise ought to have been designed.
For howsoever it has sometimes succeeded well to fo^low the enemy speedily
with such few men as are entered, yet is it not the surest way, because they may
be repulsed by a few men; which has often caused brave enterprises to be
frustrated.

There must also be a third body which must stand in battalia without during
the execution, to the end that if they which entered should be repulsed, they
may sustein them; or else to remedy such accidents which might befall them by
some of the enemies troops, which casually might arrive in that place. If you
be wholly repulsed, that troup which is without shall make the retreat, and
shall remain firm in battalia until that the repulsed troops be recollected
and put in order: but if they which entered become masters of the town, to hold
it they must disarm the townsmen before they disarm themselves. And being well
assured of all the corpse du-guards and commodious places, the houses must be
shared, that so every man may have his proportion of the booty, they being not
suffered to take it any other way; and they which shall begin to pillage must
be severely punished. By this means you may appoint the best houses to them
which have best deserved, and do the rest by lot, whereof no man shall have
cause to complain but of his own ill fortune. If it be needful, in such places
as are assailed by scalado, you may dispose some troops of musketeers, which
shall give fire perpetually upon the flanks; and if you can, you may add to
them some fire-lances: and such as give fire at the top of the ladder, must
cease so soon as their men begin to mount. I have been more particular in this
chapter then in any other; but so many enterprises have failed by the not
observing of the least of these things, that I rather chose to be somewhat long
herein then to omit them.

CHAP. XI. Of assaults by sieges.
IN the two chapters of surprises I have begun with the means to defend ones
self, for that we must never undertake to attempt the surprise of any fort, but
upon the defects which are to be found in them: so that he which knows not on
which part nor after which manner he ought to make his assault, must be
prepared for all manner of accidents. In these two I will begin to treat of the
assailing of towns by sieges, for that you must observe by what place and after
what manner you are assailed, to make a good defense against it.

Sieges are undertaken either by blocking up of towns to famish them, or by
taking them by force; for both the one and the other you must be master of the
field, and you must have two armies, the one to hinder the enemy from
undertaking any thing, and the other to form your siege. Or in any case you
must be the first in the field, that you may so fortify your self before the
town you besiege as you may be able to maintein your self there in spite of the
furious attempts of the enemy. To get the town which you mean to besiege at the
easier rate, you must attempt to surprise it when there is but a small garrison
in it: to this end you are to use all manner of inventions to keep them from
the knowledge of your purpose to besiege it; then all on a sudden you must go
and block it up. But if (notwithstanding all your stratagemes) you be not able
to surprise it at unawares, or that you apprehend the charge to be too great,
it will be better to make some other siege of less importance: for a town well
and obstinately defended is the ruin of an army; and if it be not taken, it
often diminishes the reputation of the commander which assailed it.

For this cause, before you undertake any such thing, it must be well
considered on; and you must provide your self abundantly of all things
necessary to effect it. When you form a siege, you must appoint your quarters
(as much as may be) in healthful places, and be careful to make them spacious
enough, and to keep them clean: for you must account upon your time of abode
there, that your army be not wasted by diseases. You must make the quarters of
your army so near the town besieged as may be, yet so as they be not
discommodated by their artillery: And if the ground be level and lie open
round about, the quarters must be out of reach of the cannon. You must make as
many quarters as the places are which you intend to assault, or at least as the
bigness of the town besieged, or the situation thereof requires.
Nevertheless I would have the Generals quarters to be so large, as (in a case
of necessity) it might receive all the troops of the other quarters; If you
make a siege with a small army, and that the garrison be strong, you must
fortify the quarters one after another, with the whole body of the army; and
in this case you must make the fewer quarters, and attempt the fewer places.
But if you find your self strong enough you may abridge the business and make
them all at once. Besides this, you must make a circumvallation wi h forts and
redoubts without reach of cannon of the besieged, which shall join all the
quarters one to the other, behind which your army may present it self in
battalia, and this line must be led in such manner as it may possess all the
commanding places. And if the garrison of the town besieged be so strong as you
may fear to be assailed on both sides, you must make another circumvallation
about the town, the nearest that may be, that so it may require the fewer men
to guard it: for it being made to oppose your self against the town, you need
not take care to make it out of the reach of the cannon. For the opening of the
trenches, you are to use the more or fewer ceremonies, according as the
garrison is strong or weak. If it be strong, you begin by a good fort, and
continue by good redoubts along the trenches, leaving only sentinels in them.
For it is an old error to think to defend trenches. If the garrison be weak,
you need not make so much ado to gain time. The batteries must be well
strengthened by good moats, and flanked by good corps-du-guards, to preserve
them against the sallies of the besieged. If there be any outworks which are
not yet in good defense, and which may be carried by force, you must attempt
them; otherwise you must approach them by little and little: for it is there
where the bravest defense is made, because that at the beginning they can
easiliest make their sallies. When the outworks are taken, and the cannon is
planted on the counterscarp, and you sap into the moat, and prepare your self
to lay over your galleries to get over to the bulwarks, you must then place
your musketeers all along the counterscarp, that so under favor of them and of
your cannon you may pass over your galleries. If the moats be dry, they will
dispute it with you, but at last the stronger overcomes the weaker. If they be
full of standing water, that hinders you not from making your cawsie
whereupon you place your gallerie: If they be full of running water, you must
make use of floting bridges to put over your miners. When you are got close to
the bulwarks, you are to use mines (great or small) so by little and little to
get into the ground, and the retrenchments which may be made behind the
bulwarks. I trouble not my self here to show how to make the quarters, forts,
circumvallations, the trenches, (that they lie not open to the enemy) the
batteries, (that they be well assured) the descents into the moat, how to
assail the false brayes, how the galleries are to be made, also the mines, and
the lodgings which are to be made after they be sprung; because whatsoever may
be said on that subject is already written, and it must be experience that
must perfect the rest; where every day something is altered or some new thing
is added.

CHAP. XII. Of the defense of towns against sieges.
TO withstand a siege well, the town must be well fortified, it must have a
sufficient number of soldiers to defend it; it must abound in victual; and it
must have good store of arms and munitions of war: And these four things are
so necessary, as that if there were an abundance of three of them, if the
fourth be wanting the rest will serve for nothing. For what will a well
fortified place serve for if there be not soldiers to defend it? or what good
will soldiers do if they have neither arms nor munitions of war to fight?
neither will arms nor munitions avail, if they want bread to live by; to which
I add instruments to work in the earth, without which it is impossible to make
any great resistance. But it is not enough to have all that is necessary for
resistance; there must be a good order and rule kept, otherwise it will all be
dissipated by those which will desire to get out of danger quickly, and will
find some pretext to yield upon terms which shall not be dishonorable; the
number of such being always greater then of those which will re^^st stoutly.
You must proportion the labor an^ ^^st amongst the soldiers and the townsmen,
that so they which are well affected be not suppressed, and that the rest grow
not lazy through idleness. They must be distinguished by companies of
pioners, miners, carpenters, smiths, and all artificers useful for a siege,
appointing a commander to every of them. You must take an inventory in the town
of all the iron, wood, linen, instruments to work in the ground, drugs fit for
artificial fires, and other such things necessary for a siege: and take care
that there be always of them in the magazins to serve for the present
necessity: and to avoid disorder in the distribution of all these things, there
must be a counsel which must have the oversight thereof, and which shall cause
all to be delivered out and received in according to the order of the Governor
and the Counsel of war. These things thus put in order, you must think upon
defense, which is done principally after two ways, by holding the enemy off by
retrenchment, and by hindering him (when he approaches) by sallies.

For the first; it is approved and practiced by all; and he which breaks
ground best, and begins to dispute it the furthest off, is he which makes
the longest resistance. For the smallest retrenchment without (accommodated
with pallisadoes) is hard to be forced. But if it be mined, and that there be
another made behind it, it is a dangerous piece to enter, and you constrain the
enemy to approach by little and little, and with the same ceremonies which are
used to fall upon the bulwarks and the great moat; so that by diverse
retrenchments you keep off the enemy at a distance a long time before he can
come to fall upon the counterscarp, who cannot take away your outworks but by
mines, which takes up good store of time. The moat also may be defended if it
be dry by portable casemats (which are called coffers) incircled by little
moats or pallisadoes to hinder the approach, which are placed in several places
of the great moat to defend it, and not to be discovered by the cannon of the
assailant. The bulwarks are also to be defended by retrenchments, which you are
to make either at the point, or at the middle, or at the gorge, according as
they are capable, and that the mines of the besiegers do enter forward within
the bulwarks. And when all that is forced, the last defense is a retrenchment
of the whole town, reducing it to keep only one part of it.

For the second way of defense; in stead of many sallies to drive back them
that work in the approches some would have only some few to good purpose, in
great necessity; alleging that the besieged there always lose some men, and
of the best of them, which they ought to conserve against a strong assault; and
that oftentimes they which would have a fair pretext to yield the town cause
their soldiers to be maimed by continual sallies, to show that they yield not
themselves but through necessity. For mine own part (which do approve of the
quantity of sallies, and which have always seen the works of the assailants
retarded by them more in one hour then in eight days by other defenses) I
answer, that these reasons would carry some show if the town were attempted by
assault; for they not taking any other but that way at that time, it were fit
to preserve the soldiers to withstand them: but whilst the assailant gets
ground by little and little, if you defend not the town otherwise then by
retrenchment, you must lose it at last: wherein your quantity of soldiers
stands you in no stead at all, in so much that the care you have taken to
preserve your soldiers does not prolong the taking of the town one day; but if
by your brave sallies you ruin batteries, throw down trenches, force the
redoubts which defend them; and when they are within the moat you burn their
galleries, they must be enforced to begin their work anew as ofttimes as you
overthrow it; insomuch as the besieger finding himself so enterteined, he
approaches with much more ceremony, and at last his soldiers draw back. So
that in my opinion it is very fit that the besieged should make frequent
sallies; but they must make them at several hours, that so they may the
better surprise the enemy with few men (but resolute) to avoid the disorder in
the retreat, and to do no other thing but what is commanded. For though you
find not resistance at the falling on, as is usual, if you stay to little
purpose, you run the hazard to be ill led off at the retreat. The other
particularities of defense depend upon those of assailing, the besiegers
teaching you by necessity what you are to do; wherein there is nothing but
practice and experience which can well direct you.

CHAP. XIII. Of Artillery.
IT is fit to speak of Artillery after sieges, since it is principally by means
thereof that towns are taken; and that since this has been in use, there are
no places found impregnable, if they be not inaccessible: It has changed all
the form and matter of fortifications: for in stead of towers and ancient
walls, which have not been able to resist it, we now make bulwarks and other
works of earth. We may say that it has even in a manner altered the manner of
making war. Anciently they began their approches to towns where now we end
them: for on the first day they lodged on the brim of the moat; and now adays
we must go a great way before we come at it: then the circumvallation was made
out of reach of arrows only, now they must be made beyond reach of cannon:
then it mattered not though the fortresses of the encamped armies were
overtopped, so as they had their other conveniences; now-adayes there must be
care taken above all things that they be not. In those times two armies were
quietly led in batalia at two or three hundred paces distance from each other,
and remained there whole days without being able to be dislodged but by a
hazard of a general battle; now one cannot be before another but out of the
reach of the cannon, otherwise he that has most of them, or that has planted
them best, beats out the other without fighting. At that time a General of
an army could know the order of his enemy at a near distance, and form his own
according to that, seeking his advantages upon the defects of another, and all
without danger; now these things can no more be observed but so far off as
you must rather trust to your own good order then upon any defect in that of
your enemy. Then one army could charge another without losing their order,
because they had not above two or three hundred paces to march; in these times
it is impossible to observe it in sight of the enemy for half a league
together, and to find a plain which shall be even and without hindrances.
Whereunto I add further, that without a great exercise of marching in battalia
you are not able to march a thousand paces without losing all your distances of
battalions and squadrons, and by consequence without being in confusion. Since
therefore the cannon is of so great use in war, and has so great a share in
the victory, it is necessary that you know how to make good use of it. It is an
engine which all cannot well employ, for it is of great expense, and belongs
only to great and puissant States to make ordinary use of them. They tie them
to a great charge for draught, there being a hundred draught-horses required to
draw one cannon for battery through all kinds of ways, and to shoot only a
hundred bullets. By this you may judge according to the number which you mean
to employ what length of ground it takes up. To manage one piece of battery
well, there must be eighteen men: besides, how many smiths, carters, farriers,
and other workmen must there be in the train to repair the carriages? how many
carpenters to make bridges? how how many pioners to accommodate the highwayes?
Briefly an army which carries cannon with it cannot march but leisurely, and
that which has none can do no great effect: therefore in these times the
artillery is an essential part of an army; but withal, if the General
suffers himself to be approached too near, without entrenching himself it is
impossible for him to disintangle himself without fighting, or losing it; which
cannot so happen without losing much of his reputation. For this reason he
ought to inform himself very particularly of all that depends on the
artillery: and that he may not be deceived, he must know the least even of the
smallest things, namely, of the mixture, founding, proportion, weight, calibre,
and carriage; of what wood it must be, how it must be conducted according to
the several ways, miry or mountainous; how to pass rivers, how to secure the
batteries, as well against the cannon of the enemy as against his sallies; what
ground the cannon must have for his reverse, what distance between piece and
piece; in what manner the platform must be made, at what distance the batteries
are sufficient, and other things, whereof I do not here specify the
particulars, because others have written of them. It suffices me to show the
use of artillery, the chargeablenesse of it, the turmoil of it, and whereunto
it engages you, to incite Generals not to rely upon others; and to know the
benefit and discommoditie thereof so well, that they may make use of the one to
their advantage, and avoid the other by their foresight.

CHAP. XIV. Of the baggage and pioners.
AFter the great turmoil of the artillery, I will speak a word of that of the
baggage. It is a great shame to lose it, but it is also a hard matter to
preserve it when it is excessive; there being nothing that brings so much
disorder to an army: therefore it is highly necessary to reduce it to the
smallest proportion that may be, and to make a review of it every month; for
it grows in the twinkling of an eye. We are so delicate now a days as we
will hardly carry our arms, much less would we carry a weeks victual about
us. So long as such an abuse be suffered in an army, it will make it self
incapable to do any thing that is good. For as in a battle he which can last
preserve some troops which have not fought, carries away the victory; so he
that last keeps his army in health, complete, and accustomed to labor, does
the like: which he cannot do if the soldiers be so delicate as they cannot
carry their baggage. Besides that, sickness and famine gets not into an
army, but by this rascalli^ie of soldiers boys: and this thing which seems
to be a thing of nothing, is of such importance, as it is for the most part the
dissipation of the most flourishing, yea I dare say, of the most victorious
armies. It is principally in the time of prosperity that men grow effeminate,
and give themselves to take their ease; and in that time it ought least to be
done, if after the example of the delicacies of Capua where Hannibals army
imbased it self, they would not do the same. Whilst we are about cutting off
unnecessary things from the army, I will say a word concerning pioners. There
be Captains of our time which will have an unbridled number of them, and say,
that it were better to cut off some regiments of soldiers, and to take pioners
in their stead, which are necessary to make the enclosures of the camp, the
trenches in a siege, the accommodation of the ways; briefly, to take away all
employment from the soldiers of working in the ground, for that they in these
times cannot be brought to be subject to such labors as the ancient Romans
were: alleging further, that the soldier when he arriveth at his quarter, is
sufficiently tired, though he be not employed a new to cast up earth. An
opinion whereat I cannot wonder enough, and which strengthens me in that which
I hold, that we spoil our soldiers by sparing them too much. There must be
care taken for their livelihood, for their clothing, for such as are sick and
hurt: but they must be hardened to labor, and their General and other
Commanders must be examples to them. For if you will reduce them to content
themselves with a little whilst you burst your self with excess of meat, and
to labor whilst you glory it, and live in laziness; I confess they will
murmr. But to return to the pioners: it is necessary you should have them to
accommodate the ways, for the artillery principally; for which five hundred
may serve for a great equipage. Concerning the enclosing of the camp, the
soldier is bound to make it; for that this labor procures him a means to
rest himself and to sleep in safety. I say further, that it is a work which
must be done in three or four hours; to this end all the army works at it,
or at least half of it, when the enemy is near hand. So that if we must needs
have it done by pioners, there had need be as many of them in an army as there
are soldiers, which would be a means to famish a whole country, and to
increase the turmoil, which we would diminish. Concerning the trenches; I never
saw it succeed well when pioners did it; and whilst the danger grows, the
most valiant soldiers are not too good for that employment; and further they
must be incited to that work by the gain of it: which will serve to assure
themselves the better in that danger, and to give them a means to spare
something to cloth themselves; and no money is so well employed as that in an
army.

CHAP. XV. Of spies and guides.
THere be yet two sorts of people whereof (contrary to the pioners) there
cannot be too many in an army; which are spies and guides. The first advertise
you of the deportments of the enemy, upon whose report either you enterprise
something upon him, or you guard your self from his designs. The second give
you knowledge of the country, of the ways and passages by which you are to
pass, or else by what way your enemy can come to you. Both the one and the
other must be faithful, for that in advising you ^alsly, or guiding you
maliciously, they may cause you to fall into great dangers. You must have good
store of guides: for that (especially if you march by night) every gross troup
(or at least every body) has need of their own; and before you set forward,
they must all be agreed on the way which they will take. There must be a
Captain of the guides, a man of spirit, and vigilant, and that may take care to
get guides from place to place. Concerning spies, there must be something more
observed in them, and you must be always suspicious of them: for that as it is
a dangerous task for him that undertaketh it, so it is also for him that
imployeth them. To this end it is necessary that no man know them but he which
imployeth them; and that spies may not know each other, that so they may not
agree to give false advises: for by this means by examining them severally, by
the agreement or disagreement of their advises, you may judge whether they be
good; and by the verification of those which speak true or false, you shall
know who betrayeth you, or does you true service. And howsoever when you
discover traitors, yet I say you may make a profitable use of them, by
feigning that you believe them to be faithful, and giving them commissions
which they may discover to the enemy, that you have some design quite contrary
to that which you intend to put in execution; that so whilst he is preparing
himself for one side, you may attempt something upon him on the other. But this
is not all, to beware of your own spies; you must also take heed of those of
the enemy; which you must presuppose you have within your camp, as the enemy
has of yours. For this reason besides the secrecy which must be used in all
enterprises, it is good to give a charge, by publishing (in a still way) that
you have a quite contrary design to that which you purpose to put in
execution, that so those spies may so report it to the enemy. But the most
essential means to be well served by this kind of men, is to be very liberal
to them; for they are faithful to them which give them most.

CHAP. XVI. Of victual.
BUt seeing it is to no purpose to have an army composed of good commanders and
valiant soldiers, well disciplined and obedient, well furnished with artillery
and munition, if they have not what to eat; I will distinguish this chapter
into five parts: the first to make provisions of corn; the second to provide
for the carriage of it; the third of the safe conveying of it; the fourth of
the making of good bread; and the fifth of the distribution of it. To this end
the Commissary general of the victual ought to be a man of authority,
faithful, vigilant, and active; and this office ought not to be despised (as
nowadayes it is) nor given to men of mean quality; for it is of such
importance, that according as it is either well or ill discharged, it causes
an army to subsist, or go to ruin. And the Romans always committed it to
some eminent person. To come to particulars, I will say that the provision of
corn ought to be made in due time, in sufficient quantity, in a commodious
place for transportation, and that choice be made of very good corn. For you
must not conceive any hope of finding it, either in the champain or towns where
you are to go, because the enemy may either hoard it up or burn it; and so on
that hope you shall find in this only point all your designs frustrated. In
the second, you must make Magazines in diverse places, that so you may not be in
danger to lose all at once, both in towns and castles which are nearest and
most commodious for the transporting of corn into your army; and (according to
the situation of the country) you are to make provision of wagons or mules to
carry it to the camp, where must always be a Magazine for a forthnight, which
should not be meddled with but in extremity, or for some extraordinary
enterprise. In the third place, the carriage of it ought not to be performed
without a good convoy; and never on any prefixed day, to prevent the
preparation of taking of it whilst it is on the way. In the fourth, to hinder
the abuses which are ordinarily used (and I dare say, ever, unless there be a
very narrow looking to it) about the bread. For, for their private gain, they
mingle bad grain with it, yea even earth, and use other base tricks, whence for
the most part proceed diseases in an army; which is a mischief which cannot be
too severely punished. And in the last place, that it may be well distributed
and not wasted; for if you trust the Sergeants, they always take for double
the number of soldiers they have in their companies: to this end it is
necessary that the Commissarie general of the victual from week to week
should have an exact list of those that are in the army, signed by the
General, that so he may order the distribution of bread according to it.
Besides, you must cause them to be punished rigourously which pillage those
victuallers and other persons which bring victual to the camp; whereof the
price must be regulated, that so the soldiers may not be sharked upon. When
you are at a well retrenched siege, where the hope to make you quit it
consists in nothing else but in cutting off your victual, you must have that
foresight to cause so much to be brought within your camp as you judge to be
necessary to serve your turn for the time you believe you shall stay to take
the town besieged; as Caesar did before Alexia. There be many rules to be given
on this subject, to hinder the abuses which may be used therein, which I omit
to avoid prolixitie: besides they are petty ord^rs which are changed according
to the places and occasions; all which should tend to no other end but to draw
victual to the army, and to hinder the excessive prices of it.

CHAP. XVII. Of the general officers of an army, and of their functions.
THere is nothing more necessary in an army then to have the offices therein
well regulated, and that every man may know whom he is to command, and whom he
ought to obey; and yet I never saw that absolutely decided in any, which is the
reason why I have been willing here to make a project, how things therein ought
to be established. The General ought to have absolute power, which ought not
to be communicated to any: for in war more then in any other profession the
command ought to be singular: and it is a very bad introduction to make
Generals which command the army by the day, or by the week, or by the month.
At all times when the Romans did so, they sped the worse for it.

Then there must be a Lieutenant general, or Marshall of the field general,
which ought to take care to cause all the Generals commands to be put in
execution as absolutely as himself, thereby to ease him: it being too hard a
thing for the General to do all, especially when the army marches; for that
(of all necessity) there must be a man of eminent authority at the head of an
army, and whom all the other commanders do acknowledge. Sometimes there is a
Lieutenant general and a Marshall of the field general to perform these two
offices; nevertheless these two places, being born by two men in an army,
oftentimes bring confusion, and cause that which we desire to avoid: for in the
functions thereof they never agree; because the Marshall of the field general
doing his office, must distribute the commands of the General to all the other
commanders; he must march in the vanguard, order the lodgings and encampings:
insomuch as I know not what function the Lieutenant general shall have unless
he usurp the others office, or else that he serve only as a shooting trunk,
that so through him the Generals commands may be delivered to the Ma^shall of
the field: which is the reason I conclude that there ought to be but one of
these two offices.

That done, I divide all the functions of the army into four principal parts,
namely the caualrie, the infanterie, the artillery, and the victual, and will
treat of each part one after another.

The cavalry is a body which often lodges s^parated from that of the army, and
requires a principal commander to whom all the rest should yield obedience,
which must be of great authority and eminent quality, or of such experience
and virtue that all the other commanders may voluntarily obey him. For it is in
the cavalrie, where you shall meet with more men of wealth and good families,
and consequently more difficult to be made to obey; and therefore this
authority ought not to be divided. And because in marching the cavalrie is
ordinarily in the front and in the rear, and that in lodging you are ofttimes
compelled to make two fronts, and for that in time of battle the horse are at
least on the two wings, it is necessary that there be a Lieutenant General, a
man also of great authority. There must further be a third commander, whom the
most part call a Commissary general, who distributeth the orders, keeps the
list of the guards, of the convoyes, and other functions; and ought to go and
take the orders from the Marshall of the field general, to carry them to his
General of the horse, who distributeth them to the Quarter Masters, which come
for them from every quarter. All the cavalry must be divided into companies, of
which regiments are formed; not after the manner of the infantery, under the
command of a Colonel; but only to maintein the order of the lodgings and of
battle. To form these regiments you put four or five companies together, with
one of carabines, and the ancientest Captain commands that body; and so all
the cavalry is divided: which makes it plainly evident how merely unprofitable
an office it is to have a general commandder of the carabines; for the
carabines cannot make a body, for that their want of fighting permits it
not, neither were they instituted but to serve the cavalry, either at their
quartering, or to discover, or for intelligence, or to give a charge in the
flank in time of fight, or in a retreat to harrie them whom you chase, or to
keep you from being so when you are pursued. In effect, good carabines mingled
amongst the caval^^e are of very good service; but alone are unprofitable.

If you make more quarters then there be general officers, the ancientest
Captain commands in the quarter, and therein takes the most ancient
quartermaster of his quarter. Insomuch that the General of the horse giving
his orders to the Commissary general, he to the Quartermaster general, and
he to the other Quarter Masters which come for them from the other quarters
(where the same order is observed) the commands are carried without confusion,
and pass through the hands of few persons; and when there is any deficiency
found, it is easy to be verified whence it arose.

The infantery is the more solid body of an army: that of the artillery and
victual always are quartered with it. There is not that diversity between
the companies which is between the horse; they are all of the same fashion,
composed of half-pikes half-musketiers. Many companies make a regiment, which
has its commander; and many regiments make a body, which we call a Brigado of
the army. The army is usually divided into three bodies, Vanguard, Battle, and
Rearguard. Every brigado has its commander; and besides it ought to have a
Sergeant Major of a brigado, and a Quartermaster of a brigado; The first to go
and take the orders from the Marshall of the field general, to carry them to
the commander of his brigado; then he gives the word to the Sergeant Majors of
the regiments: and the other to give to every Quartermaster of a regiment,
either his quarter, or the space of ground which is necessary, for him to
encamp in; and he divides it to the particular Quarter Masters, or to the
harbengers of every company, which afterward lodges them. If there be a
Colonel general of all the infantery, he may have a care in general of all
the government thereof; but in an army he must only command a brigado,
otherwise we should not be able to establish the order which we have
propounded. Moreover, there be diverse nations which do not judge a Colonel
general of the infantery to be necessary, but content themselves with
particular Colonels for every regiment, which acknowledge only the commands of
the General, or of his Marshall of the field general.

The artillery ought to have a General, a Lieutenant general, a
Quartermaster, then other officers. And for that all pioners, miners,
enginiers, conductours of works, smiths, carpenters, wheelwrights, and other
workmen depend on him, I would establish a commander for every sort of these
men; which I would take either out of the commissaries of the artillery, or
other persons apart, to address my self to them when I had need of such men.
The Quartermaster must every night go to receive the orders of the Marshall of
the field general. The charge of the victuals ought to be performed by a
General; he ought to have his Lieutenant, his Quartermaster, and his other
officers: his Quartermaster must every evening go and take the orders of the
Marshall of the field general.

So then you see how the commands are distributed: the Marshall of the field
general receives them from the General, then goes to his own lodging; there
the Commissary of horse comes and receives them for the cavalry; the Sergeant
Major general for the infantery, who delivers it to the Sergeant Majors of
brigadoes: for the artillery to the Quartermaster thereof; and so to him for
the victuals: Briefly, the Marshall of the field general speaking with these
four persons, gives the orders to all the army. All orders and commands ought
to be given in writing. The Marshall of the field general, the General of the
artillery, the Fiscall, the Controller of the Exchequer, the General of
victual, the Quartermaster general, the Sergeant major general and the
Provost general must always be lodged within the Generals quarter.

If all the army be encamped in bodies, the Quartermaster general gives to
each of these bodies the space of ground which is fitting; which is afterward
distributed (in every body) by the officers thereunto appointed.

On a day of battle the Marshall of the field general does assign the place
for every body; afterward the Sergeant major general rangeth the infantery
into battalia.

The Marshall of the field general ought to have three or four assistants for
the field, to carry the extraordinary orders; but they must not pretend to
command any officer in chief, unless they formerly have been either Colonels
or Captains of horse.

The Sergeant major general must command the Colonels; but that they may the
readilier obey him, he ought to be taken out of the Colonels; and none ought
ever to have that place unless he has been one: as also the Sergeant majors
of brigadoes ought to be taken out of the Sergeant majors of regiments. Things
being thus regulated and established, you shall see a great facility in the
commands, and none shall be able to excuse his fault by putting it off upon
another, because presently it will be verified whence it proceeded: which
obliges every man to be careful to do that exactly which he shall be commanded

CHAP. XVIII. Of the assailing of States, according to their forces and
situations.
AFter that you have formed an army, you must employ it, either for the
conquest of a new countre^, or for the defense of your own. We will begin with
the first. The Prince which puts himself upon the offensive must be the
stronger, or must see some garboils in the State which he assaileth, and that
he be called thither by a party: otherwise it would be a rash enterprise.

If the country which he assaileth be large and open, he must seek in the
beginning to hazard a battle or some grand skirmish, that so by the reputation
of his arms he may affright the enemies. If it be a country enclosed with
mountains, or divided by rivers and ditches, or sheltered with forests, or
full of fortresses, it is hard to force an enemy to battle; and in this case
you must go to sieges, and make your conquest by little and little. Now he that
will make any progress by this way must at least have two bodies of armies;
that so with the one he may hold his enemy in play, and with the other he may
actuate without impeachment. For it is most difficult to accomplish the design
of a siege, so long as you have a good army encamped near you, which shall cut
off your victual. If it be a country which is hard to enter, and that has
but few passages whereby to enter into it, you must force one; and before you
go further, you must there fortify, and so well assure your way for your
victual as you may not suffer though the enemy should have burned or carried
away that of his country into his fortresses. If you be called by a faction,
that is a very great advantage for you; because you are instructed of the
situation of the country, and of the defects which are to be found in the
^^^tified places, and want not spies nor punctual advertisements of whatsoever
passes amongst the enemies. You must also be very careful to use this faction
very courteously, and to engage them by little and little into actions which
may make them irreconcilable to their Prince. But when you see they make war
with respect, and that they will but by halves offend him from whom they have
revolted, you must have them in great suspicion, and march with them with
bridle in hand: for whether it be the fear of a ruin without recovery, or the
hope of a reconciliation that hinders them from putting themselves upon real
extremities, the one and other are equally dangerous; and at last you may fear
they may accommodate themselves to your prejudice: wherefore if they will not
engage themselves to do extraordinary and irremissible actions at the
beginning, you ought not to join with them but under good pledges: You must
also use such as do voluntarily yield themselves to you with all humanity,
clemency, and liberality, and such as resist you with all severitie; for
beneficence toward the one and severitie toward the other are the two
principal means which get you obedience. A town taken by force, and hardly
used, or one which yields it self of its own accord, and favored, opens
the gates of a dozen others: as on the other side, a town taken by force and
spared, or which rendered it self voluntarily and is evil entreated, shuts a
great many. Whence I conclude, that a Conqueror must be as good as his word,
whatsoever he promises, be it in clemency or severity

CHAP. XIX. Of the defense of States according to their forces and situations.
TO treat of this subject well, we must divide it into three parts; namely,
into small States, those of a middle rank, and those which are puissant. The
small ones are of that nature as they subsist not but by the jealousies which
their neighbors have one of another; for that if one of them will assail a
weak State, the other will defend it: nevertheless, it is but a tottering
condition and ill assured; for if the one finds himself able enough to assail
them, the other will not find himself sufficient to defend them. The counsels
of Princes and States are not always governed so equally, but for the most
part one prevails above the other. Besides this inconvenience there is yet
another, that sometimes they agree to divide the prey; so that such kind of
petty States which have not strength within themselves for their own defense,
are always in peril; and they must use very much pliantnesse to remove all
pretexts from their neighbors of undertaking something against them. The only
means which they have is to have one or two towns exceeding well fortified,
with arms and money enough to defend them well; that so they may give leisure
to them which will not suffer the growth of him which shall assail you, to aid
you: for if you have no means at all to resist, your country will be taken
before they shall have time to assist you: and besides that, the happiness
which they conceive of conquering you gives them a spur to assail you; you
shall find many more persons disposed to succor you then to reconquer your
country: for that the one is easy with equal forces, and the other without
greater strength is very difficult. To which I add, that there is ofttimes as
great danger that he which regaineth your country as your friend keep it not
for himself, as well as he which had taken it as your enemy: or if he restore
it to you, it will be with so hard conditions, as you shall possess but the
shadow of a Sovereigntie. And thrice happy are they which meet with so good and
so generous Princes, which do reestablish them into their lost States, with the
same authority and liberty as they possessed them before: for such examples
are exceeding rare. Concerning those States of a middle condition, I propound a
Prince (or commonwealth) which for his defense is able to entertein an army of
20000 foot and 3000 horse with all necessary equipage. If his country be of a
difficult access, and that there be no entrance into it but by certain
passages and mountains guarded and fortified, he has a great advantage: but
they which too much do trust and rest upon them, and have neglected other
defenses, have deceived themselves, and have been lost by those ways wherein
they thought themselves most assured. If it be encompassed by the sea, it is a
fair moat, notwithstanding he which is stronger will find means to make his
descent into the island. If it be environed with moorish grounds and rivers,
yet an enemy will find ways to pass them, especially when he has artillery
to favourise such passages; insomuch that the surest way is to trust to your
own forces, namely a good army and good fortresses: I say, both joynned
together: for that the army without fortresses being weak, and not daring to
hazard any thing, leaves the victual of the champain to the enemy, and so the
means to subsist at your charge, and at last to ruin you. And fortresses
without an army are not able to preserve you longer then the time you have made
your magazines of victual for, within them: but these things being
proportioned with judgment, you may make a great resistance. In these things
you must not suffer your self to be led by the fancies of the people, which
without considering the situations of their towns, or the public good, when
they see their neighbors fortify themselves, will all imitate them; a thing
equally dangerous, to have more fortresses then you can guard, or to have none
at all. Yet I should rather like the last then the first: for that at least by
hazarding a battle you put your enemy to half the fear; but by the other way
you must surely perish, without being able to do any other thing but prolong
your ruin: for the jealousy which you have to preserve all your fortresses by
leaving great garrisons in them, hinders you of the means of keeping an army
in the field: and then the spoil of two or three harvests compels you to
yield your neck to the halter. I know there are some which ground themselves
upon this reason, That when all the principal places of a State be fortified,
all the victual of the champain may be drawn into them, so that an army coming
thither, if it stays there, it dies through famine; and if it does but pass
through, it does no great hurt: insomuch that it is almost impossible to make
any great siege there. Whereunto I answer, that fortresses are principally
invented for the weaker, that so a few men may resist a great number: and if
you have so great a number of fortresses, and those requiring great guards (as
the great fortified towns do) you must have a greater number of soldiers then
he shall have which comes to assail you; otherwise you were not able to
provide them all with sufficient garrisons to preserve them from a siege. And
if you be the stronger without any fortified place, you shall preserve your
country in keeping the field. There is yet a further inconvenience in the
fortifying of great towns; that is, that you make them so proud as they will
not acknowledge their Sovereigne but upon good terms; and upon the least
discommoditie they receive in any war the inhabitants desire rather to change
their master then to see their goods wasted. Insomuch that I conclude, that you
ought to have so few fortresses that they may not hinder you from keeping the
field; that those which you have be so well fortified and furnished with
munition as they may make a great resistance; and to place them so well as they
may bridle the great towns, and that they may assure the frontiers, that so the
enemy may make difficulty to leave a place behind him which might discommodate
his victual, and that by intelligence or otherwise he may not seize upon some
principal town which may serve him for a seat to entertein war within the
country. These things thus disposed of, you must regard what enemy assaileth
you. If it be a power of confederates united together, it is the more easy to
disunite, then when it depends on one alone: and in this case it is exceeding
good to cause some diffidence to grow betwixt them, by feigning of intelligence
with some one of the confederates, to whom showing more respect and less
animositie, you may give jealousy to the rest: as also by procuring a
diversion upon the country of one of the rest. It being a very difficult thing
that many sovereigne powers should long hold a league together, without some
disgusts to arise amongst them, or mistakings, envies, and even enmities, by
reason of the diversity of their humors and interests; so that that power
which only depends upon one State only, is much more to be feared. And
because you may be assailed more or less fiercely, I must say a word for that:
If it be by forces which are not too much disproportionable to yours, you may
preserve your country without forsaking it, and with your army and fortresses
tie up the enemy, in hindering him from victual; and by entrenching always so
near him as you shall hinder him from making any siege of importance. For if a
Conqueror advances not forward he recoileth; and it is impossible for him to
subsist in a country which he would conquer, if at first he takes no footing,
and does not strengthen himself by some considerable prise. If also you be
assailed by a power altogether disproportionable to your forces; in this case
you must leave the field, and burn all the victual which you cannot contein
within your fortresses, and also all the towns and villages which you cannot
guard: for it is better for you to preserve your self in a ruined country,
then to keep it for your enemy. And it is in this that a Prince, to gain, as he
thinks, the name of being compassionate toward his people (which in such
occasions turn their backs upon him) becomes cruel toward himself: But it is
rather a vice of irresolution and of weakness of courage which possesses us,
then a true compassion which we have of the misfortune of another: as that of
the Emperor Otho, who upon the first ill fortune that befell him (his forces
being yet entire) durst not try the hazard of a battle any more. And he who
could not afford any pity to Galba in his decrepit age (being his designed
successor to the Empire) and which had committed all kinds of villainies to
attein it, would persuade posterity, that compassion to see the Roman blood
shed had made him resolve to estrange himself from it by killing himself. Thus
it is that we oftentimes desire to cover our vices with the virtue which is
nearest thereunto. But as it is a maxim, that no public good can be without
some prejudice to some particular men, so a Prince cannot disintangle himself
from a perilous enterprise, if he will please every man. And the greatest and
most usual faults which we commit in matters of State and war proceed from
suffering our selves to be carried away with this complacencie, whereof we
repent us when there is no remedy left. But to avoid such storms you must hold
this for a fundamental law for your own preservation, Never to suffer that
neighbor of yours to grow up which makes himself the strongest: for it is
better to offend him by hindering him from enabling himself to destroy you, then
to suffer him to grow greater out of fear to offend him. It being a thing
certain, that no man preserves his liberty against a conquering enemy by
complements but only by force.

It remains that we speak of puissant States which (without help of another)
have arms, money, and what else is needful to maintein a continual war.

Of this kind there be but few, and they need to care for none but themselves;
for that one sole enemy is not able to assail them, and that it is hard for the
leagues of several Princes all to agree in such a design, or for any long
time to subsist together: Nevertheless I will say a word on this subject.
Great States are either compacted altogether, or spread abroad in several
places: the first, which have all their forces united, are able to assail, and
to defend themselves more powerfully then they which are so separated; because
they carry all their forces where need requires with more diligence and
facility, and less charge: the other put a great part of the world into an
alarm and jealousy, because they frontier upon the greatest number of States.
Nevertheless, if the one or the other be assailed, they must make use of the
defenses we propounded before: only I will say that they ought to have no
fortresses but good ones, and few in number, and only on the frontiers, and
none within the heart of the country; for that having more cause to fear civil
wars then foreign, and without which no man will ever assail a great Empire,
it is the way to take away the main root from them which makes them to
undertake the enterprise and to subsist. Besides, you ought not to perpetuate
any governments, neither to families, nor yet for life. But the principal and
most able remedy against civil war is to entertein a foreign war; which
chaseth away idleness, sets all on work, and particularly gives
satisfaction to ambitious and stirring spirits: it banisheth luxury, it makes
your people warlike, and mainteineth you in such reputation amongst your
neighbors, as you are the arbitratour of all their differences. It is true
that this maxim is not good to be observed but by such States as are of this
last sort. For as it is necessary for them, I find it hurtful for petty
States, which must fear all sorts of war; for being too weak to gain by it,
they run the hazard to be the pray of such as are the stronger,

CHAP. XX. Of the means how to assure a conquest.
A Sovereigne Prince is more capable to make great and ready conquests then a
commonwealth; for that finding himself secret in his counsel, courageous in
his resolution, ready in his execution, and not fearing to be contradicted by
any, he makes more conquests in ten years of his life, then a commonwealth
which is less secret, which is long in resolving, which bridleth the
authority of her Captains, and which every hour contradicts their actions,
shall be able to do in a hundred years: So also a commonwealth which goes
always upon her own maxims, which is not subject to the want of one person,
and whose government receives no alteration by the death of any of them,
conserveth much better and for a longer time that which she has conquered then
a Prince; which ofttimes (and almost always) has a successor as much a
heartlesse dullard as himself was virtuous. Nevertheless, I will here
establish (as well for the one as for the other) the true maxims for the well
assuring of a conquest: which consist in two things; namely to take away the
desire of revolting from those whom you have conquered, and the means of being
able to do it.

For the first, it is a thing very certain, that if you conquer a free people,
you shall not take away (at least during the life of those which have lived so)
their desire to recover their liberty. If they be subjects to a Prince and a
State, and that they have only changed their master, they will rather desire
to remain under the authority of him which shall use them the most
courteously. Therefore you must always begin by a fair way, and to establish a
condition for them which you have conquered which may be sure, both for their
life and for their goods. For if even your own subjects find not this
assurance, it is to be feared they will revolt; how much more they which are
newly conquered? it being a law of nature imprinted in every creature, that the
meanest and least animal takes care for its own conservation; to which man
endued with reason adds the conservation of his honor and his welfare, which
he ofttimes prefers before his own life. Therefore a Prince must govern
according to exact justice, uphold the oppressed in his due right, abstein from
all violence himself, as well concerning the honor of their wives as for their
goods: for without this it is impossible to make a conquered people tractable.
You must also (so much as may be) maintein them in the form of their
government, and exclude none of them out of the possibility of atteining to
those offices, dignities and honors which they may possess without prejudice
to your safety. And if it be a Prince which makes this conquest, the means to
assure himself well therein is there to establish his residence the most that
may be; for that his presence does hinder many disorders, the splendor of his
court imprinteth a certain veneration into the minds of the people, and it
brings gain to the artificers and citizens where it is kept.

If it be a commonwealth which cannot change the seat of their government, it
is therefore necessary that such as they should send thither to govern live
there with splendor. For the people is sometimes more taken with appearance
then realitie. These are the means which do insensibly insinuate obedience into
a newly conquered people: but because this is not sufficient, and that ofttimes
the facility of revolting impunely causes men to have a desire to it, it is
necessary for you to precaution your self by requisite assurances, which
consist in having their arms and fortresses in your own hands: I mean not that
all the people shall be wholly disarmed, for if it be possible it must not come
to that; but to assure your self of great communalties by good fortresses; to
have arcenals in several parts, and not all in one place; and not to leave any
town or castle (except your fortresses of garrison) so strong as to be able to
endure 100 cannon-bullets. There is a last means, whereof the ancients made a
profitable use, and is now wholly left, which I do marvellously approve of;
which is, to establish colonies, and to transport the people from one country
to another. For besides that it is a great bridle to keep a conquered country
in aw, you recompense by this means the nearer part of those soldiers which
have done you good service. And I find not the reason to be sufficient which
some allege, that it is cruelty to make this permutation, and that it is
against charity; but to the contrary I find indeed those remedies to be cruel
which are commonly used, to keep the people so under as they have nothing but
their life, and cannot hope for any honor within their own country. For my
self I profess freely, that I had rather be driven out of my country into
another, where I should have a hope for my self and mine to be able to attein
to something more then now I am, then to remain in mine own country to be
deprived of that hope; finding nothing to be so hard as to take away hope from
a man, which is that which in this world, and for the goods of this world,
makes him undertake all things; and which for the goods of the other world
furnishes him with constancy to suffer all things: Moreover, there is nothing
which distinguishes a man so much from a beast, nor yet a regenerate man from
a sensual, as hope. Which makes me conclude, that you should never take from
a man the hope of being able to obtein a better condition then that which he
possesses, that so he be not cast into despair.

CHAP. XXI. How you must proceed to relieve your allie and confederate.
ONe of the most honorable actions which a Prince does, and which brings him
most reputation, is to succor his allies in their necessities: but it is a
thing which for the most part is very difficult. When you will make war, you
choose your advantages, and you take your time and your measures according to
that which you can and will do: it is not so in the succouring of your allie,
which must be assisted with such difficulties and discommodities as you meet
with. If his country be joined to yours, and that nothing hinders you from
assisting him with all your forces united, you cannot excuse the not doing of
it, unless it be that you fear his enemy, and would not offend him; which is
an unmanly and no judicious reason. For by this excuse you escape not the
danger which your neighbors loss will draw upon you. It being much better for
you to resist jointly, then suffer your selves to be undone one after another.
But if it be an allie separated from you by other Princes and States (which
ofttimes so happens) and that you meet with great difficulties to get into his
country, you must then well consider after what manner you should succor him:
for if the States which are between you both refuse you passage, and that you
must be enforced to give them battle before you be able to assist your allie,
it is to be feared that you shall not be able to succor him timely enough. And
if your neighbor, either for fear of you, or of him which assaileth your
allie, do offer you passage, you cannot accept thereof with safety, unless he
put you in possession of those places which are necessary to assure your
return; which being refused you, you must go no further. But if the enemy of
your ally has territories near you, and such as you may easily assail; you
must do it stoutly; and that succor which can be given by diversion is (in my
opinion) the surest and that which succeeds best; because you do it with all
your forces and conveniences, and ordinarily that country which you assail is
not well provided, because he which assaileth another State leads out with
him the best Captains and soldiers which he has. But if you want all these
means, there is no other left but that of money, wherewith you may assist him;
which ofttimes is not sufficient to save him.

CHAP. XXII. Which is best, whether a great Prince make war in person, or by
his Lieutenant.
IT is to the purpose in this place to treat whether a Prince ought to manage
his warre^ in person or by Lieutenants: for that the practice thereof being
different, every man brings his best reasons to maintein his opinion. They
which disapprove of his doing it in person allege, that by going out of his
territories he opens the door for disorders, and robs himself of the
means to prevent them; that it is more necessary for him to keep peace within
then to make war abroad, for which nothing can do so much good as his presence,
which keeps in aw the most stirring spirits; that holding them which are
within in obedience he may give the better order to his affairs abroad; that
there befall greater inconveniences and less remediable, when the Prince is
engaged in person out of his country, then when he is within it; that if he
shall receive some check in his person being far from his own territories,
those busy heads are more daring to make innovations, every man emancipateth
himself and shakes off his obedience; if he be slain there, his subjects are
affrighted, and his enemy is encouraged by it, and thence draws great
advantages; if he be taken, that is still worse; for none being able to declare
himself Prince, and the great ones, desiring to make their benefit of his
calamity, put all affairs into such a confusion that nothing is done in the
State with authority, because they which seize upon the government tyrannize
over the other great ones which might pretend the same, which ofttimes love
rather to call in the common enemy then to obey their fellows. Whereunto they
add, that a Prince cannot free himself without giving great advantages to his
enemy, which turn to a notable and irremediable prejudice both to himself and
his State: So that all things being balanced, they conclude that the
inconveniences are much greater of hazarding the person of the Prince in the
wars then to cause them to be managed by his Lieutenants. This opinion is
principally maintained by men of the gown, natural enemies to soldiers; who
for that they can better preserve their authority in peace then war, do not
only dissuade from going in person to the war, but even do advise the
suffering of all sorts of ignominy rather then to make war. Whereunto
flatterers, panders, and all the plagues of Princes do adhere, which entertein
them within their country in a laziness which brings them to all sorts of
luxury, making them believe that their States are but made for them, and not
they for their States; that the taking of a maidenhead is more honorable then
the conquest of a Province; that there belongs more industry and trouble to
the well-ordering of a feast then of a battle; that labor is not appointed but
only for porters; and that great Kings should cause all things to be acted
without moving themselves: which is the usual way of the loss of kingdoms
and empires. They which counsel a Prince to make war in person, allege that
the command of an army is a morsel so delicious that it ought not to be
imparted to others without great necessity: for that to acquit a man's self
well in such a charge, he must be very absolute; and ofttimes the General of
an army does not contein himself within his duty, especially when the Prince
performs not his own. For in this case he is naturally envious of the glory
of another, and cannot support the good actions of his Lieutenant, though they
tend to his own profit. In which humor they do entertein him which govern the
affairs at court, with this fear, least that an eminent virtue should supplant
them. And from hence proceeds the infelicitie of the most part of brave
designs, how well soever undertaken, which are made to perish either for want
of money or of victual, or by restraining the authority of the General, or by
putting officers upon him which oppose him, and which prove rather shackles to
him then assistants: and when affairs have not succeeded as men imagined, the
fault is cast upon him which is innocent, and the blameworthy triumph: and thus
great Princes shall be served which make war by their Lieutenants: That the
reputation of a Prince who is a good commander himself is much greater then a
Princes which has good commanders: that the first is feared for his own worth,
and the other only through others: that the first cannot betray himself, but
that the commanders of the other may be corrupted: that the first can make
choice of such as are fit for war, and the other has no good commanders but
by hazard: that the authority of the one is not so envied nor crossed, seeing
he is master, and is to give account of his actions to no man; but that the
General of the army of another is subject to a perpetual jealousy, and
thrice happy is he that escapes it: that the means to prevent civil wars is
to employ the most stirring and courageous spirits in foreign wars, where
they shall find wherewith to satisfy their ambitions; as also to be always
armed, because that will cool those which are hottest: and that the Prince be
at the head of his army, that so none may use it against him. They allege
further, that never Prince has founded a great Empire, but by making war in
person; nor has lost any, but when he made war by his Lieutenants. It is now
left to the choice of Princes what is to be done upon these two advises. If he
be a drone, which contenteth himself to be admired by his grooms, which takes
no delight but in voluptuousness, and which leaves off the acting of the part
of a King to act that of a scoundrel, he will never take that counsel to
command his armies himself. If he be a wise Prince, which loves tranquillity
to maintein his people in justice, nevertheless he will not omit to be
prepared for war, and to inform himself therein, that so when occasion shall
serve he need not commit the command of his armies to others. But if he be a
generous Prince which hunteth after glory, and desires to imitate those great
men which live still 2000 years after their death, and whose venerable names at
this day do honor those which mention them, he will doubtless choose for his
principal employment that of war; wherein he will endeavor to make himself
expert, that so he need not depend upon others for the leading of his armies,
and will make that his chief delight. And this is the true pleasure which
contenteth the spirit, which is particular to man, and common to great men: for
corporal pleasure has more of the beast then of man; and so he that wholly
addicteth himself thereunto is worse then a brute beast.

CHAP. XXIII. Of reputation.
IT is a thing which cannot be conceived, how available the reputation of a
General of an army is; and how hard it is to be preserved. For after that you
have acquired the estimation of being a wise man, and of great managing, if you
will conserve it by prudence, men will say you are become a coward; and if by
hazarding some battle you receive a check, they will hold you to be rash. So
that there is no function in the world more subject to blame then that of a
General of an arm^; and very happy is that commander which keeps his
reputation entire until the the end. Nevertheless so long as it lasts it
works mavelous effects: for when he has gotten the name of being
prosperous in war, the soldiers believe that he cannot be beaten; and go upon
his word so securely to the combat, as they take no more knowledge of the
danger; persuading themselves that he never commands them to fight, but that
he is assured of the victory: which does so encourage them as they fight with
much the more resolution. Moreover, the enemies meeting with such a man, fight
not but in fear, as being assured to be beaten. There be a thousand of ancient
and modern examples of this truth. When the army of Alcibiades (even when he
was absent) was beaten, the Athenians believed that it was with his consent.
The one^y report of the arrival of Caesar and Alexander, howsoever but with
small forces, has oftentimes caused the yielding of provinces and the defeat
of armies. The sole reputation of Henry the fourth, who was taken notice of in
the combat of Fontaine Francoise, arriving there the day before in post, made
the Spaniards abandon Burgundy. I have observed the Dauphinois to have this
belief, that the Constable le Desdiguires could not be beaten. But as this
opinion is of great profit to a General of an army when he has atteined it,
so to be thought unluckie in war is a great hindrance to him: for it is
impossible for him to assure himself on those soldiers which have such an
opinion of their Commander. Therefore a General of an army must make it his
principal aim to begin well; then not to omit any thing for the preserving of
what he has gotten: resolving rather to die gloriously in some great action
then to linger out a shameful life after that he has committed some unmanly
act. For as the profession of war is that of all others which conferreth most
honor upon a man which therein acquitteth himself well, so it draws the
greatest infamy upon him that demeaneth himself ill.

FINIS.
A Table of the books of the Abbridgement of the wars of Gallia.
THe war against the Suisses. page 1 2 Against Ariovistus. page 5 3 Against
the Belgae. page 7 4 Against the people of Vannes and their allies. page 10 5
Against the Germans of Francfort and Hessen. page 15 6 Against the Britans.
page 17 7 Against the same. page 20 8 Against Ambiorix. page 24 9 Against
Vercingetorix. page 28 10 Against Corbeus and Comius. page 35
The second Table, of the Civil wars.
THe war between Pompey and Caesar, the siege of Corfinium, Brundusium, and
Marseilles. page 39 The continuation of the siege of Marseilles, truce
violated, a panick fear, the relief of Juba. page 45 The siege of Salones.
Cesars camp, his retreat, the battle of Pharsalia, the defeat of Pompey. page
48 Of the Alexandrian war. page 56 Of the Africane war. page 61 Of the
Spanish war against Pompey's sons. page 64
A Table of the Grecian and Roman Militia.
THe military order of the Grecians. page 66 Of the military discipline of
the Romans. Chap. 1. page 73 Of the division of a Legion of 4000 foot and 300
horse. Chap. 2. page 78 Of marching. Chap. 3. page 79 Of embattelling the army.
Chap. 4. page 81 Of the orders and guards of the camp. Chap. 5. page 87 Of
punishments and rewards. Chap. 6. page 90 Of their pay. Chap. 7. page 92 Of
their order of battalia. Chap. 8. page 93 Of sieges. Chap. 9. page 96
Observations upon some battles of the Ancients. Chap. 10. page 98 A comparing
of the arms and military orders of the Romans with those of the Grecians.
Chap. 11. page 100
A Table of the Chapters of the Treatise of war.
OF the election of soldiers. Chap. 1. page 105 Of arms. Chap. 2. page 108 Of
military discipline. Chap. 3. page 113 Of the obedience of soldiers. Chap. 4.
page 116 Of marching. Chap. 5. page 118 Of encamping. Chap. 6. page 121 Of
battles. Chap. 7. page 123 Of fortresses. Chap. 8. page 127 Of defense against
surprises. Chap. 9. page 129 Of assaults by surprise. Chap. 10. page 132 Of
assaults by sieges. Chap. 11. page 146 Of the defense of towns against sieges.
Chap. 12. page 150 Of artillery. Chap. 13. page 154 Of the baggage and pioners.
Chap. 14. page 157 Of spies and guides. Chap. 15. page 159 Of victual. Chap.
16. page 161 Of the general officers of an army, and their functions. Chap.
17. page 164 Of the assailing of States according to their forces and
situations. Chap. 18. page 170 Of the defense of States according to their
forces and situations. Chap. 19. page 172 Of the means to assure a conquest.
Chap. 20. page 180 How to proceed to relieve an allie or confederate. Chap. 21.
page 183 Which is best for a great Prince, to make war in person, or by his
Lieutenant. Chap. 22. page 185 Of reputation. Chap. 23. page 189
FINIS.

