THE RELATION BETWEEN THE LORD OF A MANOR AND THE COPPY-HOLDER His TENANT.
Delivered in the Learned Readings of the late Excellent and Famous Lawyer,
CHAR. CALTHROPE of the Honorable Society of Lincolnes-Inne Esquire Whereby it does
appear for what causes a Coppyholder may forfeite his Coppy-hold Estate, and
for what not; and likewise what Lord can grant a Copy, and to whom.

Published for the good of the Lords of Manors, and their Tenants.

Non magis promaenibus quam pro servandis legibus liber: Cives pugnare debent,
siquidem sine maenibus Respublica potest consistere: sine Legibus non potest.

LONDON: Printed for William Cook and are to be sold at his shop near
Furnivals Inn gate in Holborne. 1635.

COPPY-HOLDS
The first Lecture.
THE great injuries which are offered, and small remedies which are used in
cases of Coppy-holds, which as it seems, do grow by the obscure knowledge
what Law and Custom judges in these matters of Coppyhold: moves me to show
some part of my Travailes in these points, not thereby to animate Coppy-hold
Tenants which would by too much advancing their Tenure, pretend only to be
Tenants by Custom, and not Tenants at Will, nor to encourage any Coppy-hold
Lord, which could by too much abasing these Tenures, pretend to have such
Coppy-holders only Tenants at Will, and not regard their customs, but to
prove unto you, that as their Title and name shows they are Tenants at will,
and Tenants by Custom in their Land, and they consist both of their Lords Will
and Custom of the Manor in their degrees. And that this Will and Custom be
contained within the Limits of Law and reason, according to such rules as shall
be hereafter declared.

First I will show what a Coppy-hold is, then whereof it does consist, and what
estimation the same is of, by the Antiquity of time, and by the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm.

Master Littleton in his first book of Teuures, defines a Tenant by Copy of
Court Role, and to be where a man is seized of a Manor, in which is a Custom
that has been used time out of mind, that certain Tenants of the same
Manor have used, to have certain Lands and Tenements to hold to them* and
their heirs, in Fee Simple, Fee Tail, or for Life at the will of the Lord
after the Custom of the Mannonr: And that they have no other evidence but the
Roles of the Court, by which difinition, and by certain other observations of
the Law it may be gathered, that a Coppy-hold does consist of these six
principal grounds, or Circumstances. (viz.)

First, there must be a Manor, for the maintenance of Coppy-hold.

Secondly, a custom for the allowing of the same.

Thirdly, there must be a Court holden for the proof of the Coppy-holders.

Fourthly, there must be a Lord to give the Coppy-hold.

Fifthly, there must be a Tenant of Capacity to take the Tenement.

Lastly, the thing to be granted which must be such as is grantable, and may
be held of the Lord according to the Tenure.

But first before I speak of these Circumstances, I will briefly declare unto
you the Dignity and Estimation of Coppy-holders, by the Antiquity, and
allowance of time, and by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm.

It appears by a certain book entitled De priscis anglor: legibus:
Translated out of Saxon Tongue by Master Lambert of Lincolns Inn; that
Coppy-holds were long before the Conquest, and then called by the name of
(Bookeland) as you may see in the beginning of the Book, in the Treatise De
rerum and Verborum explicatione; and by Master BRACTON an Ancient Writer of the
Laws of ENGLAND, who in his Book VVriteth diverse presidents and Records of
King Henry; of allowance, Copi-holders or Customary Tenants that do their due
services, the Lords might not expel them; according to the opinion of the
latter Judges, in the time of Edward the 4. and Edward the third: And it
appears by Master Fitz-Herberts Abridgements, they were preferred by a
special writ for that purpose, and the Lord thereby compelled to do right. And
in the time of Henry the fourth, Tenants by the Virge, which are the same in
Nature, as Copyholders be, were allowed by the name of Sokemaines in
Franktenure; as in the time of Henry 7. were allowed, and of the King, for
defense of their estates. So that in every Kings time Copyholders have had
their allowances according to their natures, unto this time present, wherein
our Justices are of opinion, as the said grave Sages have been in times past.
Now I will further proceed in some particular use of these Tenures, according
to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm: And because I find none that does so
much deface the estimation of Copyholders, as Master Fitz Herbert does in his
Writ Derecto Clauso. I will begin with his words and judgment in the same, and
proceed to other Authorities.

Master Fitz-Herbert, says that this Term Coppi-holders is but a new Term,
newly found out, and that in old time they were called Tenants in Uilenage, or
base Tenure; and this says he, does appear in the old Tenures, for no
Coppy-holders are there spoken of, although there were at that time such
Tenants. But then says, they were called Tennats in Vilenage and says, as
appears 44. Henry 4. If a false judgment be given against them, in the Lords
Court, they shall have no remedy, but sue to their Lord by petition, because to
hold by Copy of Court Role, which is as he says base Tenure, is to hold in
Villenage, which said opinion of Fitz-Herbert, have been by diverse wrested, to
make no diversity between Tenure in Villenage, and Tenure, by Copy of Court
Role or base Tenure, wherein whatsoever interpretation may be made, Master Fitz
Herberts meaning is very plain, and the Book of the old Tenures, is to be
far otherwise understood: as also I suppose, all other Authorities in our Law
do make and appoint difference between the Tenures. And first touching the
Book of the old Tenures it is plain, that the Book makes a plain
distinction between Tenure in Villenage, and Tenure in Fee Base, which is
understood this Tenure by Coppy-hold, and calls it a Fee although a base Fee,
and makes diverse distinctions between them, and says, that the Tenants in
Villenage must do all such things as their Lord will command them. But
otherwise, it is of the Tenants in Base Fee. And this it seems the said Book
of old Tenure; to be by Mr. Fitzherbert mis-recited, which I am the bolder to
affirm, saving the due reverence to his Learning: because one Mr. Thornton of
Lincolns Inn, a man very learned in his late Reading there upon the Statute of
Forger facts: Speaking of Forging Court Roles, did plainly affirm the Book of
the old Tenures to be mistaken by Mr. Fitzherbert in this point. And besides,
for the further credit of Coppy-holds, we ought to consider the great
Authority of Mr. Littleton, who amongst the rest of his Tenures, does make a
divided Chapter thereof, differing from his Tenement in Villenage, showing
there the Suites and Plaints of Coppy-holders, saying that they have an Estate
of Inheritance according to the Custom: And delivers his own opinion, that
if a Coppy-holder doing his Services be compelled by the Lord, he shall have
an Action of Transgression. And says, that Danby and Brian 21. Ed. 4. were of
the same Mind, according to which is Bracton, and the said Presidents of Hen.
3. and the Writ used in Tempore, R. 2. besides many other reasons at the
Common Law, etc. prooving that by use and circumstance things may alter and
change their original nature.

As for example, the service of Socage Tenure was at the beginning, (as Mr.
Littleton says) to Till the Lords Land, etc. And yet now by consent of the
Lord, and by continuance of time are turned into money, and other Services in
lieu thereof. Even so may be said of Coppy-holds, as long as the Tenants
themselves be free, though their Tenure were at beginning never so bound and
base: yet by course of time, they may gain more liberty and freedom, and grow
to more estimation and account. An other reason and Rule there is at the
Common Law, to this intent, that some things there were which in the beginning
were but voluntary, and yet in the end by continuance became Compulsary, as
appears 27 Ass. praescript. Bract. That a man that did at the first of his
own mere benevolence repair a high way or a Bridge by often using, was
afterward compelled volens nolens. Even so it may be said of the
Coppy-holders, who at the first held but at the free will of the Lord; yet now
by usage and continual granting time out of mind, they have gotten an estate
after the Custom, that doing their Services, and behaving themselves well,
they cannot by Law or Reason be put from them. Thus much for the allowance of
Coppy-holders by the Common Law, now let us consider the Reputation of them by
the Statutes and Parliament Law.

It appears by the Statute of 1. Rich. 3. Statutes and Parliament Laws.
4. and 19. Hen. 7. 23. That a Coppy-holder that may dispend twenty six
shillings eight pence by the year shall be Empanelled on a Jury, as he that
may dispend twenty shillings by the year of Free Lands. And by the Statute of
the 2. Ed. 6. cap. 8. the Interest of Coppy-holders are Reserved, being found
by Office after the Death of the Kings Tenants, as well as other Estates at the
Common Law, and so does the Statute of Monasteries. 31. Hen. 8. cap. 13. and 1.
Edw. 6. cap. 14. preserve Coppyholds from dissolving. And it will seem that
Coppy-holders are for the Commonwealth, and therefore to be maintained, for
that some have been erected and established by Parliament, which were not de
visible by Copy before, as appears by the Statutes 32 Hen. 8. 2. 2. Ed. 32.

What shall be said, a Manor and a Manor as will mayntaine a Coppy-hold. A
Manor consists in two parts (viz.) Demeasnes and Services, and neither of
these two parts has the name of a Manor without the other: for as a Message
or Lands cannot be called Demeasnes without Tenements thereunto belonging, to
pay Rents and do Services, but does still bear the name of Message or Lands:
So on the other part, though a Man have Tenements to pay him Rents, and do him
Services, and no Message or Lands whereupon to keep his Court, and to receive
his Rents and Services, this cannot be called a Manor, but only a Signiory
in gross. Fitz. na. brev. s. 3. and. 8.

Demeanes are so called, for that the Lord himself occupies and manureth them
In son maine Demeasne. But all Lands that have been in the Lords own hands,
be not called Demeanes, for all Free-holds and Coppy-holds were in his own
hands at the beginning. But Demeanes is that which is now, and time our of
Mind have been in the Lords hands, or occupation of his Bay liffe or
Servants: And that also which ancient Coppy-hold may be to some purpose called
Demeasnes, because in every Surrender in Manus Domini, and every grant extra
manus Domini, the Lord has a meddling with it, and may thereupon keep his
Court, and for the most part cut down Timber, and such like: And that it is
also called Demeasnes, which now is in the Lords hands by any new Escheate or
Forfeiture. And also the Lands which are in the hands of the Coppy-holders, is
such a Demeasne as with other Services will make a Manor, though the Lord
has none other demeanes there in his own hands, nor in the hands of his
Bayliffe, or servants Services, as with a Demeasne shall make a Manor to
maintain: Coppy-holds is where a man holds Lands or Tenements freely to
suite to the Court of the Lord of the Manor within the said Fee: But yet
every kind of Service will not make a Manor, for Services are of two kinds,
viz. That is by Tenure and by covenant; Service by Tenure is also of two sorts,
as if a man at this day gives his Land in tail, or leaseth it for Life or
Years, saving the Reversion: here is a Service of Fealty incident to this
Tenure, between the Doner or the Lessor, and the Donee or the Lessee. And yet
though this be a Service by Tenure, yet is it no such Service as will make a
Manor. For if a man at this Day be seized of twenty Acres of Land, and
Enfeffeth nineteen several persons of nineteen of these Acres, saving the
twentieth to himself, and reserveth of every of his Fcofees suite of the Court
and other Services to be done to this Court, to be held on the twentieth Acre,
though the Feofments be by Deed indented, or in tail or of Lives, yet all is
void, and avayleth not to make a Manor. But it makes only a Tenure in
gross, for a Tenure may by diverse means be created at this Day; but a Manor
by no way, by a Common person. Plow. Com. 2. 693.

A Manor must be by Prescription, and the Services by Continuance, time out
of mind.

But although a man at this Day cannot make a Manor, yet he may in some sort
enlarge a Manor by adding more Services unto it. 9. Ass. A man seized of a
Manor did give parcel of the same to hold of him by Suite to his Mill within
the same Manor, for this Service the Lord may distrayne, and it is their held
to be accounted parcel of the Manor.

In like manner, a man may by reserving upon a gift, Intayle, or Lease for
Life: Services ingrosse, In the case of Mounson on Aston.
increase the Services of an ancient Manor. Signior grant le Demeasnes and
Services del son Manor de Norkelsey etc. By the Report of Denham of
LincolnsInne
extend en auter Town per le melior opinion des Justices de Common Banck le
grantee, etc. keep a Court there, and so a Manor to be created at this Day.

What shall be said, a Manor or a Tenure in his proper nature or Common Law,
and what in respect of Usage or Custom to maintain Coppy-holders.

It is to be noted, that although a Manor of his proper ought to consist of
demeanes and services, yet in some cases that may be a Manor, and maintain
Coppy-holders, and a Court Baron, by usage and custom, which otherwise by
Common Law is no Manor, nor cannot so be called, etc.

A man seized of a Manor, whereunto be diverse free Tenants, diverse
Coppy-holders, and diverse special Customary Tenants, and the Customary
Tenants, do hold to give atendance on the Free holders at the Lords Court. All
the Free Tenants dye saving one, the Lord does bargain and sell the Manor to
an Estranger* This is now in respect of the Free Tenements, a Tenure, and no
Manor, in respect of the Coppy-holders, both a Manor, and Tenure, and in
respect of the Customary Tenements, neither Manor, nor Tenure.

If diverse do hold Lands, to dine with the Lord every Sunday in the year; this
makes neither good Tenure, nor Manor.

But if they hold to wait on the Lord every Sunday at dinner, and to dine with
him; this makes a good service, but no good Tenure.

If diverse do hold Lands by Copy of the Manor of D. and so have done time
out of mind, and by the like time there has been no Free holders to the said
Manor, Although this be no Manor in his proper nature, yet by usage it is a
good Manor to maintain Coppy-holds.

A man seized of a Manor, which time out of mind has been called by the
name of the Manor of S. and does demise the same by the name of the Manor of
S. this is good.

If a man seized of a Manor, whereto be six Free holders, and six Villains
Regardants: The six Free holders dye having Issue six daughters, the
Villains enterrary with them, yet the same is a Manor, and the villains
thereto regardant.

If a man seized of a Manor, whereto he has Leet, and wrecke of the sea by
prescription, all the Tenancyes Escheate, yet the Leete and the wrecke still
remain, and it is a Manor to that purpose.

If diverse do hold Lands by prescription to find the Lords man's meat, and
hounds meat, when he comes to hunt the Fox in the said Lands; this makes a
good Tenure, but no good Manor: If diverse do hold Lands to do suit and
service at the Lords Court, This is most properly such service as makes a
Manor: but if it be to do suit and service at the Lords Couri, when it
pleases themselves, this is neither Manor nor Tenure. If diverse do hold
Lands to repair a High way within a mile compass, without the bounds of the
Lord of the Manor, this makes a good Tenure, but no Manor. But to repair
or mend the ways within the Precinct of the Manor, is good to enlarge the
Manor.

If diverse do hold Lands to pray for the prosperous Estate of the Lord and his
Heirs; this makes a Tenure, but no good Manor.

If diverse do hold Lands of the Lord to wait upon him at twenty days
warning, twenty miles distant from the Manor, this makes a good Service, but
no good Tenure. But if it be to wait upon the Lord within the said Manor, by
certain space, this makes both a good Tenure, and a good Manor.

If diverse hold Lands to beat or kill the Lords Tenants that shall do
Trespass on the Lords Demeasnes, this is neither good Tenure nor good Manor.
But if it be to beat and kill the Kings enemies, that shall do so, this
makes both a good Tenure, and a good Manor.

If Diverse hold Lands by Prescription to do Service to the Lord, to his Court
of the said Manor, twenty miles distant at a place certain. This is both a
good Tenure and a good Manor. But if it be to do Service to his Court at
another Manor, this without Prescription, cannot be severance from the first
Manor.

If Diverse do hold to come to the Lords Court, and there to do nothing, this
makes neither good Tenure nor good Manor. But to come to the Court, though
not to be of the Homage; yet to offer Amersements, or make Certificates, or any
other Service to the Lord, this makes a good Tenure and a Manor.

If any do hold Lands to do Divine Service before the Lord and his Tenants in
the Courthouse, before the beginning of every Court, this makes both a good
Tenure and a good Manor. What shall be said, a good Custom to be able to
maintain Coppyholds.

A Custom to make a Coppy-hold, must be of necessity in the same Manor,
where the said Coppy-holds are so granted, viz. That the same Lands are, and
time out of mind have been only Demised and Demisable by Copy of Court
Role: for otherwise the Lord cannot grant it by Copy, because he cannot
begin a Custom at this Day. But if it have been by like time granted by
Copy, though sithence it came to the Lords hands; yet if the Lord never Demise
the same by Free Deed nor otherwise, but by Copy, then he may well grant
again the same by Copy, for it is neither the person of the Lord, nor the
occupation of the Land, that either makes or marreth the Coppy-hold. But only
the usage and manner of Demising the same, for the prescription of a
Coppy-holder consists neither in the Land, nor in the Occupier, but only in
the Usage of the Demising.

THE DIVISION OF CUSTOMS.
viz. Customs. Prescriptions. Usage, and Limitation.


THese four though they be in some confounded The division of Customs.
together, and indeed are of great Affinity; yet there be diverse differences
in their several natures between them.

Custom is where by continuance of time, a Right is obtained concerning diverse
persons in common.

Prescription is where by continuance of time one particular person obtayneth
Right against an other.

Usage is by continuance of time the efficient cause of them both.

Limitation is where a right may be obtained, by reason of a non claim, by the
space of a certain number of years, differing in the Accoumpt of time, from
custom and prescription.

But what measure of time shall make a Custom; diverse have differed in
opinion; some judging the same to be according to the Computation of years,
from the time of K. Ed. 1. until the Statute of M. 1. which appoints the
limitation in a writ of right: The account of which time unto the said Statute,
from the said K. time is 76. years, others have thought a hundred years makes
a prescription, because in old time an hundred years was accounted a Fee
simple.

But the true measure thereof according to Master Littletons Rule, is where a
Custom, or Usage, or other things have been used, so long as man's memory
cannot remember the contrary. That is, when such matter is pleaded, that no man
then in life, has not heard any thing, nor know any proof to the contrary.

And by this it appears that Customs, and prescriptions, rests only in
the memory of man, and limitation consists only of a certain time, which
has a certain beginning and of certain ending, and is not directed by man's
memory, wherein is meant limitation of time, and not limitation of estates.

If Lands have been demised by Copy by the space of 60. years, and yet there
be some alive, that remembers the same occupied by Indenture, this is not a
good Coppy-hold.

And if Lands have been demised by Copy but 40 years, and there is none
alive that can remember the same to be otherwise demised: This is a good
Coppy-hold, for the number of years makes not the matter, but the memory of
man. And it is not 60. 80. or 100 years that makes a Coppyhold or a custom,
though it makes a limitation. But such certain number of years makes only a
likelihood, or presumption of a prescription; that is, that it commonly
happens not that any man's memory alive, can remember alone such a number of
years. But if any chance to be alive, that remembers the contrary, then such
prescription must give place to such proof.

Custom has certain special virtues in it self; which for the more
estimation thereof, I will shortly show according to certain precepts and
principals allowed by all Laws, both by the Law of God, the Law of of Nature,
and the Law of Nations, and by the private Law of every Country: as by the Law
of GOD it is said: Si quis videtur contentiosus esse nos eiusmode Consuetudine^
non habemus, nec ecclesia Dei, which proves that the Scripture, and the Church
of God do atribute some what to good customs, though not to evil: And by the
Law of Nature, Consuetudo est altera natura. And by the Law of Nations,
Consuetudo est optima legum interpres. And by the Laws of this Realm, Princes
at their Coronation are sworn, as well to keep the custom of this Land, as
the Laws of this Land, which Law does attribute so much to custom, that
sometimes it is admitted to derogate from the Custom Law, for Consuetudo bona
de clausausitata et approbata, private Communem Legem.

WHEREOF CUSTOM does Consist.
Custom although it does chiefly consist of continuance of time and usage, yet
it does further require seven other necessary properties, accident for the
maintenance of a good Custom: Which are these.

FIrst, it must be reasonable, as it appears 1
2. Ed. 4. 24.

SEcondly, it must be certain, as appears 2
3. Ed. 3. 13. Ed. 3. 4.

Dum fuit infra aetatem. 3. 14. Ed. 3. 4. 14. H. 4.

THirdly, it must be according to Common 3
right. 42. Ed. 3. 4.

FOurthly, it must be on good consideration. 4
5. Hen. 7. 9. 42. Ed. 3.

Fifthly, it must be compulsary: 42. Ed. 3. 5.
Avow 66.

Sixthly, it must be without prejudice to the King. 3. Hen. 6. Custom Fits.
Hen. 2. 22. Ed. 3. Prescription. 40.

SEventhly, it must be to his profit that claims the same. 31. Ed. 3.
Prescription 40. et 28.

Usage is the efficient cause, both of Custom and Prescription; for without
usage, there can be neither Custom or Prescription, for even as the mind is
to man, so is usage to Custom. And as you see there be diverse varietyes of
minds in men, so are there many varieties of Customs as you see varieties of
Countries, and yet all men perfect, and all Customs perfect: some say that
have their minds affected according to the Constitution of their bodies: And
so have Countries their Customs, according to the Constitution of the place;
as in Kent, and in North Wales, because those Countries have been most subject
to foreign invasions, that every man there, may be of power for resistance.
The inheritance for the most part descend in gavell kind (viz.) to every
brother alike, and in other middle parts of the Realm for whom government.
Least equalty is best.

The inheritance wholly descends to the eldest brother: And in Borough English
which is in diverse Boroughs, because their substance commonly is Lands, and in
such Towns, Lands may be the better preserved then goods, therefore their
youngest sons shall only have their Lands, and as it is in those great parts
of the Realm, so it is in diverse private parts and Mannours, and diverse
private and special customs. As some Mannours have Coppy-hold of inheritance,
some for life, or lives: in some Manor the Copyholders surender in one
manner, and in some in an other sort: In some the Fine is Arbitrable: And in
some Certain, et sic in similibus.

The usage of every Custom does not rest to be yearly, daily, or continually
used, but as the equality, and the nature of the thing whereof the Custom is,
does require, as Custom Harryots when they fall, of Shacts and Foldage, in
their season of Common Estovers in their time, and for Coppy-holders, whose
Fines are certain, yet at one time to pay a greater Fine then at an other, and
all these are good Customs, though they cannot be used at all times, for
Customs may be sometimes used, sometimes not used, sometimes altered, and
sometimes not, and therefore in Custom you may see there is (user, non user)
Abuser and interuser.

User is, when according to time and occasion a Custom is used.

Non user is when for want of time and occasionor, through negligence, or
forgetfulness a Custom is not used.

Abuser is that, which user does nourish, a Custom and non abuser tolerate a
Custom, so does abuser destroy a Custom, and yet in some cases, a Custom may
be sometimes used in one sort, and sometimes in an other. And yet a good
Custom, if there be good considerations of the exchanging thereof all times,
and this I call enteruser.

If there be a Coppy-hold, of an Ancient demeasne, and this Land is forfeited
to the Lord by waste, and thereupon a seizure awarded thereof, and yet the Lord
does suffer the Tennant still to occupy it, by the space of 20. years, without
receiving any rent for the same, and after grants the said Land to the Tennant
by Copy. This grant is good and a good User of the Copy hold. But if after
the said seasure awarded, an Estranger had entered and Disseised him of his
Land, and made a Feofment in Fee thereof; And after the Lord re-entreth, and
grants the same again by Copy unto the first Tenant, this grant is not good,
by reason of the User of this Land.

If the Lord have used at the admission of his Coppy-hold Tenants, sometime to
take for a Fine twopence, or sometimes fourepence for an Acre, sometimes twelve
pence an Acre, this User is so uncertain, that it makes the Fine arbitrable
at the Lords will.

If the Lord of a Manor have used time out of mind, to admit his Coppy-hold
Tenants without Fine, this usage shall bind the Lord, as well as a Fine
certain.

If the Lord have used to have certain workdayes of his Tenants, and that has
not been used by the space of twenty years last past; yet that Non-user is no
discharge to the Tenants, so that there be any in life that can remember the
same.

If the Tenants have used when they sow their Lands, to pay the Lord
Rent-corne, and when it lies in Pasture, to pay their Rents in Money, this is
a good Inter-user.

If the Tenants have used to pay to their Lord every fourth year a double
Rent, and every sixth year an half Rent, this is a good Inter-user.

If the Tenants have used to have Common of Pasture in their Lords Woods, for
their Horse-Cattle, and they put in their Neate-Cattle, and destroy the Woods,
this is an abuser. But yet it is but Fineable, and no Forfeiture of the Common,
which they might have rightfully used: No more then if they have Common for a
certain number of Beasts in the Lords Soil; and they will exceed the number;
this abuse by their Surcharging, is only fineable, and no Forfeiture.

If a man have a Market to be used one Day in a Week, the Non-user thereof is
not forfeiture. And if a man have a Market to be used on the Friday, and he
keeps the same Friday and Monday, the Mis-user of the Monday is no forfeiture
of the Friday.

If a Man have a fair to be used two day and he keeps it three days, this
abuser is a Forfeiture.

If a man have a Fair for one Day, and he will keep it two days, and that
is presented in the Exchequer: If the party being called by Process, do claim
both days by Patent, upon sight whereof it appears he ought to have but one
day by his Patent, and the other by Prescription, though the Prescription be
found against him, and that Day lost, yet he shall enjoy the other Day.

If a Man prescribe to have a Fair yearly upon Bartholmew day, and if the
same doc fall out on the Sunday, then to keep the same the next Day following,
this is a good Prescription.

If the King do grant to the Citizens of Norwich the Franchises and Liberties
that London has, and the Franchises and Liberties that Southampton has: If
the Citizens of Norwich do abuse one of these Liberties that London has; this
is a forfeiture of all those Liberties that London has, and of no other. But
if the King does Incorporate a Town, and give them by the same Pattent
Special Franchises and Liberties, the abuser of the one of these, is a
forfeiture of them all.

THAT EVERY CUSTOM must be reasonable; and what shall be said, A reasonable
Custom.
EVery good Custom is grounded upon good Reason, and that shall be said in
Reason a good Custom, that in reason is a good Law; for Law and Custom be of
that affinity, as both does allow like reason, and both does forbid like
inconveniences. And the final effect of both to Discuss and to discern every
man's true right, and to give to every man that which is his own. For although
Custom in some cases differ from Law, and does admit execution of some Acts
without some ceremonies and circumstances as be required by the Law: yet the
end and effect of Custom is to maintain the like reason that Law does, and to
avoyde the like inconveniences.

And therefore if a Lord will Prescribe to have such a Custom within his
Manor, that if the Beasts of any of his Tenants do him any Transgress upon
any of his Demeasnes, and there be taken damagefezant, that then he may
detayne them until the owner shall satisfy him for his harms, as himself
shall require. This is no reasonable Custom that he should be his own Judge.
But to Prescribe, that if any of the Coppy-holders Beasts transgress, etc.
That the same be presented at his Court, that there should be a forfeiture of
his Coppy-hold, this may be called a reasonable Custom.

If Tenants of a Manor will Prescribe to hold without paying any Rents or
Services for their Coppy-holds, this is no good Custom. But Prescribe to hold
by Fealty for all manner of Services, is good and reasonable

If the Lord will Prescribe never to hold a Court, but when it pleases
himself, this is not good. But to Prescribe never to hold a Court for the
Special good of any one Tenant, except the same Tenant will pay him a fine for
the same, is good and allowable.

THAT EVERY CUSTOM ought to be certain; and what shall be said, a Custom
certain.
THere is nothing more required in all Laws and Customs, then certainty; for
incertainty in all cases makes confusion, and therefore Law and Custom does
also agree in this point, that without some kind of certainty, neither Law nor
Custom can be good: for in diverse cases, where one thing may be taken to
diverse intents, and the circumstances of the case such as to which intent the
thing was done, cannot be certainly judged, there the same thing so doubtfully
done, shall to all purposes be judged void. And incertainty of Customs and
customary causes, grows chiefly three manner of ways. That is to say,
sometimes of incertainty of the Persons: Sometime the incertainty of the
things, and sometimes the incertainty of the cause: and in some of these cases,
though there be at the first a Semblance of incertainety; yet by Circumstances
and Contingents, the incertainties may be turned into Certainties. As if the
Lord of the Manor will prescribe, that whenever any of his Coppy-holders
dye without Heirs, that one other of the Coppy-holders of the same Manor
shall Till the Land for the year following; and therefore this is no good
Custom, because the intent neither is, nor can be certain, which of the
Tenants shall perform this Service.

But if the Custom be, that if a Coppy-holder dye without Heir, that then the
eldest Tenant of that name, of the said Manor, shall have this Land; this is
a good Custom, and contains in it self sufficient certainty.

If a Coppy-holder do Surrender two Acres of Land into the Lords hand, the one
to the use of I. S. and the other to the use of I. N. and does not name in
certainty who shall have the one Acre, and who shall have the other, the
limitation of this use is void, for this incertainty.

If a Coppy-hold be Surrendered to the use of I. S. and his Heirs, until he
shall marry A. G. and after the said marriage, then to the use of them two in
tail special, if after they do marry, then is the Surrender to them in
tail, and till then, to him in Fee.

If the Lord will prescribe to have of his Coppy-holders in the time of peace
twopence an Acre of Rent, and in the time of War four pence an Acre of Rent,
this is good Prescription, because there is a good consideration of the cause
of this incertainety: But to pay unto the Lord twopence an Acre Rent when he
will, and fourepence an Acre Rent when he will, this is no good Prescription,
because there is neither good reason nor consideration hereof, nor can it ever
be reduced into any certainety.

THAT CUSTOM MVST be according to Common right: And what shall be said such a
Custom, and what not.
Customs and Prescriptions, must be according 42. Henry 4. Avowry 66 14. Hen.
4. Behon.
to Common right, that is to prescribe, that is to have such things as is their
right, and reasonto have, and not by Custom of Prescription to claim things by
way of extortion, or thereby to exact Fines of other things of his Tenant
without good cause, or consideration.

If the Lord will prescribe to have of every of his Coppy-holders, for every
Court that shall be kept upon the Manor a certain sum of money; this is no
prescription according to common right; because he ought for Justice sake to
do it gratis.

And so it is if the Shriefe will prescribe to have a certain Fee, for keeping
his Turn, this is not a good prescription.

But if the Lord will prescribe to have a certain Fee of his Tennants for any
extraordinary Court purchased, only for the benefit of one Tennant, as for one
Tennant to take his Coppy-hold, or such like, this is a good prescription
according to the common right.

If the Lord will have of any of his Tenants ^om. Little. pla^^ 21. 2 et Yaxley
5. H. 7 19. B2. R. 3. 16 13. Hen. 7. 16. D. St. 47. 2. Ed. 4. 17.
that shall commit a pound Breach, a hundred shillings for a Fine, this is good
Prescription, but to challenge of every stranger that shall commit a Pound
Breach a hundred shillings, this is no good prescription.

If the Lord will Prescribe that every of his Coppyholders within his Manor
that shall marry his Daughter without license shall pay a Fine to the Lord;
this is no good Prescription according to common right.

THAT A CUSTOM must be upon a good Consideration, and what shall be said such
a Custom, and what not.
COnsideration is a great effect in all Laws and Customs, and has as great
an an operation, as any one thing belonging to the Law, for in most causes it
only guides and directs Rights, properties, uses, and estates, sometimes
according to the limitation, and sometimes contrary to the limitation, as well
in cases of Custom, as in cases of common Law; for consideration is the
beginning of all Custom, the ground of all uses, the reason of all rights, and
the cause of all duties: For without Consideration no Custom can have
continuance; nothing is wrought by any conveyance, no interest transferred, no
right remooved, no property changed, nor duty accrewed. As if the Lord of a
Manor will prescribe, that whosoever passes the Kings high way, which lies
through his Manor, shall pay to the Lord of the Manor twelve-pence for his
passage. This prescription is not upon good Consideration: But if he prescribe
to have a penny of every one that passes over such a Bridge, which the Lord of
the Manor does use to repair, this is good prescription upon good
consideration. If the Lord will prescribe to have a Fine at the Marriage of his
Copyhold Tenants, in which the Custom does not admit the husband to be
Tenant by courtesy, nor the Wife to be Tenant in Dowre, or have her Widows
estate; the prescription of such a Fine is not good: But in such Manor where
the Custom does admit such particular estates, there a prescription for a Fine
at the Marriage of his Coppy-holders, is upon good consideration.

If a Coppy-hold surrender his Land to the use of I. S. so long as I S. shall
serve him in such an Office; if I S. refuse to serve, his estate does cease.

If a Coppy-holder does surrender his Land to the use of a stranger, in
consideration that the same stranger shall marry his daughter before such a
day* if the marriage succeeds not, the stranger takes nothing by the
Surrenderer: But if the Surrender be in consideration, that the stranger shall
pay such sum of money, at such a day, though the money be not paid, yet the
Surrenderer stands good.

If the Coppy-holder in consideration of twenty pounds to be paid by I. S.
does make a Surrender of his Lands to N. R. this Surrender is to the use of I.
S. because of the Consideration, expressed in the Copy, and not to the use of
N. R. But if in the Copy the use be expressed to N. R. and no consideration
mentioned, the use expressed shall stand against any consideration to be
averred.

THAT A CUSTOM MVST be compulsary; and what shall be said such a Custom, and
what not.
Custom or Law must be Compulsary; and not at the liberty of a man, whether he
will perform it or not; for then it were of no force; for all Customs and
Laws have their effect in two points. That is, in bidding that which is just,
and in forbidding the contrary: So that Laws and Customs are refrainers of
liberties, and do demand execution of Justice; not that every man should have,
or do what they would; but that which by Justice they ought, whereunto by duty
of Law and Custom, he is compellable; for otherwise it were Voluntary in him,
which were to the infringing of the Law and good order: As the Poets,

Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore,
Oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae.
If the Lord will prescribe that every of his Tenants shall give him ten
shillings a month, to bear charges in time of War; this is no good
Prescription. But to prescribe that they ought to pay ten shillings, a month,
etc. this is good. For payment is compulsary, but gift is Voluntary.

If a Coppy-holder do Surrender his Land to the use of S. so that the said I.
S. do pay him twenty pounds at such a day. If I. S. please to pay the same,
this is an absolute Surrender and not conditional, because the compulsary.

But many Customs there are which at the beginning were Voluntary, and now by
continuance are grown Compulsary. According to the Civil Law. Quae initio
fuerunt voluntatis, ex post fact fuerint necessitatis; which also agrees with
the Common Law in many cases, as I have partly touched before.

THAT A CUSTOM MVST be without prejudice to the King, and by what prescription
the King shall be bound, and what not.
THE King has that Prerogative over his Subjects, that he is not tied to time
as a common person is, for though a common person may loose his right by non
claim within a certain time, the Kings right is still to be preserved, for
Nullum tempus occurrit Regi. Yet in special cases where the King is not
Entitled against such prescription by matter of Record, there such Customs
shall bind the King.

As for example, if a Coppy-holder prescribes that he holds of the King by
Copy, this is good, and by fine certain, and not arbitrable: to have Waife
and Strayes, and Wrecke (but not Cattalla feloni fugitorum,) and vtlagatorum
without Charters.

The Kings Advowson shall never fall into lapse for not presenting within six
months.

THAT A CUSTOM OUGHT to consist of perdurablenesse of Estate, and of an able
capacity.
TO those former parts whereupon I have declared a good Custom to consist, may
be added to either parts, viz. That he which will claim by Custom, must have
a sufficient and perdurable estate to prescribe; and also in his own right, or
in some others, a sufficient ability or capacity to prescribe.

Touching the first, it is to be understood that he which will prescribe, must
have a certain and indefeazable estate, and not otherwise. As if a Tenant at
Will, or at Sufferance, after he has occupied the Land for ten years, will
prescribe to have the same for ten years, this is not good. But a Tenant at
Will after the Custom, although he came in at the first by the Lords will, yet
doing and paying that which he ought, he may prescribe to hold the Land
whether the Lord will or no: And although a Coppy-holder may prescribe in this
form against his Lord, yet against an Estranger, for a common or such like
kind of profit, he cannot prescribe, b^t in the right of the Lord: neither yet
can a Tenant for life, or for years, prescribe in the right of their own
Estate only, because it lacks continuance to make a custom or prescription
(except) in some cases of necessity, the Lord of a Manor, or of a Patronage
for years or life, may grant a Copy in perpetuity or presentation for a
longer time then the estate of the Grantor does continue, and this is admitted,
causa necessitatis, and not Iure prescriptionis.

To the second, Capacity must be in himself that does prescribe; which Ability
and Capacity must consist in the person of him that does prescribe: For as
prescription may be sometimes in respect of estate, Manor, Lands, or Offices;
so may prescription sometimes be in respect of person, which person is not to
be understood of a private person; but of a body Politic, not that many
persons may prescribe, except the same be incorporate; and to prescribe in
respect of their incorporate Capacity, and not in respect of their private
Capacity. As if the Inhabitants of Dale will prescribe to have Common in the
Soil of S. this is no good prescription; for that they be not Incorporate,
they must prescribe that H. Lord of the Manor of Dale, for him and his Tenans
within the said Manor, have used to have Common within the sai Soil: so is
it for Coppyholds, for they must prescribe in the name of their Lord, in such a
case.

If a man prescribe that he and his Ancestors have had such an Annuity, this
is not good: But if a Bishop do prescribe that he and his predecessors have
had such an annuity this is good.

The pleading of Prescription must be used in form of Law, as other matters
that be pleadable, and form must be used (likewise) in pleading of
Coppy-holds, and other Customary Titles for avoiding of confusion and discord,
as well as in other cases of the Common Law, the form of pleading prescription
does differ as the quality of the thing, whereof prescription is made, and
sometimes does differ, as the persons do differ which make the prescription: As
if a Coppyholder makes his Title to his Land by prescription; he must plead
that the same Land is, and has been time out of mind Demised and Demiseable,
by the Copy of Court Role; according to the custom of the Manor whereof it
is holden.

If two men as younger brethren will make their Title to Land in Gavell-kinde,
they must say, that the same Land is of the Tenure and Nature of Gavell-kinde,
which time out of mind, have bin parted and partable between Heirs males.

So if the youngest Son makes his Title to Land in Borough English, he must
plead, that time out of mind, the Custom of the said Manor has bin, that
when, or at what time soever, a Copy holder dies Seized of any Coppy-hold
Lands in the same Manor, having diverse Sons, that the same has used Iure
Hereditario, to descend unto the youngest Son, etc.

And as the form does differ in the things whereof the Prescription is commonly
made; so does it differ as the Persons do differ, which prescribe as a private
person shall prescribe in him and his Ancestors, whose estate he has. An
Incorporate person in him and his Predecessors. A Lord of a Manor in him and
them which were Lord of that Manor.

A Sheriff, in him and those which have been Sheriffs of the same County.

A Steward of a Manor in him and those which have been Stewards there.

A Free holder in him and them which have been Stewards to the said Lord.

A Coppy-holder shall Prescribe against an Estranger, that the Lord of the
Manor, for him and his Tennants at will, have used the like, etc.

WHAT NECESSITY A Court Baron is of, whereof it does Consist, how it is
defined, and what shall be said a sufficient Court Role to make a Coppy-hold.
EVery Mauour has a Court Baron incident to it, of common right, and common
necessity, and this Court Baron consists of four special parts viz. The
Lord, the Steward, the Tennants, and the Bayliffe.

A Court Baron is defined to be an assembly of these parts together, within
the said Manor, to take Council, care, and enquire of causes concerning the
same Manor: to see justice duly executed, the acts and ordinances there done
to be recorded in the Roles of the same Court, which Roles are the evidence of
all ordinances duties, customs, and conveyances, the Lord and Tennants of the
said Manor, and are to be entered by the Steward or an Officer indifferent
between the Lord and his Tennants, and the same Roles to remain with the
Lord, thereby to know his Tennants, his Rents, and his Fines, his Customs, and
his services.

And the particular grant of every Coppyhold, to be coppyed out of the Roles,
the coppyes thereof to be delivered to every particular Tennant, neither can
they make any other Title to their said Tennements, but by their said Copy.

If the Lord of the Manor having Coppy-hold Lands Surrendered into his hands,
will in the presence of his Tennants out of the Court, grant the same to an
other, and the Steward enters the same into the Court Book, and makes
thereof a Copy to the grantee, and the Lord dye before the next Court, this is
no good Copy to hold the Land.

But if the same Surrender, and grant be presented at the next Court, in the
life of the Lord, and the grantee admitted Tenant, and a Copy made to him,
this is good Copy.

If the Lord of a Manor having ancient Coppy-hold in his hands, will by a
deed of Feofment, or by a Fine grant this Land to one to hold at the will of
the Lord, according to the Custom, yet this cannot make a good Coppy-hold.

If the Lord in open Court does grant a Coppy-hold Land, and the Steward makes
no entry thereof in the Court Roles, this is not good, though it be never so
public done, nor no Collateral proof can make it good.

But if the Tenant have no Copy made unto him out of the Role, or if he loose
his Copy, yet the Roles is still a sufficient title for his Coppy-hold, if the
Roles be also lost, yet it seems that by proof he can make this good.

If Ordinances or by Laws be newly made, and Recorded in the Roles of the
Court, if the Court Roles be lost, the by Laws be set at liberty, yet if
there be any ancient customs or privileges by Prescriptions not entered in the
Roles, etc. though the Roles be lost, yet they remain good.

WHO SHALL BE SAID such a Lord of a Manor as has power to grant a Coppy-hold.
A Lord to grant or allow a Coppy-hold, must be such a one, as by Littletons
definition is seized of a Manor, so that he must be in possession at the time
of the grant, for although he have good right and title, yet if he be not in
possession of the Manor, it will not serve: and on the other side, if he be
in possession of the Manor, though he have neither right nor title
thereunto, yet in many cases the grant and allowance of such a Copy, is good
as Donus de facto, sed non deiure. And in some cases a Coppy-hold shall be
adjudged good, according to the largeness of the state of the Lord that
granted the same, and in some cases shall continue good for a longer time then
the estate of granter was at the time of the grant. But that is to be
understood in case of necessity, otherwise it will not be allowed.

If a man seized of a Manor, in which are diverse Coppy-holds demisable for
lives, is deseased, and the desessor grants a Coppy-hold, being void, for
three lives; this is not good to bind the Desseased, otherwise it is of a
Coppyhold of Inheritance, because it is necessary to admit the next heir.

If a man have a Title to enter into a Manor for a condition broken, and he
grants a Coppy-hold of the same Manor (being void) at a Court Baron, this is
a good grant, for the keeping of the Court amounts to an enter in the manor.

A man seized of a Manor for life, whereunto be Coppy-hold Inheritance
belonging, and one Coppy-holder Surrendereth to the use of a stranger in Fee,
the Lord may grant this in Fee, and this Grant shall bind him in the
reversion, but the Coppy-holds being demisable for lives, it is otherwise, for
then he cannot upon Surrender grant the same, longer then the life of the
Grantor. But if the Lord of a Manor for years, or during the minority of a
Ward, of which the Coppy-holds are demisable for three lives successively, and
not servingly, in this case if the Coppyholder dies, the Lord may grant the
same, being void for three lives, at his pleasure, and this shall bind him in
the Reversion, or the heir at his full age.

WHO SHALL BE SAID such a Tenant as may be a COPPY-HOLDER.
ALthough there seems some show of difference between Coppy-holders, and
Customary Tenants, yet differ not they so much in nature, as in name, for
although some be called Coppy-holders, some Customary, some Tenants by the
Virg, some base Tenants, some bound Tenants, and some by one name, and some by
another; yet do they all agree in substance and kind of Tenure, though differ
in some ceremonies and kind of serving, and therefore the name is not the
matter, but the Tenure.

He shall be said a person sufficient to Infant Itin Covert Lunatte Nemy 13.
Eliz. Dier 301
be a Coppy-holder, who is of himself able, or by an other to do the service
of a Coppy-holder; as an infant may be a Coppyholder for his Gardein, and
prochein any may do the service; so may a feme Covert, and her husband shall
do the service: But a lunaticke, or Idiot cannot be a Coppy-holder, because
they cannot do the service themselves, nor depute any other: and the Lord
shall retain the Coppy-hold of an Idiot, and not the Queen.

A Bondman or aliene borne may be a Coppy-holder, and the King or Lord cannot
seize the same.

But a man cannot be a Coppy-holder unto a Manor, whereof he himself is
Lord, although he be but Dominus pro termino annorum, or in Iureuxoris.

WHAT SHALL BE SAID such Lands or other things as demisable by Copy, and may
be holden by Copy.
IT may be said of Coppy-hold Lands, as is before said of the Tenants; they may
differ in name, but not in nature: As some called Coppy-hold Lands, some
customary Lands, some bound Lands, some base Lands, some ancient Lands, some
demeasne Lands, some increase Lands, some Mollendes, some waste Lands, some
warke Lands, some loose Lands, and some Vierge Lands.

And although Coppy-hold Lands be specially so called, because it is holden by
Copdy of Court Role; Customary Lands because of some special Custom; Bond
Lands because of the bond, Tenure, Base Lands because of Base Tenure, ancient
Lands because of the old demise, demeasne Lands because of its new demise, and
late being the Lords own Manor; Increased Lands, because it is late
purchased, and laid to the Manor: Mollands, because it is holden by easy
rents, or no rents at all, waste Land, because it has been lately approved
out of the waste of the Manor, Work Lands, such as has common appendant
belonging to it, Lose Land, because it is holden by uncertainty, Rents and
Verge Land, because it is holden by the Veirge: Yet all the said lands are
holden in one general kind, that is by Custom and Continuance of Time, and
their diversity of their names does not alter the Nature of their Tenure.

It seems by Littleton, that only Lands and Tenements are demisable by
Copy: And therefore if the Lord of a Manor will grant the rent charge, or
the office of Stewardship, or Baylewicke of his Manor by Copy, or a common
in gross by Copy, these be not good grants, because they tie not in Tenure,
and also because the Custom does not extend unto them, but common appendent to
a Tennant of Coppyhold Lands may be demised with the Tenant by Copy.

Demean Lands which within time of memory have been occupied by the Lord
himself, or his Farmour, is not good to ^e granted by Copy, because of the
newne^ of the grant, yet by continuance of time it may be good Coppy-hold, when
the memory of the contrary is worn away, as has been said before. Neither
can the Lord that granted such a Copy, put out his Coppy-holder during his
life that granted the same, because he should not be received to disable his
own grant. If a Coppy-holder do Surrender his coppy-hold into the Lords
hands, merely to the use of the Lord, I doubt whether the Lord may grant this
again by Copy, as he may where it comes unto him by forfeiture, or by
escheat, because it is made percell in demeasne by his own acceptance and not
by the Act of the Law, quaere.

Note that neither the Statute of West. 2. de bonis Conditionalibus, nor any
other Statute, that has not Copy holds named in it, does extend to Coppy-hold
Lands, as the Statute Staple. 27. Ed. 3. nor the Statute of Heresy 2. Hen. 5.
nor the Statute of Will 32. Henry the eight, nor the Statute of Limitation,
made the same year as is how taken contra to Master Brook in nov. ^se 426.

But though a gift in Tail of a Coppyholder, be not contained in the same
Statute of William the Second: Yet I think in such Manor, were time out of
mind they have used to make gifts in Tail of Coppyhold Lands, there such
gifts be good at this day, and they may make protestation in the nature of Avy
writ, as apeareth by Littleton.

WHAT SHALL BE SAID a good Surrender.
AS in the conveing of Free Lands there is required some ceremony and public
notice, so is there in the assuring of Coppy-holds necessary some public Fact
to be done therein, which is the Surrender. In which ceremony there is
contained two effects, the one what is surrenered and to whose use, the other
that it be done with the Lords good will, and for that cause it is surrendered
into his hands. And although of the means a Manor of this surrender there
be diverse kinds, as within some Manors to Surrender by the hand of another
Coppy-holder, and in some other to surrender into the Stewards hands, in some
to the Bayliffes hands, and some by giving a yard to the Steward, in some by
giving his hand, or his glove, which be outward signs of his intent: Yet in
all these kinds the words of Surrender must not be diverse, but one or to one
effect, and must be either words of Surrender expressed, or words of Surrender
employed, and therefore if a Coppyholder will bargain and sell his Land to I.
S. and this is found by the Homage, and I. S. prays to be admittted Tenant,
yet the heir of the Coppy-holder shall avoid the Admission, because of the
insufficency of the Surrender, taking by the words of Bargain and Sale, and
not by words of Surrender, opi. Sur. Dier 8. Eliz. Lou ill dit. and relees ne
vault avrer Come unsurrender.

If a Coppy-holder comes into the Court, and desires his Lord to admit his
son to be Tenant in his fathers place, this seems a good Surrender to the
use of the son.

If a Coppy-holder will in the presence of other Coppy-holders of the same
Manor, say that he is content to Surrender his Coppy-hold Lands to the use
of I. S. this is no good Surrender: But if he says he does surrender into
the hands of the Lord to the use of I. S. if the Lord will thereunto agree,
this is a good Surrender, whether the Lord will or not.

If the Tenant will Resign his Interest in the Court, into the Lords hands,
therewithal for the Lord to do his will, this is a good Surrender if it be
accepted.

If a Coppy-holder will say he will be no longer the Lords Tenant, though
these words be recorded, yet this is no good Surrender.

If a Coppy-holper for life take a new Estate for life by Copy, this is a
surrender of his first estate.

But if a Coppy-holder for life will take a Lease of the same by Indenture for
life, this is not a good Surrender of the Coppy-hold: Quaere.

If a Coppy-holder comes to the Lord, and tells him, that for the
preferment of his Son in marriage, with such a man's daughter; his will is to
give his Land presently to his Son, and desires the Lord that he would be
contented therewith, this is no good Surrender.

But if he had said these words in the Lords Court, and the same recorded, or
found by Homage as a Surrender, and so presented, then this had been a good
Surrender without any other words of Surrender.

THAT A COPPY-HOLDER must be admitted Tenant, and what shall be said a good
Admittance of a COPPY-HOLDER.
IF a Coppy-hold descend unto a married woman, and her Husband take the profits
By S^rgeant Wal^^^^ly 12. Eliz. 291 292.
thereof, and suffer a Court day to pass without admittance of his Wife, and
then the Wife dies, the Husband shall not be Tenant by the courtesy, but in the
12. Eliz. Dyer 291. 292. it seems that the contrary should be the better
opinion.

An entry before admittance is no forfeiture, 30. Hen. 8, Dicr 42. 16. there
without an especial custom pleaded, but the heir may make a forfeiture for
non payment of the Rent, as the Custom was there pleaded before admittance.

If a Coppy-hold be Surrendered unto the use of a stranger upon condition, and
the condition be broken, the party that made the Surrender may reenter and be
a Coppyholder to all Intents, without any new admission, for he did depart with
the Land but upon a condition.

Also if a Surrender of a Coppy-hold be made to the use of a stranger for
Life, and the Lord makes a grant thereof, to the same stranger in Fee, this
shall not bind the heir of the Tenant, but that he may enter after the death
of the grantee, for he took the Land by the Surrender, and not by the grant
made by the Lord: for the Lord is but an instrument for the conveyance of the
Land, for if I make a Surrender unto the Lord ea Intention, that he shall
grant over unto such a man, if the Lord will not grant the same, I may then
reenter, but the stranger has no means to enforce the Lord to grant the same
over unto him, but he may maintain Trespass against the the Lord, if he does
suffer me to reenter, and this is the opinion at this day.

The Lord of a Manor has that prerogative in his Coppy-holders, that no
stranger can be his Tenant thereof, without his special assent, and
admission, and for that cause a Coppy-holder shall not be liable to any
executions of Statutes, or recognizances, neither shall be Cassets, in debt or
Formidon, neither are contained in any the Statutes before named, for if it
were, then should the Lord be forced to have a Coppy-holder whether he would
or no, which is against the nature of a Coppyhold.

And therefore a stranger can never enter, though a Surrender made to his use
be accepted, except he be admitted Tenant, but otherwise of the heir, for
he may eater and take the profits before the Admittance after the death of his
father.

Admittance may be three manner of ways, an express admission, by the words
entered into the Court Role, viz. unde admissus est Tenens, or by acceptance, or
implication, as if the Lordwill accept the rent by the hands of a stranger,
third by admitting one Copyholder, in some cases the Lord shall admit another
by implication to some purposes, and to these three may be added a fourth,
which is by the entry of the Son, after the death of his Father, and the
Tenant in Dower after the death of her Husband, which is Lawful without
admission, till the next Court, and then they must pray to be admitted, etc.

If a Coppy-holder do surrender his Land to the use of I. S. and the Lord does
grant the same to I. S. accordingly, and thereupon he enters, yet he is no
good Coppy-holder, till he be admitted: But if I. S. appears at the Lords
Court, and passes on the Lords homage, or the Lord accepts his Rent or his
Fine for the same Coppy-hold, now is he become a good Coppy-holder without any
further Admission.

If a Coppy-holder surrendreth his Land to the use of I. S. for life, the
Remainder to the use of R. N. for life, and the Lord grants the same
accordingly, and admits I. S. it seems this is a good admission to R. N.
that is in the Remainder.

A Coppy-holder in Fee dies seized, his In Trespass by Hagger against Felston.
heir may make a surrender to the use of a stranger, without admission:
quaere. But if a Coppy-holder surrender to the use of I. S. this I. S. cannot
surrender to the use of a stranger, without being first admitted him self.

If a Coppy-holder Surrender all use of the jointly, and they are admitted, if
the one of them dies, the surviver needs not t^ be admitted again for the
moytie: But if a Coppy-holder having Issue two daughters, and they are
admitted, and then the one of them dies, the other must needs be admitted for
the other moyty, for he takes the same by descent.

L'heire dun Coppy-holder part prender profits avera accion de travers et
Ferra, Post fratris sufficicum deveant admittance 12. Eliz. 291. et part fair
lesses per ans. Denby et Bullock.

WHAT SHALL BE SAID a forfeiture of a COPPY-HOLD.
THE Tenant by Copy stands bound by his Tenure to the Lord, that if he does
any thing to the Lords dis-inheritance; or in some cases if he does transgress
the duty of a good Tenant, he shall forfeit his Coppy-hold: but because all
offenses are not equal, so likewise there are degrees of punnishment; for
there is a difference between offenses done wittingly and willingly, and
faults ignorantly and unwillingly committed.

And therefore some offenses are forfeitures ipso facto, some are only
forfeitures when they are presented and not before, and some are only fineable.

Forfeitures ipso facto are offenses that lie Mis-fesans.
in mis-fesans; and be apparent forfeitures, when they are presented only, are
offenses that lie Non-fesans.
in non fesans, and is not apparent nor affirmatively to be proved without
presentment.

Offenses Finable, are offenses of contempt, Fineable.
and not of dis-inheritance.

As if a Coppy-holder will in the presence, and sitting of the Court Baron, say
(...) extort and exact un-due (...) his Tenants, or such (...), this is only
Fineable.

But (...) and there say, being called forth to be sworn of his homage, that
he is none of the Lords Tenant, this makes a Forfeyture of his Coppy-hold.

But if he will there say, that he will shortly demise away that he will be
no longer of any of the Lords Coppy-holders, this is neither cause of
Forfeyture, not Fine.

If a Coppy-holder Sendente curia do strike an other Coppy-holder, or any
other stranger, this is only Finable, and makes no Forfeyture.

If the Steward shows forth a Court Role to prove that I. S. is a
Coppy-holder and this not withstanding he will in the Court say, that he is a
Free holder and shows forth a Free deed and claim thereby, and teareth in
pieces the Court Role, and publishes the free deed, this a cause of Fine and
Forfeyture.

But if the said Tenant will there upon some Colorable doubt, and question
which may arise, whether he be a Free holder or a Coppy-holder say to the
Steward, because he knows not whether the rent that he should pay, be Free
rent, or Coppy-hold rent, he will pay it with protestation that the rent may be
recorded as it shall fall out, and with like protestation offer and do his
service, though in truth he be a Coppy-holder, yet this deserves neither
Fine or Forfeyture.

If a Coppy-holder cannot pay his rent, and will not do his service, this
offense is on the Negative, and makes no forfeyture till it be presented.

Tenant per Coppie ne poet facere wast ne couper bois per vender mes pro
reperacontantum 9 Hen 4. 12. 43. Ed. 3. 32.. 80.

But if a Coppy-holder does Alien his Land by Free deed, or will commit waste,
or demise his Coppy-hold contrary to the Custom, or will sue a replevin
against the Lord, for a Distr. lawfully taken for his Rent or service due, or
disclaim in the Land being summoned to the Lords Court, or will there claim
it as his free hold, or will in any other Court untitle any other Lord unto it,
or be attainted of treason or felony, or continue out-lawd, or excommunicate,
during the Lords Court, or refuses to go with his Lord or other
commissionours for that purpose in the service of the prince, to suppres
Rebels, riots, or unlawful assemblies. All these offenses be apparent
mis-fesance and forfeiture ipso facto without any presentment.

But if a Coppy-holder being of the grand Inquest at the Assizes or Sessions,
shall indit his Lord of any manner of offense committed against the Prince or
Laws of this Realm, or shall upon process Compulsary give evidence against his
Lord, which is in any cause between his Lord and an other Common person, or
between the prince and his Lord without compulsary process, or shall make any
bodily arest of his Lord by the commandment of the Shriefe or other lawful
authority, or shall bring any Action or Suit against his Lord in any of the
Queens Courts (except a Replevin case aforesaid) All these last recited, be
cause of neither Fines or forfeitures of any Coppyhold.

Also a Coppy-holder not claiming his Coppy-hold after the death of his
Ancestor within a year and a day, at the Court, if any be, it is a forfeiture
for ever per. opin Catline, Slowelle Case 372. ct c. il pesse dee bone custom
in plusors Manors.

If Coppyholders being on a Jury will not find the waste committed, or will
not present things presentable, this is a forfeituer of their Tenures, if they
be Coppy-holders; by the opinion of Catlin, Dier, and Bracton. 4. Eliz. Dier.
211. pe. 31. 6. et 7. Eliz. 233. b. 9. Hen. 6. 44. b.

If a Coppy-holder will not be sworn to present such offenses as are
forfeitures, this is a forfeiture of his estate; so if he alien, or make
Coppy-hold free, for ten pound, the Lord may enter, for they are wilful
acts, for which the Lord may enter without presentment, but for negligent
offenses, as for not doing of services, or not acceptance of a Coppy-hold after
the death of his ancestor, the Lord cannot seize without presentment of the
homage. And if an infant within the year after the death of his ancestor, will
not after the Court holden and proclamation made, pray to be admitted, it is
no forfeiture, unless the Custom of the Manor be, that an infant ought to
forfeit his estate by such negligence, for it is but a claim at Common Law,
which bars not an infant, which has not discretion. Between Hautrey and
Buckshire and one of his Coppyholders. 12. Eliz. Rot 96.

If thirteen Coppy-holders be sworn in a base Court, and twelve agree to
give Verdict, the thirteenth will not; it is not a forfeiture, for it is a good
verdict without his assent, and perhaps it is not agreeing to his conscience,
and therefore it is not properly a not doing, or denial to do his duty.

Quaere, If there be 12. and 11. agree, and the twelfth will not, for it is not
a full Jury. Pasche. 20. Eliz. Co. Bank. ve. 3. Ed. 3. Verdict 10. ou. 11. 29.
Ed. 3. ibid. 45. 12 Hen. 4. 10. Sherne.

WHAT OFFICE OR POWER entirely, or dividedly the Lord Steward, Freeholders,
Coppy-holders, and the Bailiffs, have in the Court Baron.
ALthough the Lord, the Steward, the Freeholders, the Coppy-holders, and the
Bayliffes of every Manor, have an intermixed and joint office, and authority
in some cases, and to some purposes: yet to other purposes their office is
distinct and divided, and every of them does occupy several places, persons,
and parts.

The Lord is chief to command and appoint to the Steward, to direct and record
the Free holder, affirre and judge the Coppyholders to enfirme and present, the
Bayliffe to attend and execute, etc.

And all these together make a perfect execution of Justice and Judgments in a
Court Baron, and without all these a Court Baron cannot be holden in his proper
nature, in respect of all causes belonging to the perfect jurisdiction of a
Court Baron.

And yet a Court Baron may be held by use and custom, for some Coppyhold
causes, though it want one of the said parties (viz) the Free holders, and
there in Coppy-hold cases the Steward does supply the place of a Judge: But no
other of the parts aforesaid, except the Free holders, can be missed, or spared
in a Court Baron.

But to make some more particular demonstration of their distinct authorities
and offices: And first the Lord as he is chief in place, so is he in
Authority, and occupies three several Romes, the one of a Chancelour in cases
of equity, the other of a Justice in a matter of right, the third of himself
in Cases proper and particular to himself.

The Steward does occupy the parts of several persons, that is to say, Judge
and order in cases of Coppy-hold, and also a Minister, and Register to enter
things into the Court Roles, and in both these to be indifferent between the
Lord and his Tenants.

The Free holders do likewise fulfill two parts, that is, to effect, and judge
amercemetns, and also to return and certify judgments.

The Coppy-holders also do hold two several rooms, viz. to inform offenses
committed against the Lord within that Manor, and to present such things as
shall be given Charge by the Steward.

The Bayliffe does also occupy two parts, that is to say, to execute the
process and Commandments of the Court, and also to return into the Court the
Execution of the same process.

6. Ed. 6. Bract. No. case. 84. pli. 387. the under-steward in Court, without
authority of the L. or of the high-steward, may demise Copyhold, and it is a
good grant, for it is in full Court; but contrary it is if it be out of Court.
Quaere, if the high steward without authority may demise out of Court.

Finis Lecturae Calthrop.

A Coppy-holder being indebted, does surrender to his creditor, upon trust that
he shall have the Land to satisfy himself of the debt, and then to be
surrendered back again unto him; And after the debt levied, the creditor will
not surrender, whereby according to the custom of the Manor, the Tenant
pursues an English Bill to the Lord in his Court, by which the trust is prooved
by deposition; the Lord seiseth the Land to the use of the first Coppy-holder
until etc. And Wray was of opinion, that he may well so do, for he has no
other remedy, for the Lord cannot imprison him, as the Lord Chancelour of
England may do; and that the custom of deposition is good, though some do
doubt: but Gaudy agrees, but he says that the Lord cannot retain and keep
the Land, and if he should so do, the other shall have a Subpena; whereunto
Wray agrees, that he cannot retain the Land but seize it and grant it over,
which without seizing he cannot do, 25. Eliz. B. upon the motion of Cook,
who said that 14. Hen. 4. 39. and Fitz. B. 1^. are according to their opinions:
For a Coppy-holder shall not have a Writ of Error, not false judgment, upon a
judgment against him in Court of the Lord; but he shall sue by bill, and
thereupon the Lord shall reseise the Land, upon false judgment given by the
Steward, and shall make restitution.

If one recover a debt by plaint in Court Baron, those of the Court have not
power to make execution to the Plaintiff of the defendants goods; but they may
distraine the defendant, and after the judgment retain the distres in their
hands in safeguard, until the Defendant has satisfied the Plaintiff of that
wherein he is condemned by the Court, 46. Hen. 6. 17. See the book of Entrees
Fol. 166. 7. Hen. 4. 27. In replevin the defendant said, that one Edward Besall
brought a writ of Droit close against the plaintiff, and one other in the
Lords Court in ancient demeasne, and declared in nature of Assize, and it was
found against the plaintiff, and damages were taxed; whereby the defendant
being then under-Bayliffe, by the Stewards commandment, takes the beasts for
execution of the damages, and takes and sells them, and delivers the moneys to
the plaintiff in Assize; this is a good plea, and yet this is but a Court
Baron. And Fol 29. by Hull; A man recovers ancient Demeasne-Lands, and damages
in a Court of ancient Demeasne, the Bay liffe may take the beasts of him
against whom the recovery is etc. for execution of Damages in every parcel of
the Land holden of the Manor, although that Land be Frank-fee, and it is not
denied 22. Assise. 72. agrees with 4. Hen. 6. mes Kitch. 115. where it is used
to make execution by levari facias, that is a good Custom. 38. Ed. 3. Custom
133. upon a recovery in Court Baron, the defendants Cattle were delivered in
execution.

WHERE A TENANT BY Copy may plead a special Custom, which is only proper to
him and his predecessors before him.
NInth Eliz. Taverner was sued by the Lord Cromwell, for that he had committed
waste upon his Coppy-hold; he pleads by the advice of Manwood, that he and
those who before him had the house wherein he dwelt, had such a Custom by
Prescription, that they might fell Timber trees, etc. And many arguments were
against that Custom, in as much as other Tenants of that Manor had not such
a Custom, but were punishable, and had forfeited their Lands for such waste;
also that Custom was against common right, and not reasonable; and after long
deliberation of the Judges, it was adjudged, that a Tenant may plead a
particular Custom, as if one prescribe to have a way in the Lords Land, etc.
And 19. of Eliz. one prescribed that he and those of that Tenement his
predecessors, had used to have Common of estovers in another Manor,
notwithstanding that the other Tenants have not such a Custom, and it was good
by the advice of all the Justices.

WHERE THE TENANT may cut down trees, destroy houses by Custom, and such like
Customs, etc.
FOurth Ed 6. Justice Dalisons Reports, Sanders and diverse Justices; Tenant by
Copy of Court Role may prescribe to have Wood growing upon the Land. Montague,
there is such a custom, and so used in the Counties of Mid. Northland and
other places. Brown, it has been here agreed of late, that Tenant by the
Custom may prescribe to suffer their houses to fall, and to destroy their
houses; so also here, whereby this is a good Custom. Montague, I have heard a
Fable, that a Tenant by the Custom may dig in the one part of his house, and
burn the other part, by the Custom: But if you will agree that the Tenant by
Custom shall have the Land against the Lords Will, to him and his heirs by
the Custom; why then may they not by the Custom cut down Wood? Sanders, I
agree to none of your cases. Montague, surely in the Chancery it will be
overruled against you without doubt, and it is necessary that an Act of
Parliament be made upon it.

WHERE AND HOW Tenant by Copy, may make a Ioynture to his wife of the same
Land.
A Stranger brings a writ of right against the husband and wife, in the same
Court where the Land is by plea, and the husband and wife do appear, and the
demandant does Count against them, and the husband and wife do defend, and say
that they have more right then the demander, and offer to try it by Battle;
and the demander and Tenants do Imparle, at which day the demander appears,
and the husband and wife make default, whereby final judgment is given
against them; and at the same Court the Recoverer Surrenders the same Land into
the Lords hands, to the use of the Husband and Wife, and the heiros of their
two bobodyes begotten; and it was said that this assurance has been used 1.
Ed. 6. Dalisons reports.

Pell et Hikden: Trin. 36. Eliz. Rot 547. on the Kings bench: Tenant in Tail,
the In Mons^^r (...) in Court Baron, may defeat an entayle B Regis 2. Coment.
21.
remainder in Fee, Tenant in Tail Surrenders to the use of I. S. in Fee; I. S.
suffers a Recovery, and vouches the Tenant in Tail, who vouches the common
vouchee, and by special Verdict it was found that there was never any recovery
before in that manner, and it is not yet adjudged. Gaw^y and Clinch, that the
recovery can not be a Bar, for warranty can not be anexed to an estate at
will; also he shall not recover in value, because of the estate at will. Fenner
and Popham chief Justice to the contrary, and that warranty may be annexed to
Coppy-hold Land, though it be an estate at will of the Lord; but as it is an
estate in Fee, performing the services and duties, the Law will account them
Tenants in Fee: Also recovery in value, being but a fiction in Law, le common
vouchee shall be accounted to have the Land in value of the Coppy-hold, within
the Manor: and the Vouchee 23. Hen. 8. Br. Recovery in value 27. that such a
Recovery is used in ancient demeasne upon a writ of right, and Voucher over,
and that of a Freehold there; yet enquire of such a Recovery upon a plaint,
there of Land of Base Tenure, for that cannot be warranted, etc.

But in the Common Bench, in trespass Adjudged in the Common Bench, that a
recovery cannot bind an entaile.
brought by Comb, against Pears and Turner. Mich. 36. et 37. Eliz. Rot. 14.
Bromeley Britain Hall in Essex: Tenant in Tail of a Coppy-hold suffers a
recovery with Voucher, where no recovery was before; the lesser enter, by the
Court, that cannot be, but he shall have a Formdone in discender; for the
recovery in Court Baron cannot avail, because a warranty cannot be anexed to
an estate which is at the will of the Lord. Also there can be no Recovery in
value, first because there can be no recovery in value of Lands out of the
Manor, and the Coppy-land is at the Lords will: Secondly Coppy-hold Land is
granted by Copy only; and if by the Recovery the Tenant may have it, the
course and Custom of the seignory would be destroyed, which shall not be:
Thirdly the Lord shall loose his fine, and Fealty also; for the Copy is
admissus est tenens, etc. et Dat. Duo de fine pro tali ingressu, etc. et fecit
fidelitatem. Fourthly et Fifthly, Ph. et Mar. A Coppy-holder Surrenders to the
use of his wife for Life, the remainder to the right heirs of the husband and
Wife; the Wife dies, the Husband survives: The question is, who shall hold the
Land; and it was said that if the Husband had no Issue by that Wife, then his
Heir shall have it.

CERTAIN COPPY-HOLD cases reported in a cer taine BOOK.
BUt it was said there, that if the Wife had Issue by another H^sband, it was
there doubted. But it was holden by the better opinion in Dier, that the
Husband and his heirs shall have the Land; yet if the Husband had first two
sons, the heirs of the Husband, and the heirs of the Wife, shall have the
Land in Common, after the decease of the Wife, and for proof thereof he puts
this case: If land be given for Life, the remaynder to two men and their
heirs, they cannot have one heir in the case: if the Tenant for Life dye
before them in remainder they shall be J^^^etennants, and the Heir of the
surviver shall have all: But if none in remainder be in life, when the Tenant
for life dies, then the heirs of them in the remainder shall hold in common.

Thirty seventh Henry the eighth A Coppy-holder to the intent to make an
assurance to his Wife, suffers another to bring a Writ of right in the Copy
Court, and they join the Battle, and at the day the Husband and Wife make
default, and final judgment was given; and after the recoverer Surrenders the
same Land into the Lords hands, to the use of the Husband and Wife and their
heirs; and a good assurance pur Cur.

A Coppy-holder makes a Lease at Will to another, who commits Waste, A
Coppy-holder brings an action upon the case against lessee for wast and good.
which is a cause of Forfeiture; the Lessor brings an Action upon the case
against the Lessee: By Walsh, Weston and Dier, the Lord may enter, and have
Trespass against the Lessors his Tenant; and therefore it is reason that he
shall be recompensed: But the Lord shall have a special Writ of Travers, and
not vi and armis, because the entry was lawful. 8. et 9. Eliz. ibid.

The Lord Dacres enters upon his Coppy-holder, and leaseth it to a stranger for
years; the Lessee enters, and was ejected by the Coppy-holder, and he brings
a Writ of Electione firm: The Coppyholder pleads that the Lands are demiseable
per Custom; and so they were at issue; and he showed in evidence a Copy made
13. Henry the eighth, by which a Tenant had surrendered the Lands, to have and
to hold, etc. whose estate he had, and by another Tenant rendering the yearly
Rents, Customs, and Services; and also he produced certain Witnesses who
proved the Land to be Coppie by the space of 69. years. The plaintiff, to
destroy the Title of that evidence, showed certain Rentals that they were Free
Lands, etc. 9. et 10. Henry 7. and not Copy; and also another Rentall to that
intent, in 12. Henry 6. which prooved that those Lands were leassee for twenty
years: Per Cur. this evidence does not disproove the Coppy-hold, for it was
not within the time of memory; but if he had showed the Indenture of Leasse
made within 50. years or 80. years, so that a man might remember it, then it
had been good, although the Statute of limitation extends not unto it, by the
Justices, such evidence as prooves it to be within time of memory, is good.

Also by them, if those Lands be in the hands of the Lord by forfeiture,
Escheat, or Surrender, yet the Custom remains; for he may demise them
again, and the Custom shall be revived; but by some men, if by Escheat it
be in the Lords hands, the Custom is extinct. 8. et 9. Eliz. Ibidem.

Addington Lord of Harlow in Essex, would increase the Fines of his Coppy-hold
The Lord cannot increase a fine which is certain.
Tenants, which were prooved to be certain: And it was holden that he could
not increase them, and it shall be a good prescription to say, always ready to
pay such a sum and no more. 18. 19. Eliz.

4. Eliz. It was moved by Manwood Sergeant, if a Coppy-holder in Fee in right
of his Wife do Surrender, the wife being not examined by the Steward, but by
some of the Tenants, the Custom permitting it, the Husband dies: Whether the
Wife shall sue by plaint in Nature of a Cui in vita, or may enter? And by him
she may enter, because it is no discontinuance, for that it is a surrender to
the Lord who has the reversion, for if a Tenant in Tail enfeoffe him in the
reversion; it is no discontinuance; but if she had been examined, she should
have bin barred for ever.

And Dier, if a Coppy-holder in Tail surrender to the Lord to the use of a
stranger, the Issue may bring a plaint in Nature of a Formdone in discender,
and purge the discontinuance, for it is within the statute De donis
Conditionalibus, Lit Fo. 16. Com 233. 15 Hen. 8 Br. tit. Tenant per Copy 24.

And by Manwood, no negative prescription may prevail against a statute: And
the Common Law is no other but an ancient usage throughout all the Realm; and
a prime Custom may encounter with it, but not with a statute.

And by Dier, if after the Surrender the Lord admit the Wife again, yet she
shall be in by her Husband in construction of the Law.

Coppy-hold of inheritance discends unto two sisters by two venters, none of
them making entry, and before the Court and admission one of them dies, her
heir shall have the moyty, and not the other sister, by Dier chief Justice in
the Chancery.

Also if a Coppy-holder in Tail Surrender to another in Fee, who is admitted,
this is a discontinuance, and so the Husband of his Wifes Coppy-hold: And h^
said, that a remitter shall be of a Copyhold, as it shall be of a Freehold and
inheritance at the common Law. 13. et 14. Eliz.

In the Duch^^ it was in question; whether a Coppy-hold may be entayled or not?
And by Wray chief Justice, and Manwood chief Baron; the Tail was not Fee
simple at the Common Law, if it did not appear by the Custom, and that may
be prooved by the Court Roles, or by some other proof that there is a
recovery by plaint of Formedon, or the Lands had descended according to Land in
Tail, as possessio fratris shall not be of it, or that that the Daughter shall
not inherit, before the son which is uncle to the same. Egerton was of
counsel with this case, which was between Sherington and an other. 22. Eliz.

Hanchet and Rosse concerning land of Dicot in Stepping Hackney, a Coppy-holder
of inheritance dies, the Lord grants the wardship of the Land, during the
minority of the heir, to the Wife being sole; she takes a Husband and dies:
It was demanded whether the Husband should have it or not? And it seemed not,
but if it had been a thing in which he had intrest to his own use, that he
should have it, as a Lease for years, the executor shall have it without
admittance of the Lord, so the Husband shall have a Lease for years made to
his Wife, without admission.

By all the Justices. 17. Eliz. If a Coppyholder in Fee take an estate in Tail
by Charter-hold, or take a Lease for years by Indenture, his Coppy-hold is
confounded.

7. et 8. Eliz. by Harpour and others; a Lessee for years of a Manor may
make Coppyes, (if the Custom be so) to a man and his heirs secundum
consuetudinem, etc. for if the Coppy-holder in Fee dye, his heir is in by
descent, and ought to be admitted, or else he shall compel the Lord to admit
him, for for it is of necessity. But Coppies for life or years it is
otherwise, for by the death of the Tenant, there is not any that can compel
the Lord to make him a new Copy if he will not, but he may retain the Land in
his own hands, and therefore the grants of such Coppyes as are expired, made
by a lessee for years, are void.

26. ELIZ.
FIrst, Land Demiseable, by Copy in the time of Richard the second, is perfect
Coppy-hold; so if it be demised by Copy 15. or 16 years.

Secondly, If the Lord purchase the Coppihold of his Tenant money, this is
clearly a surrender, and an extinguishment of the Copy, and it is not
demiseable by Copy after: But if the Lord enter for forfeiture without
presentment found, that is demiseable by Copy again.

Thirdly, If the Lord bring Trespass against a Coppy-holder, who pleads that it
is Free hold, this is a Forfeiture, and the Lord may enter.

Fourthly, the Lord cannot seize, because his Coppy-holder was sworn to give
evidence against him, for this is no forfeiture.

Fifthly, if a Coppy-holder disseise his Lord of other Land, that is not a
forfeiture of the Coppy-hold.

Sixthly, if a Coppy-holder dye without heir, and the Lord enter by escheat,
this is demiseable by Copy again; but if the Lord afterward do make a
feoffment, or suffer a recovery, and after do repurchase it, it is not
demiseable; but if the Lord reverse the Judgment upon recovery by error,
attaint, or deceit, and has restitution, then it is demiseable by Copy again.

A disseisin does not extinguish the Custom, nor acts done by the disseisor.

Seventhly, if a Coppy-holder suffer a recovery by prescript at common Law by
collusion, or make a Feofment, or bargain and sale, and the Lord enters and
makes a lease for years thereof; the Land is not demiseable by Copy again.

Eighthly, if a Coppy-holder surrender his Land, to the intent that a stranger
shall have the Rent out of it by Copy; it is no good Coppy-hold Rent.

Ninthly, if there be two joyn-tenants in Common of a Manor; and a
Coppyholder surrenders to the use of one, this is not Coppy-hold Land.

Tenthly, if the Husband and Wife be joynt-coppy-holders of the purchase of
the husband during Coverture, and the Husband is attainted of Felony and dies,
this is not a Forfeiture of any part of the Coppy-hold; but if the purchase was
made before the coverture, then it is a Forfeiture of the moyty.

Eleventh, If two Coppy-holders exchange by license, and after the part of the
one is recovered by an elder title, he may enter in the Land which the other
has in exchange.

Twelvth, If two Coperceners Coppyholders make partition, and the one is
impleaded and does loose by just title, and the recoverer enters into the Land,
she cannot enter upon her sister, because she did not pray in aid for the
rate. A feme Covert Joint Coppy-holder with another in Fee, may surrender her
moyty to the use of her Husband and it is good.

Thirteenth, the Kings Steward without ny patent of his Office seiseth diverse
Coppyholds, and afterward the Lord Treasurer and those of the Exchequer do
lease the same Land for years; and thereupon it was moved, whether Coppies
made by the Steward without patent were good? and the Lord Dier thought they
were good Copyes; but in the Exchequer the Barons were of another opinion.

Fourteenth, a man seized of a Manor, to which Coppy-holders for years and
others are belonging, he devises by testament the same Manor to a ceraine
person for payment of his debts, during which time diverse Coppyes expire, and
the devisees grant new Coppyes, and afterward during the term, the devisees
grant in reversion, and a particular Tenant surrenders in Court to the use of
the grantee, and after the wife of the devisor recovers in Dower part of the
Manor, and has execution of those Coppy-holds assigned by the Sheriff for
her Dower: And it was moved, whether the Wife shall avoid those Coppyes made
by the devisees? And Brown Justice was of opinion that no; to which Weston
agreed, for they said, that those are ordinary things, and which must be done
of necessity by force of the Custom, and not any deed or new charge created
by the devisees, who are but officers to execute the Custom which of necessity
must be done, for they cannot be made by any others who have the possession
of the Manor; for it has been adjudged, that such Coppyes and ordinary
things, as presentment to a Church made by a disseisor, or by a Lessee for Life
or Years shall stand good, and shall not be avoided by reason of the
necessity: but other charges created by the Heir after the death of the
Huband, as a Lease for years Rent charge in which there is no such necssity,
the Tenant in dowre shall discharge them, and although the Wife shall be
adjudged in by her husband, yet she shall not have those things which chance
before assignment of her dower. If a wardship fall, or an avoidance of a
Church, or a villain regardant has purchased, and the heir enters, or
presents, these things the heir shall have, and not the Tenant in Dowre, and
it may be that the wife will never sue for her dower, or peradventure she shall
have other Mannours assigned her for the same. And as to the reason, that it is
not a thing of necessity to grant Coppies in reversion, yet they were of
opinion that because the Custom does allow it, it is Custom ley, and
therefore it may be put in execution: for the Custom is annexed unto the
Land, and not unto the interest of the Lord. But Wray said, that of estates
that are to Coppyholders and their heirs according to the Custom of the
Manor, if such a Coppy-holder dye without heir, the Custom is determined.
If such a Lessor for life or years of the same Manor grant new Coppyes, they
are not good, and so there is a diversity.

A man cannot devise that his friends shall make Coppyes or hold Courts, for
none shall make Coppye: but he that is Lord of the Manor, and has an
interest.

The Lord of the Manor shall have the government of the Coppy-hold during the
infancy of his Tenant: Executors shall have a Lease for years of Coppy-hold
Land without any new admittance.

The Husband of a Wife that is Coppyholder for years, shall not be newly
admitted after the death of the Wife, nor be tenant by the courtesy.

Where inheritance of a Coppy-hold descends, the heir may enter without
admittance; but it was a doubt whether he should have an action of Traverse
against a stranger before admittance; for before admittance he is not properly
Tenant; if such an heir will not come to the next Court, the Lord may make
process against him.

A Coppy-holder shall have Traverse against his Lord, paying his Services and
customs.

If erroneous judgment be given against a Coppy-holder in the Lords Court, the
Lord in his Court may reverse it, for it is not amendable in any other place or
Court.

If the Less of a Coppy-hold commit waste and the Lord seiseth for forfeiture;
the Coppy-holder shall not have an action of waste against his Lessee, as if
Tenant for life make a Lease for years, which Lessee makes waste, and the
Lessor recovers, the Tenant for Life shall not have an action of the Case, but
is without remedy; for it was his folly that he would not have a Collatterall
covenant of the Lessee that he should do no waste.

A Coppy-hold is not forfeit for heresy, by the last of 2. Hen. 5.

A Coppy-holder is not Ter-tenant, but is Tenant at the Lords will; and a
Coppi-hold is not bound by the statute of Wills nor of Tines, nor of Limitations

A Coppy-hold shall not be extended by a statute, Merchant or Staple.

The Husband and Wife being seized of a Manor to them and the heirs of the
Husband; he grants a Rent charge out of it, and dies, the Coppy-holder
surrenders, the Wife makes another Coppie and dies, the grantee shall distraine
upon the Coppy-hold.

If the Lord of a Manor has a great waste, and grants a rent charge out of
the same, and the Coppy-holders have Common in the waste, and they put in their
Cattle, the grantee shall distraine them, if they cannot make prescription.

If a Coppy-holder surrender to the use of another and the Lord will not admit
him, nor make a grant unto him, the surrender is void.

If there be two Joint Coppy-holders, and the one commits a forfeiture, he
shall forfeit but the Moyty.

Lessee for years ofa Coppy-hold shall have an eiectione firm; by Plowden and
others.

If there be a Lease for years of a Manor, and one Coppy-holder purchase the
reversion in, fee, this is a destruction of the Coppyhold, and the Lessee of
the Manor may put him out, and occupy during his term. 8. Eliz. adjudged.

A Coppy-holder purchases the Manor to him and another in fee, the companion
may occupy the Coppy-hold joyntlyp resently 14. Eliz.

Nota, it was agreed in the common Bench. 21. Eliz. that the Bay liffe of a
hundred or of a base Court, may take goods upon levari facias, to give
execution to the plaintiff, as well as the Sheriff; yet they agreed that
diverse Books are against it. 4. Hen. 6. 22.

Two Joint Copyholders in Fee make a partition, that is good, and no
forfeiture, nor alienation. 12. Eliz. agreed in duchy chamber.

If a Coppy-holder surrender, and then the Lord does acknowledge a statute
merchant, and after the Lord grants it by Copy, the Coppy-hold is liable, for
at the time of the knowledgment it was annexed to the free hold; but if a
Coppy-holder acknowledge a statute, that is not liable.

If a man enter with force upon a Coppyholder, he shall not have forceable
entrey, nor indictment, but the Lord shall have it, and upon restitution to the
Lord the Coppy-holder shall enter.

The Lord grants to a Coppy-holder his trees growing, or that shall be growing
upon the Land, he may fell trees now growing, and no forfeiture, by reason of
the dispensation, but he cannot cut the trees which shall grow in time to come.

If the disseisor of a Manor make Coppyes for life, and the disseisee enter,
he shall defeat them, but of Coppy-holds in fee before disseisin, and a new
^^^nt of them upon Surrender in time of disseisin, it is otherwise per Plowden.

Popham in Case Ramsey verse. Arthurs. 29. Eliz. A Coppy-holder may prescribe to
have common in the Lords Land.

If a Coppy-holder surrender to the use of another, and the Lord grant it to
cesty que use, making no mention of the surrender, yet it is good, per Plowden
in Batlands case.

If there be a Manor consisting of demeasnes, Free hold and Customary
Tenements; if the Lord grant certain of the Coppy-holds in Fee, the grantee
may keep Court, and do homage, and the Coppy-holders by their oaths may make
presentiments of their Customs, or of the death of any Tenant, and the grantee
may make in Court a new estate by Copy, as if it should be a perfect Manor;
mes the style shall not be, Curia Manerij, but Curia halimoti, id est,
Convocatio tenentium, for when they are assembled, they may inform the Lord of
their Customs and duties. It was otherwise adjudged in the Com bench. 29 Eliz.
between Dodington and Chaffin for parcel of the Manor of M.

It was adjudged in the common Bench 29. Eliz. that where Sir Peter Carew bein
solely seized of the Manor of M. in the County of Devonshire for Life;
granted a Coppie in reversion according to the Custom of the Manor, and dyed
before the praticular Coppy-holder, this is a good Copy in reversion against
the Lord, in whose hands soever the Signory should come.

FINIS.
Errata.
FOl. 4. line 8. for preferred, read preserved, l. 14. for and read Aid: and
in the beginning of the l. for as read and. Fol. 6. l. 23. for compelied read
expel. d, l. 24. for transgression re. trespass, f 7. l. 17. for Bract re.
Brook f, 8 l 6. re. shall be accounted as able to be, l. 16. for Coppyholders
re. Coppyhold, l. 19. for divisable re. demisable, l. 27. for Tenements re.
Tenants, f. 9. l. 2. for Tenements re. Tenants, l. 23. leave our (it) f. 15. l.
19. for offer re. affeere, f. 17. l. 9. re. a particular right, f. 18. l. 9.
for M. 1. re. Westminster. 1 f. 20. l. 9. for eiusmodi re. talem, last li. for
clausa. re. causa, f. 21. l. 4. for accident re. incident, f. 23 l. 4. for
commonly is lands, re. commonly is in lands, l. 23. for custom Haryots, re.
custom of Harryots, l. 24. for of common Aestovers re. common of Aestovers, f.
25. l. 4. for deceased, re. disseised, l. 13. for is uncertain, re. is so
uncertain, f. 28. l. 7. for both to discuss, re. both be to discuss, f. 29.
l. 3. for transgress, re. trespass in diverse places, l. 13. for or services,
re. doing services, l. 15. for prescribe, re. to prescribe.


