A SOLVTION OF DOCTOR RESOLVTVS* His Resolutions for kneeling.

Ambrosius in 1. Cor. 11. Jndignus est Domino, qui aliter mysterium celebrat,
quam ab eo traditum est. Non enim potest Devotus esse, qui aliter praesumit,
quam datum est ab auctore.

He is unvvorthy of the Lord, who does celebrate the mystery otherways, then
as it was delivered by the Lord. For he can not be Devote, who presumes
otherways, then the author has delivered.

M.DC.XIX.

Cyprianus ad Caecilianum, Lib: 2. Epist. 3.
REligioni nostrae congruit, and timori and officio sacerdotij nostri custodire
traditionis Dominicae veritatem: and quod prius videtur apud quosdam erratum,
domino monente corrigere, ut cum claritate sua, and majestate caelesti venire
caeperit, inveniat nos tenere quod monuit observare quod docuit, facere quod
fecit.

It agrees fitly with our religion, and the fear and duty of our priesthood,
to keep the verity of the Lords tradition: and wherein any error seem to
have been committed before, to correct the same, where the Lord does admonish
ws, that when he shall begin to come with his brightness and heavenly majesty,
he may find ws to hold that which he commanded, to observe that which he
taught, and to do that which he did.

TO THE READER.
WE are become so Apish in the imitation of the English pattern, that where we
cannot imitate in substance, yet we will imitate in imaginary forms. Amongst
other strange novelties, it behoved us to have Doctors of Divinity; whether
they be sufficiently qualified or not. About five year ago, some ministers
aspiring to Bishoprics, were inaugurate Academicall doctors, as it pleased the
Arch* bishop of St. Andrews Mr. Spottiswood, that learned Rabbi, to admit or
allow. Mr. David Lindsay, our master Doctor, so defended the article of
kneeling at Perth Assembly, that he did save the credit of the rest of the
Doctors, who had been all put to shame unles he had undertaken the burden, as
he himself gave out afterward. But how well did he plead the Kings cause, when
he was driven to confess, they had neither scripture reason, nor antiquity, and
that he condescended only to avert the Kings wrath from our Kirk? But the
Doctor baited with benefits, and hope of promotion to a Bishopric, which he
does now enjoy, hes since that time notwithstanding set forth in print a new
light, revealing unto him both scripture, reason, and antiquity. Seeing the
Doctor styles arrogantly his reasons Resolutions; let him be called Doctor
Resolutus for Scotland, as Johannes de Baccone of old was so called for
England, that in this also we may be conform. He marches under Dissipate, the
martial motto of the Constables Arms; but I will march under Colligite, the
martial motto of Christ's standaad, and will encounter not with Goliath, but
with Thraso, for so I hope the Reader shall find him. The half of his book
needs no answer: I will answer therefore only so much as concerns the
matter of kneeling: let the judicious Reader confer this answer with his
Resolutions, and try boldly, if I have dealth faithfully. The Lord praeserve so
many as do yet stand to their oath and profession, that they may continue
constant, and not be carried away with every light wind of erroneous doctrine,
nor cast down with terrors and threatenings. Such as are already fallen, the
Lord give them remorse of conscience, and grace to recover thetr fall. Let us
all possess our souls in patience, and cry to God for the days of old, and
then he will return and repair the breaches made in our walls, and purge our
Temples of the corruptions which are already entered.

CHAP. I. A table gesture is necessary.
THe Doctor takes needless pains to prove fitting in the act of receiving
the Sacramental elements of bread and wine, not to be necessary. For we hold
not sitting in special absolutely necessary in the act of receiving, but a
table gesture in general, whether sitting or standing about the table, we hold
necessary; howbeit not to the essence, yet to the right ministration of the
Sacrament. And of these two table gestures. We hold sitting most aggreeable to
the institution: for Christ setting down before his Apostles, a pattern
conform where unto they should celebrate that holy action thereafter,
celebrate the same sitting: and this gesture ougt not to be changed, no not in
an other table gesture, without some urgent necessity. To stand at the
ministers hand, or to take in passing by, we account no table gesture; for
there is no use in that case more of a table gesture, then if it were a
dressor, or cup-boord; and that kind of gesture takes away the distribution of
the communicants, which is not taken away by standing about the table.

CASAVBONVS, does acknowledge the gesture of Christ and his Apostles at the
Paschal supper, to have been not a Exercitat. 16. page 490.
and alleged not only the place of Ezkiel, 23.41. But also Onkelos the
Chaldee paraphrast, Hic fitus neque plane jacentis est, neque plane sedentis:
Idcirco hebrei hoc dixerunt sedere in lectis.
expressing the sitting of Joseph's brethren, by a word which the Syrians use to
express, sitting with leaning: and Josephus expressing it by the word
Cataclisis, the proper word used to signify the gesture received in Christ's
time: thereafter he alleges the phrase of the Rabbis, which they use to
express sitting with leaning. Seeing therefore the Hebrew, Chaldaick and
Rabbinical writers do interpret the one word indifferently by the other, our
vulgar translators have done right in expressing Christ's gesture by the word,
sitting. The Doctor himself at perth assembly, confessed that our gesture of
upright sitting, and his Apostles gesture at the Paschal supper, were Analoga.
If Christ had celebrated the Paschal supper in the days of DAVID or SOLOMON,
before the custom of sitting at table in beds entered among the Jews, he had
used the gesture of upright sitting, as the Jews did then, and as the Jews do
at this day, when they celebrate the Paschal Supper.

he was to raise Lazarus, he gave thanks lifting up his eyes. And when he went
out after supper to the garden, and prayed that prayer Ioh. 17. It is said
only that he lifted up his eyes. The Liturgy ascribed to James and Ambrose,
De Sacrament: lib. 4. cap. 5.
constantly affirm, that he lifted up his eyes also when he gave thanks at
the Eucharistical supper: no further do they affirm.

Put the case the Doctors conjecture were true, it will not follow that Christ
and his Apostles continued the gesture of standing or kneeling throughout the
whole action. They could not stand all the time: for their sitting with leaning
on their left elbowes, and their breasts, toward the table, required the table
to be so near, that they might not stand betwixt the beds and the table. They
could not stand upon their beds; for then their feet had been nearer to the
table then their hands or their heads. Christ said, Arise, let us go hence,
Ioh: 14.31. How could they arise if they were already standing? It behoved them
therefore eihter to sit or to kneel.

I prove they kneeleed not by the reasons following: 1. If there had been such
a change from sitting to kneeling, the Evangelists would not have omitted it,
seeing it had been so great a change from the accustomed and ordinary
table gesture used at all times before at the Paschal supper, unto a gesture of
adoration, a gesture of a far different nature and kind. The Evangelists
make mention of all other changes made in passing from the last act of the
Paschall supper to the Evangelicall. There is no reason therefore to think that
they omitted this. There is no circumstance of their texts that does insinuate
any such change, but rather the contrary, that while they were eating, and
consequently while they were sitting still, Christ took bread and gave
thanks. 2. If Christ changed sitting into kneeling, then kneeling is a part of
the institution: and so all the Kirkes which have not kneeled since Christ's his
days, shall be guilty of transgressing the institution. For this I hold as a
ground; That whatsoever change Christ made, in changing the last act of the
Paschal supper into the Eucharisticall, was a part of the institution; namely
when the change is made to a rite of worship or adoration For to what end else
should the change have been made, if it was not to be practiced afterward as a
part of the institution? Now our opposites do acknowledge, that kneeling is
indifferent, and consequently not a part of the institution. 3. Christ at the
delivery of the elements, spoke in an enuncirtive form; This is my body that is
broken for you: and not in form of a prayer, saying in the Gregorian style; The
body of the Lord preserve thee both body and soul to life everlasting, or in
any other such form of prayer. Therefore the Apostles kneeled not in the act
of receiving. And this I hold as an other ground: That kneeling was never
practiced in the Apostolical Kirk in time of divinine service, but in the
action of public prayer or thankesgiving, nor ought not to be practiced but at
the said times. Our opposites in our neighbor Kirk pretend that they kneel in
regard of the prayer uttered at the delivery of the elements. The ministers of
Lincoln denude them of this pretense: yet their alledgance confirms my
assertion. 4. The elements were carried from hand to hand, and divided by the
communicants amongst themselves. Now our opposites themselves do not admit as
compatible, the kneeling of the communicants, and the distributing of the
elements among themselves.

This last reason is proved at length in Perth Assembly, where unto I refer
the Reader, I add only for further confirmation, the authorities both of
Papists and Protestants, applying the precept Luk 22.17. Divide it amongst you,
to the communion cup. Barradius Tom. 4. Lib. 3. cap. 1.
follows Augustine and Enthymius, because Luke subjoyneth to that precept,
the same protestation that Matthew and Mark do subjoyne to the communion cup; to
wit, that Christ would drink no more of the fruit of the vine, until, etc. and
that the cause of the anticipation was, that the protestation of not drinking
more might be joined with the protestation of not eating more. Iansenius
Concordia Evangelica, cap 151.
is moved with the same reason, and because the thankesgigiving mentioned in
the 17. verse is omitted, when Luke returns afterward to speak of the same
cup, because it was already expressed. Maldonatus In Math. 26.27.
says, that when Christ gave the cup to one, least he should seem to will him
only to drink, he said, Drink ye all of it, which Luke expressed in cleerer
terms, cap. 22.17. saying, Divide it among you. VValterius De triplici coena.
page ^15.
says likewayes, that the cup was carried from hand to hand. As for our own
writers, Hospinianus History sacramentarie part. 1. Lib. 1. Cap. 1.
says, It is manifest, that Christ gave not the cup to every one severally,
but only to the first, and the first reached it to the second, and so forth.
Erasmus in his paraphrase Luc. cap. 22 17.
says, it is observed by the Ancients, that Luke makes twice mention of the
communion cup. Piscator in his Analysis on Luke, says, Cap. 22.17
It is clear that the words are to be understood of the cup of the Lords
supper. Gualter In Luke 22 17.
likewise begins the institution at the 17. verse. Mornaeus De Euchar. lib.
1. cap. 12 p. 154 in folio
says, Christ gave the cup when he said, Drink ye all of it: Divide it among
you. Sibrandus In cateches. palatino belglca^, quest. 75.
speaks to the same purpose. Calvin in his Institutions Lib. 4. c. 17. sect.
43.
Beza in his last annotations in the same place, VVislets, De Euchar. quest 4.
p. 545
Bilson, Obedience page 495
Jewel, Of private Mass, divis. 8
and many more might be cited to the same effect howbeit Bellarmine is loath to
grant that precept to be meant of the communion cup, because of the fruit of
the vine, mentioned in the protestation subjoyned, which makes against
transubstantion, yet he grants the matter itself, to wit, that the cup was
divided, De Euchar. lib. 4. cap. 25.
and reached from one to another. And Becanus the Jesuit De communione sub
utraque specie page 125.
says, Drink ye all of it, is all one with take and divide it among you. Now
as the cup was divided among the communicants so was likewise the bread: for as
Christ said, take ye in the plural number, drink ye; so he said, take ye, eat
ye, and not take thou, eat thou. Analogy requires, that the bread should be
divided among the communicants, as well as the cup. It were strange to see the
minister remain in his own place when the cup is carried from hand to hand, and
to go along the table to dispense the element of the bread. Hospinianus,
Morneus, Sibrandus and others, make the precept, divide it among you, common
both to the bread and the cup. Cajetane In Math. 26.
confesses that Christ was so far distant from some of them, that he could
not deliver the bread to every one severally, more then the cup. The later
confession of Helvetia subscribed not only by the Tygurines, and their
confederates of Bern, Scaphusia, Sangallia, Rhetia; but also by the Kirkes of
Geneva, Savoy, Polonie, Hungary, and Scotland, anno 1566, has these words,
Chapt. 2^
: Outwardly the bread is offered by the minister, and the words of the Lord are
heard, Receive, eat, This is my body: divide it amongst you, drink ye all of
this, This is my blood. Suppose it were granted, that the Apostles divided
only the cup, and Christ's precept concern the dividing of the cup only, and
not the bread, yet it is sufficient for our purpose, seeing the communicants
must compass the table with a table gesture, to the end they may divide the
cup among them selves. For if every one take the cup severally out of the
ministers hand kneeling, Christ's precept concerning the cup is transgressed. I
think no man will be so absurd as to say, that we should kneel when we
receive the bread, but not when we receive the wine. When Mr. Stuthers was
urged with this dividing of the communicants, he answered; Is it not better to
take it out of the hands of the Minister, then of an adulterer? It was replied
by the Minister proponer; what if the minister be a Judas? I ask, if holy
Sixtus and St. Laurence, gave the bread and cup out of their own hands, when
the Arch Bishop of St. Andrews, and Mr. Gladstanes his Archdeacon gave them
to the communicants, all the communicants are presumed to be penitent sinners,
and holy persons, neither does the virtue of the Sacrament depend upon the
moral dignity of him that ministers, or of him that distributeth. And this
far for confirmation of the fourth reason, referring the reader for further
satisfaction, to Pert Assembly. Page 41^42 43.44.


When the bready god was adored in the time of most gross superstition, the
popish Doctors were not so shameless, as to deny Christ and his Apostles
sitting, to maintain their kneeling. The old verse, Rex sedet in coena, etc.
was current among them. Johannes de Turrecremata, calls it, versum
antiquorum, a verse of the De Summa Ecclesie, lib. 1 c. 39.
ancients, and Thomas Aquinas, their Angelical Doctor, cites it to prove that
Christ took the Sacrament himself, 3. quest. 81 art. 1. unde et quida^ metrice
dixit. Rex sedet in cena, turba cinctus duodona. Se tenet in manibus se cibat
ipse cibus.
but our Doctor in another sense Angellicall, is become so impudent to call in
question that which no ancient or modern writer did call in question before
this last year. Mr. P. Galloway after the reading of Mr. Doctors Book, in
wrir, became incontinently so profound a clark, that upon the reconciliation
day before the last communion, when the body of the Town of Edinburgh were
assembled with their Ministers, he would take in hand to prove a strange
paradox, to wit, that Christ and his Apostles sat not at the supper. No, said
Mr. Andrew Ramsay, say not that brother. O said Mr. Struthers, gybing and
jesting at the people all the time; he sat this way and counterfeited Christ's
table gesture, deriding them whom he ought in all lenity and meeknes to have
instructed. But the honest men received nothing at their hands that day to be a
vvarrant to their consciences for kneeling, but threatenings from Mr. Galloway,
jests and derisions from Mr. Struthers and Mr. Sideserfe and aversnes from
hearing their reasons from Mr. Ramsay, who did moderate that meeting.

It is the trivial argument of our opposites that we are no more bound to
sitting, or any particular gesture, then we are Obedience* page 489
that the Lord neither in his speech nor actions, did comprise the time, place,
or persons. And Paraeus In 1. Cor. 11
sayih, that the evening, the Inn, the number of twelve, by the consent of
all, were not Sacramental but accidentary circumstances. Christ celebrated in
the evening, because the Sacrament of the new law behoved to succeed the
passover, the Sacrament of the old Law, which was ordained by God to be eaten
in the ev^ning, and Christ was to be apprehended before the morning. The
Paschal supper was ordained to be eaten in Jerusalem, in several companies and
families, and therefore Christ celebrated in an Inn, and to a small company.
The Jews were expressly forbidden to have any leavened bread in their houses
in time of the passover. It behoved therefore Christ to celebrate with
unleavened bread. All these circumstances were occasional and unavoydable, by
reason of the paschall supper. But Christ might have easily changed into
kneeling: for there was no ^xpresse commandment given to the people to sit at
the P^schall supper. If they stood in Egypt, that standing was only for that
time: when they came to Canaan they sat, as Scaliger says De emend. temporum
lib. 6. in the last Edition.
in argumentum securitatis: or for the proportion and Analogy of other
religious feasts, whereat they sat. Seeing Christ might have altered this
gesture and did not, but retained as a gesture as fit for the Sacrament of the
new Law as it was for the Sacrament of the old Law, which is called the
oblation of Iehova* Numb. 9 7. it* is evident that it was his will that it
should be retained.

He says it shall not expressly be found, nor by reason demonstrated, that
sitting was received at any time after the first succeeding Churches. We may
more safely presume that the Apostolical churches followed Christ's example,
then he may presume the contrary, which he is never able to prove. The fathers
expounding the breaking of bread at Emaus to be the communion, will not deny
sitting after the first supper. B. Bilson says, Obedience page 461.
that dissension was the thing which defaced the Lors supper among the
Corinthians, in that they would neither at common meats, nor at the Lords table
sit altogether, but sorted themselves together in factions and companies, as
they favored or friended each other. Beza says, Contra Harchium. Agapas
quidem ce^te constat vix ac me vix quidem genuflexionem admisisse.
that the Love Feasts did no ways admit geniculation at the Lords supper in
the act of receiving and no doubt, the Apostle comparing their partaking of the
table of the Lord and the table of devils together 1 Cor 10.21. did include the
gesture with the rest, and oppose the sitting at the Lords table to sitting at
table in Idols Chapel. 1 Cor. 8.10. Durandus Rational. lib. 4. cap. 1.
says, that the Apostles celebrated as Christ did, Et forma^ observantes in
verbis and materiam in rebus, observing both matter and form: And he says,
Lib. 6. c. 77
that in the first beginning of the Kirkes, the Apostles used no other words,
but the words of the institution at the consecration: he says, that they added
afterward the Lords prayer, but this is but an uncertain and unwritten
tradition. The Waldensis allege out of Chronica gestorum, that the form of
the institution was a long time observed in the Kirk, and that the communicants
kneeled not, but sat. Apologia contra hinas titeras doctoris Augustini. Ex
isto manifestum cit, quod primitiva Ecclesia hanc fidem habuit, et illa^
confessa est et non secit reverentiam huic Sacramento, quia rilo tempore
exemplo Christi sedentes statim acceperunt et nihil retinuerunt, nec extra
domum extulernt et hec institutio diu stetit, sicut Chronica gestorum
ostendunt. v. Tydij Waldensia.
Mornaeus testifies De Euchar. lib. 1. cap. 1.
that there are some footsteps that remain in the monasteries of St. Bennet,
where they have no other mass for three days before Easter but this form
following: The Abbot sanctifies the bread and the wine, and the Monks do
communicate sitting, receiving the elements out of the Abbots hand. And this
form is called by them mandatum, the commandment. Then in the account of the
very Benedictines, to sit at table and comunicate, is a commandment. We must
not think the Apostles altered Crists precept, ordaining the communicants to
distribute among themselves, but this could not be done but with a
table gesture. The Apostle in rehearsing the institution declares, that the
words of the promise whereunto the seals are annexed of bread and wine, were
uttered not in form of a prayer, but in an enunciative form. It follows
therefore according to the ground already laid down, that in the Apostles time
the table gesture, and not kneeling was the gesture of the communicants. But
put the case we were destitute of reasons for the sitting of Apostolical
Kirkes, yet as long as we have nothing to prove the contrary, we ought to
adhere to the institution. For Calvin says, Institut. l. 4. cap. 37. sect. 35
that they who receive as is commanded without adoration, are secure that they
depart not from gods commandment, then the which security there can nothing be
better when we enterprise any thing. They have the example of the Apostles whom
we read not to have adored prostrate, but as they were sitting they received
and did eat. They have the use of the Apostolical Kirk, where it is declared
that the faith-full did communicate, not in adoration, but in breaking of bread.

We omit the washing of feet, why may we not likewayes, Hommij controversy
Belgice in art. 33
would have this Jewish ceremony made a Sacrament and the Doctor a
Sacramentale, belonging to the holy communion, but none of them is worthy of
confutation.

He reasons now in personam and not from the matter itself: he had all his
guests within his view. The Minister must act his part in the view of the whole
congregation: and therefore they may lawfully change sitting into standing for
the edification of the hearers and beholders of the action. Sitting we thought
never so necessary, but that it might be changed into another table gesture
when necessity required.



pronounced at the delivery of the elements, and not in form of a prayer: and
therefore all gesture of adoration at the receiving was excluded, as we have
often said. The Evangelists say, that while they were eating, Christ took
bread: howbeit their eating did not belong to the institution, yet it includes
their gesture, that while they were sitting, Christ took bread, etc. a gesture
does belong to the institution. Out of these words do all vvriters collect
that they sat at supper.

Howbeit we plead for a table gesture in general and not for the absolute
necessity of sitting in particular, yet how vveakly has the Doctor disputed
against it? Sitting indeed we think ought not to be changed, no not into
another table gesture, without necessity: Johannes a Lasco In Liturgia
ecclesiatum peregrinatum Londini sub. Ed. 6.
exhorted all the ministers in the Reformed Kirks, to remove according to their
office and duty, not only geniculation, but also standing and taking in
several from the Minister en passant, and to restore the sitting of the
communicants at table, again, where it is worn out of use.

CHAP. II. A table gesture agrees best with decency.
THe Doctor goes about to prove kneeling more decent in the act of receiving,
then sitting or any other gesture* and so he carpeth not only our former order
which he preferred before any other at Pert Assembly, but also Christ himself
as not wise enough to consider what gesture was most decent for so holy an
action. If another more commodious and better form could have been devised, out
of all doubt, says Hospinian History Sacramenta (...). 1. lib. 1. cap 5.
Christ would have instituted it, and the Apostles would have recommended it
to the Kirkes, and therefore wills, (...) cap. 2. l. 1*
that if any thing be found different either in the nature or proper sense of
words, or in rite or external ceremony from this rule that it be amended
according to the same as the most excellent, most holy, most uncorrupted, most
absolute, and most certain rule. If therefore there be any gesture that shall
put this rule out of rule: I say it ought not to be esteemed agreeable either
to piety, decency, or charity, let be to be preferred before other gestures.

The Doctor lays down for a ground, that by the table of In 1 Cor. 8.10. 1
Cor. 10 21.
, Tilenus* disput de coena.
Caietanus, In 1 Cor 8.10. (...) 1 Cor. 10 21.
VVillets. Sy^ops. page 414.
Now if the table of devils from which the cursed feasts were denominate,
were material tables, then the table of the Lord compared with them was
also material. And Beza out of the same verse which the Doctor has alleged
concludes that in the primitive Kirk there were material tables and not
altars. The Christians offended their weak Brethren by feasting on the things
sacrificed in private houses, but in feasting in the temple there was both
scandal and error. The Apostle finds fault both with the one and the other.
In a word all such metonymicall speeches do import the verity of the subject.
The cup of the new Testament does import that there was a material cup. To
partake of the Altar, does import that the Israelites had an Altar. I conclude
with the ground laid down by Paraeus, In 1 Cor. 11. A quo ritu totam
Eucharistiam deno minaverat ecciesia Apostolica is proculdubio est
sacramentalis et necessarius.
from whatsoever rite the Sacrament is denominate, it is Sacramental and
necessary. He infers that Sacramental breaking of the bread after
thankesgiving, is necessary to the integrity of the Sacrament: and I infer
upon the same ground that a material table is necessary, seeing the Sacrament
is denominate metonymically from a table, and called the table of the Lord, to
distinguish it from other material tables.

His reason to prove kneeling more decent then sitting, is because it is a
religious gesture, and more conform to other and all the rules of the feast?
Our sitting applied to a holy purpose is sanctified for the time as all our
actions are holy when they are done according to Gods will, and with a respect
to his glory.

He says, that the gesture of the body is moral, voluntary, and changeable,
and should be applied according to the nature of the action. It is true, the
gesture is changeable, according to that faculty in man which the Philosophers
call Locomotiva, but it is to be ordered by Laws, both in civil and religious
affairs.

We grant that our maniers and gestures must be composed according to the use
use of the table, and not according to the matter or form; but all table
whatsoever be their matter, form and use, do require a table gesture, never one
does admit kneeling. Men use not to kneel, no not at the table of Exchange.
The table of exchange does differ in use from the table appointed for feasting,
and therefore no wonder that they differ in the table gestures. But the table
of the Lord agrees with the feasting table in the analogicall use and end.
Christ himself has taught us how to use the Lords table, and with what
gesture.

We are silent, we sport not, we take nothing before we are commanded and
instructed at this table, as we do at other tables and feasts, because in so
doing we should dicturb that holy action; but sitting is so far from
disturbing, that it makes us more fit to attend to the commandment and
instructions given us.

We sit with our heads uncovered at this table, which we do not at common
tables, but we do it for veneration and not for adoration. We sit with our
heads uncovered when the word is read, but not when it is preached, to
distinguish between the voice of God and the voice of man. At this holy action
the words, the symboles, the rites, are all divine, and Christ's own words,
rites, and symboles; his voice sounds through all the tables of the world:
the symboles are the Princes seals, and our celebration is nothing else but a
repetition of the first institution, and the authentike instrument written over
again. We use not kneeling civilly, wheresoever we use the uncovered head; but
kneeling is the gesture of adoration both in civil and religious uses. The
uncovering of the head does noth spoil us of the liberties and prerogatives of
a table sociall admission to it, and familiar entertainment at it, nor breaks
not the order and frame of the institution, but kneeling is guilty of all
these enormities, as I have said.

If commodity make custom, and custom make decency, In Thomam tom. 1. page
764. genuflexio que est nota adorationis potest esse actus penitentic propter
pen alitatem, quam habet adjuncta^.
says, that kneeling which is a note of adoration, may be made an act of a
penitentiarie, for the pain which is joined with it. But we consider not now
the pain, but the purpose of it, in this argument. For never man yet thought
that kneeling was the fittest table gesture, neither have we ever heard any
nation never so barbarous, use it.

He says kneeling is more universally received in the reformed Kirkes then
sitting. If he mean of the Lutheran Kirkes, that universalitie is not to be
regarded. The best reformed Kirkes as they have abandoned the opinion of the
bodily presence, so have they the gesture of kneeling: yea all the Lutherans do
not consent to the adoration of Christ in the Eucharist as Illyricus and his
followers, because they say Christ is to be adored only where it is his will
to be adored. As for the Anglican Kirk, I deny that the body of that Kirk does
approve kneeling howsoever they be compelled by their Kirk representative to
practice it. If we should follow examples, we must look to voluntaries.

It is no great commandation of kneeling, that it was practiced 400 years
under the Antichrist: and howbeit we were not able to design some time, when
another gesture was in use, it will not follow, that it was in practice in all
ages before. We are not bound to show the behinning of every corruption.
VVhilest the husband man was sleeping, the evil one did sow his tares among
the wheat, which he perceived not, till they were grown up. Yet we will be
more liberal, and for further satisfaction, we use to give an instance of an
other gesture which was in use, to wit, standing at the act of receiving, for
the space of 500. yea an thousand year after Christ, and they cannot produce
one express authentike testimony of kneeling for the space of 500 yea of a
1000 year after Christ. And to testify ancient standing, we have yet the
custom of Christians in the Orient. Morneus de Eucharist. lib. 4. cap. 7.
quare Ecclesie Orientales adorationem Sacramenti admiserunt nusquam: non que
patriarche codstantinopolitano obsequuntur, non quae Antiocheno. Et in
Abyssinis etiam ipsis hodie stantes Sacramenta participant nec eo minus
reverenter.


Honorius it seems ordained not kneeling at the elevation of the Mass, but a
reverend inclination of the body: howbeit afterward it turned to kneeling. But
whether Honorius ordained kneeling at the elevation, and whether kneeling in
the act of receiving went before kneeling at the elevation or followed after,
is not prejudicial to our cause. seeing both were bred under the Antichrist,
and no authentic testimony can be alleged of the gesture of kneeling for a
1000.

Page 59.
and the words of Tertullian are confounded in Perth assembly through the
Printers fault, which by the way I vvish the Reader to mark.

The ancient Kirk changing sitting into standing, judged sitting not
necessary, It is true. Neither do we hold it absolutely necessary, and as for
the change we are not to imitate them herein: for they adulterated the form
of the institution many ways, mixing the wine with water, giving the
communion to Infants, taking the Sacrament home to eat it in their private
houses, as may be seen in the most ancient vvriters. We ought to take heed,
not what any has done before us, says Cyprian, Lib. 2 epist. 3. quod si nec
minima de mandatis dominicis licet solvere quanto magis tam magna, tam grandia,
tam ad ipsum dodominice passionis, et nostre rede^ptionis Sacramentum
pertinentia fas non est infringere.
but what Christ who was before all, did: we must not follow the custom of
man, but the truth of God. And if it be not lawful (says he) to break the
least of the Lords commandments far less is it lawful to violate so great
commandments belonging to the Sacrament of the Lords Passion, and of our
redemption. Calvin Institut. lib 4. c. 18 sect. 11
finds great fault with them, and says, that the ancients went nearer the
Judicial manner of sacrificing, then Christ's ordinance, and the course of the
Gospel would permit. And a little after he says, that if we think this
supper the supper of the Lord, and not the supper of men, let us not move a
nail breadth from it, for any authority of me^, or prescriptio^ of years. And
Tossanus says, Orat. de coena domini. principium erioris circa cocnam domini,
nec minima superstitionis occasio proculdubio fuit, immutatio ceremonia rum a
Christo institutarum, et accumulatio illarum, quas humana ethelethrescia
successu temporis excogitavit.
that the changing of ceremonies in the Lord supper instituted by Christ, and
heaping up of other ceremonies divised by man's vvill-vvorship, was the
beginning of error anent the supper, and was no small occasion of superstition.

The ancient Kirk judged not standing the fittest gesture for prayer: for if
they had so judged then they would have enjoined standing at prayer upon other
days as well as upon the Lord day. They stood on the Lords day, not because
it was the fittest gesture for prayer, but for signification, to signify
their joy for Christ's resurrection, but kneeling they judged the fittest
gesture for prayer, as may be seen in the questions attributed to Justinius.
quest. 115. Genuum inclinatio in precatione magis peccatores deo co^mendat,
quam si stantes oret.
The ancient Kirk standing at the receipt of the Sacrament, ye see then, judged
not the gesture of prayer, the fittest gesture in the act of receiving the
Sacrament.

CHAP. III. Kneeling agrees not best with piety.
THe Doctor will now prove kneeling to agree best with piety. But if it agree
not best with the decency of a table, but overthrows the right use of it how
shall it agree best with piety. That gesture agrees best with piety, that
agrees best with the order and rules of the institution. For he cannot be
devout says Ambrose In 1 Cor. 11.
who presumes to do otherwaise, then the author has set down.

The consideration of the giver the gift, the manner of donation, De Eucharist
page 575.576.
For the Fathers sometime called the inward grace of the Sacrament the gift,
and sometimes the symbolicall part, and sometimes they called it the gift, and
sometimes gifts. If we were to receive a gift, if it were both a morsel of
bread out of gods own hand immediately, we ought, no doubt to adore, and so his
similitude of a subject receiving a benefit out of the princes own hand, may
illustrat the matter very well. But at the Lords supper we receive the elements
of bread and wine not out of gods own hands immediately, but out of the hands of
the Minister, who is our fellow servants. 2. Our union with Christ, and
participation of his body and blood is not begun at the Lords supper nether is
it proper to it, but common to the word and to baptism. By the ministry of
the word, and the Sacrament of Baptism, we are made partakers of Christ and
his benefits if we have the hand of faith to receive. Origin says, In numer.
homil. 23. hoc quodmodo loquimur, sunt carnes Christi.
that which we are presently speaking to you is the flesh of Christ. And in
another place, In numer. homil. 16.
we are said to drink the blood of Christ not only by the rites of the
Sacraments, but also when we hear the word. And Hierome says In psalm. 147
licet in mysterio possit intelligi, tamen verius corpus Christi et sanguis ejus
sermo scriptu^^um est.
howbeit the words of Christ to eat his flesh and drink his blood, may be
understood in the mystery, yet more truly the speech of the scriptures is the
body and blood of Christ. Augustinus says, Epistola ad Bonifacium.
there is no doubt but every one of the faitfull is made partaker of the body
and blood of Christ, when in Baptism he is made a member of Christ.
Chrysostom says, In Marcum homil. 14.
that in Baptism we adore the body of Christ. We receive then the very same
benefits in the word and Baptism which we receive in the Lords supper. Our
union with Christ is begun by faith; faith is wrought by the ministry of the
word, and confirmed afterward by the same word, and strengthened also by the
ministry of the Sacraments, which are seals and pledges to us of our union
with Christ. 3. These benefits are common to the Sacraments of the old Law
and the new: they had the same substance of the seals that we have, did eat
the same spiritual food, and drink the same spiritual drink that we do, 1
Cor. 10.3.4. Augustine says De utilitate penitent. cap. 1. quicunque in manna
intellexerunt Christumeundem quem nos spiritualem cibum manducavcrunt.
that whosoever in the Manna understood Christ, did eat the same spiritual
meat that we do. And yet the people of God in gathering the manna, howbeit
not ministered to them by the hand of men, did not kneel. The Paschall Lamb
was the same to the people of God, that the Lords supper is to us, and yet
they sat at the Paschal supper. 4. The inward grace is not given to all the
communicants, but to the godly only; neither do the godly ever find comfort at
the instant of receiving the seal. Then according to the Doctors own words,
the action of donation not being perceived at the instant, it is then to be
acknowledged with thankesgiving when it is felt afterward. But all the
communicants participate of the Sacrament, even the wicked. Now the Lord in
setting down the order of the institution, had respect to the Sacramental
manner of donation, which is common to all, and not to the spiritual which
is proper to fevv. Even the very wicked eat the body and blood of Christ
Sacramentally: and when the godly eat spiritually, yet they participate not
pure spiritualiter, as Cajetane In 3 quest. 79 80.
speaks, merely spiritually, but Spiritualiter and Sacramentaliter. And this
manner of donation with solemn testification, which is not purely spiritual,
but spiritual and sacramental is common to the godly both under the Law and
under the Gospel, and to Baptism, alsvveill as the Lords supper.

The Apostle 1 Cor. 11. condemns all manner of unworthy receiving, whether
by hypocrisy, when we come without faith and repentance: or by prophannes,
when we come like drunkards and factiously. But sitting the Apostle did never
condemn, but rather approved as the ordinary table gesture. The wicked,
howbeit they partake not spiritually of the Lords body, yet they are guilty in
respect of abusing the seals, as Chrysostom says, he that polluteth the
Princes purple robe offends the Prince himself.

As for our manner of receiving, the common manner is sacramental, and
according to that which is common to all should our carriage be. The Godly
receive also with faith spiritually, but as I have said not purely spiritually,
but Spiritually and Sacramentally. Faith is accompanied with humility, it is
true; but humility is an habit of the Soul, and not an act of adoration.
Faith is accompanied with hunger and thirst, it is true; but hunger and thirst
is not the prayer of the Soul, but a provoker of the soul to pray, as hunger
and thirst provokes a man to cry for meat and drink. Faith is accompanied with
joy, and joy resolves in desires, it is true; but desires are not formallie
prayers and praises. Faith is accompanied with all other Christian graces: For
every Christian grace is accompanied with the rest. But this concomitance of
the habits of other graces, which is all times in a Christian, does not import
their actual vvorking at all times. Faith is the chief worker in the act of
receiving: the rest do assist, if there be need; but ought not hinder the
meditation and application of faith. When there do arise any short
ejaculations of prayer or praise, they are only occasional as the co^municant
does find himself disposed, and Faith for to work. Next, they are subtle and
swift, that there is not that agility in our hompish bodies, as to follow with
our gestures these swift motions, ending perchance in twinkling of an eye.
Thirdly, they are secret between God and the Soul, and therefore ought to be
concealed rather then expressed by gestures of worship. In a word, seeing the
manner of our receaving is not purely spiritual, but spiritual and
Sacramental, the spiritual must not disorder the Sacramental manner set down
by him that is the instituter. We are bound to hear the word with Faith, and
Faith must be accompanied with humility, and other Christians graces. There
will arise also from hunger, thirst, joy; desires, vvishes, mental
ejaculations of player and praise; but the hearer must not for all that cease
from hearing, and fall down to worship. Is there any thing here required, but
the like was required under the Sacraments of the old Law, and is required at
the hearing of the word.

The secret and hid covenant, made betwixt God and Man, is made at the time of
effectual calling. The first solemnization and that the conjunct communicating
be not intertubed. When the history of the Passion is read, we are in actual
remembrance of Christ's death, but we burst not out in vocal praises. When the
seal is received, it is received from the hand of men, and it is no more but
the outward seal, grace is not enclosed in it as a plaster in a box, or
liquor into a vessel. The kirk in the time of Novatus, was gone from the right
form of administration, and therefore their example is no good argument to
prove several thanksgiving. And we read of nothing, that was answered then by
the co^municants, but Ame^. He that delivered said, The body of the Lord: he
that received, said Amen. Novatus when he delivered, said these words to the
communicant, Swear to me by the body of the Lord, that thou will not return to
Cornelius, in stead of these words the body of the Lord; and likewise the
receiver answered, in place of Amen, I will not return to Cornelius. Baronius
anno 57. numero 146. Et anno 254. numero 75. Bellarminus de eucharistia, lib.
4. c. 13.
Now for a custom of saying Amen at the receiving, as a particle of
confirmation of the words uttered by the Minister, to wit, the body of the
Lord, we cannot conclude kneeling; for they said Amen standing. But as I said
before, we are not to look to the forms of the ancient kirk. For the very
Papists themselves have thought shame of some of them, and the posterior ages
abolished many of them. Let it be remembered here also, that all the D.
discourse may be applied to the Sacraments of the old Law, as well as of the
new. For there in their Sacraments the covenant was solemnized, and they
received the seals, and actual remembrance of the benefits received, and to
be received was required, but kneeling was not required. The comparing of the
Sacraments of the old Law and new Law, and of the word of God with the
Sacraments, together with the order of the institution, may furnish answers to
all the Doctors arguments.

This Sacrament is called the Lords supper, partly for honor symbolicall
representation of a supper, a table gesture and specially sitting was most
correspondent and agreeable, and so Christ and his Apostles used it. Piscator
says, In Math. 26.26. Page 757.
it is evident in that the disciples did eat of the bread, and drink of the cup
sitting together at table, that this action had speciem convivij, the show or
semblance of a banquet: yea, that it was a banquet indeed, but a sacred one. And
Mornaeus says, De eucharist. lib. 4. ^. 7. mitto sacram coenam olim convivij
instat in quo discumbebatur celebratam, cujus etiamnum in Benedictinorum
mandato vestigium.
the like. It is true, the Doctor says the name of supper should not diminish
the estimation of it: but on the other side say I, no ceremony should be
brought in to take away speciem convivij the semblance of a banquet or supper;
but when the communicants receive severally kneeling, as if there were no table
not only is that semblance of a banquet or supper, which the Lord instituted
taken away, but all form of banquet or Supper, that ever was used in any part
of the world. As for the giving and receiving at this supper, we have spoken
already.

The washing of the Disciples feet, and Christ his sitting at

We never reasoned after this manner, The Apostles sat at table with Christ,
therefore we may sit now with Christ. Christ is not bodily present now, that we
may sit with him. To ask if we would sit at table, suppose Christ glorified
would come down from heaven and sit with us, were a question not worthy
scanning. But we reason after this manner, when Christ was bodily present, the
Apostles kneeled not, but sat at table; far less when he is not bodily
present should we kneel.

That he was then in the state of a servant, will not help their cause. For
howbeit he was in the state of a Servant, yet upon singular occasions he was
adored. If I would discourse Rhethorically upon the present occasion they had
to move them to kneel, then any man would grant that the occasion of adoration
was singular, and yet they kneeled not, for other weighty reasons and causes.
It is also untrue, that the Doctor says, that he carried at this time only
the form of a Servant, and Minister of the external element. for he carried
also in open view, the person of a Lord, in that he did institute the Sacrament.

We yet reason further from the example of Christ and his Apostles, not
respecting adoration directed to Christ bodily present, and we say that Christ
directed not his Apostles to adore and worship God the Father for the benefit
of redemption, when they were in the act of receiving. Christ's familiar
presence should not have with holden them from directing their prayers and
praises to God, if it had been a thing requisite, no more then when they
kneeled in their prayers to God at other times, no doubt notvvithstanding of
Christ's familiar presence in the carriage of a Servant. And Christ should have
taught them so to do, if the reasons hitherto alleged by the Doctor were good.
All his reasons are as good for the first supper as for the rest of the rest of
the suppers which have followed since. The words of the institution served to
teach the Apostles, as well as us, that he was their benefactor, testator,
adopter, redeemer, and feeder.

Again, the form that Christ instituted, he appointed it not for that night
only, but to be observed to his coming again, and therefore the different
state of Christ in humility or glory, did not alter it. And even after his
ascension, when he was in the state of glory, the Apostolical Kirkes as we
have said, sat at table. The rules of the institution and precepts general
and particular, admit no other gesture, but a table gesture. Seeing these rules
and precept are perpetual and to be observed, whether Christ be in the state
of glory or humility, it is evident, that it was Christ's will, that after
his glorificatio^ also, we should continue the table gesture, and the semblance
of a supper till his coming again, when we shall sup with him in glory.

according to the judgment of the Fathers, the Lords death must be showed not
only by the action, but also by words that may stir us up to remembrance and
thankfulness. Although says he a long sermon as we take a sermon, is not
necessary, yet at least a summarie and brief declaration of the institution
and use of the Sacrament, is necessary. And therefore says VVillets, Of the
sacrament. quest. 1.
the Sacraments cannot rightly be Ministered, unles there be a declaration and
showing forth of the Lords death, not only in the visible action of breaking,
distributing, but also in setting forth the end of the Lords death, with an
exhortation to thankfulness. Pezelius says, Refutatio Catechismi Iesuitatum. P.
421.
that to annunce or declare, is not to express by similitude of fact, but to
inculcate the death of Christ and his benefits, and to teach the right use of
the Sacrament. This annunciatio^ agrees with the Hagadah, that is the
declaration which was made at the passover, according to the commandment, Exo.
13.8. and thou shall show. This precept was give^ not to be performed
co^fusedly by all, but according to good order and comelines, and therefore at
the paschall supper one made the declaration, expounding every coremony, in the
own place; the meaning of the Lamb, of the bitter herbs, and so forth of the
rest This hagadah and declaration of the Jews, says Casaubonus, Exercitat.
Page 324.
answers to annunciate, 1 Cor. 11.26.

But admitting the Doctors interpretation, what would he infer? He would
infer that this Sacrament is called Eucharist not only for the
thankesgiving, wherewith it begins and ends, but because the action
itself is an actio^ of thankesgiving. for as it is a memorial of his praise,
so it is a testimony of our thankfulness. It is true indeed that the name of
Eucharist is attributed, not by scripture, but by the Fathers to the action,
yea to the elements themselves. But it is unproper appellation to call the
bread of the Sacrament Eucharist, that is thankesgiving. And therefore Justinius
Apolog. 2.
calling it so, must expound it again by more proper speech, saying panis
Eucharistetheis, the bread whereupon thankesgiving was made, so likewise the
action of giving, receiving, eating, drinking, if at any time they be called
Eucharisticall, it is unproper speech; For properly thankesgiving stands in
words, and no other but verbal thankesgiving is prop^rly Eucharistia. And from
that which is properly thankesgiving, it should seem most reasonable that the
whole action is denominated Eucharist or thankesgiving. And Casaubonus says,
Exercitat. p. 517. Eulogia et Eucharistia utraque vox a part una totam domini
actionem designat.
that the Sacrament is denominated both Eulogia, and Eucharistia from a part of
the action, to wit, the proper thankesgiving and blessing.

The actions ar properly a representation, and consequently a memorial of
Christ's death and Passion; but not properly a commemoration of his death and
Passion. When verbal commemoration is made, of Christ's death and Passion it
is not formally, a rendering of thanks: far less is the representation. We
kneel not when verbal commemoration is made of Christ's Passion; should we
kneel at the representation. The Jewish passover was to the People of God a
memorial of their bypast deliverance, and a type of the spiritual
deliverance to come; yet neither for the action, not nor for the declaration
made at the action did they kneel. To divine worship, says Cyrillus, Contra
Iulianum Lib. 4.
belong sacrifices, hymns, prayers, praises, and thankesgivings, adoration and
worship, sacred devotions, priesthood, temples, altars, offerings, confessions,
solemnities. Where ye may see thankesgiving and adoration are distinguished
from the rest. All these particulars belong to Gods honor in general, but
they are not adoration or praise in particular: honor is more general then
praise or adoration. He that adoreth, honoreth; but every one that honoreth,
adoreth not. The last Section contains a conclusion of his former discourses,
which are answered.

CHAP. IV. Kneeling stands not with Charity.
OF the gift, the giver, the manner of donation; and receiving,

The Pastor ministering the external element, represents

When we speak of fellowship with Christ, at the spiritual table, we do not
so much as dream of equality, no more then David and Jonathan thought
themselves equal to Saul, when they sat at his table, or lame Mephibosheth to
David, when he eat at his table.

As for standing of the communicants in ancient time, we say it did not so
well express this fellowship as sitting. As for kneeling, it altogether
obscureth it.

Our union likewise among our selves in one body, it is true, as the Doctor
says, is sufficiently expressed by partaking of one bread: but our fellowship
amongst our selves as guests at one table, is expressed by communicating the
elements one with another, and consequently with a table gesture. The eating of
the guests feeding upon one meat, is one thing, for that may be done apart: and
eating together at one table, distributing each to other is another thing. The
communicants are considered diversely: sometimes as members of one body, feeding
upon the selfsame food: sometimes as several guests feeding together at one
table, and enterchanging token^ of amity amongst them selfs. The first is
union, the second is fellowship. This fellowship is not only obscur^d, but
taken away by kneeling and only preserved by a table gesture.

The Apostle 1 Corinthians. 10.17. does mean Sacramental communion of these who
in one congregation ate together did eat of one Sacramental bread, and not of
the general communion, which all the members of Christ's body, wh^resoever they
be, have one with another. They who are joined together by Sacramental
communion, have their spiritual communion also with the whole Kirk, sealed by
this Sacramental communion. The ancients did understand the Apostle to speak
of one Sacramental bread; and therefore in some places and times they had but
one Sacramental bread indeed, to express the communion of the saints the more
vively. Durandus says, Lib. 4. ca. 53.
In the primitive Kirk, they offered one great bread sufficient for all which
custom the Grecians are said yet to observe. And Honorius Augustodune^si says,
In Gemma animae cap. 58.
that of old the Priests took floor out of every house and family, which the
Grecians yet observe, whereof they make one bread which they distribute.
Dionysius Areopagta Eccles. hierarch cap. 5
, Ignatius, Ad philadelph.
and Anselmus In 1 Cor. 10.
make mention likewise of one bread, and of one cup. Moulins Of the Lords
Supper. 2. part. page 15.
reports out of Franciscus Alvarez, that the Abyssins make a great Bunne,
about a finger thick, wherein the Priest makes five holes with his finger, in
remembrance of the five vvounds of Christ, and this he does consecrate in the
Arabian tongue.

the use of the gesture belongs must also be the third symbol or sign
representing Christ, and consequently as necessary, and essential, as bread
and wine; and the gesture as necessary, as eating and drinking. We answer,
first, there is no necessity, that every ceremony and rite be significant.
for some may be ceremonies of order only, yet serving to the right
ministration of the Sacrament, that with out them the Sacrament can not be
rightly administered, nor the order and frame thereof duly observed; the^ they
are necessary, suppose they have no signification. But we have demonstrated
already, that kneeling puts al out of joint, and a tablegesture only does
keep the institution in order as Christ has commanded. Next, the table gesture
is employed about the elements themselves: for it is not employed about a bare
table, but a table with the elements set thereon, and for the elements. 3.
Every significant ceremony, is not of like necessity. The breaking of bread
after thanksgiving, is a significant ceremony and necessary for the
integrity and right ministration of the Sacrament, yet it is not equal with
eating and drinking: which is necessary to the essence of that actio^. What
reason therefore is theere to make a table and table gesture suppose they be
significant, as necessary as bread and wine, eating and drinking* 4. As for
the signification of a table and table gesture, we admit not strange
allegories, as to signify the accomplishment of the ceremonies of the Law in
Christ, yet such significations as arise of the proper use and end of
table-gestures at ordinary banquets we allow. The guests sit at ordinary
tables, appointed for ordinary feasts, with greet personages, partly for ease,
partly to signify their familiar admission to their tables, and sociall
entertainment thereat. Sitting is the ordinary table gesture chosen for these
respects. Our sitting at the Symbolicall part of this feast, represents the
soul sitting with ease, and familiarly admitted by Christ to the spiritual
feast. This signification is expressed in metaphorical speeches and parables
by Christ himself, when he says, many shall come from the east and from the
west, and sit at table in the Kingdom of heaven with ABRAHAM, ISAAC and
JACOB, Math. 8.11. And LAZARUS is brought, in Luke 16.23. sitting at that
heavenly table near to ABRAHAM, leaning on his bosom.

As John was nearest Christ at the Paschall supper, when he leaned in his
bosom, that is, was nearest his bosom. For the second was nearest the first,
and the third nearest the seconds bosom, who were in one bed. By one Lazarus
is expressed the happy estate of all Gods Children, they shall be so dear to
Abraham, as if every one should sit nearest to him at his bosom in heaven.
See Beza in Luke 16, and Reynolds Censura De Lib. apoc^yphis. P. 942.
and Barradius Tom. 4. Lib. 2 c. 12.
. Seeing our repose and familiar entertainment at the heavenly table, is
expressed by sitting, the repose and familiar entertainment at the spiritual
table, whereof that is an acco^plishiment, is very fitly resembled by sitting
at the communion table. Christ signified so much before he arose from the
supper Luke 22.30. I have appointed to you a Kingdom that ye may eat and
drink at my table in my Kingdom, and sit on seats, and judge the 12 tribes of
Israel. The Fathers in calling it a mystical table, do understand that there
is a spiritual table answerable to it. Nazianzen says, Orat. 13. Post reditum.
that howbeit they thrust him from the altars, meaning the Lords tables, yet he
knew another altar, whereof these were only examplars, he will stand at that
altar or table. Is it not our common custom to put the communicants in mind
of another table, whereat the soul is to feed spiritually? If the table be
mystical, why may not the table gesture be mystical. Now sitting expresses
this signification very well, standing not so well; kneeling not at all.

We require not ever of necessity, to the right ministration of the Sacrament
an artificial table made of timber, but the form of a table we require,
whatsoever the matter be; timber or stone, or a piece of ground. As Mark. 6.
where the mullititude sat in rows by fifties and fifties upon the ground to
eat of the loaves; that piece of ground, vvhereabout they sat, was the form
of a table, howbeit the matter was earth. So if the Turks were converted,
and did communicate after the same form, sitting on the ground in companies
with their feet and legs plett, the dimension and shape of the ground,
whereabout they sit, is their table, and their sitting their table gesture. For
the high table and the table on the ground, answer analologically one to the
other. This kind of table and table gesture, preserves the whole order of the
institution. For sitting in this manner, the communicants may distribute the
elements among themselves. The like we may say of the times of persecution,
where the artificial table cannot be had, there the natural is sufficient.
There is no diverse fashion of nations, takes away the form of a table, nor no
different state of time prosperous or troublesome. Wine is one of the elements
instituted by Christ to be a sign of his blood: but what if the communion were
celebrated in parts, where there is no wine to be gotten, nor bread made of
wheat, but of the roots of herbs; may they not use such things as they have,
which come nearest to the use of our bread and wine? Calvin says they may, and
Beza approves his judgment; Epist. 2^.
for they are to other Symbola analoga says he.

The Doctor says, there is no other table gesture, necessary, but that which
the Apostle calls Metechein to participate of the table by eating and
drinking, as only prescribed in the institution. But we have already said,
that there is such an order of the institution prescribed, as will not admit
every kind of participation, but such as may stand with the rules and precepts
of the institution, that is, with do this, and divide it among you. And
therefore participation with the gesture of kneeling, is excluded. If to
participate only be required, then let us take it by the mouth, and not by the
hand, for greater reverence. As for fear of superstition the Doctor will free
us of that; we are so well informed against transubstantiation, and the bodily
presence.

He says all nations agree not in one form of Table Gesture. What then? do
they not all agree in a table gesture? And as for kneeling, no nation under the
cope of heaven did ever use it for a table gesture. Further, it is urged, not
as the most decent table gesture, but as a gesture of adoration.

To receive the Sacrament upon the Sabbath day after meat

We received not the gesture of sitting from the Arrians, but from the first
primitive and Apostolical Kirk, and Christ's example: therefore we cannot be
said to symblize with ArArrians. The 4 conclusion of Synodus Petricoviensis,
cited by the Doctor, alleges, that sitting at table is no where used in
Europe, which is false. For when that Synod was holden anno 1578* sitting at
table was in use in the Kirkes of Scotland, and the Low Countries and is yet
still in use among them. That Synod consisted of sundry sorts of protestants,
some adhering to the Augustane Confession, some to the confession of Bohemia,
some to the Confession of Helvetia. The Lutherans would not consent to sitting,
because of the bodily presence: others adhering to the Helvetian confession,
would not consent to kneeling; therefore that they might agree, it was
permitted to every one to stand, or kneel. And so not only for dispite of the
Arrians or (as Synodus Cracoviensis calls them) Arrianabaptists, did they
discharge sitting: But also for their respects of common agreement among
themselves. We are not to follow the Canons of such confused Synods. Yet I
vvish the Doctor had set down the words immediately preceding, where they
say, qua quidem propter externos ritus homines pios ferire, neque est domini
voluntas, neque pu^ioris Ecclesiae mos.
that it is neither the will of God, nor the custom of the purer Kirk, to
smite men with Ecclesiastical discipline for external rites, and therefore
permits every man to stand or kneel. Ye see the Lutherans notwithstanding
of their opinion of the real presence are not so hot for kneeling as our men,
who outwardly profess otherways. This Synod would not have allowed
office-men to be compelled to kneel under the pain of deprivation from their
offices, whereunto they have right of their life rent, by the Laws of the
Land, and wherein there livelihood does stand. This mixed Synod would not have
allowed our two pretended Archbishops Mr. Spottiswood, and Mr. Law to sit in
the court of high commission, where they sit without allowance of the Kirk and
the States, and to exerce like Popes the power of both the Swords, suspending,
depriving, fining, confining, and imprisoning. First they delate, and then they
execute, as Doeg did. That mixed Synod would not have allowed the four
Ministers of Edinburgh aboue-named to incense his Majesty against the people
with their calumnious and sycophanticall letters. Mr. Galloway professed openly
in pulpit, that he would do good service to God, who would procure their
punishment. Mr. Struthers declaimed against them, because they were not so
pliable to his course, as he desired. All the four press to extinguish that
spark of light and zeal yet remaing with the better sort; which was kindled by
those worthies, who went before the^, shining as burning la^pes, Mr. Knox, Mr.
Lowso^, Mr. Bruce, etc

It were strange if Calvin should be a favourer of kneeling, whose doctrine
and perpetuable practice was against it. In the Page,
where he says, the Apostles in the institution, and the Apostolical Kirkes
afterward, kneeled not.

P. Martyr, wrote his treatise of the Eucharist, when he was Professor in
Oxford, not many years after he had forsaken papistry. Crammer, his special
friend, Ridley and others who saw not all things in the dawning of the day,
being moved with the stirs and outcries of the papists, to appease them some
what, enjoined kneeling in the act of receiving, in the renewing of the book
of common prayer. P. Martyr, a stranger was loath to contradict his great
friends, and the received order; or it may be that the^ he saw no further* his
reason is very weak: for many do kneel devoutly says he, when they hear
these words read; And the word was made flesh. What was this, but to corfirm
one superstition with another? for wherefore should we kneel at these words
more then at the rest of the articles of our faith, or confortable passages of
scripture? When he was afterward in Zurich writing against Gardener, he was
forced to defend his former treatise, and through the importunity of his
adversary, he was driven to utter such speeches. As the papists worship their
absent Saints in their images so do we worship Christ's body being absent in the
sacrament. And again, Page 67.176, 177.
as the nobles and Citizens revere^ce the Emperor in his purple robe and his
seal, howbeit they know he is not contained in them: so do we in the Sacrament
worship Christ's body being absent. Yet this much we may perceive, that he could
never thoroughly digest it, for in the same part where the Doctor does cite
him: Page 673.
he does twice vvish that all kind of external adoadoration were abolished,
whether prostration of the body, or kneeling. And when he was in Zurich, In his
defense against Gardener, ^ Page 7.179.
he affirms plainly, that it was without any vvarrant of Gods word, yea
against the example of Christ and his Apostles. But not willing to insist long
in scanning men's testimonies, I proceed.

We compare not the brazen Serpent with the bread in the

we see the works of God, hear the word, or receive the Sacraments, which he
would be loath to do.

He does the like in the two examples following, when the fire fell down and
consumed the sacrifice of Elias, the people fell on their faces and cried the
Lord is God. And the infidel, or unlearned Christian, convinced by the
Prophets in his conscience falling on his face, adored God saying, God is among
you. Here the Principal cause of their falling down was God, says he, but
the miraculous work of the fire, and the word of the Prophets, were
instrume^tal causes whereby they were vvakened and stirred up. Even so when
we fall down at the Sacrament, the principal cause that moves us (says he)
is God to whom we kneel, but the Sacrament is the instrument, whereby we
are taught, and admonished to fall down at that time, and in that place. If
the Doctor had said of the first two, that at the same time, and in the same
place they fell down also, he had said to the purpose. But he does altogether
suppress the circumstance of time and place in the two examples. And the
truth is, that the people fell on their faces, after that the fire had consumed
the burnt-offring, and the vvood, and the stones, and the dust* and licked up
the water that was in the ditch, 1 King. 18.38.39. And the infidel, or
unlearned Christian is brought in (upon supposition in case such a thing fall
out) falling on his face, and adoring God after that the Prophets had ended
their Prophesying. For he is brought in speaking, which could not be done
without confusion, if the Prophets were prophesying in the mean time. So his
examples do not serve his purpose, nor his comparison in general of the
Sacraments with the word and works of God. For if we should fall down at
the time and place when we see the works of God, and feel our selves
vvakened and stirred up by them, then shall we fall down before the whole
host of heaven, and every thing that creeps on the earth. Or when we hear
the word, if every man as he finds himself vvakened and stirred up, should
fall down and worship, howbeit he join not speaking with it, like the
infidel, or unlearned, what a confusion would be brought into Gods service?
Next I say, suppose it were granted that the people fell down in the mean
time that the fire was vvorking the work wherefore it was sent, there is a
difference betwixt the customable beholding of Gods ordinary works, the
Sacraments, and a miracle. For as Augustine De trinit. Lib. 3. c. 10. Honorem
ta^quam relligiosa habere possunt, stuporem tanquam mira non possunt.
says of the sacred Scripture, the Serpent, the Sacraments, they may be
honored as matters religious, but vvondred at as matters of marvel they may not
be. The infidel or unlearned if he had fallen down in the mean time and
spoken, it had been but his rudenes, not yet well understanding the order of
the Church. What men do either amazed with the Majesty of God in a miracle,
or of ignorance being but new couverts to testify their conversion before the
congregation as vvitnesses, does not help the Doctors cause. Thirdly, suppose
they had fallen down in the mean time, yet their falling down was not for
adoration of the fire, or the word, but of God, Kneeling at the Sacrament is
for reverence of the Sacrament, as we shall make manifest. But as I have said,
their falling down was not in the mean time of the vvorking of the fire, or
the prophesying of the Prophets, and so serves not the Doctor to the very
pretense of falling down at the Sacrament.

He denies that they bovv their knees at the Sacrament, for the religions
respect and reverence which they carry to the Sacrament, but to Christ, for the
religions respect and reverence that by it they are taught to give to him. I
see men make no account what they deny, providing they can ensnare simple
people, and bring them to the doing of the act. The Doctor said otherways, at
the pretended assembly, and the act penned by him and some others, when it
was reformed, the copy whereof subscrived by the clarke come in my hands
speaks as I have already alleged. It is there ordained, that we kneel in
reverence of so divine a Mystery to wit, as is the Sacrament, or holy
communion, whereof mention is made in the words immediately preceding. And
the words follovving, in remembrance of so mystical an union, as we are made
partokers of thereby to wit, by the mystery, declare that by the word
mystery, Page 54.
is meant the Sacrament. The like speech he has in this book, that the
communion of the body and blood of Christ is offered to us by the sacred
mysteries which are given at the table. It is an usual term of the ancients
to call the Sacrament, sometimes mysteries in the plural number, sometime
mystery in the singular number, as the Doctor does also vary the term in
this book. And in the English Confession the bread and wine are called the
heavenly mysteries of the body and blood of Christ. To kneel then in religious
reverence of the Sacrament, is to adore it. For all religious kneeling is a
gesture not of ordinary and common reverence, but of adoration. Seeing
therefore the public intent of the enforced act is Idolatry. whatsoever be
the private intent of the communicant, he is guilty of Idolatry in kneeling A
man may go to Rome, and take the Sacrament at the Antichrists hand, if private
intention will save him from the guiltines of Idolatry.

Our conformity with our neighbor Kirk, does also manifest the intent of our
act. The disputers against Mr. Rogers, Mr. Hutton, D. Cowel, and D. Spark,
prove out of their vvriters, that the reverence of the Sacrament is intended. I
will only set down Mr. Huttons words. Our bowing at the Sacrament (says he)
is an outvvard reverence meet to be performed because of that holy action in
hand, namely our religious communicating; partly to stir up in others a more
religious estimation of those divine seals, partly to remove all profane
thoughts of Epicures and contemners, partly to put a difference between the
ordinary bread and wine, and those Sacramental, to which we give more
reverence, because they are more the^ ordinary bread and wine. That book of
common prayer, whereto they are tied by the statute of Q. Elisabeth, gives also
to understand, that kneeling at the communion is enjoined upon this ground,
that the Sacrament might not be profaned, but held in a reverent and holy
estimation amongst us.

I hear that our men have put in another word to color the matter. In
reverence of God, and of so divine a mystery; but that will not help the
matter. For God will be the total and only object of adoration, he will have
no compartner, and he will have it to be directed to him alone immediately.

But what if by the word mystery be understood the action of celebration, that
will not help the matter; For the action of celebration is nothing else but the
mystical rites and ceremonies employed about the elements, giving, receiving,
eating, drinking. I may not kneel in reverence of the mystical rites, more
then of the mystical elements. I may not lawfully adore actions more then
substances. No action never so mystical or holy, is the right object of our
adotation.

Seeing therefore we kneel in reverence of the Sacrament, and it is in part
the object of our adoration, we are said as properly to bow before it, as the
Papist to bow before his image. Yea, suppose a thing situate before us vvanting
life, be not the object of our adoration, as a wall or a tree, yet are we said
properly to bow before it in our vulgar language. howbeit speaking Greek we
would not use the word Enopion to that purpose. David or Daniel may be justly
said to bovv toward the Temple, they being far removed from the sight of it*
or toward the Ark, the Ark being out of sight in the holy of holies. The
elements are not only in our sight, but are also the object of our reverend
worship, as the crucifix is to the Papist. And admit that the speech were not
proper to say we bow down before any dead element, the doctors phrase is
sufficient for us. For we may not bow down toward a creature, as the object of
our adoration. Yea and further, we may not bovv by direction and ordinance now
under the new Testament, tovvard any place or creature, there to worship God,
as the people of old, did tovvard the Ark, where God manifested himself by a
singular manner of presence, sitting betvyixt the Cherubins.

It is manifest then, that the public intent of the act is Idolatrous, seeing
the elements are made an object of our reverent kneeling. Yet let us examine
the Doctors private, but pretended intent. 1. If we kneel only to Christ at
that time and place, when the elements, in the sight and use of them, as
isntrumental causes, vvaken and stir us up to give that bodily worship; then
at what time, and in what place soever, we are moved and stirred up by any
creature, work of God, word, Sacrament, type, figure, monument to acknowledge
our duty of bodily worship to God, we should give it in that place, at the
same instant time. For the Doctor did except only Images and Idols, as not
fit to teach us any thing of God, and consequently, that we should not bow
before them. But of this purpose we spoke a little before. Page 50.
See also Perth Assembly. 2. If I kneel only in regard of the pretended
prayer of the soul, and yet in the mean time of my kneeling, which is an
external worship. I perform an other action of divine service. I confound two
parts of external worship. I am praying, and in that regard, as is pretended,
kneeling; and in the mean time I am beholding with mine eyes the mystical
actions, hearkening with the ears to the audible words, receiving the elements
with my hands, eating and drinking with my mouth, and so one person at one
time is (...) two sundry parts of external worship. For these actions are not
the actions and gestures of prayer and adoration. The diverse kinds of Gods
worship should not be confounded with other; but specially none of them ought
to be confounded with prayer and adoration for eschewing of Idolatry. Did ADAM
eat of the tree of life, the people of God eat of the Paschall supper, or the
manna, the Priests eats of the things sacrificed, of the presence bread, or
other holy meat, and adore in the mean time also? The Lord would have
external adoration superceeded during the use of the means, the word and the
Sacraments, both for eschewing of Idolatry, lest we adore the means; and of
confusion and distraction lest the parts of Gods worship should undecently be
confounded, and our hearts distracted. And so kneeling in this action does not
best beseem this action, as the act would insinuate. Babylon is not so
confused: for they think the actions of eating, drinking, taking, beholding,
when they are upon their knees, and in time of their prayer, are employed
immediately about their God. 3. Either the soul is wholy employed in prayer
during the time that the communicant is upon his knees, and then the actions of
beholding, taking, eating, drinking, are idle, or rather hurtful because they
distract the soul, or the soul is not totally exercised in prayer, and then
kneeling must be in regard of the actions and elements vvhereabout they are
employed, as well as of prayer, and this is Idolatry. 4. If the actions
outvvard employed about the elements, and the internal considerations and
actions correspondent be the principal work of the communicant: and on the
other part, the prayers be but mental ejaculations, and occasional, then is
the gesture of kneeling principally for the actions, and the elements
whereabout they are employed. But so it is, that these actions employed about
the elements, and the internal actions correspondent, are the principal work
of the communicant, the mental ejaculations of prayer and praise, are but
occasional and incident. Therefore kneeling is principally for the actions and
the elements, wherbout they are employed. 5. If mental ejaculations give place
to all other parts of Gods worship, and require no bodily adoration, as we may
see at the hearing of the word, our mental ejaculations require not kneeling.
The^ it vvil follow, that kneeling is not at all in regard of these mental
ejaculations of prayer and praise, but of the public worship commanded, that
is, of the celebration of the actions, and signs whereabout they are employed;
and this is also Idolatry. As for public prayer in the act of receiving, they
cannot pretend it. For no such prayer is set down by any Canon of our Kirk. The
disputers foresaid have laid open the nakedness of this pretense also.

So we may see the carriage of every communicant, declares that kneeling is
for reverence of the elements, let the communicant pretend what he please.
Next, let him pretend what he please, he is to be exponed according to the
public intent of the act injoyning him, which is Idolatrous. Make never so
many respects besides, either in your private conceit, or in the act, this
public intent being one, does mar all the rest. The Lord will not be mocked
with relations, but respects the act, and not the intention says Bilson,
Obedience, Page 347.
howbeit to another purpose.

He denies that our kneeling hardneth the Papist in his

the reverence and respect that in this action we owe to God, as the Doctor
alleges. I understand not what the weak brethren be of whom he means; but
well I know, that all the Godly Professors of the Land are offended at it, and
justly. They have heard our preachers these 60 years by past teach otherwise
and in the subscribing, and swearing to the second confession of Faith, require
persons of all estates to abjure it. If they shall now hear the Preachers
defend it, and urge the practice of the same, what shall they believe? may they
not think that the rest of the doctrine which they have taught these many
years bypast, they will recant, if they were but a little put at. I know
none for mine own part content, but blind ignorants or superstitious people.
The old wives that knocked on their breasts, and glowred up to the bread, when
Mr. Galloway delivered them the elements, were very well content. Vile
atheists, and blasphemers of Christ's name, can both buffet Christ rent his
wounds, blaspheme his name, and yet kneel and say, Hail master. Some
politians indifferent in matters of religion, can be content to do any thing,
whether they have delight in the matter, or no delight at all. Some, it may be,
and I fear too many, think as the familists do, that they may lawfully present
themselves to any worship which the prince or Magistrate shall enjoin, suppose
it were never so Idolatrous. A number did kneel because they were seduced by
corrupt teachers, temporizing or seeking benefit or preferment. Many kneeled
for Fear of loosing their offices, and estates, and some of them have been
grieved in conscience for so doing. But the Fear of danger and trouble will
not hold men excused. If the Doctor would obtain that no man should be urged,
we should then see what manner of men these be whom he alleged to be so well
contented.

The determination of kneeling, when and where, and in what cases is to be
used, is left to the determination of the kirk, says the Doctor. Be it so,
where the word has not already determined. But. 1. The exemplary sitting of
Christ. 2. The use of the Table. 3. The Sacramental breaking of the bread
after the thankesgiving. 4. The enunciative Form of deliverie of the
Sacramental word. 5. The generality of the Sacramental word. 6. The
commandment 1 Cor. 11. to communicate together. 7. The precept, Divide it
amongst you. 8. The semblance of a supper or Feast. 5. The discharge of
vvil-worship. 10. The discharge of conformity in rites and ceremonies with
Idolators. 11. The discharge of kneeling religiously in reverence of any
creature. 12. The discharge of dangerous provocations to the grossest Idolatry
of the Papists, do all discharge kneeling. See al those particulars treated in
Perth Assembly.

Howbeit we differed before from the Kirk of France by our sitting, yet we do
differ Further both from the Kirk of France, and from our selves by kneeling:
yea, we differ from all the well-reformed Kirkes round about us.

The Doctor says, if the ancient Church might have lawfully intercha^ged
kneeling, a gesture ordained by God himself into standing at prayer, touching
which there is no precept, how much more may our Church interchange sitting
never commanded, and never or very seldom practiced in Gods public worship
with kneeling a gesture commanded by God, and most agreeable to this Sacrament.
We have already made manifest, that at the religious Feasts under the Law, at
the Sacrament of the Supper under the new Testament they did sit. In the time
of the preaching or prophesying, it was likewise the ordinary custom to sit
both in the Synagogue of the Jews, and the Assemblies of Christians, 1 Cor.
14.30. Acts. 16.13. Act. 20.9. Luke. 4.28.29. Act. 13.16. Luke 10.39. I think
no man will deny but the ministration of the Sacraments, and the preaching and
hearing of the word, are parts of Gods public worship. If by public worship
the Doctor do mean the solemn and public prayers only, then he speaks not
to the purpose. Neither does Calvin say, that kneeling in time of prayer is
simply a divine ordinance, but he says, it is so human a tradition that it is
also divine. It is divine in so far as it is a part of that comelines which
is recommended to us by the apostle. The Prophets upon singular occasions as
they were moved by the spirit, exhorted the people to come and bow down before
the Lord. But these exhortations were not precepts. for then Christ had sinned
if he had not kneeled in the times of thankesgiving; but we have already
manifested that he sat. Then David likewise had sinned when he sat before the
Lord. 2. Sam. 7.18. To expone sitting standing, were catachresticall indeed. To
expone sitting remaining, will not agree with the text. To devise a mystery
for that sitting Peter Martyr says, it is without a warrant. If there had been
a commandment to kneel in time of prayer, then Iehosaphat and all Judah
standing before the Lord with their young ones, their wives and Children in
time of prayer, 2. Chron. 20 5.6.13. had sinned, and the ancient custom of the
Jews to pray standing, had been unlawful. Of this custom see Perth Assembly.
Page. 51.
It was the office of the Levites to stand evening and morning to give thanks
and praise the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 23.29. The tribe of Levi is said to be separated
to stand before the Lord to Minister to him, and to bless in his name. What
the ancient Kirk did in changing kneeling in time of prayer into standing,
insignification of their joy for Christ's resurrection, and that so precisely,
that it was accounted a great sin to do otherwise, on the Lords day, and
betwixt Pasce, and Pentecost, is nothing to us, who are not to follow them in
such conceits. Paul kneeled betwixt Pasce and Pentecost the time forbidden by
the ancients, as we may see Acts. 20.36. and had no mind of such devises.

The Doctor alleges, that our first reformers established sitting only as a
fit ceremony for the time, to abolish the opinion of transubstantiation. But
this he alleges against his own knowledge, and I am sure against the truth.
For in the first book of discipline, in the second head thereof, it is ordained
as a perpetual gesture because most agreeable to the institution. In the
parliament holden anno 1572. it was inacted, that if any man did communicate
otherwise with the Sacraments, then as they were then truly ministered in the
reformed Kirkes of this realm, should be holden infamous, unable to sit or
stand in judgment, persew or bear office, or to be witnesses or assisers
against any professing the true religion. Shall we now have a new act in the
contrary, for this English guise, or rather old Papisticall manner. In the
second confession of Faith, we detest all allegories* rites, signs and
traditions added to the true ministration of the Sacraments, without or against
the word of God. Did any preacher preach otherwise till now? And at Perth
Assembly the Doctor confessed that yet still the former order was best, but he
would please the King, and avert his Majesty's wrath from this Kirk. P. Martyr
vvriting to the Polonian Ministers and Professors anno 1556. Willed them to
pluck up superstition and Idolatry by the roots, if otherways they plucked
only at the Leaves, the Fruits and the Flowers, it would spring up again as
it had done in some places already. I know what I speak says he. And this he
spoke when our neighbor Kirk revolted to Popery in Queen Mary's days. But
chiefly he desires them to make a sincere reformation in this Sacrament,
where there are, says he, Loci com. p. 2111. quae porro nisi sublata fuerint
nunquam Ecclesia Christi puro sinceroque cultu erit ornata, etc.
Pestilent seeds of Idolatry, which except they be taken away, the Kirk of
Christ will never be decored with pure and sincere worship. And again he
says, as the Sacraments ought not to be contemned; so men ought not to give
them greater honor then the institution will suffer. Bucer in his censure
written at the desire of Cranmer, says, Cap. 9. Nihilque loci vel invenient
vel retinebunt apud nos eae res omnes verba, et gestus, in quibus vel appeateat
esse aliquid euntis impietalibus affine, aut ad uliam tapiatu^ qua^quam improbe
et absque data causa) harum suarum impietatum commendationem et picturam.
that if we love God and our Savior Christ none of these things, words, or
gestures, will find or keep place amongst us, which have appearance of
affinity with the impieties and abominations brought in by the Antichrist
upon the holy mysteries, or which may be taken hold of to make up, any any
commendation of them, howbeit unjustly and without just cause offered. A whole
Synod did condemn this gesture for the danger of Bread-worship, as may be seen
in Festus Hommius harmony of the Belgic Sinods. Our first Reformers upon the
same considerations abandoned this gesture simpliciter, and not for a time
only.

He pretends a needless Fear of Prophanitie and contempt, which may by time
creep in by our former order. If it creep in, it is to be amended, and the Form
and order of the institution is not to be broken or adulterate for remedy of
the same. For as Bucer says, Ibid haec ut nulla nobis potest improrum vitiate
perve^sitas, ita nec propter (...) us.
neither the perverseness of the wicked, can vitiate the things which the Lord
has instituted, neither ought we to intermit them for their abuse. But I
appeal to the consciences of all true Professors, if ever they did see any
exercises so gracious, powerful and heavenly, as were our communions It is
well known what graceles, confused* cold and disordered communions we had
insundry parts this last Year, where kneeling was put in practice. Some
complained for want of the Bread, some for want of the wine. Mr Galloway
quarrelled some of the communicants for not kneeling, when he was in the very
act of delivering the element. Such pretty dialogues had we at the last
communion, as was matter of much talk afterward.

He purged our Kirk in this book before of Arrianisme, and now he makes much
ado as if the maintainers of a table gesture did savor of Arrianisme, or
plead for equality with Christ. When the Arminians were like to prevail in
the Low Countries, then did the Doctor every where reason for them. This is the
man who makes a counterfeit outcry, as if our Kirk were in danger of
Arrianisme; howbeit he does understand there is no appearance of any such
matter more now, then was from the beginning of the Reformation. Neither did
Christ ever institute any order which should give just occasion to any
malicious or perverse person to pretend such Fears.

What a vain alledgeance is it to say, that kneeling will serve to declare
our union with other reformed Kirkes; seeing the best Reformed Kirkes do
abhor kneeling. His other alledgeance is as Foolish, that kneeling will vvin
some Papists to our Profession. Is this the way to cure a man of the Fever, to
fain a Fever? God set up a partition wall of many rites and ceremonies
betwixt his people and Idolaters, and took not the course of conformity with
them to make proselites. P. Martyr says, Loci commun. p. 1111. In ritu
Sacramentorum administrandorum is amplectendus est qui fuerit quam
simplicissimus, atque a Papisticis nugis et ceremoniolis maxim remotus: et ad
puritatem qua Christus cum Apostolis usus est, qua^ plurimum accesselit.
That rite in the administration of the Sacraments is to be embraced which is
most simple, and furthest removed from Papistical toys and ceremonies, and
comes nearest to that purity which Christ and his Apostles used. This was
his judgment after he had left England, and had experience what such matters
meaned. Does not daily experience teach us, that where kneeling and the like
ceremonies do flourish most, Papists do increase most? Are not our Papists
already insulting upon us, and saying that* we are returning home again to
them?

There was an argument much made of be the D. in Perth Assembly, which I find
not in this Book of Resolutiounis. To wit, whatsoever benefit we may crave
of God upon our knees, we may receave it upon our knees. We may crave the
Sacrament upon our knees. Ergo. Bot appearantlie the D. has thought shame of
it since that time. And indeed if the propositiovn were true, the King ought,
or may kneel when he receaveth homage from his subjectis: The Bridgroome
when he takes his Brid by the hand: and every one of us when we receave
food or phisike. Mr. Galloway wanting better reasons did notwithstanding with a
little restrictioun use this same argument in the Great Kirk of Edinburgh upon
the Lords day before the last communion as the chief reason that after study,
meditation and prayer gave him Resolution. What spiritual blessing in Gods
public worship I may ask of God upon my knees, I may receave upon my knees.
When N. denied this proposition to the late Bishop of Galloway Mr. Cowper he
could proceed no further. I demand wherefore should we not kneel in the receat
and fruitioun of temporal benefits and blessings alsweill as Spiritual, seeing
we c^ave of God conform to the perfect pattern of Prayer day lie bread and
temporal benefits necessar for this our natural life. Will they not say,
because Gods benefits temporal are presented to ws be sensible creatures, and
therefore if we did kneel, we should kneel before creatures, Fire, Water,
Wine, Bread and so forth of the rest. Do we not the like at the Sacrament,
are not the seals of the Spiritual blessings presented to ws, be sensible
creatures. If e say the one sort is Holy and sacred and so is not the other:
then first it will follovv that we kneel not ratione doni in respect of a
blessing or benefit bestowed, for then we should kneel in the receat of the
temporal blessing and benefit also: bot that we kneel because that sensible
pledge of the spiritual blessing is ane holy thing or creature consecrated
and set apart to a holy use. Bot to Kneel relligiouslie in that respect before
any creature whatsoever is Idolatry. That conditioun which is added: In Gods
publik Worship, vvil not help the matter. For whether we kneel in or out of
Gods publik worship in the forsaid respect, it is still Idolatry to kneel
relligiouslie in regard of the holiness of any creature. Nixt there is
aequiuocatioun in this word worship. For some time worship of God is taken
in a general sense, for the fear and reverence of God, service of God, or any
other relligious or Ecclesiastical actioun, ROMANS 1.9. MATTHEW. 15.9. ACT. 18.7.
ACT. 18.13. ACT. 24.14. PHILIP. 3.3. DEVT. 10.12. COLL. 2.18.23. 2 SAMUEL 15.8.
EXODUS 3.12. And so the word worship in our language serves to express
diverse words in the original latrevoo, doulevoo, threskevoo seboma^, etc. In
this general sense the preaching of the word, the celebratioun of the Lords
Supper, the Ministration of Baptism, singing of Psalms, etc. Ar public
worships of God. The Preacher Prays upon his knees for a blessing when he
shall Preach and consequently in Gods public worship ROMANS 1.9. ROMANS 15.16.
Shall he therefore Preach Kneeling, when he finds Gods blessing assisting
him. The hearers do crave likewise a blessing upon their hearing* If the
hearers as they are diverslie affected with good motiouns in time of Sermon
shall kneel when others do sit: and the Sitters again kneel when others
are risen, if at an other time they find themselves moved, what a sort of
hearers should we have. Gods public should not be confounded with men's
peculiar worship and devotioun. It is Gods Commandment, that the hearer should
hear, when the Preacher does speak. This Commandment should not be broken,
for the private motions and secret ^ja^ulatiouns of the soul in the time of
hearing. Even so at the Sacrament the communicant is to observe the ordour,
rules and rites of the institution, which will not admit Kneeling as we have
often said. It is therefore unlawful to kneel in the act, seeing that we
cannot kneel without making many breaches both in the secound Commandment in
general, and in the instition in particular. All which are set down at lenth
in PERTH ASSEMBLY, the sum whereof I have set down before PAGE 45. The
word Worship is taken again and that most usua^lie for kneeling and
prostratioun and serv^th in this sense to express the Greek word proskuneo as
MATTHEW. 2.2. REVEL. 13.4. 1 COR. 14.25. MATT. 8.2, and the Hebrew word
Histachavah; and this is performed in time of prayer or thankesgiving. To kneel
in time of Gods public worship in this strict sense, that is in time of
solemn and public prayers no man does call in question, and is not pertinent
to this purpose. If Mr. Galloways pensions had not tempted him at his prayers
study and meditations, he might soon have come to better resolutions. He had
another reason that same day of as little weight. To wit, The people of Israel
stood in Egypt at the passover as they were commanded: and sat in Canaan.
Why may not we likewise change sitting in kneeling as they did standing in
sitting. First it is only conjecturall that they stood, it is not certain.
For no circumstance in the text Exodus 12, does enforce any such thing. Next,
if it was commanded it was enjoined only for that night as many other
ceremonies were peculiar to that time, as to eat in their houses vvher they
had made their residence in Egypt, the sprinkling of the side posts with blood,
the eating in have, the not going out of house. Christ and his Apostles went
out of the house that same night to the Mount of olives Matthew. 26.19.20.30.
Seeing therefore the Lord did not set down a Law for standing at the Paschall
supper, and the people of Israel had not the like reason to stand at other
times as at the first passover in Egypt: there was nothing to hinder their
sitting. That standing was only occasional, because of their hasty departure
out of Egypt, bot sitting was the ordinary gesture at all relligious Feasts.
Put the case it were certain that they stood at the Paschall supper even to
the captivity, which is denied be Scaliger in the last edition of his book de
Emendatione temporum: and that they took up sitting after that, yet that change
of standing about the table into sitting is bot the change of one table gesture
into another. Bot to change sitting into kneeling is to chang a table gesture
into a gesture of adoration, and to bring in a change upon the institution as
we have said. When D. Denisons book come in Mr. Galloway his hands, he made a
new onsett in the pulpitt upon the Lords day following and caused sing after
Sermon the 95 Psalm, as if he had been singing the triumph. Bot certanely he
produced no new reason vvorthie the answearing howbeit he did flee with other
men's vvings. I vvish that man saw his one weakness and insufficiency for such
a place. Mr. Ramsay proponed an Argument at the meeting upon the ^wesday before
the last communion, which he bragged he would manteine against all the
Theologues in Europe. To wit, where the soul should necessarily bow, the body
may lawfully bow. In the act of receaving the Sacramental elements the soul
should necessarily bow. For we should receave with humility. The answer is
easy, first the proposition is to be denied. The 3 children no doubt bowed
there souls, when they were presented before the golden Image. Bot there bowed
souls were averse from the Image and looking upon God. For we may not Imagine
that the soul throws about as the body does. A man surprised with a
sudden tentation, when he is gazing on a crucifixe ought to bow his soul
necessarlie bot he must not bow his body. Nehemias standing before King
Artaxerxes Nehem. 2.4. bowed his soul, bot might not bow his body. A man
ryding through a deep water, and in peril of drouning should necessarily bow
his Soul. In a word whatsoever we be doing, or whatsoever thing be setr before
ws, we should bow our soul, when we are assaulted with danger either internal
or external, or when we have some present neid of Gods presence and
blessing, whether we be ryding, eating, lying, hearing the word, or
participating the Sacrament. As for the assumption; we bow the soul in the act
of receaving if there be neid, and as we find our selves moved to beg grace to
strenthen us, when we find our Faith weak, or in such like caces. Bot that
bowing is nothing, but the mental ejaculations of prayer and praise whereof we
have often spoken before which are occasional only, subtle, swift and
secret. For to say that the soul should bow by way of internal adoration of
prayer and praise during all the time of the action is to exclude the principal
work of the soul, that is meditation, consideration of the analogy of the
signs and things signified, and the application of Faith, as we have said
before. Humility is not this bowing of the soul, which is internal
adoration, bot ane habit accompanieng us in all our relligious exercises, in
the hearing of the word alswell as in receaving the Sacrament. Farther it
will not follow that we should bow the body, if we bow the soul at that
time as I have declared in the refutation of the proposition. All the 12
transgressions noted before do hinder us to bow our body at that time. M.
Struthers greatest arguments were terrible knocks upon the pulpit. Mr. Sideserfe
told the people of the threadbare reason drawn from the circumstances of time
and place accessoir to the first institution: whereof se before Page 11.

S^ing therefore kneeling in the act of receaving is not a thing indifferent, but
unlawful in respect of the many transgressions committed by the same, it is
the duty of every good Christian making conscience of his vvayes, specially
in the solemn worship of God, to detest the same. Bot what if liberty be
offered to sit, or stand, or kneel? Remember first that no particular person
h^s power to make that offer. The enforced act of the pretendit assembly
tends only to uniformitie. Next, remember the trick which the Ministers of
Edimburgh played. When they had allured some people with this offer to come to
their communion, they wrought upon them diverse vvayes to make them to kneel,
and dashed the Silly ones. Tempt not the Lord: take pains rather to seek
abroad nor to cast your selves in a snare, or to countenance such confusions.
Ye ought not so far as in you lies to depart one nail breadth from the
institution, as I alleged before out of Calvin. Thridlie consider that this
offer will only serve for ane introduction to uniformitie in kneeling. For
when that confusion shall take place, then shall they cry out as D. Spark has
done: (...) Page 17.
that some moderate severi^ie must be used to remove that offensive diversity,
and to reduce all men to uniformitie. The conclusion of Synodus Petricoviensis
alleged be them now against us, shall not serve then for a defense to us
against them. And this moderate severiti shall prove sharp persecution, which
is already begun. If the observation of holy days be first urg^d it is the
du^t^e likewise of every good Christian making conscience of his oath, promise,
subscription, former profession, and purity of Gods worship, to vvithdrawe his
countenance from the same. A day of rest without relligious exercises is an
idle day, not a holy day. Relligious exercises are the life of a holy day. And
th^^ for our Kirk woul not approve the Confession of Helvetia in that point,
howbeit prophanitie and other accessorie abuses of popery were not allowed be
that Confession. The veri^ ^bservation itself of an^ anniversarie F^st^v^ll day
with cess^tion from work, and relligious exercises, the two chief elements of
a Festival day was judged superstition. As may be seen be the continual
abstinence of our Kirk from extraordinar Preaching upon these days, the
censures acts and articles of the general assemblies, the Confession of Faith,
the first Book of discipline. See Perth Assemb^^e p. 63. Nixt by your
countenancing of holy days ye countenannce the vicious constitution, and
shameless proceedings of Perths Pretendit and Null assembly. Th^^dly ye open a
door to kneeling and all the rest of the English ceremonies, which will rush
in, after we have given way to any one of them. And then when we shall be
made fully c^^forme to our neighbor Kirk, we shall turn in a tr^ce to
Papistrie, when it shall please authority by found of Trumpet to command us.
For PETRVS CVDSENIVS a Jesuit viewing the state of the English Kirk Anno 1608.
gave this judgment in his Book de desperata Calvinistarum causa, that the
state of relligion in England was such, as that it might be easily changed to
the Catholic Roman, and that they were not properly to be called heretics, but
schismatiks. This is recorded by Francis Mason in his book of the consecration
of the Bishops of England. The terrible inquisition of the high commission is
set above our heads, where the acts of some Psendosynods, corrupted, and
slavish conventions are put in Execution by the two Archbishops, and all the
ordinary judicatories ecclesiastical past by. If these two bone companions,
pretty football men, sometimes fellow-presbyters in one presbytery, still
brethren in evil, had been casten forth of the ministry, when they were nere
the point of suspensio^ for profaning the Lords day, they had not been able
instruments to cast out vvorthie men out of the ministry in their times. To
conclude the relligion of the best Reformed Kirks round about ws is persecuted
in our persons under the name of Puritanisme, and Papists do increase.

For M^thode it behoved me to follow the Doctors disordered stepps. For matter
I have studied to brevitie, referring the Reader to Perth Assembly for
farther, if he be desirous. For I eschewed repetition, so far, as I might.

Anno 1619. November. 5.

