A DEFENSE OF OUR ARGUMENTS against kneeling in the act of receiving the
Sacramental elements of bread and wine impugned by Mr. Michelsone.

CYPRIANVS. lib. 2. epist. 3. ET de hoc quoque ad collegas nostros literas
dirigimus, vt vbique lex evangelica, and traditio dominica seruetur, et ab eo
quod Christus et docuit, et fecit, non recedatur. Quae vltra iam contemnere, et
in errore pristino perseuerare, quid aliud est, quam incurrere in objurgationem
Domini.

Imprinted Anno. M D C XX.

DE CONSECRATIONE did. 2. c. 3. Cyprianus Caecilio. SEd vide frater charissime
si quis de antecessoribus nostris vel ignoranter, vel simpliciter non hoc
seruavit et tenuit, quod nos Dominus, et exemplo et magisterio suo docuit,
potest simplicitati eius de indulgentia Domini venta concedi: nobis vero non
poterit ignosci, qui nunc a Domino admoniti et instructi sumus.

BUt see, most dear brother, if any of our antecessours either through
ignorance or simplicity, has not kept, or holde^ that which our Lord taught
us, both by his example, and precept, his simplicity may be pardoned of the
Lords indulgence, but we cannot be pardoned, who are now admonished and
instructed.

TO THE READER.
I Have found nothing (good Reader) in Mr. Michelsons confutation worthy of
any answer, but that which is borrowed from D. Morton or D. Denison, and has
been already answered in Perth assembly. What is his own, is new, but so
absurd, that just lie he has deserved the change of his surname from
Michelsone to Nihilsone. The judicious Reader may find as much in Perth
assembly untouched, as may serve for defense of that which he has lightly
touched: and may find further in the Solution of D. Resolutus his resolutions
for kneeling. I have now added this defense of our reasons, not so much for
reply to his confutation (for that was needless) as for illustration, and
confirmation of that which has been already written in the two former, and to
obviat such cavillations, as perhaps may be used by some other of our
opposites. I will keep the same ordour, which our Antagonist has set down^e:
howbeit he has divided our arguments, to make them seem the weaker, as Medea
rent, and scattered the members of her brother, that there by she might the more
safely flee: which fault Peter Martyr objected to Gardinerus. His arguments for
kneeling shall be answered in the defense of our reasons, as occasion shall
offer (...) self: for his answers and arguments are all alike, and of equal
strength. I will also, so far as I may, eschew repetition of any thing already
written in the two former treatises ^^ent this argument: yet so that this
Defense shall be, as I ^ope, sufficient without them. Mr. Michelsone has chosen
a worthy Patron to his Pamphlet, my Lord of Scoone. The one kept the door
sometime, when the other did execute the ordinance of the high Commission. Such
^^pps, such ^^^tuce. He has given so notable proof of profound knowledge in
Divinity, and subtilitie in handling this controversy in this worthy work of
his, that the Bishop of St. Andros, (a man as void of learning, as of good
manners,) has made him a Doctor. He has been sorning at the Treasurers gates
for his wages, but he will not rest contented, till he get that which he gapeth
for, a fatt bishoprik, the hope whereof will sharpen the wit of very mules and
asses, let be of so fine a wit, as Doctor Michelson has.

P. A. for Perth assembly.

Sol. for Solution of Doct. Resolutus resolutions.

DEFENSE OF OUR I. ARGUMENT.
THE gesture of our Lord, and his Apostles, at the Paschall Supper, was a kind
of sitting gesture. The same gesture was continued at the Eucharisticall
Supper. For whilst they did eat, to wit, of the second service of the Paschall
Supper (and consequently whilst they did sit) Christ took bread, and gave
thanks, Math. 26. 26. Mark. 14 22. This collection is so clear, and evident,
that the Papists themselves, hot persecuters for kneeling, do acknowledge the
same. Cardinal Baronius; Annal. tom. 1. an, 34. number. 44. Vnde quod dicit
Matthaeus, coenantibus autem eis accepit Jesus panem, and benedixit, and quod
Marcus a^, and manducantibus illis accepit Jesus panem, and benedicens fregit:
idem est ac si dixisset, recumbe^ubus illis.
That Matthew says, And as they were eating Jesus took bread, and blessed; and
Mark says, And as they did eat Jesus took bread, and blessed, and brak it, it
is all one, as if they had said, whilst they were sitting. But Matthew and
Mark, says our new made Doctor, must be interpreted by Luke and Paul, who do
say, that Christ did institute the Sacrament after they had supped, Luke 22.
19. 1. Cor. 11. 24. I answer, that Paul and Luke speak of the cup, and not of
the bread, Likewise after Supper, he ^ook the cup, and blessed. Likewise, that
is, he give thanks, as he had done before, when he took the bread. Neither
Paul, nor any of the Evangelists do say, that after he had supped, he took
the bread, as they do of the cup. This difference of speech made Bellarmine De
Eucharist lib. 4. cap. 27.
to follow their opinion, who thought, that Christ consecrated, and
distributed, the bread, in the very time of the Legal Supper, whilst they were
eating of it, and that after other actions interveening, and the Supper ended
Christ took the cup. There is no necessity to collect such a disjunction of so
heavenly a mystery; but the common opinion is to be retained, that this
Mystery was instituted per modum (...) signi, in one continued action. Always
we may see, that the bread being consecrated, and distributed, and eaten,
before Christ took the cup, justly it may be said, that after supper he took
the cup, seeing now the first half of this holy action was ended, and had
intervened between their eating of the Paschall Supper, and the taking of the
cup. Put the case that Luke and Paul had said that after Supper he took bread,
their words must so interpre^ Matthew and Mark, as that there be no
contradiction. Christ took bread whiles they were eating, and yet
notwithstanding after they had supped, because they were now closing up their
eating, and Christ entered in another act on. Barra^^us the Jesuit Tom. 4. l. 3.
c. 2. Quavis aute^ ^otu^ Sacramentu^ post coenam institutum fuerit, in ipsius
tamen coenae fine institutum est, eum adhuc discumbere^t, and manducarent. Nam
manducarunt ^bos alios quosq^e ad institutionem ^oelestes ^bi ventum est.
Ideoque Matthew. and Mar. a^unt, mand^cantibus ipsis effectum esse hoc
Sacramentu^. Adhuc enim in inducabant, cum Dominus accepit panem, benedixit,
and fregit.
faith, Howb^^t the whole Sacrament was instituted after supper, yet it was
instituted in the end of the supper, while as they were yet sitting, and
eating: for they eat other meat, (...) the time of the institution of the
heavenly food* and therefore Matthew and Mark say, that the Sacrament was
instituted, while as they were eating: for they were yet eating, when the Lord
took bread, blessed, and brake. Thus much for the first collection of the
sitting gesture of Christ and his Apostles at the Eucharisticall Supper, upon
which all interpreters ancient and modern have builded. Suppose the first
collection should fail, this second collection following will prove it. It
behooved them either to sit, stand, or kneel. Stand they could not, for the
beds joined to the table would not suffer that gesture. They did not kneel;
for if Christ had changed the ordinary gesture of sitting at the Paschall
supper, into kneeling at the Eucharisticall, a gesture of adoration, and no
table gesture, then kneeling had been instituted and not left indifferent, and
arbitrarie: For to what end should Christ have changed the one in the other,
except it had been his will to have it observed, as other changes made in
passing from the last act of the Paschall supper to the Eucharisticall. But our
opposites dare not say, that kneeling was instituted. If therefore they neither
kneeled nor stood, it follows that they ^ate. Never man was so impudent as to
call this in doubt, till within these two or three years by past, that two or
three hirelings have done it.

In the Apostles times the gesture of sitting was continued in the Kukes: for
the lovefeasts and the Lords Supper were so near conjoined in time, how be it
different in mystery, that Casaubone Exercit. 16. p. 511. Paulus ^otam illam
Corinthioru^ actione^, quae sacro and co^muni convivio constabat; a potiori
part vocat Coenam Dominicam. Tom. 1. An. 57. Number. 130. Corinthios autem inter
coenandum miscentes sacra co^munibus, quod correxit Paulus, Eucharistia^ sumere
consuevisse. Au. epist. 118. ad Ianuariu^ affirmat.
says, the whole action consisting of the sacred and common banquet, was calied
by Paul the Supper of the Lord from the better part. Augustine affirms that
the Corinthians not only conjoined, but also confounded them; and so does
Baronius the Cardinal understand him, when he says; Augustine ad Januarium
epist. 118. affirms, that the Corinthians used to take the Eucharist at
supper, mixing sacred things with common, which the Apostle corrected. And
afterward Number. 136. scriptu^ a Philone convivium sacris videtur admixtu^ quale
illud Pauli ad Corinthios.
he says, that the feasting described by Philo seems to have been mixed with
sacrea purposes, like that of which Paul writes in his epistle to the
Corinthians. Now at that frugall feasting whereof Philo makes mention, they
sat on the ground upon mattes made of flagges, and their feasting was
intermixed with hymns and praises. Howsoever the Corinthians abused this holy
action otherwise, yet this intermixing declares the usual conjunction of the
two parts, or actions. They being then in the Apostles time so nearly
conjoined in time, and distinguished only in mystery, it behooved them to sit
at the one part, as they sat at the other: and so does Bishop Bilson affirm
Obedience page 461.
. The practice of many Kirks after the Apostles times, even till Augustines
days argues, that they sat in the Apostles times. Bullinger, De origin
error* circa coenam cap. 4. Vnde nimirum ritus ille ad nos dimanavit, quo vel
body in Cathedralibus ecclesus and monaster^s Benedictinorum in die Coenae
Domini ante parasceuen Coena Domini palam and sp^endidius celebratur. Nam
Evangelium Iohannis 4 Diacono public praelegitur, and dulcisstma illa
colloquia Christi, quae abiturus cu^ discipulis habuit, recitantur: interim
ordine dispositis mensis convivae assident, panem azimum frangentes, and
calicem invicem propinantes, and in totum veteris coenae vestigium praeferentes.
from the different manner of celebrating this holy Supper related by
Augustine, observes as follows: Whence that rite is stowed unto us, by which
even as yet in Cathedral Churches, and the Monasteries of the Benedictines on
the day called The Supper of the Lord, before good friday, the Supper of the
Lord is celebrated openly, and with great pomp: For the Gospel according to
John is read publikly by the Deacon, and these most sweet conferences of
Christ, which he being to depart had with his disciples are rehearsed. In the
mean time the tables being set in order, the banketters sit down to them
breaking unleavened bread, and reaching the cup to other, and so every way
representing the trace of the ancient Supper. This footstep of the ancient
custom yet remaining amongst the monasteries of S. Bennets order, and observed
upon Maundy Thursday, Morneus also observes. See the Solution of D. resol.
resolutions. p. 12. 27
.

Our first Argument then against kneeling in the act of receiving the
sacramental elements is drawn from the example of Christ and his Apostles at
the first institution; and the practice of the primitive Kirks following in the
Apostles times. Their gesture was not a gesture of adoration in the act of
receiving, but a Table gesture* for it was a sit^ing gesture they used, and not
kneeling. Christ instituted Baptism, but we read not that he baptized in his
own person. But in this Sacrament he was not only institutor, as Lord, but
also celebrated as a Minister, and set down a most exact and perfect pattern of
celebration. The practice of the Apostles following the same order is a
direction to us to follow the same also.

We reason likewise from this example and practice, against any other gesture
which is not a Table Gesture, howbeit not with the same force, as against
kneeling. There is eating with walking (as Pios the Monk did, who said he
would not make a work of eating his meat) but this is no tablegesture. To
stand in the act of receiving, and then pass by, as in some Churches they do,
is not a table gesture. For there is no more use of a Table in this case, when
the communicant stands, and takes out of the ministers hand, more then of a
cupboord, or dressor, suppose it were never so long. For so it serves only to
the setting on of the elements, that from thence they may be reached by the
hand of the Minister to the Communicant. A table of as short dimensions, may
serve to that use, at the Papists require of necessity for their Altar to hold
up the foot of the Chalice, and so much of the plate, as may keep it from
falling, together with the Masse-book, and the candle.

We reason thirdly from the same example and practice, but with least
vehemency, against other table-gestures also, as standing about the table;
because it is not agreeable to the first pattern and practice. It was not coena
stataria, aut ambulatoria, but accubitoria, which Christ and his Apostles
celebrated: not a standing or walking, but a sitting supper. But to return to
kneeling, I conclude with the words of Calvin, who says, That (i) Instit. lib.
4. cap. 17. S. 35.
they are sure that they swarve not from Gods commandment, who take the
sacramement as God has commanded without adoration. They have the example of
the Apostles, who prostrate not themselves but took sitting. They have the
practice of the Apostolical Kirks, etc. And of Beza against Harchius, Contra
Harchium. Scilicet, quu^ ipse adstans ad mensam Dominus, vere adorandu^ qua
Deus, and qua De^^ and homo simul coenam instituebat, surrexerunt singuli
discipuli, ut ^^genua procumbentes, panem illum and vinum illud ex ipsius ma^^
acciperent: and ignorabant scilicet ipsi Apostoli quo ritu deinceps celebranda
mysteria ecclesijs traderent.
So like, as when the LORD truly to be adored as God, and as God and man at
table did institute this holy Supper, that the disciples arose, to the end that
falling on their knees, they might receive that bread and wine out of his hand:
and so like as the Apostles were ignorant h^^ to deliver to the Kirks the
manner of celebrating these mysteries.

It is objected first* that if this argument be go^d then the minister should
teach sitting, because Christ taught sitting. But the case is no alike. For the
Lords supper is a rituall action, and a visible object is presented before the
communicant. Christ taught us by his example, how to behave our selves in such
a case. Next, Christ taught sometime standing, sometime sitting, according to
the opportunity of time and place. He sat in the mount, Mat. 5. he stood in
the plain, Luke 6. Paul stood up and made his exhortation in the synagogue,
Act. 13. He that prophesied stood up, 1. Cor. 14. 30. as Cajetanus does
collect. Audientes sedere, prophetantes stare significat dicendo, Quod si alij
sedenti.
The original word signifies, that the other prophet who was not in the act
of prophesying, was sitting, not sitting by. Lastly, this objection may be
retorted upon themselves, That seeing Christ and his Apostles and all teachers
and hearers in all ages afterward, did not preach or hear preaching kneeling,
we can have no warrant to do it. If not at delivery or receiving of the word,
then also not at the delivery or receiving of the sacramental elements.

It is objected next, that Christ and his Apostles sat not at the paschall
supper alter our manner of sitting, and that it was rather a lying then a
sitting, as the original words anakeisthai and anapiptem do import? It has
been answered already P. A. page 38. ^ol. page ^. 6.
that it was not totally lying, but partly sitting, partly lying, and
translated sitting, not lying, by the English translators. Yea the holy Ghost
does express this same gesture also by the word sitting in the original
language, Ezech. 23. 41. That kind of gesture, (whether brought in among the
Jews by the Romans or Persians, or if it was as ancient as the days of David
or Solomon, as some do collect out of 1. Sam. 9. 22. Prove. 7. 14. 16. Cant. 1.
12. it is not material) succeeded in the room of upright sitting, and has
given place again to the same, as answering analogically to it. It was in
Christ's time the received manner of sitting, and no further is required of us
but to observe the received gesture of the country, where we are. It is also
to be observed that anakeisthai and anapiptein are not the proper vocables to
express this kind of gesture, as Athenaeus does testify. Lib. 1. cap. 18.
Beza in Math. 8. 11. says, that anaclinesthai is put there for cataclinesthai
the proper greek vocable of this gesture. Farther, howbeit in a private parlor
a small number did sit after that manner at the first paschall supper, yet it
is no way probable, that in the Christian assemblies afterward in Corinth,
Jerusalem, or else where, they sat after the same manner. For howsoever there
is mention made in ancient writers of houses of 60. 80. or 100. beds, that was
not common, but peculiar to princes and great men. Plutarch Symposia 5.
notes it as a vice in a man to build houses for 30. supping beds, or above.
Shall we then think, that the Apostolical Kirks had the use of such houses for
their meetings, or that the Lords supper could be celebrated in such a form in
their numerous assemblies.

It is thirdly objected, that if we be bound to the imitation of Christ, and
his Apostles gesture by as good reason we shall be bound to the imitation of
the time and place; that is, to celebrate after supper, and in a private house.
It is answered that the circumstances of time and place of the first supper
were only occasional, and the occasion of them was unavoidable because of the
law of the pass over. But the gesture might be easily changed by Christ
without violation of Gods law, namely seeing the paschall supper was ended. It
was a easy to them to go to their knees, as to the Egyptian Naucratits after
they were set down to their feasts, when they began to sing hymns to their
gods. But our Lord would keep the same form at the Eucharisticall supper,
which he kept at the paschall. Our Doctor says, that the Apostles retained
these circumstances, and changed them not. I answer, if that were true, we have
no reason, nor warrant to do otherwise. Next, if the Apostles retained these
circumstances upon occasion, and not for imitation, upon necessity, and not
voluntarily, then he has gained nothing. For we deny not, that in times of
persecution, or when occasionally there falls out any necessity, we may
celebrate in the night, and in a private house, where the Church is assembled.
The Apostles would not have been suffered to celebrate the supper in the
temple, as sometime they were overseen to teach. Next, it was not so fit for
the celebration of the Lords supper, as for the preaching of the word. The
first was ordained only for the believers: the last, to convert also
unbeleeving Jews. Thirdly, there is no likelihood that they celebrated ever at
night. For howbeit at Troas Act. 20. it were granted to have been celebrated at
midnight; as some do call it in question, yet who sees not, that it was then
d^layed to that time, not because it was the usual time, or for imitation of
the institution but only upon occasion. The Apostle being to depart, did
continue preaching, and so that action was continued. The Centurie vvriters do
not affirm, that the Corin^hians did celebrate after supper, but only say
videtur, that it seems so. But Chrysostom Homil. 7. ^n 1. Cor. 11.
affirms the contrary, that they did celebrate in the morning. It is said
Act. 2. 46. that they continued daily with one accord in the temple, and
breaking of bread from house to house. Pa^ae^s says, De symbol. and ritib.
eucharist. p. 152. Neque Apostoli ad tempus vespertinum sese adstrinxeru^t, sed
pro occasion caenam administrarunt, alias diurno te^pore, ut legere est, Act.
2. 46. alias inte^pesta nocte, ut act. 20. Quo sacto satis ostenderunt tempus
coenae per se esse indifferens.
that the Apostles did not adstrict themselves to the evening, but occasionally
ministered the Supper, sometimes in the day time, as Act. 2. 46. sometimes late
in the night, as Act. 20. whereby they show that the time of the Supper is
indifferent.

Defense of our second Argument.
TO the due ministration of the Lords Supper there is required a table,
whereabout the communicants are to be placed. If a table, then also a table
gesture; kneeling is not a table gesture. Therefore kneeling is not a fit
gesture for this Supper. A table is so requisite to this action, that from a
table this supper has received one of the scripture names, that is, to be
called the Lords table, to distinguish it from common tables. As it is called
breaking of bread, because that rite was usual in the celebration of this
sacrament. By this reason, says the Doctor, it should be celebrated at
evening, because it is called the Lords Supper. It is true, that in our
language, this word, Supper, signifies only the evening meal, but not so in
the original. For the word Deipnon in ancient Greek writers signifies
indefinitly the repast that a man takes any time of the day, yea suppose it
were before the rising of the sun, as may be seen in Ho^^er the Greek Poet.
The banquet or feast w^^ch Luke 14. is called Deipnon, is called ^^^th, 22.
ariston. Cas^ubonus Exercita^. p. 511. Hoc* ut videtur, significans, priscu
temporib. omni^^ convivia fuisse appel^ la^a deipna, etiam quae non fierent, in
fine di^i.
observes (...) of Photius, that Paul called this Sacramental ^anket Deipnen,
according to the (...) of the word in Paul's time; meaning that all ^an^ets were
called Deipna, howbeit they were not (...) the end of the day. He confirms
this in the (...) following, when he says, that the ^asts of idolatours in
their temples were also called Deipna not Arista. Read Concilium Ancyranum,
where ye shall also find these idolatrous feasts expressed by this word
deipnon. The word which was ever used to signify that which we call Supper, is
dorpos, or dorpon. Casaubonus gives also this reason of the name, That it is
called a Supper, rather then a dinner, because of old they dined sparingly and
supped more liberally, to signify the plenty and liberality of this feast.
Other allegorical reasons of this name I omit. To return then, not only was
this feast called the table of the Lord, but also it had a table indeed, not
only in the Apostles time, but also many ages afterward, both for consecration
and distribution. Now it was not a money changers, or writers table, but mensa
conviv^alis a feasting table which Christ and his Apostles used, and not
without some profitable consideration. For a Table was counted sacred of old by
the Ethnicks, and they thought the gods were present there at their feasts An^e
focos olim longis considere mensis Mos erat, and mensae ^redere adesse Deos.
Ovid. fast. 5.
, and likewise the Poets bring in sometimes their gods feasting at a table.
There is a notable sentence of Ben Syra Mensa parata, sive posita cententio
tollitur, the table being prepared and set, contention cease, signifying that
the communion of one table betokened reconciliation* and love. The Jews say,
that when some altercation arose in the house of Ishbosh^^h the son of Saul,
the servant incontinen^ spread the Table, and the altercation ceased If at
profane feasts, a table was counte^ sacred, and a symbol of concord and
fidelity, far more at this sacred feast, which is a banquet of Love. Musculus
therefore is not to be commended for his saucie censure of the laudable custom
of the reformed Churches, where are, and has been so many worthies: I will
forbear comparisons. Luthers testimony set down by Musculus in that same
place is memorable. Therefore Christ so instituted the Sacrament that in it we
should sit at Table. But all things are changed, and the idle ordinances of men
are come in the place of Divine Ordinances. Musculus himself on Matthew. 26. 23.
observes in the ancient Proverb Mensam and salem non transgred^, that the
Table was counted sacred, and a symbol of friendship. And deploreth the
corruptions of our times, wherein neither the fellowship at the profane, nor
mystical Table, makes us mindful of this duty. And in his Common Places De
coena Domini page 345. Sacrificio competit ara, communication^ sacrificu compet
it mensa.
he says, that to a sacrifice belongs an Altar, to the communication of the
sacrifice a Table. A feasting Table then being granted, the gesture of
Kneeling, being no Table Gesture, must be excluded in the act of banqueting,
which is the proper use of the Table. The Christians under the ten
persecutions, it is true, could not have the commodity of high tables, and
seats a swerable. But it is neither the height, nor the matter that we stand
upon. Whether the table be round, square, or extended in length: whether it be
of timber, or stone; of a bull hide, or a plot of ground: whether it be high or
low; the form and ^ashion of a table ought to be observed, that the
Communicants may communicate tablewise: Whether they convene in dens, or
deserts; in Kirks, or houses. Wine is one of the Sacramental elements, and yet
Volaterranus writes that the Priests of Norway were permitted to consecrate in
other liquor then wine, because wine could not be kept in that Northern
Country. So a plot of ground whereabout men sit and feast, answers
analogically to the high ^able. As for private consecrations in time of
persecution, like that of Lucianus the Martyr who used his breast for an Altar,
when he was in prison: or for keeping the Sacrament, and communicating a part,
belong to the controversy of private consecrations, and private communions, to
be enquired, whether they did right or not. We are now speaking of Assemblies,
and Congregations, whether in time of peace, or under persecutions. See further
of this second Argument in the answer to D. Resolutus. page 16. ^8, 34. 35.


Defense of our third Argument.
CHRIST said in the plural number, Take ye, eat ye; not take thou, eat thou,
in the singular number, as the minister speaks to the communicant kneeling*
He produces Musculus, saying that Christ gave the bread to every one of the
Apostle^ severally. But the same Musculus acknowledges that Christ gave the
cup to the nee* rest, and not to every one severally. Now as Christ said, take
ye, drink ye all of this, so he said, Take ye, eat ye. Gabriel Bi^l Lect 3^.
in Can. miss^
Swarez Tom 3. p. 702. 90^.
the Jesuit, and Cajetanus In Mat. 26.
have devised another form, which will sort better with the phrase of the
Evangelists. To wit, That Christ did break the bread in so many pieces, as
there were communicants, laid them in a plate, and reached the plate to them,
saying, Take ye, eat ye. And as for the cup, they acknowledge it was given
only to the nearest, and that the words were so spoken generally to all. The
D^ct. says, that Christ speak first generally* Take ye, eat ye, and then he
gave the bread to very one of them severally. Otherwise (says he) Christ
should have given the b^e^d before it was a Sacrament, meaning before he had
said. This is my body. But I would demand, if Christ said first generally,
Take ye, eat ye, this is my body, if he said again, Take thou, eat thou,
this is my body, when he gave to every one severally: as many of the
schoolmen adstricting the power of cons^cration, as they call it, to the five
words, Hoc est enim corpus meum, do feine, that Christ spoke these words twice.
Which Swarez refuteth; Tom. 3. p 702 vbi nu^la ratio cogit, non oportet
(ordinem tex us) mutare ^raesert^^ cum ab Evangelistis. and Pa^lo tanta
conse^sio^e observatus ^it.
because it changes the order of the ^^xt set down with so ^ull consent of
Paul and the Evangelists, no reason enforcing them so to do. Or did Christ in
giving severally, utter the Gregorian prayer, or what said he? Likewise when he
gave the cup, ^e behoo^ed according to his imagination first say generally*
Take ye, drink ye all of this, This cup is the new Testament, etc. and then
give it severally to every one; and then what said he? Did he repeat the same
words: or utter the Grego^ian prayer for the cup, or wha said he? Is not this
Popish shifting of the Doctors, violence done to the t^x^. As if the text were
not clear of itself, that Christ in the very act of giving did join the words
of promise* this is my body, to the element consecra'ed before by prayer, and
then they eat of it. Swarez without any violence done to the text, says
better, agreeing with his div^ce of distributing the bread, when he says Ibid.
I. taque postqua^ Christus accepit and bened. xii pa^e^, illum insufficientes
parts distribuit, and in pa^ina acc^modate posuit, ac po^rexit discipu. is,
^tcens verba co^secrationis, quibus fi i^ is singul^ suam partem acceperu^t and
communicarunt.
After the Lord had taken the bread, and blessed it, hec divided it
insufficient number of pieces, and ordered them a the Plate, and reached them
to his Disciples, saying the words of consecration, which being finished, every
one received his own part, and communicated. What is further alleged by the
Doctor against this third Argument, shall be answered in defense of the fourth
reason, as in a place more convenient.

The Doctor casts by, in a dark corner, two of our reasons, as not worthy to
be answered, or ranked in order, and number with the rest. First we say, that
where kneeling is in use, the Sacramental breaking after that ksgiving is not
enjoined, so far as we can find in their Service books, when as other rites
invented by man are enjoined. And for practice, Paraeus testifies that the
Lutheran Kirkis have it not, but have the bread cut in small pecces before it
be brought to the hands of the Minister, which is not that Sacramental
breaking instituted by Christ. The Doctor ^aith that he and some other of his
follows do break the bread. But I would demand, if that be the common order
of the Kirks where kneeling is in use. Next if it be a breaking in the own
time, and place, that is betwixt the thankesgiving, and giving with these
words, This is my body, as Christ gave it. For the Papists have a kind of
breaking after all the words are finished. For belike it is heresy to break
it before they have said; Hoc est enim corpus meum.

The second reason disdainfully rejected by the Doctor, is this, that kneeling
has brought in a change upon the sacramental word, changing the enunciative
form of the words, T^is is my body into a prayer uttered in the act of
delivery of the el ments to the communicant, The body of our Lord Jesus, which
was given for thee, prese^ve thy body and soul unto life everiasting. He
brings in Perkins approring the m^tter of Doctrine contained in this prayer.
So does Perkins many other heads o^ doctrine concerning this sacrament. But
where does Perkins allow this kneeling, or forming any such d^ctrinall point in
a prayer, to displace the comfortable words of the promise conceived by Christ
himself. He says, that he and his fellows utter the words of promise before
the giving of the ^read, and in the act of giving use the prayer. But he
speaks without a warrant. Mr. ^alloway said, we shall say, Take this as a
pledge (...) Christ's body, and that, said he, will hold out all idolatrous
thoughts, suppose ye kneel. And who appointed that prayer to be uttered in
the act o^ giving? There is no such ordinance in our K^^k; The Doctor who will
be conform to English ^orma^ties, before ever he be enioynee, is not a rule to
others. It is strange, that the worth^est preachers should be persecuted for
kneeling before that all the rest of the forms belonging to it, or depending
on it, b^ brought in, without the which it cannot be put in practile, It
agrees not with the Scottish form, and the English has not ye^ been
prescribed, But to come to the Doctor his form. That is ou^ question;
wherefore the words of the promise are not uttered in the act of distributing,
when the bread is given to the communicant, according to the order of the
institution, a Christ himself did, but other words are put in their place. To
reheare the words o^ the institution, and the words of promise among the rest,
may very well se^v^ to show what warrant we have out of the word to minister
that holy action, but it is not the ministration it self, as Christ ministered
that action. I wish it were well observed, that in the English service-booke
the words of the institution are rehearsed in form of a prayer to God, in a
contnuall tenor with the prayer begun in other words before, just according to
the order observed in the Canon of the Mass. And so the words are reh^arsed
not to the communicants as Christ uttered them to the Apostles, but prayerwise
to God, as the Priest does when he offers the sacrifice of the Mass, which
is a great absurdity, and abuse of holy Scripture. There the words of promise
are uttered in an enunciative form, but to God; as if there could be no
consecration before the rest of the celebration, except these words be
pronounced with the prayer. I dare be bold to affirm, that the sacrifice of
the Mass had never entered into the Kirk, if this double action, one of
consecrating with rehearsal of the words of the institution all at once,
without the rites correspondent to the words; another of distributing with
other words, had not first entered. The first turned into sacrificing, the
second only remained to be called the sacramental service, or communion.

Defense of our fourth Argument.
THE communicants ought to distribute the elements to others, according to
Christ's precept, Divide it amongst you. This distribution cannot consist with
kneeling. He alleges Fenner against this distribution, but impertinently: for
he speaks nothing against it. Beza is so far from den^ing that precept,
Luke 22. 17. to be meant of the communion cup, that he are be bold to
conj^cture the verses to be transposed, and that this should be their order,
16, 19. 20. 17. 18. Luke applies the protestation, that Christ will drink no
more of the fruit of the ^^^e, to that same cup which he commanded them to
divide amongst themselves. But that protestation is applied to the communion
cup by Matthew and Mark, Math. 26. 28. 29. Mark. 14. 24. 25. It was therefore
the communion cup which Christ commanded to divide. He alleges against this
reason, Piscator in Math. 26. 29. saying, that it is no absurdity to think
that Christ made that protestation twice, once of the paschall cup, and again
of the communion cup. But writing afterward upon Luke, he says, as being
better advised, Piscator in Luke 17. 18. Ordinis inversio aliqua, quatenus pars
actionis circa vinum narratur, v. 17. and 18. ante actione^ circa panem. Nam
verba illa de poculo coe^^ Domini^^ int^lligenda ess^l quet ex Ma^co, qui verba
illa, dico me non bibitu^um, etc. verbis de poc^lo coe^ae Domini^^ pronunciatis
continenter sub^ungit.
that there is inversion of order to be observed in Luke, in so far, as that
part of the action, which concerns the wine, is set down verse. 17. and 18.
before the action concerning the bread. For that these words are to be
understood of the cup of the Lords supper, it is clear says he, out of Mark.
14. 24. 25. who subjoyneth immediately to the words pronounced of the cup of the
Lords Supper, these words, I will drink no more, etc. No Evangelist makes
mention twice of this protestation of not drinking more; how then can men so
boldly conjecture, that it was spoken twice, once of the Paschal cup, and
again of the Eucharistical' Matthew and Mark make this protestation to be
spoken but once, and that of the communion cup. Again, if Christ had made this
protestation concerning the paschall cup, how did he keep his promise, if he
did drink after the paschall cup, of the Eucharisticall cup? He says Musculus
doubts, if it may be assirmed, that Christ himself did eat, and drink, of
the sacramental bread, and wine. But he doubts without reason. Does not
Matthew and Mark say, that Christ protested ^nene the communion cup, that he
would drink no more of the fruit of the wine after that. It follows then that
he drank of it. When the Schoolmen are to prove that wine is one of the
sacramental elements, they cannot find a proof in all the four Evangelists,
but in this protestation, Lectio 3^ in Canon Missae.
that he will drink no more of the fruit of the vine. Gabriel B^el groundeth
his proof on this protestation, as it is set down by Luke, and collecteth,
that neither the wine of apples, nor wine as it is in the berry, but as it is
potable, is the matter of consecration in this sacrament. Does not Musculus
himself say, De coen^ Domini, p. 348. Existimo neminem esse qui nege^ vinum in
poeulo fuisse, cum dixerit Dominus Math. 26. Luke 22. haud bibiturum se
amplius. Homil. 83. in Math.
I think there is no man will deny, that wine was in the cup. seeing the Lord
said, Math. 26. Luke 22. that he would drink no more of the fruit of the wine,
etc. Chrysoltome says, Ipse quoque bibi^ ex eo, ne ^^itis illis verbis
dicerent, Quid? ergo sanguinem (...), and carnem comedimus? and pertuba^entur.
He drank also of it, lest hearing these words, they should say, What? Do we
then drink blood, and (...)? and so should be troubled. And Hierom ^aith, Ad
Hedibiam.
that the Lord was conviva, and con^^^um, comedens, et qui comeditur, the
banketer, and ^e banquet it seife; he who did eat, and was eaten. Where to
should I cite many old testimo^^^. The two ancient Se tenet in manibus, se
cibat ipse cibus. Se nasce^s dedit socium, convescens in edulium.
hymns, are suf^^^nt. He needed not to partake of this ^^^ment for himself,
yet for example sake, ^o show, what others should do, he communicated with
his Apostles. He needed ^ot to have been baptized for himself, and (...) he
was baptized for the instruction of others* It becomes him, who inviteth
others to a banquet, to eat with his guests. Se^ further in De coena Domini q.
59.
Buc^nus common places. Hes says next, that Christ kept his promise, albeit he
drank of the cup of the new Testament, after that he drank of the paschall
cup, but lets us not see, how that should be. He protested, that that
passover should be the last, he should eat with them in this mortal life, and
this he performed. He says he protested the like of the paschall cup, Luke
22. and yet drank after that of the communion cup, but that is the very thing
we deny: and we have already made manifest, that there was but once
protestation made anent the cup, and that it was the communion cup. Further,
this protestation was made anent the last cup; but so it is, that the communion
cup was the last cup. Beza in Mark. 14. 25. Alludit ad morem, q. o nefas erat
post poculum illud apolyticon quicquam cibi in posterum diem capere.
Christ alluded to the Canon, and custom, whereby it was not lawful to taste
any thing that night after the last cup, the cup of ^praise. Christ foretelling
his death, protests he will drink no more of it, not that night only, but not
at all in this mortal life.

The obaldus Meuschius Defens. Harm^n. generalis, cap. 4
proves that this protestation was once only spoken, and that of the
Sacramental cup, by this same custom of the Jews. Inde concludi potest, quod
Iudaei panem. and poculum soliti sint distribuere, prorsus in sine Paschatis
quibus distributis quicquam porro gustare ea vespera nefas erat. He not only
opens up Hysteron proteres Lucae contin^um, the inversion of order i^ Luk,
and affirms the distribution of the cup ver. 17. to be meant of the communion
cup: but also says, therefore Verosimile igitur est and prope necessarium hos
versiculos ex sacrae coenae institutione huc esse a scribis trajectos.
it is likely, yea almost necessary, that the verses 17. and 18. were taken out
of the institution of the Supper which ^odoweth, and were placed here by the
negligence of W^uers. Howsoever it be, if there be not transposition of the
verses, there is anticipation in the matter, and purpose it self. To the
reasons and testimonies before alleged, and in Perth Assembly, and the answer
to Doctor Resolutus, I add only the testimony of Swarez. ( z) Howbeit these
words, I (n) Tim. 3. p. 909. Licet a Luca haec verba, non bibam etc. referantur
ante consecratione^, videtur tamen id factum esse per anticipationem Nam
Matthaeus and Marcus post consecrationem ista referunt.
will not drink, be related before the consecration, yet it seems to be done
by way of anticipation: for Matthew and Mark relate them after the
consecration. Seeing ^hen we have so many reasons, and such a cloud of
witnesses, both of Papists and Protestants, the ancient Fathers, the
Schoolmen, and modern Writers, hat the Precept divide it amongst you,
belongs to he communion cup; Kneeling in the act of receiving the
Sacramental elements cannot have place. It is true, when Christ said, drink
ye a^^ of it, he required that one should not drink out all that was in the
cup* as the Priest does in the Mass, but that every one drink of it. But this
precept, divide (...) you, import^^h further, that they should divide, and
distribute it among them selves. Christ says not, Let it be divided, or, I w^d
divide it, but, divide ye it amongst your selves. When Christ gave the cup to
th^^ ^rest, he took it not from him again, to d^l^v^r it to the next; n^r yet
did every one s^t down the cup on the Table, that the next might take it up
from the Table, but they reached the cup to the other. So was the last Paschal
cup carried from hand to hand. This last Paschall cup was changed into the
Eucharistical, and when it was changed, it was carried from hand to hand after
the same manner. Piscator In Math. 26. Ita salicet ut illud dederit alteri ex
proxime accumbe^tibus actum deinceps singuli ordine aljis cata cucloposia^
istud porrexerint.
says, that they reached the cup one to another, Bellarmine says, Caiuem
autem non fregit nec div^sit ipse discumbentibus. sed dedi^ integrum ut unus
alteri porrigeret, de Eucharist lib. 4. cap. 25. Christ brake not the cup* nor
divided it himself to the ^i^ters, but gave it whole, that one may reach to
another. Swarez says Tom. 3. p. 861. Quod in calice est ev^dentius ex illis
verbis. Accipite and divid^^e inter vos, fuit ergo per proprias Apostoloru^
manus ab uno in alium delatus.
he applied not with his own hand the consecrated bread to the mouths of the
Aposties, but only offered the plate to them, and they took it with their own
hands. which u more evident in the cup, in these words, Take it and divide it
amongst you. It was carried therefore by the Aposties own hands from one to
another. Seeing therefore this is acknowledged, not only by Calvin, Beza,
Piscator, Bellarmine, Swarez, Walterius, and many more both Popish and
Protestant Writers, that, divide it amongst you, concerns the communion cup,
we may not hear without any gaine-saying, that it is indifferent, whether the
Ministers or the Communicants, distribute it. For if Christ commanded the cup
to be distributed by the Communicants, who has authority to make it
indifferent? But when it is made indifferent to open a door to superstitious
and idolatrous rites to enter in, then is Christ Precept most of all to be
observed, If the cup should be divided by the Commumunicants, then is it like
that the bread should be divided also, seeing Christ said of the br^ad, Take
ye, eat ye, in the plural number. See Piscator in Matthew. 26. He says
Probabile est Dominum panem confregisse in duas parts, earumque alteram
dedisse illi qui proximus ipsi accumbebat ad dextram alteram vero idi qui ad
sinistram, ut isti deinceps proxime accumbentibus porrigerent, donec singuli
particula^ sibi decerpsissent.
It is probable that the Lord brak the bread in two parts, and gave one of them
to him that sa^e nearest to him on the right hand, the other to him, that sat
on the left, and that they reached in order to the nearest. B^za, Tossan^s
Hospin^anus, Tindall say the like: Mornaeus, Sibrandus, and others, extend the
Precept to the bread also. The reader will find them already all^dg^d in Per^^
Assembly, page 41. 42. 43. and ^he answer to Doctor Resolutus, page 8. 9.
An^logie requires that the Communicants should distribute the bread as well as
the cup. And it were not seemly to see the Communicants distribute the cup,
and the Minister to go along to minister the bread. That the cup should be
divided by the Communicants is sufficient for our Argument against kneeling.
For it excludes kneeling (...) receiving the cup. If we may not kneel, when
we receive the cup, should we kneel when we receive the bread? I bel^^v that
there is no man so absurd, as to think it.

This rite of the Communicants dividing the elements, say we, has a profi^^^le
use, in that it is an interchange amongst the Communicants of tokens of l^ue
and amity. He answers that the Primitive Kirk had another mean, to
entertain love, and friendship, to wit the Love Feasts. Let the taunt which he
borrowed from Gardinerus be here retorted against himself. He has his mind in
patinis. Jude says that the false Teachers were rocks, or spots in the feasts
of charity feeding (r) De Orig. error. circa coenam ^ol. 201. Hinc fortassis
ritus ille ad nos manavit, qui etiam hodie in usu est, ut finitis, Missaru^
solenn^^s panes diuidantur pauperibus.
themselves without fear. They would have wished that world to last ever.
Does he think that the Love Feasts were to remain, as long as the Sacrament
of the Supper? They are worn^ long since out of use, and no trace of them left,
saving that when the solemnities of the Mass are ended some bread is
distributed to the poor, as Bullingerus reports. There is also some footst^p
of them, as some do think, at fu^erals. We point out a rite commanded, which
should endure, seeing it was commanded, he leads us to another temporary
custom. Antiquitatum co^vivialium li. 3. cap. 10. In jis enim amicitiae ergo
humaniter se mutuo excipientes vini calicem sibi invicem porrigebant, quent
Philotesiam appellabant, metonymice nimirum, quia symbolum erat amoris, and
amicitiae, q^^ nomine verissime quis idud sacrosanctae Domini coerae poculum
(...) signierit. See more of this 4. Argum. P. A. page 41. 42. 43. 44. Sol.
page 8. 9. 10.
The guests in evil bankets of old, entertaining others courteously reached a
cup of wine to others, which cup they called, Philotesia, Metonymicallie,
because it was a symbol of love and friendship, which name a man may justly
impose (...) the cup of the holy Supper of the Lord, says St^^k^us. There be
other tokens of love in the Supper it self, without the Love Feasts; yet one
token should not justle out another. We cannot be too much remembered of this
duty. To drink of one cup betokn^th friendship, but to reach the same cup also
to others expresses this duty in a more lively manner.

Defense of our fifth Argument.
KNeeling, say we, makes many communions in one Congregation, in the place of
one, without any necessity: whereas if we kept the right order, we needed
not to do so. This addition without any necessity, he leaves out, and
impugneth the rest. We set to that addition without any necessity, because some
Congregations are so populous, that they cannot communicate together in one
day. Neither do I think that any reasonable man will allow Congregations to
be so populous, that they cannot communicate together in one day. That P^rishes
should be of so large extent, and Congregations so populous, is rather to be
reformed as an abuse, then to be allowed. So the addition of that clause,
without necessity, is only made in respect of the corruption of the times,
not of that order which should be. Our Argument is grounded upon the Apostles
precept, 1. Cor. 11. 33. Where(...) brethren when ye come together to eat,
ta^(...) another. He says, that this text is alleged impertinently, because
the Apostle by these words would redress a certain abuse which was in the
Church of Corinth at their love feasts, willing the rich to ^ary for the poor.
This is just the answer of the Rhemists upon this place. He exhorts them say
they, to keep their said suppers or feasts in unity, peace, and sobriety, the
rich expecting the poor, etc. I content me with Fulk his answer. The words
that follow (if any be an hungered, let him eat at home) do declare manifestly,
that this expectation, or tarying one for another, is to receive the communion
of the Lords supper, and not to the eating of their love-suppers, which were
ch^efly to relieve the poor, that were hungry. And brings the testimonies of
Photius, Chrysostom, Theophilact, Primasius, Ambrose, and Hierome, to this
purpose. Ambrose upon this text says, He says that they must tarry one for
another, that the oblation of many may be celebrated together, and that all
may be served, and if any be impatient, he may be fed with earthly bread at
home. That you come not together to judgment, that is, that you keep not the
mystery so, as you be worthy to be reprehended with offense, Hierome or some
other under his name, upon this same place says, Because none tarried for
other, that the offering might be made in common, therefore they came together,
not unto sanctification, but unto judgment. Bilson Obedience, p. 461.
cites Augustine to the same purpose: yea Augustine affirms, that the
Apostle speaking of this sacrament, says, For which cause brethren, when you
assemble together to eat, expect one another. And again, Obedience p. 494.
he cites these words of Chrysostom, Homil. in dictum Pauli oportet hereses
esse.
Paul calls (...) the Lords Supper, which is received in common, with one
consent of all assembled together: for until all communicate and be partaker^
of that spiritual food, the mysteries once set forth, are not taken away, but
the Priests standing still, stay for all, yea for the poorest of all. The
particle therefore knitting he 33. verse to the verses preceding, makes it
manifest that this precept is to be referred to the Sacrament. See more of this
point in Perth Assembly P. A: page 44.
. He says that we may communicate Sacramentally in diverse Parishes, which I
think no other man ever affirmed. For howbeit they communicate together
spiritually, as all Christians do in the remotest parts of the world,
receiving the same spiritual food signified in this Sacrament. Yet they do
not communicate together sacramentally, but who receive the Sacrament together.
Cartwright, writing against the Rhemists, speaks well to this purpose In 1.
Cor. 11. 24.
The Apostle, 1. Cor. 10. 17. means the communion of those that in one
Congregation, or Church, eat together, and not of the communion of those that
receive the Sacrament in another Church, it is evident, for that he places
the seal of this communion in eating all of one bread, and at one table:
whereas they that communicate in another Congregation, or Church, communicate
not of one table or bread with them that are far removed, no more then they,
that celebrated the Passover in diverse houses, were partakers of one Lamb or
Kid. For notwithstanding that Christ (who is the Lamb and the Bread) be but
one, yet the outward matter of the Sacrament cannot be one but many, according
to the number of places, wherein the Sacrament is ministered. See more in this
place, and in 1. Cor. 10. 17. See also Fulk in these places. And whether only
the twelve Apostles did communicate at the first Supper, see Cartwright and
Fulk on Matthew. 26. 20. This sacramental communion of one Congregation was
expressed yet more lively, where they drank of one cup, and eat of one bread.
The Doctor himself alleged before Page 19.
a saying of Musculus, wherein he approved their form, who used but one cup to
signify the Mystery of one and the same blood, whereof all the faithful do
drink alike, yet not condemning the custom of those Churches, which use more
cups in the Lords Supper, because of the multitude of the Communicants. Neither
do I think on the other side, that others will condemn those who use but one
cup. But to place a greater necessity in one cup, then in one bread, cannot be
commended. They had of old, in some Churches, one bread, as well as one cup,
one in number, of one mass, unum unitate numerica sive physus per partium
continuationem, and not one in moral conjunction of many pieces, as many
dishes are called but one banquet. And this one mass or loaf was unbroken, or
cut in pieces till the Minister had first blessed; and for this use they had a
knife called Sacra ^a^cea, as Jewel observes. Art. 11.
Where also the Reader may find many testimonies of t^^^ one bread, whereunto
I refer. This old custom declares that sacramental communion cannot be
extended so far, as the Doctor would have it. See more of this argument (c)
P. A. page 44. Sol. p. 32.
in the two former Treatises.

Defense of our sixth Argument.
KNeeling takes away the resemblance of a (...): because ^h^t guests invited
to a banquet kneel not in the act of ba^ketting no not at the banquet of a
Prince. It is called a Supper, and in what respect it is so called, we have
already declared in the defense of the second Argument. He says that the
analogy betwixt the two feasts stands chiefly in eating, drinking and making
merry. It is stands chiefly and not only in th^se, he reasons not to the
purpose. He discourses upon the perpetual feast which a Christian has
inwardly, and of that glorious and solemn feasting in heaven, which is not
doubted of. He says, that there is great difference betwixt the spiritual
feast of the Sacrament, and a common corporal banquet; this also is not de^yed.
He says, he who entertaineth* us at this banquet is not a man, or earthly
Prince, but God and man* and his entertainment is spiritual serving for the
soul, that be gives himself to be the food of the soul; that Calv^n will
have us to think it the Supper of the Lord, and not of men. All this is true;
and has been already answered in the two former Treatises P. A. page 54. ^
Sol. page 22, 25. 27.
We acknowledge both the Giver and the Gift, but beside we acknowledge, that
honor whereunto he has advanced us, that so great a Prince will entertain
us, not as servants any longer, but as friends; and this advancement he has
expressed in the Symbolicall Supper, representing our spiritual advancement at
the spiritual Supper. He who inviteth us, it is true, is not a simple man,
like an earthly Prince, but God and Man; but that sets forth the greatness
of our dignity. The food whereon we feed is not earthly, it is true, but that
ministers matter of greater joy to us. But the manifestation of his will and
pleasure, is not to be obstued in the outward resemblance of the feast, seeing
it has pleased his Majesty to set forth his neerenesse and communion with us
by the forms of feasting. In the old Law, the Lord sat between the
Cherubines, and eat of the sacrifice (to speak after the manner of men) at his
Table, to wit, the Altar, which is so called, Malach. ^* 12. Ezech. 41. 22. and
the people eat of the remains of the peace-off^ings before the Lord at their
Tables. Christ God and Man set forth our spiritual feasting, and communion
with him in the form of a feast also yea, he took a part of the Paschall
feast and translated it to that use. Whatsoever be the excellency of the
spiritual feast the outward resemblance thereof being s^^ forth, under the
form of a banquet, ^o^ under the Law and under the Gospel, gesture competent
to the outward resemblance should be chosen; Kneeling was never used in any
nation to this purpose. It to be observed also, that their Argument smell
greatly of real presence, or of a g^n^rative force, and virtue in the
Sacraments. They speak, as if we had never received Christ's body, but when we
receive the Sacrament, and as if Christ's body were present. The holy Mysteries,
says Reply to Harding art. 1, p. 136.
Jewel, do not begin, but rather continue and confirm this incorporation. As
soon as ever we began to believe Christ's body was given to us. The Symbols when
they are added to the Word, while the Mysteries are celebrated, I doubt not,
says Contra Gardin. col. 735. edit. Basil. 1581. Tamen illa Christum nobis
praesente mag^s constituere, quant verba, aut promissiones constanter pernego.
Martyr, serve very much for assurance; for they seal the promises. But that
they make Christ more present to us, then hu Word and Promises do, I utterly
deny. Christ has set down a form, how we should conform our gesture at this
Feast, to wit, according to the sacramental manner of taking, which is common
to all. The spiritual is proper to the faithful. See more of this Argument, in
the answer to Doct. Resolutus. (g) page 22. 23. 24.


Defense of our seventh Argument.
THE seventh is almost coincident with the former. So it pleases him to divide
and rank our reasons. Kneeling is not a fit gesture for a guest invited to a
banquet; It obseureth the fellowship, whereunto he is advanced. He perverteth
our reason very perversely, against his own conscience, as if we smelled of
Arrianisme; and meant that we are equals with Christ. A simple reader may
smell in this stinking flower of his, gross popery, and in some points grosser
then in a common Papist. Does every one invited to a Princes table, think
himself equal with his prince. He gathers as perversely, as if we thought,
h^t we should not bow our knees to God the ^acher, o^ his son Jesus Christ:
when as we say, that in the very act off a^^ing, we are acting the persons of
guests, not o^ supplicants: and therefore in the outward resemblance of the
feast, a competent gesture should be used. In time of p^ayer we act he persons
of supplicants, and then a fit gesture in such an act is used. His own instance
re^^^eth himself* for the 24. Elders, who are said to ^all down before him
that sits on the throne, were seen at the first by John, sitting about the
throne, clothed with white raiments, and crowns of god; Apoc. 4. He says that
Christ did not institute this supper to resemble to us that glory which shall (
l) ^om. 3. p. 8. O sacr^m convivium, in quo Christus sumitur, recolitur memor^a
passionis ^ius, men's impletur gratia, et fu^^^ae gloriae nobis p^gnu^ datur.
be revealed. Musculus, whom he often cites, but never for the main povnt,
says, In Mat. 26. Et in nostra coena typus est futurae coe ae, ac m^nsae
Domini^^e qua Luc 22. 29 etc.
And in our supper there is a type of the supper^^ ^^m^, and of the table of
the Lord, whereof Luk 22. I app^ynt you a kingdom, as my father has appointed
me: that ye may eat and drink at my table, in my kingdom, and sit on thrones.
Iohann^^ Alasco Liturg. e^^les pereg.
often makes it figurative of that Supper of glory. The Bishop of Spalato
says the like. lib. 5. de rep. eccles. cap 6 appendice ad Naz an.
The Kirk speaks this way of that mystery, says Swarez the Jesuit, O sacred
banquet, in which Christ is received, the memory of his passion is celebrate,
the mind is fi^^^^ with grace, and a piedge of our glory to come is given to
us. Aquinas says, Part. 3. quaest. 60. a^t. 3.
that it is not only signum rememoratiuum, a sign forcommemoration of Christ's
passion, which is past, demonstratiuum, demonstrative of a present benefit; but
also prognosticum, id est, p^aenunciatiuum futurae gloriae, foretell^th our
glory to come. Yet do we not urge any such type, as i^ this supper were
ordained to that end, or as if it were typus destinatus, but only we count it
amongst typo^ factos, because Christ alludeth to it, Luk 22. 29. when he
promised another feast in heaven. But this all men do, they make it a figure
of a thing present, to wit, of the spiritual feast whereat the soul is
feeding, when we partake of the outward symboles. And when we ascrive any
signification to our sitting, we say not, that it signifies our sitting in
heaven, but a present rest, and ease of the soul admitted familiarly to the
spiritual table, where Christ dineth and suppeth with it. See more Sol. 33. 34.


Defense of our eighth Argument.
KNeeling before the sacramental elements is Idolatry. The Papist in his
kneeling intends to adore Christ bodily present by transubstantiation. The
Lutheran, by consubstantiation. The chiefest of our opposites will not have us
to be curious to understand the manner of Christ's presence. For says Hooker,
All things considered, and compared with that success, Eccl. Pol. l. ^. sect.
6^.
which truth has hitherto had by so bitter conflicts with errors in this
point, shall I wish that men would more give themselves to meditate with
silence what we have by the sacrament, and less to dispute of the manner how?
The Bishop of Rochester commends the simplicity of the ancients, who disputed
not whether Christ were present Con sub, in, or trans in the supper. What is
this but to permit every man to adore upon what intention he pleases. But let
the formalist be as free as may be, both of the Popish and Lutheran conceit,
yet he is guilty of Idolatry two ways: First, in that he kneeleth by
direction before a creature. Next, in that he does kneel for reverence of the
sacrament. As for the first, suppose it were true, that they kneeled not for
reverence of the symbols, yet there is no difference betwixt them, and the more
tolerable sort of Idolaters, Durandus, Holcot, Alphonsus, Mirandula, and the
rest in their worshipping of Images. The Doctor says here, and again page 55.
that they worship not Christ in the bread, nor by the bread, nor the bread it
self, but directs the worship of their hearts and bodies immediately to
Christ in the heaven. So says that finer sort of Papists, that the cruc^fix,
or any other image is not either the material, or formal, the total, or
partial object of their adoration, but that they direct immediately their
worship to Christ, or the Saint. He brings in Martyr, page 74. saying, Contra
Gardin. par. 3. ibi enim, and verbis, and symbolis, visibilibus ex citamur ad
Christum ipsum and agnoscendum, and adorandum.
For there both by words and visible signs, we are stirred up, both to
acknowledge, and to worship Christ himself. So says Swarez, Tom. 1. disput.
53. 54.
that the image is not in their opinion, objectum quod, the object of their
adoration, but only at the presence and sight of the image, the person
represented by the image, is called to remembrance, that the image is an
occasion, a mean and sign stirring up a man to adore the principal person
represented, and that before it he worshipeth the principal after the same
manner, as if he were present. For to direct worship by the image, is in their
sense no other thing but to direct it immediately to the principal, before the
image, as Bellarmine declares. de magnib. cap. 20.
The ^^mboles are then to the kneeler, objectum a quo s^^nificative, says
Doctor Morton, Defense page 285.
a signifying object to move the heart, and consequently the body to adoration.
No more is the image to these Papists, and their adoration is as abstract from
their object, as the kneeler is from his. But, says the Doctor, there is
difference betwixt images, and the sacramental symbols. The first, are the
invention of men, and forbidden to be used in the worship of God, the other are
Gods own ordinance, and commanded to be used in his worship: and confirms
this his saying with the testimonies of Martyr; which needed not. For we deny
not, that they are commanded to be used in Gods worship, as the worship of God
is taken in a large sense, for his public worship, and all the parts thereof,
the preaching of the word, ministration of the sacraments, etc. But they were
not commanded to be used in the worship of God, as it is taken in a strict
sense, in statu accommodato ad adorationem, for adoration properly so called,
to fall down before them, and worship Christ absent. The force of this argument
must be this. Whatsoever thing God has commanded to be used in his public
worship, we may lawfully fall down before it, and worship God by way of
adoration properly so called. The sacramental symbols are commanded to be
used in Gods public worship: Therefore we may fall down before them and
worship God. The weakness of this argument is seen in the proposition, which I
hope, they will not maintain. If the Jews had fallen before every significant
object commanded by God to be used in time of divine service, they had
continually committed Idolatry.

P. Martyr professing in Oxford at that time, when kneeling was enjoined to
pacify the Papists somewhat, who had made some stirs, pretending that the
Sacrament was profaned; was loath, being a stranger, to contradict the
prescribed order, and his great friends, who called him to that place. He was
forced afterward to defend, what he had written before, and through the
importunity of Gardener his adversary, was driven to plaster the English
adoration, with such speeches as cannot be well allowed. But even then, when
he was excusing, he was wishing it were not, and was ever warning them of the
danger of it; and l^st, after the experience of the miserable revolt of
England, he uttered his mind very freely in an Epistle to the Polonians. His
testimonies shall be cited in the own place, howbeit in a part, some of them be
already cited in the answer to Doct. Resolu^us, and therefore I proceed. When
we allege a principle out of Perkins, That und^^ the new Testament it is
idolatry to direct our worship to any creature, or place; and in special to
the bread on the Altar, or in the hand of the Minister: he grants that
Paraeus says in effect as much But says he, they speak against the Papists.
And so much the worse, say I, if others be guilty of the like fault. It is
Papistrie Superstition, and Idolatry, against which they write, wheresoever it
be. And it is Papist^y, Superstition, and Idolatry, whereunto at this present,
we oppose our selves. He ^aith that ^^elcatius writes, that Christ is to be
^^^^ed in the Mysteries. But does he not tell how? To wit, that the eyes of
our faith are ^o be lifted up to heaven: and the same say we, and do more often
inculcat^ the same, then our opposites. What is this to the prostrating of our
bodies, whereof T^^lcatius did not dream? He says they k^^^l^ not as the
Papist does, when the bread is carried in procession, or at the elevation, but
when they receive the bread: when as it is notoir that they kneel a long
space, before they receive. But let it be so, that they kneel only when they
receive, do they not kneel before it, when they receive it? What matter of the
length, or shortn^^se of the time; or the act of receiving? If it be unlawful
at any time, even for a moment, or in any act. God never ordained, that any act
of his service should be performed with any sin, but rather in case there lay
such a necessity on a man, that he cannot perform service to him without
sin, that he should omit his service. For God will not accept of sin in no
case. Next, why will they make scruple to kneel at the elevation, seeing it is
then consecrated; it is objectum a quo significative; it is in the ministration
of the Mysteries, in the time of Gods public worship. God forbid, that we see
the day, wherein he and his fellows may do this without controulement. Suppose
the Formalist did not commit Idolatry in bowing before the creature by
direction, yet he commits idolatry, in that he kneeleth for reverence of the
creature. For to kneel before a creature, because of a reverent estimation of
it, is to adore it. Because kneeling in religious worship, is ever the gesture
of adoration. The formalist kneeleth for reverence of the Sacrament, and the
sacramental actions, taking, eating, drinking. For kneeling is enjoined in the
Kirk of England for reverence of the Sacrament, as the Ministers of Lincoln do
prove in their Abridgment. Conformity with England is intended. Therefore
kneeling for reverence of the Sacrament is intended. Next kneeling is enjoined
by the act of Perth, for reverent and due regard of so divine a Mystery, as is
the Sacrament. Seeing therefore the public intent is to kneel for reverence of
the Sacrament, let no man deceive himself with his own private intent; for his
act must be interpreted before men according to the public intent, and before
God he shall be guilty, not only of idolatry, but also of dissimulation.
Otherwise he may go to Rome, and take kneeling Corpus Christi, out of the Popes
own hand. Thirdly, this private intent, must either be for reverence of the
Sacrament, or else with prophannesse, and mocking of God. For put the case he
be praying in the act of beholding, hearing receiving, eating, drinking; he
cannot, nor should not be praying all that time, and perform these actions
also, as he ought to do, but sometimes he must have his senses, the members of
his body, his mind exercised otherwise then in prayer, to wit, outwardly
beholding, taking, eating, drinking; considering inwardly, what these signs,
and rituall actions do mean. If in this time he be not praying, and yet
kneeling, he is either mocking God, not caring for what respect he kneeleth; or
else he kneeleth for reverence of these symbols, and actions, whereabout and
wherein he is exercised. But the truth is, that the short ^jaculations of the
heart, whereof we shall speak afterward, may consist with any other actions,
either civil or religious: but a set or continued prayer, cannot consist with
any other actions, either civil or religious, except the gestures of prayer
themselves, whether a man stand, sit, or kneel. If a man should be praying on
his knees, and in the mean time be eating his meat, would ye not think, that
that man were either mocking GOD, or kneeled for reverence of his meat, and
made an Idol of it. Ye will say, the case is not alike: for the one is
consecrated, and holv, the other is but common. Is not then, the kneeling at
the one, and not at the other, for reverence, holiness being the reason,
wherefore a man does kneel. As the King is the person honored ut quae, and the
Royal Dignity is the reason ut qua, whereby h^ g^t^eth that honor. So the
bread is objectum quod, the object which is adored; the holiness of it in that
it is consecrate to signify his body, is quo the reason, wherefore we kneel
before such an object. With what face then, can men say that they kneel not for
reverence of the elements, and actions employed about the elements? And this is
more then I think a Papist will do to the crucifix^: for except h^ be a praying
to Christ before it, he may well b^ck, but he will not kneel; but here he
kneeleth because he believes he is taking and eating Christ's very Body, and so
he is consonant to himself: the Formalist is not so, but misapplyeth the
Popish adoration.

It is objected first, that we uncover our head, why may we not also bow ou^
knees: I answer, that we uncover our heads in the time of this action, as we
do at the hearing of the Scripture read, which we do for veneration, not for
adoration. For in this Sacrament CHRIST'S own words are heard, and his actions,
which were divine and holy, reiterate, and therefore we owe reverence or
veneration, but not adoration for reverence, no more then at the hearing of the
scripture read. For as Chrysostom says, In 2. Tim. hom. 2. Quemadmodum enim
verba, quae locutus est Christus eade^ sunt, quae sacerdotes nunc quoque
pronunciantita and oblatio eade^ est* eademque baptismi ratio est, adeo omnia
in fide consistunt.
As the words which Christ spoke, are the same which the priests now pronounce,
so is it the same oblation, the same baptism: all things do so consist
together in the faith. And again, Homil* de proditio. Iudae. Et vox illa quidem
semel dicta est, sed per omnes mensas ecclesiae usque ad hod^rnum die^* et
usque a^ ejus adventi^e praestat sacrificio firmitatem.
that voice was once pronounced, but it gives firmness to this sacrifice
through all the tables of the world to this day, and to his coming again. This
veneration given to the word, and symbols in so holy an action, redoundeth to
God himself, or Christ the author and institutor: for they are reverently
respected for their sake, and therefore in the reverent usage of them, God is
reverenced. As he that gives alms to a poor man, is said to do it to
Christ, because he does it for Christ's sake, and honors Christ in the poor
man. But in adoration God will have no mediate creature to go betwixt him and
the worshipper, howbeit he would pretend, that it is done for his sake; as all
Idolaters do pretend. Kneeling is the gesture of the high and divine worship,
which the schoolmen call cultus latria, and never given in Scripture to any
other, in religious worship: howbeit the Papists have given it also to
inferior creatures, which is their vile idolatry. It is not sufficient to say
that in our adoration, non sistendum est in symbo^^, we must not rest upon the
symbols, when as our adoration should not light upon the Symbols, or glance at
them: for God will not have a glance of his worship bestowed upon any creature.
It is objected next, that when the meat is set on our Tables, we uncover our
heads, and do say grace. I answer, There is a relation here between God and the
meat, but not a relation of worship, either from the meat to God, as if our
worship did pass by the meat, and determine in God, or return from God, and
determine in the meat. The meat is the subject whereupon we desire Gods
blessing to be bestowed before we use it. And therefore we use the gestures of
prayer, which are used in blessing of other things, that is, we stretch out
our hands over our meat, or use the like demonstrative sign of the creature,
which we desire God to bless. Or sometimes without any such indicant sign,
we express our selves with these or the like words, Upon these thy good
creatures, etc. When persons were blessed, or consecrated, if one, hands were
laid upon that one: if many, then the Priest listed up both his hands, as high
as his shoulders, toward or over them, and blessed all together. So is it in
the blessing of the meat, o^ any other creature. There is a relation o^ a
blessing from God to the meat, but no^ of worship from God to the meat. Yea ^
say further, that in all these blessings, either of persons, or other
creatures, we never read that the blesser kneeled down before that creature,
when he blessed, but rather behaved himself as superior unto it, whether ^
was meat, or drink, or any thing else. ^ know not one instance to the contrary
in ^ the Scripture. Put the case there were, y^ after the meat was blessed and
sanctified t^ our common use, in the taking, eating, drinking; what people
never so barborous, did ever kneel? See more of this eighth Argument (u) P. A.
45. 46. 47. 48. 49. 50. 51. Sol. p. 40. 41. 4^* 43. 23.
in the two former Treatises.

Defense of our ninth Argument.
WE say, that we should eschew all show of conformity with the Papists and
idolators. But kneeling in the act of receiving the sacramental elements, we
are in show conform to the Papists. He tells us; that we are conform with
them in many Articles of our faith; we and they agree in many points of
doctrine^ but therein we are conform to the truth, and true Apostolical
Church. They possess some points of truth which we do, as a theife does a
true man's purse; or a Pi^ate the ship of an honest Merchant. He ^aith they
kneel for one end, and the Pa^ist for another. It is not the end, but the
^ite; not identitie, but likeness, whereof we ^re now speaking. If Christians
had decked their houses with Laurel, and green ^oughes upon the festival
days, whereon the Pagans decked theirs, against the 73. Canon of the Council
of Bracara, how^eit there had been no intention to honor the gods of the
Pagans, yet they could not ^ave been excused; because they decked their ^ouses
after the same manner, and at the ^^ne time. We might bring in a multitude of
Jewish and Popish Rites, if the different intention might be a sufficient
warrant for us. God made his people as unlike the idolatrous Nations as might
be. And so should we be as remote from all Papisticall ceremonies, as may be.
P. Martyr in an Epistle to the Polonians says, Loc. com. p. 1111. In ri tu
Sacramentorum administrandoru^ i^ amplectendus est, qui fuerit quam s^^p
i^^s^mus, atque a Papist^^s nugis and ceremoniol^ maxim remo^^s: and ad
puritatem, qua Christus cum Apostolis usus est, quam plu^imum accesserit.
that rite in the administration of the Sacraments is to be embraced, which is
most of all, and furthest removed from Papisticall toys, and ceremonies, and
comes nearest to that purity, which Christ and his Apostles used. Further,
we differ not in one general end, to wit, adoration, but we misapply that
which they do. For they are employed about their God, as they think, when they
are taking, eating, and drinking. And the Formalist is employed about bread and
wine consecrate to an holy use: which are mere creatures even in his own
conceit. It is conformity with all the true worshippers o^ God to kneel in
prayer: but not to kneel before the sacramental elements.

Defense of our tenth Argument.
WE say that kneeling in the act o^ receiving the sacramental elements,
suppose it had been indifferent, or lawful at the first invention of (...)*
yet seeing it has been abused, and polluted with the vilest idolatry, that
^ver was* it ought to be removed, and no monumen^ thereof left; far less
should it be restored where it has been out of use these threescore years by
past, and cast away as a menstruous cloth. He tells us that the Ark was in
the Philistimes hands: that the gold, brass, and Iron of Jericho was taken
into the Lords treasure, and other like instances. The Arc was Gods own
ordinance. The silver, the gold, the brass, were not idolatrous, but the
civil goods of idolaters. What God has instituted, the abuse of men cannot
take away: What belongs to the idolater, not being idolatrous, not having
state in the idolatrous service, if it may serve to some necessary, and
profitable use, may be retained, the abuses being purged. But kneeling has
state in Gods service, and both had, and has state in idolatrous service, and
is of no necessary use. When we say that Ezekiah brake the brazen Serpent in
pieces, howbeit it was Gods own appointed sign, and reserved for a monument of
his mercy 700. years: and that kneeling was not appointed of God: He tells
us, we are not bound to imitate the fact of Ezechias in the particular
circumstances. It is not from the breaking of it in pieces, or the manner of
abolishing it in particular, that we do reason, but from the abolishing of it
in general. So that kneeling be abolished, and altogether removed out of that
place of divine service, we shall not contend for the different manner. He
says, the use of the brazen Serpent ceased: The use wherefore it was first
instituted ceased, but the other use, to be a monument of Gods mercy, ceased
not, and might have continued longer, if it had not been abused. He says
kneeling shall have a profitable use so long as the world stands. True: but
not, kneeling before the elements of the Sacrament in the act of receiving. He
says Ezekiah brake the Idol, but reserved the burning of Incense to God: So
they have broken in pieces, the idol of Real presence, but reserved kneeling
to Christ. But we say, that he abolished the burning of Incense not simply, for
it was a part of Gods service, but burning of Incense before the brazen
Serpent. So we crave not kneeling simply to be abolished, but kneeling before
the elements in the act of receiving. P. A. p. 55. Sol. p. 38.


Defense of our eleventh Argument.
KNeeling in the act of receiving, is dangerous, being an occasion and
provocation to idolatry. He says, we called it before idolatry, and now only
an occasion or provocation to it. We call it so now in a new argument: first
giving and not granting that it were not idolatry. Next, we say, it is
dangerous, because it is a provocation to another kind of idolatry, beside
that we spoke of before, to wit, the grossest sort of worshipping the
transubstantiated bread, or Christ bodily present. He says, we are prone to
prophannesse as well as idolatry. But we should not give dangerous
provocations, either to the one, or to the other. He says, the Belgic Kirks
making a Canon against kneeling for fear of bread worship, feared where there
was no need of fear: for it has been used in the Kirk of England without any
such danger. Mr. Cartwrights ( z) 1. Part. p. 164.
report in a matter of fact, will get credit even with his adversaries. He
says, That in diverse places the people have knocked on their breasts, and
holden up their hands, whilst the Minister was in giving of it, and not only
those who received it, but also those who looked on, and were in the Kirk.
Peter Martyr after the revolt of England in Queen Mary's days, writing to the
Polonian Ministers. (a) Let the evil seed and rotten ( z) Loc. com. p. 1111.
Averruncentur sub ipsis initijs mala semina and putres radices, nam si e
principio negligantur ( scio quod loquo*) postea multo difficilius ^lluntur,
Idque providendum est ut in sacramentis, and praecipue in ^ucharistia, quam
sincerissime fiat. Ibi sint mihi creed idololatriae estifera semina, quae porro
nisi sublata fuerint ecclesia Christi puro ^ceroque cultu nunquam erit ornata.
Non contemnantur sacramenta ut inania and vana signa, rursumque non illis plus
tribuant omines quam ipsorum institutio ferat.
roots be plucked up at the first beginning: for if they be neglected at the
first (I know what I speak) they are more hard to be taken away afterward. And
this is to be seen unto, as in the sacraments, so specially in the Eucharist,
that it be most sincerely done. For there are there, believe me, pestilent
seeds of ^dolatry, which except they be taken away, the Church of Christ will
never be beautified with pure and sincere worship. Let not the sacraments be
con^emned, as empty and void signs: and on the other (...)* let not men give
greater honor unto them, then their institution will suffer.

And before that time, even then when he wrote against Gardener, he often fore
warns of the danger of it. Col. 160
Vt, quod mihi videtur, dicam, ad evitanda superstitionum pericula nolim hoc
tempore. adorationis externae signa in Eucharistiae perceptione adhiberi, utut
non ad symbola panis and vini, sed ad ipsum Christum in coelis regnantem
derigerentur. Howbeit they should direct their worship, not to the symbols, but
to Christ; yet he says there is danger of superstition in it. This was the
best that ever Martyr could make of it, for thoroughly he could never digest it,
and in that Epistle to the Polonians he is more free. Where he testifies upon
his own experience, what such pestilent seeds of idolatry have wrought. I know
what I spoke, meaning no doubt the revolt of England: and who knows if there
were the like trial, what the formalists would do. So howbeit Papists are
hardened, and increase to the feeling of all men, yet all the danger is not
seen not felt, till the time of trial come. Beza says, Quaest. 243. In ipsa
panis sumptione adoratio apud ne^sam quam sit periculosa, utpo^e quae
artolatriae occasionem aperuerit, unde tandem homines ad metousian
praecipitavit Satan, res ipsa demonstrant.
Adoration in the very act of receiving, how dangero (...) it is, it being that
which has opened an occasion to breadworship, from whence at last Satan cast
men down headlong to transubstantiation, the matter it self makes manifest.
And in his eight Epistle he says, that the event, and lamentable face of the
Kirk, does more then sufficiently teach us, how hurtful it is; and commends
these Churches which have abolished it, with no less care, then other apertas
idolemanias manifest mad idolatry. What need I cite many testimonies, when as
all the Divines in well reformed Kirks do think the same; and yet he will say,
that the Belgic Kirks feared where there was no need of fear. At last he
tells us, that a Synod in Pole made standing or kneeling indifferent, but
sitting they condemned. That Synod was a confused or mixed Synod of sundry sorts
of professors, some adhering to the Augustane confession, some to the
Helvetian, some to the Bohemian. Next, they thought that the Arrians had been
the first authors of sitting after the reformation, when as both the Scottish
and Belgic Churches at that same time, and many years before, did use the
gesture of sitting; and as worthy a Polonian, as that Church bred in his time,
Johannes Alasco, a Polonian Baron, wrote before the holding of that synod many
years more amply, and more earnestly for sitting, then any other man else, and
did put it in practice in the kirkes, where he bare office. So it was in them a
gross ignorance in a matter of fact, which was so public in the view of all
men. Thirdly, howbeit there was at that mixed Synod a great number of Lutherans,
yet they consent with the rest, that no man should be urged to kneel; because
it was neither the will of God, nor custom of the purer Kirk to censure, or
punish godly men for external rites. The Lutheran, ye may see, is more
favorable in this point, howbeit he maintain Christ's bodily presence, then
these who would seem to be of our own profession. Sol. page 36.
It is to be marked, that in this place the Doctor esteems bread-worship to
be no error in the foundation.

Defense of our twelfth Argument.
KNeeling in the act of receiving, say we, is will worship. He says it is no
part of Gods worship properly; and therefore it cannot be will worship. This
follows not: for will worship is of sundry sorts; as when a man inuenteth a
new kind of service to God, which he never commanded; or when he misplaceth
that which God has commanded, and uses it where he will; or when that,
which is not in the own nature worship, the user makes it worship in his own
conceit and opinion. Next, it follows not, because that kneeling is a sign
of worship, that therefore it is not worship properly; or because sometime we
use it, and sometime not: for howbeit it be a sign of the internal adoration,
yet is it the matter it self of external adoration; for by it we do not only
signify the affection of our heart, but also honors God, either in secret,
or before men. For he that adoreth, honors; and we honor. God not only
with our spirit, but also with our body. As the Doctor himself said before; we
direct to God, not only the worship of our hearts, but of our body: When we
pray without kneeling we give spiritual worship, without determination of
that particular bodily worship at that time: but when we pray kneeling, we
cojoyne the bodily, and spiritual worship. Thirdly, it is not the kneeling
outward only, that we call will worship, but that also whereupon kneeling does
usually attend, that is set and continued prayer. For we say, that in the act
of receiving, there is not the proper time and place of set and continued
prayer; whereof we shall entreat in the own place. To pray then, is Gods
worship, but to pray in an unfit time, to displace any other part of God
worship, is will worship.

Defense of our thirteenth Argument.
WE say, that kneeling entered into the Kirk under Antichrist: whether
Honorius was the first deviser of it, or not, we regard not as a point
material. It appears that Honorius decreed only an inclination, or bowing
of the super our bulk of the body at the elevation, but not kneeling. If he
ordained so much to be done at the elevation, it is likely that in the act of
receiving, kneeling was either then also ordained, or come in a little after.
But whether before, or after, is not the chief question. It is sufficient,
that it was not in use in the Kirk of God for a 1000. years, or before the time
at least, when the Antichrist was at his height. For there is not one express
testimony in all the ancient Writers for kneeling in the act of receiving,
except some counterfeit work; yea, not so much as in any counterfeit work, so
far as we have yet seen alleged, except in one Cyrillus. The censure of
Moulins upon these Catechismes of Cyrillus is marked and set down already in
Perth Assembly P. A. p. 60.
. I add the censure of the Bishop of Spalato, who says, De rep. eccl. li. ^.
c. 6. append. ad Hilarium ^umer. 69.
that the Catechismes which go abroad under the name of Cyrillus
Hierosolymitanus, are to him greatly suspected, for they smell of far
posterior times: and he sets down the reasons of his judgment. Beza says,
that kneeling in the act of receiving, brought in Popish bread-worship, and
transubstantiation, because, it may be, he gave some credit to Cyrillus; but it
is very likely that it came in after the opinion of the real presence, and
transubstantiation. For as I have said, there is not a testimony we can hear
of, yet alleged for kneeling, within the space of a 1000. years. And suppose
that kneeling went before the opinion of Real Presence, or Transubstantion,
yet even then it was, (and no other ways it could be) the Formalists idolatry,
preparing the way to, or rather drawing on the worshipping of Christ as bodily
present, or the bread transubstantiated into his body. For I have already
declared, that kneeling in the act of receiving, eating and drinking, cannot be
but idolatrous. Many gross corruptions were in the Kirk before the opinion of
the Real Presence, or Transubstantiation prevailed. Seeing then it came in
under the Antichrist, whether should we follow the Antichrist, and his Laws,
or Christ his holy Institutions.

Defense of our foureteenth Argument.
KNeeling in the act of receiving is scandalous to many. He says that we
ought to do our duty, though men be never so much offended, otherwise the
scandal is not given, but taken: our duty is to obey the ordinance of the Kirk
made anent kneeling, and not to offend the Kings Majesty. Here ye see first he
opponeth offending, that is greeving or displeasing the Kings Majesty, to
offending, that is, giving occasion to his brother to fall in a gross sin,
and so to distroy him, for whom Christ died, so far as in him lies. Next
suppose that ( g) Quando ipsum factu^ est tale, quod de sui ratione habeat,
quod sit inductivum ad peccandum, puta cu^ aliquis public facit peccatu^, vel
quod habet similitudinem peccati. 2. 2. quest. 43. art. 1. ad 4.
kneeling in the act of receiving the sacramental elements, were not a sin,
both in disordering the right manner of celebration, and also in that it is
idolatry; yet it is a matter of active scandal, in that it has a show of
evil, and gives occasion to our brother to fall into that evil, whereof it
has a show, to wit in bread-worship. For a man's doing is the cause of another
fall, two ways, per se, of it self, or per accidens, through the default of
another only, who is ill affected, and takes occasion to offend, even at good
things. The first is active scandal, the second is passive. In the active,
sometime there is intentio operantis, an intention in the doer to draw another
to sin: sometime there is without any such intention, only conditio operis,
such a manner of doing, that of it self it gives occasion to another to fail.
As when a man does such an act, which is an inducement to sin; as when a man
commits publicly a sin, or that which has the show, or likeness of
sin, says Aquinas. This show of idolatry that is in kneeling, suppose there
were no more, is an inducement and occasion to others to commit idolatry, and
hardneth the Papist in his idolatry; It is an active, not a passive scandal.
We must not omit a necessary duty, suppose others unjustly take offense. But
kneeling in the act of receiving is not a necessary duty, but such a deed as is
inductive to scandal.

The Doctor' says that it is a necessary duty to obey the ordinance of our
Superiors, and not to withstand the Authority. No man denies obedience to be
due to the Magistrate, or Superior, suppose others should take offense, for
that were mat^ris proxima scandali, the nearest and immediate matter of the
scandal, to deny that lege cominum, by the common law, the law of God and men*
Magistrates and Superiors should be obeyed. But lege particulari by a
particular law made of any particular matter, we are not ever bound to active
obedience; as when he commands to sin, or do any thing that has the show
of sin, or is apt to breed scandal; like as kneeling in the act of receiving
has proved by the event, or experience both of the ages before and at this
present. Neither is in this same case obedience passive denied; and so the
Moral duty of obedience is fulfilled. Daniel would not desist from opening his
windows toward Jerusalem not withstanding of the Kings edict. The commandment
of the Magistrate cannot make a thing, which of it self is scandalous, and
hurtful, not to be hurtful, but rather by the strength of his authority
makes it more scandalous and hurtful, then it would be. But none of our
Formalists will deal in earnest with the supreme Magistrate, and tell him that
he commits active scandal in laying a stumbling block before the people,
and therefore sins against the LORD. The Nurse that left a knife with the
child found dead at her return, could not be free of blame; but the Nurse that
lays down the knife, is far less to be excused. Ez^kias removed a passive
scandal, to wit, the brazen Serpent: For the brazen Serpent was not an
active scandal. Seeing therefore there is passive scandal in this kneeling,
it is sufficient cause to remove it, suppose there were no active. Will the
flattering Formalist then be instant with the Magistrate to remove, or rather
not to reinduce this passive scandal, and follovv the example of good Ezekias.
For this invention of man, has been, is, and is still likely to be abused
superstitiously, giving and not granting that of it self it were not
idolatry. But our flatering Formalists care more for their formal coats, then
the hazard of many thousand souls. Again, it is to be remembered, that our
superiors cannot free u^, or drive us from our oath taken by their own
consent. Can they make us swear the one day, and drive us to perjury another
day. Last, it is no lawful ordinance, which was made at Perth, as all our
arguments do evince* neither was that meeting a lawful and free Synod, but a
Null and pretended Assembly, which they are never able, do what they can, to
defend. The Doctor faith, he fears some Ministers do cause the people to take
offense. Surely, if they were not constant in their doctrine, and practice, as
they have professed these many years, they would cause the people take offense
at the whole doctrine, which they have taught, and to call it in doubt. Let
them alone says he, they be blind leaders of the blind. Certainly, who will
be lead by this worthy work of the Doctors, I affirm he is either a
temporizer seeking a cloak for his backsliding, or else he is blind, led by a
blind Doctor: or if he be not blind, he is blinded with avarice and ambition,
or has a part of both.

Defense of our fifteenth Argument.
HE makes us an argument of every thing, wherewith we exaggerate their fault.
We say, that Bellarmine argues a priori from the real presence for adoration*
and again, a posteriori from adoration for the real presence. And if it be
lawful to kneel at the receiving of the sacrament, it is lawful to kneel
before images. He says, We may fall down before the symbols, which we have
already refuted. He says, that the Papist worshipeth Christ, and the image
with one worship, Christ and the Eucharist as being one. What is that to the
purpose, that the idolatry of the Papist, and of the formalist, is not all one
in every respect, seeing he misapplieth only the popish adoration, as I have
said before. Bellarmine says not, that Christ and the image is to be worshipped
with one worship after one manner: for Christ is to be vvorshiped with that
high worship called cultus latriae, and that properly, the image of Christ
improperly, and per accidens; as he that adoreth the King, adoreth him and his
purple robe at one time with one worship, but after a diverse manner. So in the
sacrament they adore Christ and the species together with the same worship,
but not after the same manner: for they worship the accidents and species,
only per accidens, with that worship which they give unto Christ, as in the
coadoration of the Kings throne, or his robe, when the King is worshipped. But
the formalist kneeleth for reverence of the elements, not per accidens, but
perse, howbeit propter alium. Now to kneel for reverence is to adore with that
gesture, which in scripture is used in religious and divine worship to be
given only to God.

Defense of our sixteenth Argument.
THe ancient Kirk received not the communion kneeling. Upon the Lords day it
was the custom to stand, and that for a thousand years, even in time of
public prayer. He says, that howbeit in time of prayer they stood on the
Lords day, to testify their profession of Christ's resurrection, yet at the
celebration of the supper they might have kneeled. I ask then, was it more
needful to testify their profession of Christ's resurrection in time of prayer,
then in the act of receiving the elements. It was that day, that they observed
with such a rite, because Christ rose on that day, and not a part of the day.
The Canons and testimonies for not kneeling on the Lords day, some of them make
mention of the time of prayer, because otherwise at other times they kneeled
in time of prayer. Some without any particular mention of prayer time, or more
general. And therefore Zonaras vvriting upon the sixth Council holden in
Trullo, Can. 90. forbidding Post vespertinum sacerdotum ad altar in sabbatho
ingressum. ex co^suetudine quae servatur, nemo genu flectat usque ad sequente^
vesperam in die Dominico.
to bow the knee from the ^^ening service on Saturday, to the next evening tide
on the Lords day, says, Medio illo tempore nullo modo in genu procumbendum
esse denuntiat. It is intimate, that i^ that mean time no ways they should
fall on the^ knees. When at any time mention is made of prayer in particular,
it is because it was the proper and only time of kneeling on other days.
Tertullian likewise says, De Cor^milit. die Dominico jejunare, aut de
geniculis adorare nefas est.
that it was counted unlawful to adore upon their knees on the Lords day.
Iustiuus Martyr says, that when they were beginning this action, they arose,
and stood; and when prayer was ended, did communicate. The Doctor says, it
may be, that how beit they arose, and stood on their feet, that they
communicated kneeling. He has not so much as any appearance out of Justinius
words, and yet will answer, It might have been done with kneeling. Further,
they cannot produce (k) Hist lib. 7. cap. 8.
one testimony out of authentic antiquity, to prove that they kneeled; howbeit
we produce testimonies for standing, as the man of vvho^ Eusebius makes
mention. H^ ^^th, howbeit they kneeled not in the act ^f receiving upon the
Lords day, yet it may be that they kneeled on other days. Y^^ again it may be,
and no presumption, no proof alleged. Our testimonies are general for every
day. Eusebius example makes mention of no day in particular. Chrysostom
Homil. de encenijs. Stemus trementes and timidi demissis oculis, renata autem
anima gementes, sine voce, jubilantes cord. Annon vides eos, qui sensibili,
corruptibili, temporali and terreno regi assistunt, qua^ sint immobiles, non
loquentes, non oculos huc et illue mittentes, etc.
adds a reason, which cannot agree with exception of times. Let us stand
^embling and in fear, with our eyes cast, down, in ^ renewed soul, making a
moan without a voice, ^^^o^^ing in our heart. See you not these who stand
beside a sensible, corruptible, temporal, earthly King, how unmovable and
unstirring they are, not ^eaking, not casting their eye this way or that way,
etc. Tertullian speaking of some, who ^ought, that in case they took the
Sacra^ent upon a fasting day, their fast was bro^en: he assures them on the
contrary, that their fast was the more solemn. De orat. cap 14 Ergo devotion^
Deo obseq^^^ Eucharistia resolvi^, ^^^magis Deo obligat? Noune ^^l^n* mor ^rit
statio ^ua, s^ and ad (...) Dei st^^^^s? No^n^ acce^^to corpore Domini and
reservat* (...) qu^ sa^vu^^m est* and pa^^ici^ ^^^o sacrifi^ij and execu^^ ^ss
^ij.
Does the Eucharist loose, or rather bind your devotion? Shall not your
station be the more solemn, if ye^ stand at the altar of God? For after ye
have received and reserved the body of the Lord, both are kept whole, both the
participation of the Sacrifice, and execution of your devotion* that is, your
fasting, says Pl^ssie, (...) (...)* (...) (...). 65
^^ be that thereby it should be broken. And Baronius by S^^^^^o in Tertullian,
says, is understood (...) fasting Seeing they fasted not on the Lord day, as
ye have already heard out o^ Tertullian, it follows that they stood (...) the
^ct of receiving upon other days also. The custom of the orien^al Kirks yet
not d^^u^^d to this very same day (...) a proof sufficient, that in the
ancient Kirks they stood. As for the standing in time o^ public pr^yer, it was
not enjoined as (...) fi^^est gesture of prayer (for upon other da^^ they
kneeled in time of prayer) but only upon the Lords day were they appointed to
stand in prayer, for signification of their ^or for Christ's resurrection. The
custom o^ standing in the act of receiving, was not unversall for a long time*
for in many places they ^a^^, as well as they stood and w^^ so fa^^e in
imitation of the first Supper, that they communicated at evening, and ^om^ ^
(...) Th^^ costome was observed by many (...) day. At last it was restrained to
the anniversary day (called Coena Domini (...) the third Council of Carthage,
which ^^^^ome yet remains at th^^ day, upon th^^ anniversary day with the
Monks of S^^^^ Bennets order. Chrysostom also speaks of sitting, when he
says, Hom. 27. in 1. Cor. Et hoc facis, cum ad Christi mensam dis^ubueris, in
die illa, qua carnem eius linguae attingere dignatus es^
And doist thou also this, when thou sit at the table of the Lord, in that
day, wherein thou wast deinzed to touch his flesh with thy tongue. In Justinius
time, the Deacons dispensed both the bread and the wine, to the communicants. I
would then demand two things: First, if they pronounced any words, when they
delivered the elements. Long after Justinius time we know they did when as the
Deacon said, The blood of Christ, the (...) of life, which was an abuse
authorizing Sanguis Christ's, c^lix vitae.
the Deacon to speak to the commu^^^^^ in that act which was the duty of (...)
Minister. If they did not so in Justinius ^^me, did the communicant kneel, when
he received the elements from the Deacon, without any words pronounced. Next,
seeing the Deacons dispensed the elements to the communicants, whether before
that time in the Apostles days, did the Minister dispense the elements out of
his own hands, or not. It is not likely, if that had been their office, that
they would have transferred that office to Deacons Deacons ministering at tables
for the love feasts, were the s^on^r employed to minister to the communicants
sitting at tables in the time of the holy action. And from ministering in
common, they came to particular dispensing to every one severally. Thereafter
words were put in their mouths. At last they were made half Priests, and got
power to teach and baptize. To conclude, howsoever the ancient kirk kneeled not
in the act of receiving; their other customs, of standing, and turning the due
celebration of the supper into a form of Jewish sacrificing, as Calvin says,
Justit. lib. 4. c. 18, s. 11.
and many other corruptions, which entered in very soon, are not to be followed
of us. Not long after the Apostles days, says ( p) Justit. lib. 4 c. 17. s
43. Quam non long ab Aposiolorum aetate coena Domini tacta rubigine fuerit;
sed isthaec scilicet humanae confidentiae procacitas est, quae se continere
nequit, quin semper in Dei mysterijs ludat and lasciviat.
Calvin, the Supper of the Lord was defiled with some rust, but this is the
malapertnesse of men, which cannot contain it self, but must ever play and
toy foolishly in the mysteries of God.

Defense of our seventeenth Argument.
WE say that in the act of receiving the Saciamentall elements; we should
meditate, and consider the analogy of the sign, and the things signified;
attend with our minds, exercise our senses, because of the external Symbols,
and rituall actions, wherabout they are employed; and that it is not a fit time
of solemn prayer, and thankesgiving, and consequently that in the ect of
receiving we should not kneel. He forms his second Argument flat
contrariwise in this manner. In worshipping God with solemn prayer and thanks
giving we may lawfully kneel. In the act of receiving the Sacrament we
worship GOD with solemn prayer and thanks giving. Ergo, in the act of
receiving the Sacrament we may lawfully kneel. We deny the assumption, for the
reason already alleged, to wit, that it is not a fit time of solemn prayer
and thanks giving when men have their outward senses, and members of their
bodies outwardly, and the powers of their soul inwardly otherwise employed. He
proves his assumption, both here, and in his second Argument after this
manner: We should meditate on Christ's death; We cannot remember of his death,
except we remember also that by his death life comes unto us; we cannot
remember of this, without remembrance of our own misery. The remembrance of our
misery ministers matter of prayer: Therefore the remembrance of Christ's death
causes prayer and thanks giving: praver, that by his death we may have life;
thanksgiving, for the benefit of redemption. Ye see the whole force of his
reason depends upon the duty of remembrance of Christ's death. Now Becanus the
Jesuit says De communione sub utra que specie cap. 12.
That diverse ways we may remember of the benefit of redemption, which Christ
has conquered to us by his death. First, in participation of the Sacrament of
the Enchartist: Next, in reading the Gospel, where his death and passion is
described. Thirdly, at the sight of an Image, which represents him and his
Passion. If therefore at the sight of a Crucifixe the Doctor be put in
remembrance of Christ's death, should he blot out so good a thing out of his
mind? If not, how then can he remember of Christ's death, but he must also
remember of his misery, and the benefit gotten by his death, and so burst
forth in that very time, and act (for so does he reason) into prayer, and that
kelgiving. To say, that we are forbidden to perform that duty before a
crucifix, is to grant that we ought not, and lawfully may not bow down,
whenever we remember of Christ's death: And it we may not do it before a
ciucifix, by his own grant, we say we may not do it, when there is any other,
or the like impediment, as there are many. For howbeit we remember of Christ's
death when we are most busied in our worldly affairs, yet we must not burst
forth into lelemne prayer and thanksgiving. When the history of the Passion
is read, we are put in remembrance of his death; and yet in the act of hearing
that Hysto^e read, we must not burst forth in solemn prayer and thanksgiving,
and kneel; but he that has ears to he are ought to hear. In the act of
receiving the sacramental elements there is like wise impediments, that we may
not burst forth in solemn prayer and thanksgiving, and kneel in the very act
it selte of receiving. First, the solemn prayer and thanksgiving ^ar not
co^sill with our other employments of the senses and members of the body, and
powers of the soul. Next, we cannot adore before a creature, how beit
consecrated. For as we have said, the elements are not ordained of God to be
used in statu acccmmodato ad adorationem, to that endtnat we should pray on
our knees to God before them. When the crucifix, or any other image is
condemned in the second commandment, all other creatures for the like use are
condemned. He says, if a man fall down on his knees where the Idol is,
praying against the idolatry committed in that place, no man seeing him to take
offense: or if he will turn his face from the Idol he doeh not unlawfully. He
does unlawfully three ways. First, in that be kneeleth where he needs not to
kneel; for kneeling is not a necessary a(...)ant on prayer. Next in that he
cast th(...)lfe into a temptation wilfully; for the Lord has forbidden worship
before Images, not only public, as if it were to eschew scandal; but also
in private, because they are dangero is provocations, and enticements to
idolany. (...) a man should go and lie down in the bed with the Hariot, and
give her the defiance, he sins notwithstanding. Thirdly, in so doing, he
were but playing the fool, and offering but the sacrifice of a soole, how beit
he had a Doctors hood. But we will not insist in this instance of his, seeing
it is not pertinent to our purpose; for we are now speaking of a public and
voluntatie worship without any protestation contrary to our fact. Against
the impediment of our senses, and thoughts otherwise employed in the act of
receiving, he object* the that the mind may comprehend diverse things together,
and that the heart may be touched with diverse affections at one time. There is
no man doubts of this, it being taken in a right sense. For the soul of man
has sundry powers and faculties, which concur to the mutual help of
other: one power removing impediments out of the way, that another power may
work the own operation the more easily: one power being subordinate to
another; and the superior by some influence applying the inferior to some
work. Sundry and diverse powers of the soul, and Christian graces, are working
together in our religious exercises. But our question is not of one action, or
exercise, but whether the same power of the soul at one time, and yet durable,
work in diverse actions, and exercises. The Schoolmen dispute concerning
Christ, whether in reaching and giving the bread to the disciples, he did both
offer a sacrifice, uttering the words of consecration, as they call them, and
reach to them the bread, without any distraction of mind. They say, that not,
Physica duratione, and concomitantia metaphysica, sed mor^li tantum, that he
first uttered the words and offered, before he gave the bread in their hands,
and there was two actions one succeeding another according to physical
consideration, howbeit morally both made but one action. There is in the act of
receiving presupposed two actions, one of mental prayer, another of
communicating, that is, taking, eating, drinking. Mental prayer is either a
short ejaculation of the soul, which endures for a moment, and is called by
the Divines, transitoria vel jaculatoria oration: or else it is durable and
permanent, and is called oration continua. As for the first, there is no action
so laborious, or earnest, or worldly, let be religious, but it may consist with
it, without distraction of the soul from that action, Etiam in medio strepitu,
and clamore hominum, In the midst of the noise and clamours of men, says Hom.
79. ad populu^.
Chrysostom. For these momentanean, and transient acts require not permanent
attention. Not only momentanean petitions, but every godly motion, and
elevation of the mind, is called by the divines, by this name of mental
prayer. These require not, nor cannot, because of the action with which they
are mixed, have geniculation to attend them. For geniculation during for a
certain time must attend upon a permanent action of prayer, and not upon a
transient, This transitory ejaculation may, and does consist with the taking
of the Sacramental elements, eating, and drinking, seeing it may, and does
consist with all other our actions, even taking, eating, drinking, at our
common meals. It is the permanet action of mental prayer which we deny, can
consist with the act of receiving, eating, drinking. The understanding cannot
in one continued act be employed in a continued operation, about another action
during the same time without distraction, and consequently without unreverent
behavior.

If a man were speaking to a Prince, and mind all that time another thing, if
it were possible, it were unreverent behavior especially if his behavior were
manifested by some outward signs, and employment about other actions, howbeit
otherwise commendabl^. Our opposites must either confess, that during that
act of receiving, eating, drinking I mean not only the soul, but one power of
the soul, As for example the intellectual faculty is exercised by a permanent
operation in the action of prayer during the time of their geniculation, and
also at the same time, the same faculty of the understanding is exercised by a
permanent operation in another action, considering the analogy of things
sensible with things invisible, according as the symbols, and every rite
ministers occasion of meditation, which is the careful inquisition of the
soul. And so confess that they do both a thing unpossible, and unseemly, or
else, that one action succeeds another, and that geniculation is in respect of
both, which is idolatry. Ye suppose the first were supposed to be true and
possible, that both the permanent actions must consist together, yet were it
also idolatry. For mental prayer should be concealed at all times in public,
and ought not to be expressed by signs and gestures of prayer outwardly: far
less in the place, where it cannot be done without idolatry, or a show of
idolatry: for otherwise the three children might have bowed before the golden
image: and Nehemias, when he stood before the King.

Defense of our eightenth Argument.
KNeeling brings in a private worship, during the time, and act of another
worship, which is public. He tells us of the abuses of some places. For it
is no good, and comely order, that whilst others are communicating apart, and
the minister speaking to them, chapters should be read* and P^^lms song by the
congregation, but the mi^^^^er ought first to d^si^^ from speaking. Wala^^dus
Strabo says, De rebus ecclesiast cap 22. Cum ver^ credamus pris^^s temporibus
patres sanctos cum si^entio obtul sse, vel co^municasse ^ quod e^^^m hactenus
in Sabbatho sancto pasc^ae observamus.
We beleev, that of old ^he (...) fathers did offer, and communicate with
s^^ence; which we yet observe upon Easter Saturday. Howb^^t all cannot
conven^^ntly communicate at one table, yet when others do communicate, and reap
their private and particular fruit, the action should be so ministered, that
some public fruit may in the mean time re^ound to others who have not, or have
already communicated.

Defense of our ninteenth Argument.
WE are bound by our oath to keep the purity of our profession, both in
doctrine, and policy, and to withstand to the uttermost, all corruptions
^^^n^d by our K^^k, either in the first or second confession of faith, the
first or second ^ook of discipline, acts of parliament, and ^cts of general
assemblies, under the danger of damnation in the fearful day of judgment. Let
the temporizer and the formalist keep the next Christmas with this fearful
execration. Discipline is changed, and the form of government to another kind
of policy, and not acts of circumstances only. Our oath was not made of
matters indifferent, but of things unlawful; and suppose indifferent, yet not
as indifferent, but as scandalous, dangerous, and apt to provoke to
superstition and idolatry. The oath is handled already at large in Perth
Assembly.

Answer to his ten Arguments for kneeling
I Have no will to spend another sheet of paper on them, therefore I will be
short. To the first: All our former arguments prove this kneeling not to be
indifferent. Sitting we think not so necessary, as that there could not be a
sacrament without it, but to the due ministration of the sacrament we think a
table gesture necessary. As for the gesture of sitting, we think that the
example of the first supper, seconded with the practice following, should be
equivalent to a precept, seeing it is so taken in other matters of policy.
Howbeit to sit be not in the Categorie of actions, yet it necessarily
presupposes local motion, which is an action. And Christ commanding them in
these words, Do this, comprehended not only deeds, but also words, and the
whole form of the celebration, as if he hadisayd, celebrate this supper, is
ye see we have now celebrated it The rest of the confirmation of this Arment
has been answered in the defense of our first, second and sixth arguments, and
the two former treatises. His second and third arguments are answered in our
seventeenth argument. The sensible manner of giving in the sacrament, is one of
the chief reasons, wherefore we should not kneel; least we seem to adore the
means when we are in the very use of them. And as for the spiritual manner,
we receive these same things in the word one by one, as we do in the
sacrament, howbeit outwardly the word sound generally to the ears of all. We
uncover our heads, when the scripture is read not for adoration, but
veneration, whereby we discern betwixt it, and the voice of men. To kneel
when the word is read, is to adore in the time of another action, and
confound them, or rather to omit the duty of hearing with such attention, as
we are bound to; or else to adore the word it self, which is idolatry, or else
to mock God, and his public worship. Of this we have spoken sufficiently in
the seventeenth Argument. Yea, further, suppose it were lawful to kneel at
the hearing of the Word read, it is not lawful to bow down before a creature
in the Sacrament. To the fourth Argument: a table gesture we hold necessary to
the due ministration, suppose sitting in special be not so necessary, it
follows not kneeling is as necessary, as sitting, because kneeling is no
table gesture; the rest is answered in our 1. 2. 6. 7. Arguments. His fifth
Argument is answered in our 1. and 2. Arguments. His six^ is answered in our
first Argument. The gesture of Christ at preaching and prayer, was variable;
and therefore we may v^ry. His gesture at the Pa^chall suppers, and at this last
Supper was one, and in a rituall action requiring some competent gesture. The
seventh Argument is answered in our 16. Argument. That the Ancients changed
sitting into standing, was done without good reason: Their liberty of changing
that, and many other things in the Sacrament, drew on at last the abominabl
Mass, and the breadie God. I^ the Church now should take greater liberty, and
change from siting or standing to kneeling, as they did, it were but to proceed
from worse to worse. For there is great difference betwixt change of one
Tablegesture into another, and a change of a Table Gesture into a gesture of
adoration. The eighth Argument is answered in the 8. 9. 1^. 11. Arguments. To
the ninth, Howbeit the Lutheran thinks that Christ is not to be adored in
the bread, out of the use of the Sacrament; yet in the use and in the act of
receiving, they kneel; because of their opinion of the real presence of
Christ's body. The rest has been answered in our 11. Argument. The tenth does
not conclude for kneeling, and impugneth sitting as thoug^ urged necessarily by
us. When as we only ground upon Christ, and his Apostles sitting, and other
rites, the necessity of a Tablegesture, not to the essence of a Sacrament, but
to the due ministration of that action: that the rest of the commanded rites
may be performed, which cannot be performed with a gesture of adoration.
Sitting we think ought not to be changed, no not into standing, without some
weighty consideration of some urgent occasion, because it was the gesture of
Christ, his Apostles, and the Apostolical Kirkes; it is the ordinary gesture
of guests at feasts, and resembles best the familiar access of the soul to
the spiritual Table. As for types of our Supper in heaven, and sitting at it,
we have answered in the defense of the seventh Argument.

What I have omitted in the answer to his ten Arguments, is either not worthy
of answer, or already answered in the preceding defense, as also in the two
former treatises.
FINIS.
Page 2. in the Marg. quosque for quo^sque. page 6. at for as. page 32. obstued
for obscuted. page 60. or for are.


