THE Altar of Damascus OR THE PATTERN OF THE ENGLISH HIERARCHY, AND
CHVRCH-Policie obtruded upon the Church of SCOTLAND.

2. KING. 16. 10. 11. And King Ahaz went to Damascus to meet Tiglath Pileser
King of Assyria, and saw an Altar that was at Damascus: and King Ahaz sent to
Vrijah the Priest the fashion of the altar, and the pattern of it, according to
all the workmanship thereof.

And Vrijah the Priest built an altar according to all that King Ahaz had sent
from Damascus, so Vrijah the Priest made it, against King Ahaz came from
Damascus.

Anno 1621.

TO THE READER.
I Have drawn this pattern of the English Altar obtruded upon us, out of their
own Tables of the Hierarchy and Church policy, Muckets book, their Canons and
Constitutions Ecclesiastical, the statutes of the Realm, the admonitions,
petitions, assertions, treatises, answers and replies of those who sue for
reformation, the confessions of their opposites in their own defenses. I have
followed the order of the Tables translated out of Latin, and printed with a
letter different from the rest. I intended not a full refutation: for I
thought, to discover it only, was to refute it sufficiently, to any man of
sound judgment; saving that sometime there i^ a light touch, or poynting at
any corruption where I suspected the simpler sort might be miscarried.

CHAP. 1. Of the Kings Supremacy.
IN the Ecclesiastical policy of England generally are to be considered, The
Table.
1 Persons, 2 possessions, 3 constitutions concerning both: Persons to be
considered, are either such as have some kind of administration, or such as
have none at all. The persons that have some kind of administration, have it,
either as supreme, or not so ample. The supreme, or more absolute
administration, which is called the Kings supremacy, is to be considered, 1
generally, 2 particularly. Generally, by which authority the Prince as supreme
governor under God, can set down in all Ecclesiastical causes within his
dominions, whatsoever is not repugnant to the word of God.

By causes Ecclesiastical are meant, not only matrimonial and testamentary
causes, and others abusively called Ecclesiastical, but also these, which are
in a proper sense Ecclesiastical, subject to Ecclesiastical cognition and
jurisdiction. By the title of Supreme Governor, is understood the same power
which before was expressed by the title of Head of the Church of England in the
days of K. Henry the 8. and Edward the 6. For howsoever for removing of
offense taken at the metaphorical title of Head, it was changed in more proper
terms of supreme governor under the reign of Queen Elizabeth, yet the sense
remains still. In the first year of her reign, it was enacted and ordained,
That such jurisdictions, privileges, superiorities and preeminences spiritual
or Ecclesiastical, as by any spiritual or Ecclesiastical power, or
authority, has heretofore been, or may lawfully be exercised, or used, for the
visitation of the Ecclesiastical state and persons, and for reformation,
order, and correction of the same, and of all manner of errors, heresies,
schisms, abuses, offenses, contempts and enormities, shall for ever be united
and annexed to the Imperial crown of this Realm. And that the Queens
highness, her heirs, and successors, shall have full power, and authority, by
virtue of this act, by letters patents under the great seal of England, to
assign, name, and authorize, when and as often, as her highness, her heirs, and
successors, shall think meet and conve^ient, and for such and so long time, as
shall please her highness her heirs, and successors, such persons being
natural born subjects, as her Majesty, her heirs, and successors, shall think
meet to exercise, use, occupy, and execute under her highness, her heirs, and
s^ccessors, all manner of Jurisdictions, privileges, and preeminances, in any
wise touching, or concerning any spiritual or Ecclesiacticall jurisdiction,
within the Rea^^es of England or Ireland, or any other her highness ^^minions,
or countries, and to visit, reform, redress, order, correct, and amend all
such errors, heresies, schisms, abuses, offenses, contempts and enormities
whatsoever, which by any manner of spiritual or Ecclesiastical power,
authority, or jurisdiction, can, or may lawfully be reformed, ordered,
corrected, restrained, or amended. And for the better observation of this act,
it was further enacted, that every Ecclesiastical person, officer, and
minister, all and every temporal judge, Justice, Mayor, and other lay or
temporal officer, and minister, and every other person having her highness fee,
or wages, within the Realm of England, or any of her highness dominions, shall
make, take, and receive a corporal oath upon the Evangelist, before such
person, or persons, as shall please her highness, her heirs, or successors,
under the great seal of England, to assign and name, to accept and take the
same, according to the renor and effect hereafter following, I A. B. do
utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the Queens highness is the
only supreme governor of this Realm, and of all other her highness dominions
and countries, as well in all spiritual or Ecclesiastical things, or causes,
as temporal, and that no foreign Prince, person, prelate, state, or
Potentate, has, or ought to have any jurisdiction, power, superiority;
preeminence, or authority Ecclesiastical or spiritual within this Realm:
and therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all foreign jurisdictions,
powers, superiorities, and authorities, and do promise, that from henceforth I
shall bear faith, and true allegiance to the Queens highness, her heirs, and
lawful successors, and to my power shall assist, and defend all jurisdictions,
privileges, preeminences, and authorities, granted or belonging to the Queens
highness, her heirs, and successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial
crown of the Realm. So help me God, and by the contents of this book. The
title then of Supreme Governor in the oath is explained by the preceding
words of the statute, to which, and for observation of the which, the oath is
subjoyned, viz. that the Prince has all manner of spiritual or Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, and all manner of privileges and preeminences any way touching or
belonging to the same, which was before, or may be lawfully exercised for
visitation of the Ecclesiastical state, reformation, order, and correction of
the same, and of all manner of errors, heresies, schisms, abuses, offenses,
contempts and enormities, and that he may commit the exercise of the same to
any of his natural born subjects, whom it shall please his highness to
constitute commissioners in causes Ecclesiastical, to judge, discern, and
correct in matters of Idolatry, simonie, error and heresy, and all other
causes Ecclesiastical whatsoever. This oath of supremacy is different from
the oath of fidelity or allegiance devised of late. That requires no further
the^ to acknowledge the king to be lawful and righteous king, and to swear
obedience and fidelity to him, notwithstanding he be excommunicated by the
Pope, and to acknowledge, that the Pope, notwithstanding of his
excommunications, cannot depose kings, and dispose of kingdoms at his
pleasure. The Papist is straightened with this oath of allegiance, but not with
the oath of supremacy for fear of troubling his tender conscience. The
statute of the supremacy was explained the same year of Qu. Elizabeth's reign,
in an admonition added to the injunctions, as follows, That her Majesty
neither does, nor ever will, challenge any other authority then was challenged,
and lately used by the noble kings of famous memory, king Henry the 8. and king
Edward* the 6. which is, and was of ancient time due to the Imperial crown of
this Realm, that is, under God to have the sovereignty, and rule over all
manner of persons born within these her realms, dominions, and countries, of
what estate soever they be, either Ecclesiastical or temporal, so as no other
foreign power shall, or ought to have superiority over them. In this
admonition the subjects are made to understand, that her Majesty did not
claim power to minister divine offices in the Church, as to preach the word,
and minister the sacraments. They have been too simple, who have construed the
statute in such a sense. For no wise man will think, that kings and Queens
will take upon them either the pains, or worldly discredit to preach the word,
minister the sacraments, intimate to the congregation the sentence of
excommunication. The statute does make no mention of divine offices in the
Church, but of jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, which is, and was in time of
papistrie, exercised at visitations, and in Ecclesiastical courts. This
explanation therefore of the admonition annexed to the Injunctions, and
ratified by Parliament in the fifth year of Qu. Elizabeth, derogateth nothing
from the former statute, but only summeth it in more general terms. To
challenge no more then was challenged, and lately used by the noble kings of
famous memory, K. Henry 8. and Edward 6. is to challenge to be head of the
Church, to have all jurisdiction Ecclesiastical flowing from the possessour of
the Crown, as from the head and fountain. Mr. Fox in his Acts and Monuments
relates, that in the 34. of K. Henry the 8. it was enacted, That the king, his
heirs, and successors, kings of that Realm, shall be taken, accepted, and
reputed the only supreme head on earth of the Church of England, and shall
have and enjoy annexed and united to the Imperial crown, as well the title
and style thereof, as all honors, dignities, preeminences, jurisdictions,
privileges, authorities, immunities, profits and commodities, to the said
dignity of supreme head of the same Church belonging and appertaining: and
that they shall have full power and authority from time to time, to visit,
repress, redress, reform and amend all such errors, abuses, offenses,
contempts, and enormities whatsoever they be, which by any manner of spiritual
authority, or jurisdiction might, or may lawfully be reformed, repressed,
ordered, redressed, corrected or amended. In a rescript of Edward the sixth,
Sander, de Schism. Anglic. lib. ^. p. 227.
it is thus written to Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury. Seeing all manner of
authority and jurisdiction, as well Ecclesiastical as secular, does slow from
our regal power, as from a supreme head, etc. we give unto you power by these
presents, which are to endure at our good ple^s^re, to give and promove to the
sacred orders even of the Eldership (or as they use to speak, Priesthood) any
within your Diocie. Rastall, Bishops, 9.
Anno 1. Edw. 6. cap. 12. an act was made, That the Bishop, should be ma^e by
the Kings letters patents, and not ^y election of Deane and Chapter, and that
they should make their process, and writings in the Kings name, and not under
their own names, and that their seals should be the Kings arms. This act
repealed in the 1. of Queen Mary, was revived in the 1. of K. James. It was
objected to Bishop Farrar in the days of the same young king Edward, F^x. p.
1405 1406.
that he deserved deprivation, because he constituted his Chancellor by his
letters of commission, omitting the kings majesty's style and authority: and
that he had made collations and institutions in his own name and authority,
without expressing the kings supremacy. His answer was, that howbeit there was
some default of formalitie in the commission, yet his highness style and
authority, was sufficiently expressed in the said commission: Neither did the
said Chancellor offer to visit, but in the Kings name and authority to the said
Bishop committed. And as to the other point, that he made his collations and
institutions in his own name, not by his own authority, nor by any others,
save the kings authority, expressing in them the kings supremacy with the
Bishops own name, and seal of office. Whitgift sometime Bishop of Canterbury,
says, Page 680.
We acknowledge all jurisdiction that any court in England has, or does
exercise, be it civil or Ecclesiastical, to be executed in her Majesty's name
and right, and to come from her as supreme Governor. And again in another
place, Page 381.
The Prince having the supreme government of the Realm in all causes, and over
all persons, as she does express the one by the Lord Chancellor, so does she
the other by the Archbishops. Dr. Bancroft, who was afterward made Bishop of
London, and at last Bishop of Canterbury, in a Sermon made at Paul's Cross,
anno 1589. makes her majesty a petie Pope, Page 70.
and assigns unto her, not some of the Popes power, but all honors,
dignities, preeminences, jurisdictions, privileges authorities, profits and
commodities, which by usurpation did at any time appertain unto the Pope,
belike relating the words of the act made in the 34. Henry 8. Our Bancroft, Mr.
Spottiswood, pretended Archbishop of Saintandros, at the pretended deposition
of N. in the high commission, said likewise, I say unto you N. the king is now
Pope, and so shall be. To be supreme governor in all causes Ecclesiastical
then, is not only to be an avenger with the sword, as Bilson would make the
Jesuits believe in his book of obedience, but also to be judge in matters of
error and heresy, superstition and idolatry, and all other causes
Ecclesiastical; and, as a supreme governor, to communicate this power to auy
natural borne subject. In the Parliament holden at Perth anno 1606. where a
number of the Nobility consented to the restitution of the Bishops to their 3
estate, and old privileges, that they might get the other prelacies erected in
temporal Lordships, it was declared in the second act, That the whole estates
of their bounden duty, with most hearty and faithful affection, humbly and
truly acknowledge, his Majesty to be sovereign Monarch, absolute Prince,
judge and governor over all persons, estates, and causes, both spiritnall and
temporal within his said Realm. He is then not only governor, but judge
also over all causes. But the nature of the supremacy may be yet better
conceived, when we have taken a view of the particular rights of the
supremacy, and of the power granted to the high commission.

The Kings supremacy considered particularly, consists, either of things
which are granted only by statute, or restored by statute, as due of right to
the Royal Crown. Granted first by statute, as to receive the Annates, or
first years fruits of every Ecclesiastical benesice after the vacancie of it,
and the tenth of all Ecclesiastical benefices yearly.

These first fruits, and tenths, were the Popes due, in time of Popery: when
the Pope was cast forth, they were given to the King, and it was enacted, That
the Kings Majesty, his heirs and successors, Rastall, first fruits. 6.
for the augmentation and maintenance of the royal estate of his Imperial
Crown and dignity of supreme head of the Church of England, should yearly
have, take, enjoy, and receive, united and knit unto his imperial crown for
ever, a yearly rent, or pension, amounting to the value of the tenth part of
all the revenewes, rents, farms, tithes, offerings, emoluments, and of all
other profits, as well called spiritual, as temporal, then appertaining, or
belonging or that afterward from thenceforth should belong to any
Archbishopricke, Bishopric, Abbacie, Monastery, Priorie, Archdeaconrie,
Deanrie, Hospital, College, house Collegiate, Prebend, Cathedral church,
Collegiate Church, couentuall church, Parsonage, Vicarage, Chanterie, free
chapel, or other benefice or promotion spiritual, etc. It was further
enacted, That the said first fruits and tenths, and all the revenues and
profits thereof should be in the order, survey, and governance of the Court of
first fruits, and tenths, and ministers of the same. This Court was erected in
the Parliament begun anno 31. Henr. 8. Mark these words, for the augmentation
and maintenance of the royal estate of his Imperial crown, and dignity of
supreme head of the Church of England: for in that respect are the tenths
exacted.

Restored by statute, as of right due to the Crown, are either such as have
ever been used by the Prince within his dominions, or have not been in use,
etc. Ever in use, as the supreme right of patronage, called Patronage Paramont,
so that by lapse of time, collation of benefices are transferred to the Prince,
and no further. 2. To reap the tents of vacant benefices to his own proper
use, 3. to give license to choose a Bishop. 4. to, nominate a fit man to the
Chapter, whom they shall choose to the Bishopric. 5. to give consent to the
person elected. 6. to receive the oath of homage from the Bishop. 7. to present
any Ecclesiastical persons whatsoever, before the civil judges, for offenses
committed against the peace of the kingdom, and the Kingsroyall dignity.

Presentations and collations of benefices, whether ordinary and original, or
extraordinary, and transferred by devolution to superiors for the neglect of
inferiors, Confess. fidei ^. 35.
postponing times prescribed by law, are the inventions of Satan, broched and
dressed in his kitchen, says Beza. For when the Patron presents to a
benefice, and the Bishop gives collation, the liberty of the Church to
choose, and seek the worthiest and fittest man one of a thousand, as Job
speaks, is taken away, and unworthy men thrust upon the Churches. When there
is any defect through neglect of time, this liberty is not restored to the
Church, but her bondage still increases, till at last the power of bestowing a
benefice by gradation come to the Prince. Now to confer a benefice, is to set
a Pastor over a flock: for howsoever the person presented have received
Ordours before, yet he has not a particular charge, but is a minister, or as
they call him, a Priest, at Random, till he obtain some benefice. The Prince
takes up the rents of vacant Bishoprics, as Superiors of vassals, who hold
their lands of their Liege Lord. The Bishops See being vacant, the Diocesan
Church as they call it, has not liberty to choose a Bishop, either in a full
convention, or by their commissioners, nor yet the ministers of the Diocie, but
only the Dean and Chapter, as was the manner in time of Popery. Neither may
the Deane and Chapter proceed to the election, till first a license be sent
from the Prince, and with the license is sent a letter nominating the person
whom they shall choose, and then they proceed to the acceptance, rather then
free election of the person nominated. Notwithstanding of this imaginary and
feigned process of election, the kings assent and ratification is required.
Yea without all this imaginary proceeding of Deane and Chapter, the Prince may
by virtue of the statute above mentioned, proceed to the full election by
himself, and will do it, when he thinks good. The clergy, nobility, gentry,
communalty of the Diocie are not regarded all this time. They must accept whom
Deane and Chapter at the Princes pleasure shall recommend to them. Hence it is,
that the Church receives Pastors and Bishops from the Princes palace, and he
that can give or promise the greatest gift to the greatest Courtier, shall win
the prise. So the profane courtier sets these great commanders, Pastors
over many Churches. From Popes and Princes courts, as out of the belly of the
Trojan horse, have been sent forth asses, swine, Bears and Bulls upon the
Lords vineyard. At the last Parliament 1617. election by Deane and Chapter was
established, without the consent, yea against the acts of our Kirk. And the
first man that entered this way, I mean the Parliament way, that is, by Deane
and Chapter, was the land of Corce, who made it nice to take on a Bishopric,
till he had a lawful calling, and the free approbation of the Kirk. My Lord
elect must make homage to the Prince, and swear not only fidelity, which
every subject owe to their Prince, but also as a vassal to do homage to him
as his superior, and perform that knight service, which he is obliged to for
his temporal lands. Whereas before they held their lands in pure alms, they
were either compelled by Princes to hold in knights service, or made filthy
pactions with them, to the end they might get in many temporal lands, and for
that cause rendered themselves as vassals, selling both their own liberties,
and the liberty of Ecclesiastical elections.

Not in use, till after the Papal usurped authority was utterly driven forth
of the bounds of the English Empire. These concern, 1 appellations, 2 Canons
and laws, 3 Benefices. As for appellations interposed at the instance of any
party, 1 The last appellation is made to the Prince, and not forth of the
kingdom. 2 he delegateth judges by the Chancellor of England, under the
great seal, who shall determine in the cause.

Appellations ascend by degrees from one to one, not from one to many. No
mediate appellation is heir from one to a Provincial Synod, or National,
but from the Archdeacon, or his official, to the Bishop: from the Bishop or
his Commissary, to the Archbishop: from the Archbishops Archdeacon to the Court
of Arches, or the Court of Audience: from these Courts to the Archbishop
himself: from the Archbishop to the Court of Chancery, or to the Prince, who
by the Chancellors seal appoints judges, 24. Henr. 8. 25. Henr. 8. 1 Elizab.
So in place of gradation from parish Sessions and Consistories, to classical
meetings of the Presbyteries, from Presbyteries to Synodes of Shires, from
Synodes to National Assemblies, they must step up a Popish ladder, by
Archdeacons, Officials, Bishops, Deane of Arches, Archbishops, saving that at
the top of the ladder they find the Prince for the Pope, to whom they must not
appeal, nor yet to any greater Councels of many reformed or unreformed
Churches, or to an oecumenicall Council, whatsoever they talk of General
Councels. Now the causes convoyed by these subordinate appellations, are all
Ecclesiastical causes agitated in the Ecclesiastical Courts. Of which causes
we are to treat in the third chapter.

These which belong to Canons, or Ecclesiastical laws, concern either the
making of them, or the administration and execution of them, or the relaxation
of them. As for the making of them, 1. in that the Prince may make new laws
anent ceremonies and rites, with advice either of his Commissioners in causes
Ecclesiastical, or of the Metropolitan. 2 Synod, provincial or national, may
not be convocated without the Princes writ direct to the Metropolitan. 3.
Nothing may be treated or determined in the Synod, till the Prince first be
made privy, and give assent. 4. Nothing shall have the force of a law, till
the Royal assent of the Prince be given to those things which the Synod shall
think good to decree.

Beza in his 8. Epistle to Grindal Bishop of London, confesses, that he
trembles and shakes at the first of these heads. And in very deed it may
turn upside down the whole government of the Church, and outward form of Gods
worship, overthrow the one, and deface the other. Did not the Bishops affirm
at the examination of Barow, that the Queen might establish what Church
government it pleased her Highness? Because they dare not affirm that Princes
may change any thing that is unchangeable by divine law, therefore they make
many unchangeable things both in government and external ceremonies in Gods
worship, to be changeable, that they make a change at their pleasure, and may
bring in all that ever was hatched by the Antichrist, a Popish Church
government, significant rites, and symbolicall toys and ceremonies. For what
may a corrupt Prince, and a corrupt Metropolitan, or some few corrupt
commissioners not challenge for changeable? Nay, even rites of order and
comelines, and laws of things indifferent for a religious use, should be
considered by the lawful and ordinary assemblies of the Church, how they agree
with the general rules prescribed in the word, how they will edify the
Church, how God shall be glorified, Christian charity entertained, order and
comelines preserved. For we must not consider things indifferent only in their
general kind, but in their particular and circumstantiall use; which if we
permit to Princes, they may abuse indifferent things to the great hurt of the
Church. Synods ought not to be convocate without the Princes privitie, or the
warrant of the law in general; but if the Prince be wilful in denying his
assent, and the Church be in extreme danger, ready to be overwhelmed or
greatly disturbed with heresies, schisms, divisions, enormities, we may use
the benefit of the law: and if the law of man be wanting, yet the Church should
not cease from doing her duty, and exercising that power which is granted her
by Christ, who has also promised his presence, when but two or three are
convened in his name. Salus Ecclesiae suprema lex esto. The power of Christian
Princes in the Church is cumulative, to aid her to execute her power freely,
not privative, to deprive and spoil her of any power Christ has granted to
her. And by the same reason, the Church may entreat, determine, and strengthen
her decrees and constitutions with Ecclesiastical censures and punishments,
notwithstanding the Prince will not assent, approve, ratify the Canons of the
Church, nor confirm them by his laws, and fortify them with temporal
punishments. Prudence I confess is required in the Church, to weigh the case
of necessity, when to put this ^er power in practice.

As for the administration and execution of laws, in that the Prince may 1.
visit the Ecclesiastical state, and their persons, 2. reform, redress, and
correct them, and whatsoever sort of heresies, schisms, errors, abuses,
offenses, contempts and enormities of any whomsoever, 3. to assign, nominate,
and authorize, when and as often as it is his pleasure, such persons, being
natural borne subjects, as he shall think meet, 1. to exercise and execute all
manner of jurisdictions, privileges, and preeminences in any wise touching or
concerning any spiritual or Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. 2 to visit. 3 to
reform, correct and amend, all such excesses, or defects whatsoever, which by
any manner of Ecclesiastical power, authority, or jurisdiction, might been have
been reformed, ordered, corrected, amended, or restrained.

The Princes power in visiting, reforming, and correcting abuses, enormities,
errors, heresies, etc. may be seen, as in a lively picture, in the high
commission, to be not only a temporal power, but also a spiritual to inflict
Ecclesiastical censures and punishments. For the Prince could not communicate
this power to his Delegate Commissioners, except he claimed it to himself as
Principal. For none can transfer that to others, which he has not himself.
It must follow therefore that the Princes power is Ecclesiastical, not only in
respect of the object, and matter whereupon it works, as heresies, errors,
abuses, etc. but also formally in respect of the manner, to wit, by inflicting
Ecclesiastical censures and punishments, unless we will affi^me that
suspension, deposition, excommunication, are not Ecclesiastical, but civil
punishments and censures, which were absurd. We shall entreat of the power of
the high commission in the next chapter severally by it self.

As for the relaxation of the Canons or laws in that 1. first for ever, when
as they are altogether abrogated by the Prince. 2. for a time only, as when
he grants remission of any crime or transgression of the Canons, for times
by gone and to come, when both infamy is abolished, and the transgressor is
restored to his former state. 4. When the grace of the Canon is granted for
time to come, to any certain person upon special occasion, the cause being
tried, which (grace) they call dispensation, which is for the most part done,
when the faculties of this kind granted by the Archbishop of Canterbury upon
whom this office does lie by statute, are confirmed with the great seal of
England; or when, if he without just cause refuses, the Chancellor of
England, grants them primarily, according to the statute made thereanent.

If the Prince may abrogate the canons of the Church without consent of the
church, in vain were the Canons of the Church made. Or that the Church may not
abrogate any canon, when they find it proves inconvenient, is as great an
inconvenience. In vain likewise are canons strengthened, and guarded with
censures, and punishments, and the black marks of infamy set upon heinous
crimeswith the legal effects thereof, if the Prince may abolish the crime, as
simoniacall paction, or any the like, or else infamy arising upon the crime,
and make petent the ports of Ecclesiastical dignities to infamous men, against
the rule of the Law. Infamibus portae ne pateant dignitatum. The Prince
grants also dispensations, either primarily by his Chancellor, if the
Archbishop refuse, or secundarily confirming the faculties and dispensations
granted by the Archbishop, and so by dispensations may dissipate, and wound at
pleasure the Canons of the Church. Now the Prince may dispense by their laws
in all causes, wherein the Pope of Rome was wont to dispense of old.

The third sort of rights restored as due to the crown, which were not in use,
but since the Popes authority was driven forth, concern Benefices
Ecclesiastical, and Dioceses, in that the Prince may 1. enjoyne the Archbishop
to confirm the election, as also to consecrate the elected into the
Bishopric. 2. to unite and consolidate, or to divide lesser Benefices, or
Bishoprics, which were before united. 3. to grant a vacant Bishopric, or
lesser Benefice, in title of trust, which they call a Commendam. 4. to
translate Bishops from one Bishopric to another. 5. of two, which are
nominated, to choose one to be a Suffragane Bishop. 6. to enlarge, or contract
the bounds and marches of any Diocie.

Election, confirmation, and consecration, of Bishops were performed of old all
at one time, and that in a Synod of Bishops. If the Prince may unite, and
enlarge Diocies, and Parishes without the consent of those, who have interest,
he may make parishes Diocies, and Diocies great Provinces. The competent
flocks for Pastors should be measured by the Church who calls them, and
knows best what burden is most proportionable to their strength. Bishops
should not be translated at Popes, or Princes pleasures, as it often comes to
pass in our times. The old Canons condemn this leaping from See to See.
Ambitious and covetous men cannot content themselves, till they get either a
fatter, or more glorious Bishopric. Some are not content of one Bishopric,
except they also get the commendam and custody of another. They must not have
two Bishoprics at once by the Canons, yet heir a trick, one they may have in
title of a Bishopric, another by way of trust and custody till it be
planted. A man may not have two wives, yet he may have two women, one as a
wife, another as a Lemman. Some of them have kept another Bishopric in
commendam sixteen or twenty years, as the Bishop of Gloucester was
commendatare of Bristow. Yea they may keep this Lemman all their life time, if
it please the Prince to bestow a perpetual commendam. For commendams are not
only temporary, but also perpetual, whereas of old they endured only for
six months, or some like short space.

They enrich themselves not only with Commendams of other Bishoprics, but
also when that cannot be had, with the commendams of fat parsonages, and lesser
benefices. The Diocesan Bishop has a greater task then he can commodiously
expede, or else, because he is a loytering Lord, he must have a suffragane
Bishop to exercise some pontifical parts of his office in some part of the
Diocie, and disburthen him that far. This Suffragane Bishop is to be chosen
by the Prince out of the Leits of the two presented by the Diocesan Bishop,
according to the statute made 26. Henr. 8. cap. 14. Translating of Bishops,
erecting and changing of Bishops Sees, union of Bishoprics, enlarging of
Diocies, were in time of Popery, Papal cases, reserved for the Pope of Rome.

We say then, that the Prince, as supreme head and governor of the Church of
England, is supreme judge in matters of heresy, simonie, idolatry, and all
causes whatsoever, has all manner of spiritual jurisdiction united to the
crown, may commit the exercise and execution of the same to others also, so
that they be natural borne subjects, may confer benefices, and consequently
give Pastors to flocks, may choose Bishops without Dean and Chapter, receive
appellations, abbrogate canons, abolish infamy, and restore the infamous to
dignities, grant dispensations in all causes where the Pope was wont to
dispense, give Bishoprics and lesser benefices in commendams, enlarge,
contract, unite, divide Diocies. etc. And this he may, whether he be a
Christian or not, so that he be righteous possessour of the Crown: for all the
particulars above rehearsed, are said to be due of right to the crown, so that
true or false Christian, or infidel, male or female, man or child, have all
alike right. What is due to the Christian Magistrate, is due indeed to him, not
because he is a Christian, but because he is a Magistrate. A Christian Prince
does understand better how to use his righteous power, then the infidel, but
he can claim no further authority then the infidel, and his power is only
cumulative, as I have said, not privative. Now, whether the particulars above
rehearsed belong to any Prince whatsoever, be he true or false Christian, or
infidel, I think him too simple, that cannot judge.

CHAP. 2. Of the High Commission.
THE High Commission is called commission of jurisdiction in causes
Ecclesiastical, it is called the high commission by the favorers of it, to
strike a greater terror in the hearts of subjects.

The commissioners are partly civil, partly Ecclesiastical persons, as the
Archbishops, certain other Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, Chancellours, some of
the secret counsel, and of the chief Judges, Courtiers, Aldermen, sometime the
Lieutenant of the Tower, the Postmaster, and others making up a great number.
But it is not requisite that all these, whose names are set down in the kings
letters patents, should be present at every Session, to make up a full
judicature, but power is given to any three of the number, the Archbishop being
always one. As with us are nominated and appointed by the Kings letters
patents to the number of forty or fifty persons, Bishops, Counselors, Noble
men, Barons, Commissaries, Ministers, yet power is given to any five of them to
make up the full judicature, the Archbishops of Saintandros, and Glasgow, or
any one of them being of the number of the five always. And as with us, so
there also, grave Counselors, and Judges, and other of honorable respect, may
well be desired to be present when an incestuous person, or some other
ma^efactor is brought before them, that their countenance at one time or other
may bring credit to their great authority. But when a minister, or any other
godly professor is to be troubled for nonconformity, or writing against
crossing and kneeling, or having, or spreading of books touching reformation
of abuses, and corruptions in the Church; then are they not desired, lest being
present, they should perceive the mysteries of their iniquity, by which they
uphold their pomp, and Lordly Domination. If there be a courtier, or new
upstart that favors them, or dare not control them, he may well be
advertised to be present.

The Archbishop has power to associate unto himself any two nominated in the
Kings letters parents, whether they be Ecclesiastical or civil persons, as
for example, the Lieutenant of the Tower, and the Postmaster: as with us the
Archbishop may assume any four of the number to be his assessours; as for
example, Mr. Thomas Henderson comissarie of Edinburgh, M. John Weemes
commissarie of Saintandros, M. James Hammilton commissarie of Glasgow, and the
Chauntour of Glasgow Mr. David Sharp, or any other four Ecclesiastical
persons, or civil enrolled in the letters patents.

These three, as for example, the Archbishop, Postmaster, and Lieutenant of the
Tower, have power to inquire in all heresies, errors, schisms, contempts and
enormities whatsoever, which were wont to be reformed by Ecclesiastical laws,
and jurisdiction, in all offenses and contempts committed against the form of
their service, and common prayers, and other late statutes made anent
Ecclesiastical matters, as also seditious books, private conventicles,
adulteries, fornications, outrageous misbehaviours, disorders in marriages, and
other offenses particularly expressed in the letters patents, and all other
grievous offenses punishable by the Ecclesiastical laws of the Realm. So
with us the five, as for example, the five abovenamed, have power to take
trial of all offenders in life, and doctrine, or religion, or scandalous in
any of these, intercommoners and recepters of Jesuits, Seminary and Mass
Priests, hearers of Mass, and excommunicate Papists, (so like) recusants, or
not communicants, (so like) incestuous or adulterous persous, obstinate
contemners of the discipline of of the Kirk, and excommunicate for the same:
all ministers, preachers, Doctors, or masters of Schools, Colleges and
universities, all exhorting and lecturing Readers, for preaching, or speaking
in public, against the present established order of the kirk, ( truth) or
estate, against any of the conclusions of the bypast general assemblies of the
Kirk ( truth) specially of the acts of general Assembly holden at Perth in the
month of August 1618, ( truth) and all disobeyers of the said acts ( truth)
likewise writers of Pamphlets contrary to any of the constitutions of the
Kirk, or Printers of the said books and pamphlets ( truth) or of any other
books without license.

These three commissioners may authorize their drunken pursevant to break open
men's studies, chambers, coffers, letternes, and search if there be any books,
or writs against their Hierarchy, and the orders of their Kirk, and to spoil
at their pleasure.

These three commissioners may convent before them, any subject of whatsoever
degree, or calling, civil or Ecclesiastical, in whatsoever season of the
year, earing time or harvest, from whatsoever part of the kingdom, even the
remotest, for whatsoever offense reputed Ecclesiastical, even the lightest, to
the great detriment and damage of the subjects. So with us, may these or any
other five in the number, the Archbishop, or any one of them being always
present, summon and call before them, at the times and places they shall think
most convenient, any person dwelling within the kingdom of Scotland, and
provinces of Saintandros, and Glasgow.

These three commissioners have power to command the Shireffes, Justices, and
other officers, and subjects to apprehend, or cause to be apprehended, such
persons as they shall think good, and take such bonds for their appearance, as
they shall prescrive, or to commit them to prison. So may the five with us
direct their warrant to the Captain and Lieutenant of the Kings guard, the
Provost and Bailies of the Burgh, where they shall happen to sit, Shiriffes and
Bailies of Regalities, to search, take, and apprehend, whom they please, and to
present them before them.

The three commissioners have power to force any person convented before them,
whom they suspect, to accuse himself upon his own oath, to answer to their
interrogatories, when there is no accuser, nor article of accusation libelled
against him. He must swear to answer to that, which he does not as yet
understand, not so much as in general. And to grace this oath, they call it
the oath ex officio. If any person refuse to take this oath, he is forthwith
committed to prison. The manner of taking the oath, is by laying their hand, or
three fingers on the book, to swear by God, and the contents of the book,
that they shall answer truly to such things as shall be demanded of them; and
when the book is kissed, the oath is accepted, Page 249.
as Barow reports in his Discovery. And although the penalties of the
statutes be never so great, as Praemunire, abjuration, forfeiture of lands and
goods, and some of the offenses are limited to be tried only in the Kings
Bench, yet the party suspected shall be forced by this commission, to accuse
himself, upon his own oath, upon such captious interrogatories, as the wit of
man can devise, when there is neither accuser, nor libell of accusation, says
Nicholas Fuller in his arguments and defense of his Clients. This oath was set
on foot under King Henry the 4. at the instant suit of the Prelates, for
detecting and suppressing of those, whom that blind age called Lollards, that
is, for suppressing of the Gospel, which was peeping out of corners. The
Commons repined against that Statute ex officio, and the godly wrote against
it, as a bloody Maximinian law: They were first ordained to accuse themselves,
and then to be burnt. See Fox in Henry 4. The same oath do the Prelates, now
make a means to suppress a due reformation of their Church, Worthy Vdal, and
many more have ended their days in the prison, for refusal of this unjust,
and superstitious oath.

The three Commissioners have power to fine at their discretions, to commit to
prison for non compearance, or for contumacie in refusing to obey their
decrees, or reputed desert of their offense, and all the Iayles, Wards, and
Prisons in the land, are at their command to receive the person committed, and
sent by them to prison. So with us the Captains and Constables of the Kings
Wards, and Castles, jaylors and keepers of prisons, in burgh, or land, are
charged to receive, and deteyne all persons directed to them, in such form, as
shall be prescribed in the warrant subscribed by any five of them, one of the
Archbishops being always of the number. Neither may the imprisoned be set at
liberty, but at their pleasures. And with us also the Lords of his Ma: privy
Council, are required upon the sight of any certificate subscribed by any 5.
of the said Commisioners, one of the said Archbishops being always one,
either of fine, imposed upon any party, or upon the refusing to compeir before
the said Commisioners, to direct a summar charge of horning upon ten days for
payment of the fine that shall be imposed upon them, and to direct others
letters for denouncing persons that shall refuse to compeir before the said
Commissioners, of the which letters no suspension or relaxation shall be
granted, without a testimony under one of the Archbishops hands, of the parties
obedience and satisfaction. Howbeit with them they be thus authorized by the
Kings letters patents, to fine, ward, and imprison; yet are they not so
authorized by the statute, whereupon the Commission is founded, which I have
set down in the beginning of the first chapter. For it was ancient jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, which was restored to the Crown in that act, and meant to be
executed by the Commissioners, as Nicholas Fuller avowed in the defense of his
Clients. But to fine, imprison, and force any person to accuse themselves upon
their own enforced oaths, their being no accuser known, nor accusation
libelled, he proved, was not ancient jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, but brought
in, in the second year of ^. Hen. the 4. In the record of the worthy
proceedings of the House of the Commons, at the Parliam. holden 1610, we have
this greivance. Secondly, for that whereas by the intention and words of the
said statute, Ecclesiastical jurisdiction is restored to the Crown, and your
highnessly that statute enabled to give only such power Ecclesiastical to the
said Commissioners, yet under color of some words in that statute, whereby the
Commissioners are authorized to execute their commission, according to the
tenor and effect of your ^ighnesse letters patents, and by letters patents
grounded thereupon, the said Commissioners do fine and imprison, and exercise
other authority, not belonging to the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction restored by
that statute, which we conceive to be a great ^^rong to the subjects. And
that these Commissioners might as well by color of these words, if they were
so authorized by your Highness letters patents, fine without stint, and
imprison without limitation of time, as also according to will and discretion,
without any rules of law, spiritual or temporal, adiudge and impose utter
confiscation of goods, forfeiture of lands, yea and the taking away of limme
and of life it self, and this for any matter whatsoever pertaining to
spiritual jurisdiction. Which never was, nor could be meant by the makers of
that law. To fine and imprison at pleasure, are punishments belonging to the
temporal sword, which Christ has forbidden his Apostles, and all Pastors
their successors to use. The weapons of their warfare are not carnal, but
spiritual. Christ committed unto them keys, not swords. In very deed, there
is no crueller beast, nor more tyrannous, then a degenerate Churchman. He is
more insolent and outrageous with the Dative sword, then Princes are with the
Native. Why should they not be like their eldest brother, that bloody beast of
Rome. Degenerate Clergimen will either usurp the power of the temporal sword,
or take it when it is offered, but ^ver abuse it.

The three commissioners may inflict spiritual censures and punishments, as
suspension, deprivation, deposition, excommunication. They may call for a
Priest, command him to denounce and declare in some Cathedral Church, or other
public place, the offender to be excommunicated, but they enquire, cognosce,
decerne, and pronouuce the sentence of excommunication in their Court; and the
excommunicate may be denounced long after: and howbeit the Priest should
pronounce the sentence in judgment, yet he should be only like the dempster,
that pronounces the doom, or like the hangman, or poor slave directed by the
judge: he neither inquireth, cognosceth, nor decerneth. Yet, if ye think the
commisioners may excommunicate, because the Archbishop is present, ye are
deceived: for his power in the high commission is not Episcopal, nor
Archiepiscopall, but delegate only from the Prince, which other assessours not
Bishops, have as well as he; and by this delegate power he with his two
associates, as I have said, may inflict this censure upon any subject within
England or Ireland, which he cannot do as Bishop or Archbishop, for their
jurisdiction ordinary is limited within the bounds of their Diocie, or
Province. When Spottiswood, pretended Archbishop of Saintandros, was but a
rural minister in Calder; and Law of Glasgow, a rural minister at Kirkliston,
possessing only the rents of Bishoprics, not authorized as yet with the
office of Bishops (for that pretended Assembly of Glasgow was not yet
convocated) yet were they armed with power to decern excommunication against
any subject within our Realm, and to command the minister of the offender to
proceed against him: and if he refused, to suspend, deprive, or ward him. They
were thus armed immediately before that pretended assembly, with power of
warding, ^ining, imprisoning, suspending, degrading, and decerning
excommunication, without the consent of the Church, or approbation of the
Estates, that they might wring out of the hands of the Kirk at that corrupt,
and pretended Assembly, EpisEpiscopall jurisdiction, which many times they
protested never to usurp, before and without the free consent of the Church
obtained thereunto. O perfidious violence! What we have said of
excommunication, may be likewise said of suspension, deprivation, and
deposition: The Archbishop does not suspend or deprive, as Archbishop, but as
the Kings Delegate, Judge, and Commissioner, by which power he may suspend or
deprive Ministers out of the bounds of his ordinary jurisdiction, which no
Bishops or Archbishops may do by their ordinary power. We had a late example
in our own Archbishops about two years since: for when Mr. Spotiswood was at
Court, Mr. Law pretended Archbishop of Glasgow, suspended Mr. Blyth, and Mr.
Forrester from their ministry, which he could not do as Archbishop, for they
were neither within his Diocie, nor his province. He did it then as head of the
Commission sitting for the time, that is, by a delegate power from the King. To
let pass, that at that same vile Assembly, no mention was made of Archbishops:
and paction was only made with these men who had the benefices, for which
vulgarly they were called Bishops, that excommunication, suspension,
deprivation, and deposition, should not be concluded without the^, not that
they might suspend, deprive, excommunicate by themselves, and at their
pleasures in the high Commission, or any where else, but according to the
damnable Canons made by that woeful, but pretended and null Assembly. Farther,
the Prince may enable one or mo^ lay men with this same commission, wihout
mixture of Ecclesiastical persons. It is then an extraordinary power,
wherewith they are enabled by the Prince to suspend, depose, and excommunicate.
But the Prince has not this power himself, and therefore by no right of Gods
law may he communicate this power unto them, and it is a proud usurpation over
the Church to them to receive it, or exercise it. In the Parliament holden
1592. some acts, which were made in that turbulent time of the 1584 year, were
repealed as follows. Item, our Sovereign Lord, and Estates of Parliament
foresaid, abrogates, cassis, and annulls the act of the same Parliament holden
at Edinburgh the said year 1584. granting commission to Bishops, and other
judges constitute in Ecclesiastical causes, to receive his highness
presentations to benefices, to give collation thereupon: and to put order in
all causes Ecclesiastical, which his Majesty and estates foresaid, declares to
be expired in the self, and to be null in time coming, and of none avail,
force, nor effect. Not withstanding of this repealed commission, our perfidious
Prelates have resumed the same again without any law reviving it. But let us
proceed, and hear what is recorded in the worthy proceedings of the Parliament
above mentioned. The Act is found to be inconvenient, P. 27, 28.
and of dangerous extent in diverse respects: 4. for that every petty offense,
pertaining to spiritual jurisdiction, is by the color of the said words, and
letters patents grounded thereupon, made snbject to excommunications, and
punishment, by that strange and exorhitant power, and commission, whereby the
least offenders, not committing any thing of any enormous or high nature, may
be drawn from the most remote places of the kingdom, to London, or york;
which is very grievous, and inconvenient,

These three Commissioners being armed with double vengeance, and power of both
swords, temporal and spiritual, may strike a man at one strike, in one
sentence, for one and the self same fault, both with temporal and
Ecclesiastical censures, and punishments. They may depose and imprison a
minister at one time for one offense: they may fine and excommunicate at one
time, etc. Again, they may punish the same offense in one person with a fine,
in another with imprisonment, in the third with excommunication, in the fourth
with deprivation. For their own pleasures and discretions, and not the laws,
ar the rules of their censures and punishments. Let us see what is recorded in
the grievances. Therein (to wit in the Commission grounded upon the statute) is
grievance apprehended thus. ^. 28.
First, for that thereby the same men have both spiritual and temporal
i^risdiction, and may both force the party by oath to accuse himself of an
offense, and also inquire thereof by a jurie: and l^stly may inflict for the
same offense, at the same time, and by one and the same sentence, both
spiritual and temporal punishments. 2. whereas upon sentences of deprivation,
or other spiritual censures given by force of ordinary jurisdiction, any
appeal lies for the party grieved, that is here excluded by express words
of the commission. Also here is to be a trial by Jury, yet no remedy by
traverse not attaint. Neither can a man have any writ of error, though a
judgment or sentence, be given against him, ^^^^unting to the taking away of
all his goods, and imprisoning him during life; yea, to the adjudging him in
the case of premumire, whereby his lan^s are forfeited, and he out of the
protection of the Law.

3. That whereas penal laws and offenses against the same, cannot be
determined in other Courts, or by other persons, then by those trusted by
Parliament with the execution thereof, yet the execution of many such Statutes
(diverse whereof were made since 1. Eliz.) are commended and committed to these
Commissioners Ecclesiastical, who are either to inflict the punishments
contained in the Statutes, being Praemunire, and other high nature; and so to
enforce a man upon his own oath, to accuse and expose himself to these
punishments, or else to inflict other temporal punishment at their pleasure.
And yet besides, and after that done, the parties shall be subject in Courts
mentioned in the acts, to punishment by the same acts appointed, and inflicted:
which we think were unreasonable.

The three Commissioners may not only enquire, and try, but also judge in all
causes Ecclesiastical, in causes of heresy, simonie, idolatry, etc. It is, I
grant, provided in the statute 1. Elizabeth, that they shall not in any wise
have authority, or power, to order, determine, or adiudge, any matter or cause
to he heresy, but only such, as heretofore have been determined, ordered, or
adiuged to be heresy, by the authority of the Canonical Scripture; or by the
first 4. general Councels, or any of them; or by any other general Council,
wherein the same was declared heresy, by the express and plain words of the
said Canonical Scriptures, or such as hereafter shall be ordered, judged, or
determined to be heresy by the high Court of Parliament of this Realm, with
the assent of the Clergy in their Convocation. This provision is no
limitation, unless we will say, that without the limits of the Canonical
Scripture there are some heresies determined, which are not determined within
the bounds of the Canonical Scripture. Seeing then they may determine in all
he resies determined in the Scripture, they may determine in all herefies
whatsoever, and may affirm that to be determined for heresy in the Scripture
which is orthodoxall. If the commissioners, the Princes delegates, may be
judges in all causes of herefie, far more is the Prince himself by their
laws, and that without the provision foresaid, wherewith the delegate
commissioners are circumscribed.

These three Commissioners have power to receive appellations from other
inferior courts Ecclesiastical, like as the five with us have power by the
Kings letters patents, to receive, and disusse, all appellations made to them
from any inferior Ecclesiastical Judges, and to inhibite the said
Ecclesiastical judges to proceed iu any matter, which they shall hold to be
improper for them, wherein they shall perceive the said Judges to have behaved
themselves partially, advocating the said matters is their own judgment. See
the commission renewed Anno 1618. So they may draw to themselves any cause
whatsoever, agitated in inferior courts, not only at the appellation of any
notorious villain pretending grievance, but also by advocation, when they
shall construe the cause to be unproper, or the proceedings of the infe^iour
Court to be partial. In the narrative of the proclamation it was pretended,
that this high commission is erected to stay advocation of causes granted by
the Lords of Council and Session. That forasmuch, as it has been compleaened
by the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ministers of that his Majesty's
Kingdom, that advocations and suspensions, are frequently granted by the Lords
of Council and Session unto such, as be in process before them, and their
Ecclesiastical Courts, for offenses committed, whereby offenders are imboldned
continuing in their wickedness, and ^ing the said, advocations and
suspensions, or means to delay their trial and punishment, Therefore etc.
Complaint has been made sometime by ministers, and suit to stay advocations,
that the ordinary indicatures Ecclesiastical might proceed to their censures
without stop, but not to change advocations. Are the Archbishops and Bishops
with their associates, honester and more conscientions men, then the Lord of
Council and Session? An ambitious and covetous Clergieman, is of all men the
most vile and profane. Did the Bishops complain? why do they then advocate
causes from inferior Courts Ecclesiastical, seeing they have usurped the sway
of proceedings in Courts Ecclesiastical to themselves. Do they accuse
themselves of partialitiall proceeding in inferior courts, or handling
improper causes, and will these same men be less partial, and more
conscientious in the high Commission? If no censure can take effect without
their approbation, and appellations should ascend from inferior courts to
superior courts and Synods, wherefore will they rather advocate causes to this
extraordinary court of high commission? In England if a man stand wilfully
forty days together excommunicate, P. ^.
and be accordingly certified by the Bishop into the Chancerie, that then* he
is to be committed to prison, by virtue of a Writ directed to the Shriefe: as
it is said in the Apology of certain proceedings in courts Ecclesiastical.
And in a wr^^ de excommunicato capiendo, it is said: quod potestas regia
sacrosanctae Ecclesiae in querelis suis deess^ non debet. The ordinary lawful
courts Ecclesiastical far more then should be aided, and assisted by the
secular power, and not molested or stopped. The truth is, that this high
commission is erected to suppress the liberty of the Kirk, to maintain the
usurped power, and tyrannous domination of our perfidious Prelates over Synods
general and Provincial, Presbyteries and sessions, and to effectuate the
intended conformity, which they know they will never get done in Synods and
Presbyteries, unless the terror of this high commission were standing above
their heads. And therefore when they urge conformity, they have their recourse
to this weapon, or in Synods and Presbyteries men are terrified with the fear
of it. This is their strong castle, out of which they command, and hold in
slavery and bondage the whole city. Here the Bonifacian Prelates stoutly draw
the two swords, fine, consine, suspend, deprive, imprison, etc. But the
courageous soldier fighting the Lords battle, will not be borne down with
any such outrages, and terrors. Now as they receive appellations from
inferior courts, no appellation can be made from these three, or our five,
suppose their injustice and tyranny cry never so loud. I wonder if the heart of
any faithful Patriot, let be conscientious professor, can digest this.

These three Commissioners may appoint inferior Commissioners, from whom also
as subdelegates, they may receive appellation.

I will add out of the record of the grievances of the house of Commons these
considerations. First, out of the statute, that the said act is found to be
inconvenient, and of dangerous extent in diverse respects: for that it inableth
the making of such a commission, as well to any one subject borne, as to more.
Item, for that by the said Statute, the King and his successors may (howsoever
your Majesty has been pleased, out of your gracious disposition otherwise to
order) make and direct such commission, into all the Countries and Diocesses,
yea, into every parish of England, and thereby all causes may be taken from
ordinary jurisdiction of Bishops, Chancellers, and Archdeacons, and Laymen
solely be enabled to excommunicate, and exercise all other spiritual censures:
For that limit touching causes subject to this commission being only with
these words, viz. ( such as perteine to spiritual, or ecclesiastical
jurisdiction) it is very hard to know, what matters or offenses are included in
that number. And the rather because it is unknown what ancient Canons, or laws
spiritual are in force, and what not: from whence arises great uncertainty,
and occasion of contention. Out of the commission grounded upon the statute.
That the commisson gives authority to enforce men called into question, to
enter into recognisance, not only for appearance from time to time, but also
for performance of whatsoever shall be, by the Commissioners ordered. And also
that it gives power to enjoin parties defendant, or accused to pay such fees
to ministers of the Court, as by the Commissioners shall be thought fit. As for
the execution of the commission, it is found grievous these ways among other.
1. For that lay men are by the commissioners punished for speaking (otherwise
then in judicial places and courts) of the simonie, and other misdemeanors
of spiritual men, though the thing spoken be true, and the speech tending to
the inducing of some condign punishment. 2. In that these commissioners
usually appoint and allot to women discontented at, and unwilling to live with
their husbands, such portions and allowances for present maintenance, as to
them shall seem fit: to the great encouragement of wives to be disobedient, and
contemptuous against their husbands. 3: In that their pursevants, or other
ministers employed in the apprehension of suspected offenders in any things
spiritual, and in the searching for any supposed scandalous books, use to
break open men's houses, closets and deskes, rifling all corners, and secret^
custodies, as in cases of high treason, or suspicion thereof.

Their commission is grounded upon a statute and act of Parliament, howbeit it
agrees not with the statute. We have not so much as a show of a statute for
commission of jurisdiction in causes Ecclesiastical, and yet our usurping
Prelates tyrannize over loyal subjects, faithful Patriots, conscientious
professors, deserted by these, who will be counted fathers of the Common
wealth, left open and naked to their violent rage, without any protection of
the law, as if they were but the vile off scourings of the land. Will not the
estate in Parliament redress this proud usurpation? Shall the house of Commons
in their Parliament be grieved not only at the exorbitant power of this high
commission, but also at the statute it self, and shall our nobles, and
inferior estates not be grieved at our usurped commission? Or will they suffer
the like statute, and make the country mourn and groan for it the next day,
as our neighbors have done? Can Princes or estates give power of spiritual
censures either to lay or spiritual men? Or may they lawfully put the temporal
sword in the hand of Pastors? Or may spiritual men as they call them, accept
it: If neither can be done, how can the estates erect, ratify, or suffer such
a commission? What is this but the Spanish inquisition? Set me up this throne,
Satan shall set up Papistry, or any other religion whatsoever in short process
of time. For they sit at the rudder, and may turn religion as it pleases them,
and when they see fit occasions, and themselves to have able power.

CHAP. 3. Of the dignity and power of Archbishops in England.
THis proud name of Archbishop is not to be found in all the Scripture. It was
not attributed to any common Metropolitans at the first, but to the renow^ed
and mighty Giants the Patriarchs of Constantinople, Antioch, Alexandria, and
Rome, who were mounted far above Metropolitanes when the time was near that
the Antichrist should be mounted on horseback. But after that he was mounted,
then Metropolitanes that they might keep some proportion with their head, were
lifted up to a degree of power above other Bishops, and invested into an office
that the book of God, and the Apostolical Church never knew, to consecrate
Bishops, to convocate Synods, to receive appellations from the courts of
inferior Bishops, to visit the Diocies of other Bishops within the Privince. A
Diocesan Bishop that is a Bishop over many flocks, and Pastors of one Diocie,
was unknown to the Apostles, far more a Bishop of Bishops, a provincial Bishop,
an Archbishop having jurisdiction and power over the comprovinciall Bishops.
The Church being for the most part within the bounds of the Roman Empire, the
governors framed the government according to the form of the Empire, and made
degrees in the Church like to degrees in the common-wale. They intended not to
set up the Antichrist, but being led, partly with carnal wisdom, partly with
ambition and vainglory, wittingly and willingly did that, which brought in the
Antichrist, and so the mystery of iniquity, which began to work in the
Apostles time, wrought on still, till Antichrist come to his full strength, and
perfect age. While they were framing degrees according to the fashion of the
Roman Empire, first Bishops, then Metropolitanes, then Primates, then the
four great Patriarchs, they were but forming the second beast according to
the image of the first beast, and the Bishop of Rome, one of the four
Patriarchs, became the head. Neither was the Bishop and Metropolitan so great
in power before the Antichrist come to his perfect age, as they were after, and
have been ever since, even to this day. They hatched him, and he has rewarded
them with greater authority and power. But giving and not granting the Diocesan
Bishops to be of divine or Apostolical institution, we will in this chapter
only let you see the Archbishops unlawful superiority over them.

Persons having lesser ample administration, having either judicial
administration, or administration not judicial, either constitute by law, or
introduced without law, constitute by law, as the administration of the
ordinary Judges. They do execute it under the Prince, either in their own
name, or the name of others. In their own name as Bishops, so called, either
with addition, as Archbishops, or simply Bishops. Archbishops, (being in
England two, Canterbury and York) are considered, either in respect of their
peculiar Diocies in all respects, as other Bishops: or in respect of the whole
province, according to the place, which they hold, either in the
ecclesiastical state, or the civil. In the ecclesiastical estate, either
according to the place, which they hold common to both the Archbishops, or that
which is peculiar to Canterbury. According to the place, which is common, they
are to be considered, either as in their ordination, or as after their
ordination.

In the ordination it self, it is to be considered, that if they the
Archbishops have not been heretofore Bishops, they must be consecrated by some
Bishops. If they have been Bishops, then their election only is confirmed by
some Bishops.

Metropolitanes were chosen, confirmed, and consecrated of old, not by some,
but by the whole Synod of the comprovinciall Bishops. But the English Bishop
have no Provincial Synods to any such purpose. They have neither the
Discipline prescribed in Gods word, nor the Discipline of the old Bishops and
Metropolitanes, but the Discipline and policy which was in use in the time of
greatest darkness under the Antichrist; Here also we see a sign, that they
make the Bishop and their Priest of a different order. For a Priest, when he is
made a Bishop, must receive a new consecration. But a Bishop when he is made
an Archibishop, is not consecrated of new, howbeit he be in degree of power
and jurisdiction above other Bishops.

After ordination they are to be considered, either as Metropolitanes, or as
Archbishops, or as Primates, or as lesser Patriarchs.

The English Metropolitanes have only Bishops under them, De polit. c. ^.
yet, says Mucket, they enjoy the titles, and discharge the functions of
Archbishops, and Primates also. Metopolitans at the first were not called
Archbishops, as I have said, but the Patriarchs greater and lesser only, to
whom appellation was made from the Metropolitan. But when Metropolitanes began
to receive appellations, then this proud style descended to them also, as we
will see incontinent, that as Bishops, they received appellations. They will
extol the wisdom of the ancients in framing degrees in the Church, and yet
they themselves confound these degrees, and offices, and make one man to be a
Metropolitan, an Archbishop, and a Patriarch. Many degrees were made to the
Pope, to climm up to his throne: that being done, then was there confusion
again. We have this confusion then out of Babylon.

As Metropolitanes, 1. in confirming the elections of the Bishops of his
Province. 2. in consecrating these Bishops together with other two Bishops.

By the ancient Canons it was ordained, that all the Bishops of the Province
should assemble to the election, confirmation, and consecration of the Bishop
also, and the Metropolitan was present with the rest, as one of the number, and
moderator only of the convention, and the action was common. The Bishop of
Spalato confesses, that by divine law one Bishop has no greater right to
consecrate another Bishop then another has. Lib. 3. c. ^^ number. 1.
By their own book of orders, it is not needful, that the Archbishop
consecrate a Bishop, but an inferior Bishop may do it for him: yet a Bishop
may not suffer a minister to ordain or say hands one a minister for him. How
can they then be so shameless, as to say, that Archbishops be of divine
institution; if another may consecrate a bishop as well as he, whether it be
with his consent, or without it? Abbots, who have been but simple Priests, have
of old ordained bishops without either commission or consent of Archbishops, as
Beda restifieth. Hist. 1. 3. c. ^^.
Of the form and rites of their consecration, we shall entreat in the next
Chapter.

This, that they call consecration of Bishops, was not known to the purer
Church. The ministers chose one of their number to be a perpetual moderator
of the common actions, and called him Bishop, as at Alexandria, where he was
first hatche^, and made at the first, but only perpetual president, and this
was all.

3. In convocating Provincial Synods, according to the Kings rescript, 4. in
moderating Synods, and giving the last voice.

Their Provincial Synods are not like the provincial Synods which we wont to
have. For ours were but Synods of Shires, 4, 5, or 6 classical Presbyteries
assembling together twice in the year. But their Provincial Synod is a Synod
of the Bishops of one Province. All the Diocies of the Archbishop, and of his
suffragane, or comprovinciall Bishops which are under him, make but one
province. And seeing they have only two Archbishops, they can have but only
two Provincial Synods. The Metropolitan convocateth the Provincial Synod upon
the Princes letter, which happens very rarely. If the Prince direct his
letter to any Bishop, as sometime he has done, what need is there of a
Metropolitan. For they say, we cannot have Synods, unless we have
Metropolitanes to convocate them; and this is a chief part of his function. If
so be, why does he not exerce his function without a particular letter of the
Prince, as well as the Bishop does in convocating his Diocesan Synod. If that
be a part of his ordinary power to him, as this to the other why does it depend
on the Princes letter, and how dare a common Bishop take upon him
notwithstanding of the Princes letter, that which of office apperteineth to the
Metropolitan. Ye may see that this part of his function also, is not of divine
institution, that is so dependant and changeable at the pleasure of princes, as
they confess themselves; Neither is it requisite of necessity to have a
Metropolitan to convocate Synodes, for Synodes at the first assembled without
Metropolitanes. And in our age, both in our own, and other reformed Churches,
Synods have assembled, where there is no Metropolitan. Nay rather, Synods
would be more frequently convocated, if they were altogether removed: it is so
far from the truth, that either we cannot have Synods, unless we have
Metropolitanes, or that God has ordained in his word that they should
convocate Synodes. For we have no Synods Metropoliticall, but only Diocesan,
since Metropolitans have been set over our heads, nor yet national, but
seldom, and dressed before hand for their purpose. If it be not of divine
institution, that the Metropolitan should convocate Provincial Synods,
neither is it to moderate. And as for necessity there is none, as experience of
our own and other reformed Churches can bear witness: yea in their own last
Synod, Ban^roft Bishop of London was president. It may be that it was his
Papsticall office, which he had of old. For in the Catalogue of the seventy
Archbishops, Canterbury is made the head of all ^ur Churches, T. C. 2. Reply,
p. 644.
all Bishops sworn to Canonical obedi^nce of that Archbishop, and defense of
all privileges and liberties of that seat. Where the Bishop of London is his
Deane to call Synods, to publish his decrees, to make return of the execution,
Wincheste^ his Chancellor, Lincoln his Vicechancellour, Salisbury his
Chaunter, Worcester his Chaplain, Rochester his Crosse-bearer.

As Archbishops 1. in receiving of, and answering to appellations interposed,
and made from his Suffragane Bishops. 2. In visiting the whole Province
according to the laws and custom.

As the Bishops have suffragane Bishops under them, so the Bishops themselves
are Suffraganes to the Archbishop. They are not his suffraganes, as he is
Metropolitan, but as he is Archbishop. So that as Archbishop he has greater
authority then he has as Metropolitan. For as Metropolitan he must do nothing
without a Synod in the Dioces of another Bishop, neither by receiving
appellation, nor by way of visitation. But as Archbishop he may receive
appellations, and visit the Dioces of his Province without a Synod, as being
not only superior in honor, and prioritie of order, but also in power of
jurisdiction. And for this his greatness, which he attained unto, he bears the
proud title of Archbishop. The old Bishops knew no other but a Metropolitan,
and the Provincial Synod assembling twice in the year, to the which
appellations were made. It is troublesome, say they, to call Synodes so often,
Dioces are so large, and the Synod should be wearied to stay till all the
appellations of inferior Courts were decided. Here a notable trick. First
they say, it is needful to have Synodes, and therefore needful to have a
Metropolitan. This again they cross and say, there is no need of Synods, it
is difficile and incommodious to have two provincial Synods in the year, as
of old. The Archbishop may do all that the Synod did, receive appellations,
visit and correct the excesses and defects of other bishops, only he may not
make Canons and Ecclesiastical laws without a Synod. Neither is there any need
of new Canons, the old are sufficient. But I would demand, why Synods may not
be so easily, and so often convocated as of old? Is it because they have their
Diocies extended over one, two, or three Shires, and the province extended
almost as far as the kingdom: as Canterburies province in England, and
Saintandros in Scotland. Their wings should be clipped, their Diocies and
provinces contracted and multiplied, if that the Discipline of the old Bishops
were to be preserved, that Synods may assemble. But before they loose any part
of their extensive power, and large impire, they will rather retain the
corrupted discipline brought in under Antichrist. If they will say on the other
side, the Diocies were as ample of old, then why do they pretend to their
loytering in their own, or the Kings palaces, the distance of their Diocies.
And if they will not convocate Provincial Synods twice in the year, what is
the reason that they will not convocate once in the year, or as was concluded
in the Council of Basile, Can. ^^
once in three year? Ye may see, that this corruption is so gross, that it
was palpable in the time of most palpable darkness. Again, Synods did not
assemble only to make Canons, but also for to put order to all causes
Ecclesiastical. Farther, there is continual occasion to make new Canons, and
also to reform or repeal old corrupt canons. Neither do Synods need to stay
long upon appellations. if the Church should meddle only with causes properly
Ecclesiastical, and the ancient judicatories inferior were restored of
presbyteries, and consistories. But to meddle with tithes, testamentarie and
matrimonial matters, and to set up Archdeacons, Officials, and Chancellours,
and the rest of that ^able, it may well procure more appellations, then a grave
and godly Synod should be troubled with. When all is done, yet Canterbury
does not, nor will not take the pains as by himself to decide the
appellations. He has ^ Court, which they call the Court of Arches, wherein
sits as Judge, Camd. Brit. p. 181.
the Deane of the Arches, he has to do with appeals of all men within the
province of Canterbury. Advocates there be in this Court 16. or more, at the
pleasure of the Archbishop, all Doctors of law, two Registers, and ten
Proctors. And another Court, not unlike unto this, which they call the Court of
Audience, which entertaineth the complaints, causes, and appeals of them in
that province. So ye see, what way the ancient Synods are gone. Neither to
direct by making Canons, nor to execute them being made, should be permitted
to the pleasure of one man. And yet by the way remember, that the Prince with
advice of the Metropolitan* may make Canons also. Howbeit the Archbishop be
made up with the spoils of the provincial Synod, his grace may not attend on
the ^^scharge of the Synods care and jurisdiction. And whereas he may visit if
he please, the whole Diocies of his province, do ye think he will take the
pains himself? who then shall attend on Court and Council? Yea I suppose that
seldom he sends his Chancelour, or any other for him. By the Canons of the
Council of Trent, the Archbishop may no visit the Diocie of another bishop,
Sess. 34. c. 3. D. ^ reform
unless the cause and necessity be first tried in the provincial Synod: so
that the fathers of that superstitious and bloody council, were ashamed of the
Archbishops exorbitant power which the English retain. And the English say,
that during the time of the Archiepiscopall visitation, Down. def. ^. 2. c. 6
p. 112. 113.
whereby the jurisdiction of the ordinary is suspended, that Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction which he practices, he does exercise from, and under the
Archbishop, as his deputy. The Archbishop may with the Princes consent without
a Synod depose a bishop, says Whitgift. Whitgift. p. 440.
If bishops be such vassals to Archbishops, what slaves think ye poor
ministers be?

As Primates, or lesser Patriarchs, 1. of right, as to admit appellations from
inferior judgments immediately. 2. of the prescription of time, to have the
custody of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction during the vacancie of any Episcopal
See within his own province.

York is styled Primate of England, and Canterbury Primate of all England.
There is a fine composition of an old plea. what they may not do as
Metropolitanes, they may do as Archbishops, and what they may not do as
Archbishops, yet they may do as little Patriarchs. As little Patriarchs they
may receive appellations immediately. So where one may not make a leap from the
Archdeacon or his Official to the Archbishop, and pass by the Bishop. Yet he
may leap over him to that same man, as he is Patriarch. And as for custody of
spiritual jurisdiction, during the vacancie of the Episcopal See, that was
the right of Deane and Chapter.

According to the place peculiar to the Archbishop o^ Canterbury, 1. every
Bishop of his province confirmed by him, must exhibit to him a Chaplain, till
he provide him some sufficient benefice. 2. As Primat of all England, he may
grant letters of tuition, whereby the appellant may prosecu^e his appellation
without molestation offered to him in the mean time.

The Bishops have their Chaplains, as Princes and Noblemen have, more for
pomp and glory then for any necessity or utility. For they will be inferior
in nothing to the great Nobles, that concerns pride of life. Noblemen for
pride will not join themselves with the parish, where they are members, to
worship God jointly with them, as members of one political body, but must have
their servile and flattering Chaplains at home: yet they spoil many parishes
to entertain their beneficed and non-resident Chaplains. Will the Bishops be
behind them in this? Nay, they will be as noble in this trespass as the
noblest, and the Archbishop will lead the ring. Take this unclaime of
appellations from him, his letters of tuition are dear of a doyt.

According to the place, which they hold in the civil estate, either as common
to both, or as peculiar to any one of them. Common to both, either by the
common Municipall law, or by the grant of Princes. By the common Municipall
law, either in things Ecclesiastical, or in things civil. In things
Ecclesiastical, in which they have this prerogative, to receive and register
the probate of wills, and to grant to the party succeeding the administration
of the goods of the person dying intestate, having at the time of their death,
Bo^a Notabilia in diverse Diocies or jurisdictions of their Province.

The Archbishop has a Court which is called the Prerogative Court, Camd. Br^
181.
in which the Commissarie sits upon inheritances fallen either by intestate,
or by will and testament. By the 92. Canon of the Constitutions made Anno 1603.
All Chauncellours, Commissaries, or Officials; or any other exercising
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction whatsover, are commanded to charge with an oath
all persons called, or voluntarily appearing before them, for the probate of
any will, or the administration of any goods, whether they know, or moved by
any special inducement, do firmly believe that the party deceased, (whose
testament and goods depend now in question) had at the time of his, or her
death, any goods, or good debts, in any other Diocie or Diocies, or peculiar
jurisdiction within that province, then in that wherein the said party died,
amounting to the value of five pounds. And if the said person shall upon his
oath affirm, That he knows, or firmly believes, that the said party
deceased had goods or good debts in any other Diocie, or Diocies, or peculiar
jurisdiction within the said province to the value aforesaid, and particularly
specify and declare the same: then shall he presently dismiss him, not
presuming to intermedle with the probate of the said will, or to grant
administration of the goods of the party so dying intestat^: and shall openly
and plainly declare and profess, that the said cause belongs to the
prerogative of the Archbishop of that Province, willing and admonishing the
party to prove the said will, or require administration of the s^yd go^s in
the court of the said prerogative, and to exhibit before him the said judge,
the probat or administration, under the s^^l of the prerogative within 40 days
next following. In the^^ (...) Canon the Rate of Bona Notbilia liable to the
prerogative Court, is defi^^^ (...) amounting to the value of five pound, at
least, (...) and de^laring, that who so has not good in then, to the said
sum or value, shall not (...) to have Bona Notabilia. unless in any Diocie
by composition or custom, Bon^ Natabilia be rated at a greater sum. Here
the Archbishop has a Court for testamentary matters, which are mere civil,
and belongs no ways to a spiritual Court* which may and ought to be heard
and determined in Courts temporal.

In civil things is 1. to have the title of Clemency, which in English we
call Grace. 2. to have praecedencie before all the Peers of the kingdom.

This title and style of Grace is not granted to any inferior to a Duke, so
that they have a ^tile above Marquises* Earls, and Vicounts. They mock at
Christ's words Luke 22. 25. when they say, that Christ forbad his Disciples
only to be called bountiful or benefactors, but not to be called gracious
Lords. For Christ forbidding his Disciples to bear civil rule and temporal
domination, forbad them the styles, which were attributed unto, or usurped by
civil Princes, and magistrates, to set forth their pomp and power, and for
example he alleges that style which was given to some of the kings of Egypt,
by one style meaning all other of the like kind. For as he forbad them not
only to be like the Kings of Egypt, but generally like the kings of the
nations, so the titles of all secular Princes and Rulers, that rule Nations and
kingdoms, are forbidden. Farther, there is greater pomp in the style of
Grace, then of benefactor, and less truth: for there are none so graceless,
unclement, and cruel scoutges in the hands either of Popes or Princes to
scourge the Church of Christ. These base fellows must also have place before
the greatest Nobles in the land, and the chief seat in public conventions,
and parliaments. Canterbury must have place before the chiefest officers of the
kingdom, York before all except the Chancellor like the ambitious sons of
Zebedee seeking to sit the one at the right, the other at the left hand of
Christ in his kingdom, which they dreamed should be a glorious worldly
Monarchy. They have also trains of men to attend upon them, greater then many
Noble men, and some to bear up their tail, Abstract. 237.
which no Noble man has. Fie. The Doctors of the civil law attend in their
Scarlet robes upon Canterbury his grace, when he passes through Paul's. And as
I hear, when any come to his Chamber of presence, they must hold off their
hats, howbeit his grace be not present himself. We shall see more of their
pomp in the next chapter.

By the grant of Princes, as Immunities, liberties, etc. in their own large
fields or possessions.

Their immunities, liberties, privileges and jurisdictions in their Baronies
and large possessions, are but temporal, nothing availing to further and
advance Christ's kingdom. The particulars are best known to them, who have seen
their charters.

Peculiar to any one of them, to wit, either to York, as to have the
praecedence before all the officers of the kingdom, except the Lord
Chancellor. Or to Canterbury, as 1. to take the place before all the officers
of the kingdom: whence it is, that he is called the first Peer of the Realm.
2. to inaugurate the king at his coronation. 3. to receive the rents of the
lands, which hold of him in homage, while the heir is minor, not past 21.
years, howbeit the same heir hold other lands in chief of the crown. 4. to
hunt with his own hounds in any park within his own province.

Bishops are made Peers of the Realm, and Canterbury is the first Peer,
therefore he must have place before all the officers of the kingdom: whereof we
spoke before. He must inaugurate the king at the coronation, which is a duty
not appertaining to him: for the rites of coronation are not parts of the
pastoral charge. And suppose they were, they belong no more to a bishop then to
a minister, or to one bishop more then to another. For if there were no more,
but to make an exhortation, to conceive a prayer, and bless, a minister may do
that as well as a Bishop, or a bishop as well as an Archbishop. Bishops have
vassals under them as noble men have. William the first ordained Bishoprics
and Abbeys, which held Baronies in pure and perpetual alms, and until that
time were free from all secular service, to be under military or knights
service, enrolling every Bishopric and Abbay at his will and pleasure, and
appointing how many soldiers he would have every of them to find for him,
and his successors, in the time of hostility and war. As they became vassals
to kings and Emperors, so they labored to have many vassals under themselves,
insomuch that noblemen became their vassals. The Earls of Gloucester had lands
of the Bishop of Canterbury on this condition, that they should be his
stewards at his installing. And howbeit the king should have the custody and
ward of the lands of those who hold of him in chief for knight service, till
the perfect age of the heir, yet the lands which hold of the Archb* ar
excepted. Pastors and ministers should be content of their stipends, not
meddling with superiority over vassals, personal or real wards. Their bishops
have parks and ponds, besides their palaces, for hunting and fishing.
Canterburies grace may hunt in any park within his own province, that is
through al England except 4. diocies, a pastime condemned by the ancient canons
in clergy men. Hierome says, he never read of a hunter that was a holy man.

B^ s^atu^e, as to grant the Grace of the Canons, and other Ecclesiastical
laws, through all the Dominions of the English Empire, which (grac^s) they
call Faculties.

C^nterburie has among other courts, a court, which they call the court of
Faculties, wherein there is appointed a chief President, ^md. Brit. 181.
who hears and ^onsidereth of their grievances and requests, that are
petitioners for some moderation, and easement of the Ecclesiastical law,
sometime, as they pretend, overstrict and rigorous and a Register beside, who
records the dispensa^ions. The Laws of God may not be dispensed with. If
Ecclesiastical constitutions, which are made by men only be too strict, their
rigor may be relaxed, when and where there is a necessity. This necessity
ought to be considered by the Ecclesiastical Senate, and not reserved to the
Ar^hbishop of Canterburies grace, to be given, or (...) sold at his pleasure.
For in this court of Fa^ulties, dispensations are set to open sale, as at Rome
as the admonition to the Parliament does ^ port* If there be a just cause to
remit of the rigor of the Ecclesiastical law then eas^ment should be granted
to the petitioner without money. P. 3.
If ^here be not a relevant cause, then there should be no dispensation
granted at all let be for money. So this power to dispense with Ecclesiastical
laws, is to dissipate the Canons of the Church, and to wound th^se which are
yet whole and sound.

I^ was enacted, 25. Henr. 8. that the Archbishop of Canterbury for the time
being, ^stal Romans
and his successors, shall have power and authority from time to time, by
their discretions to give, grant, and dispense by an instrument under the seal
of the said Archbishop, all manner such licenses, dispensations, compositions,
faculties, grants, delegacies, instruments, and all other writings, as
heretofore have been used, and accustomed to be had and obtained at the Sea of
Rome, or any person, or persons by authority of he same. Provided always,
that no manner of dispensitions, 2. Reply. ^. part, p. 97.
licenses, faculties, or other res^ri^ts, or writings hereafter to be granted
by the Archbishop, or his commissary, being of such importance, that the tax
for the expedition thereof at Rome, extended to the sum of four pounds, or
above, shall in any wise be put in execution, till the same lic^nce,
dispensation, faculty, rescript, or other writing, of what name or nature
soever it be, be first confirmed by his (...), has heirs, or successors, kings
of the Realm, under the great seal, and enrolled in the Chauncerie in a Roll
by a Clarke to be appointed for the same. It was therefore justly written by
Mr. Cartwright that the Archbishop (saving profession of obedience to the King)
was made Pope in the Bishop of Romes place, and that he exercises untollerable
and filthy Merchandise.

These faculties are to be considered, either particularly, or generally, 1.
particularly, such as are often granted after summary examination and trial of
the cause, as 1. to appoint public Notaries, 2. to give license to the sickly,
women traveling with child, aged and diseased persons, to eat flesh on
forbidden days, for some political respects, 3. to solemnize matrimony,
howbeit thrice open publication of the Banne^ has not preceeded. 4. In cases
which belong to benefices.

Notaries, which are called Registers, are appointed by Bishops, and
Archdeacons respectively. Public Notaries appointed by Archbishops, serve, as
I suppose; the Diocies of the whole province. Seeing they have such manner of
courts and officers under them, depending wholly on them, it is no wonder, that
they have this prerogative engrossed in their hands also amongst many more* If
he grant license to eat flesh only for political reasons, wherefore are the
same fasting days, or days of abstinence from flesh observed, which the
Papists observe? wherefore does the curate in time of divine service make
public forewarning of these days, as they are to fall in the week following?
and why are not politic judges appointed to grant such licenses? It is the old
superstition then, not new policy, which is respected. Do none obtain
licenses but the diseased, aged, etc. and obtain they licenses without money?
The 101. canon of their last constitutions, gives power to the commissarie for
faculties, to grant license for marriage without 3* proclamations preceding,
only to persons of good state and quality, as if persons of mean estate or
quality, could not have as necessary a cause to seek relaxation of 3
proclamations. But if there be any quantity of money in the purse, the person
is of sufficient quality. By these licenses, children are sometime married
without consent of their parents, and sometime the heir is carried away, and
married without further notice. Precontracts are deluded, persons having
interest which might take exception, not being publicly warned: a way given to
clandestine mariages^ the congregation mocked, when two of their members are
joined in marriage, they know not where nor when. As for taking caution and
security to make good the conditions required of of them, yet says the
defender of the last petion for reformation, Page 227.
that licenses have been abused, as much as before, and that the strength of
the canon depends upon the bonds of the sureties, which may be knights of the
post, and men of no worth.

In causes which concern benefices, as 1. to abolish irregularitie, not
wilfully contracted.

Irregularitie is an impediment of the Canon law, which inableth a man to take
on orders, or to minister into them, and consequently to be admitted to
benefices, or to enjoy them. All the Popish irregularities, which are not
expresselie taken away, either by their late canons, or statutes of the Realm,
stand still in force with them and they may observe them, as they please. To
sit in judgment upon blood, was irregularitie of old, yet these Bishops, make
no scruple of it, or any other thing may serve to advance their greatness. That
which was reckoned amongst irregularities, but was in very deed a divine, and
not a Canonical impediment brought in by man, they made least account of, to
wit, the irregularity of apostasy. For they allowed Popish massemongers, men
for all seasons, K. Henry's Priests, K. Edwards Priests. Qu. Mary's Priests to
be preachers of the Gospel in the days of Qu. Elizabeth, as the authors of
the admonition to the Parliament do testify. When they would cover their
Apostasy with Peter's fall Mr. Cartwright makes this distinction. Peter denied
Christ cast down, ^. Reply, 2. part. p. 178. 179.
or in time of his humility, they have denied him risen from the dead, ascended
up into heaven sitting at the right hand of God in glory: Peter did it to save
his skin, they to save their honor: he for his life, they for their living. I
speak favorably: for otherwise I might say of some* that they did it not
only to save that which they had, (...) to get more unto it. Peter did it
privately, and (...) corner, they in set and open judgment: he only denied
that he knew him, or that he was one of his Disciples, but spoke no evil of
him: they affirmed, that they knew the Gospel to be naught, and so spoke
evil both of Christ and it: he did it suddenly, and at a push* they
deliberatly, and with time given to consult: he although he forsook his master
Christ, yet never served the Scribes and Pharisees, which were the enemies of
Christ; they did not only forsake Christ, but served in the courts of his
sworn enemy the Antichrist. And again, they at one clap have renounced him
with mouth, P. 178.
and subscribed against him with their hand, and where he forsware him once,
they have forsworn him often, according to the member of Dioceses, where they
have their livings, and diversity of times, wherein such things have been
required. Peter was called immediately by Christ himself, and not by man, and
after his repentance comforted, and confirmed in his Apostleship. Christ was
the Lawmakers, and might dispense with his own law. But the Levits which went
astray after idols, shall not come near unto me to do the office of a Priest
unto me, nor ^om^ near to any of my holy things in the most holy place: but
they shall bear their shame, and their abominations, which they have
committed, Ezekiel. 44. 13. Notwithstanding of their repentance, they were not
restored to the Priesthood again. If they do unfainedly repent, they may be
received again into the besome of the Church: but because of the skar which
remains after the deep wound of their fearful Apostasy, they ought not to
be restored to their degree of office in the Church. Men proving inconstant in
the faith, are not fit to be made captains in the Lords armies. Bastardy is
no true irregularity, or just impediment to enable a man to receive orders. If
it were not too tedious to run over and apply all sorts of irregularities, we
should find an huge number of irregulars by the Canon law, amongst their
Clergy men.

2 To abolish likewise simoniacall suing for promotion to benefices, or orders.

Their Simonie cannot be expressed more vively, nor contrived more succinctly,
then it is already by Mr. Brightman on the Revelation. But specially their
beggarlinesse in suing for livings, Cap. 3. v. 1^
is notorious. For let us take a view, and make a general muster as it were of
the whole Clergy, and if you will let us begin it the basest underlings. The
Curats, as they call them, are both in very deed, and in all men's account, a
company of beggarly follows. In whom a man may see that verified which was
threatened against the family of Esi; men bowing themselves to the ground for a
piece of silver, or a morsel of bread, and craving to be put into one of the
Priests offices, that he may have a snap at a crust of bread, 1. Sam. 3. 36.
Now for the rest, those that by means of their more full purses, walk more
lustily, such as we call sturdy beggars, what running up and down is there
among them, what bribing, what importunat and impudent begging, what flattering
offers do they make of all their obeisance, and dutiful complements, that they
may come by these Ecclesiastical promotions? You may see many of them, that
post up to the Court, or to the house of the right honorable, the Lord keeper
of the great seal: for these two places are like to the beautiful gate of
Salomons temple, Act. 3. 2 Men come in this way apace, thich and threefold, and
they are in great hope to carry away some good relief. Others there are that
become followers of Noblemen, and P^eres of the land, whose Chaplains they
become, either household or retainers, as I may call them, that live under their
protection, for what end, trow ye? Even for this and no other, that as soon
as any benefit, as they call it, shall fall void, they might enjoy it by the
Lords gift. And does not this, I pray thee, see to be an honest way to get a
Church living, no such base and beggarly one as you speak of? But is not this
currying of favor mere beggary? Is it any whit a less filthy thing to come
to a rectorie (or Personage) by favor then by money? If we will judge
indifferently, it is all one fault to creep in, whether it be by bribing and
simonie, or by fawning and flattery. The rest of the rout in the Country are
diligent in attending the common sort of Patrones, whose thresholds they lie
watching at, whose wives they brave and court, as if they were their
mistresses, whose children they cogg with, whose servants they allure with
fair words, and promises, to be their spokesmen, and in every place and point
they play the parts of miserable beggars. Some there are that beg more
craftily, like to those that sit in the high ways, or in places where two
ways meet, and there they offer pilled rods to passengers, to get a piece of
money^ therewith as it were a pennieworth for a penny. So do men make way for
their suits, by large giving of money in hand, or else by compacting to give
some of their yearly tithes for a gratification. But some man will say, all
this is not the corruption of the Laws, but the corruptions of men. Nay
surely, as long as that manner of conferring Ecclesiastical charges takes
place, which has been in use among us to this day, there can be no remedy
applied to cure or prevent this beggarliness. Do we not sufficiently find it
to be true in experience? In the late Parliament, Laws were enacted severely
against it. But what came of that? nothing truly, but that it made men deal
more closely and cunningly, to cosen the Law. We must not think to do any
good with our laws, where Christ's laws are not observed. But to proceed,
whence once the living is by beggerie obtained from the Patron, what a deal of
begging work is there to come, for those Sir Iohnlack latins, that
institution might be had from the Bishops. Here he must supplicate, not only
to the right reverend Bishops, but to Master Examiner, to my Lords Groom of his
Chamber, his Register, the Yeoman of his Butterie, and Larder, yea, the
meanest, that belongs unto him. Not that want of Latin* and learning will
keep him from entrance into his benefice; but that he that has need of money
for dispatch, or speech with my Lord, or the like, must fee the servants the
better, whose gain comes trowling in this way. There is no Castle so
defenced which a Latinelesse ass laden with golden mettell, may not scale and
conquer. Neither is there only almost so unfit, that has the repulse, but by
what engines he prevails, let them look to it. The like is the condition of
Praebendaries, Archdeacons, and Deanes. Nay, are the Bishops themselves clear
of this base beggarie? What means then, that continual haunting of the
court, and hanging upon the Nobles? Why do they not stay and wait, till they
be sent for? yea why are they not rather pulled away from their studies against
their wills? Nay rather, if a man should appeal to their consciences, whether
a^ not some of those fat demeasnes of their Bishoprics let out of their own
accord, to such as they seek, and sue to, that might farm and hire them, or
else are there not other large bribes covenanted to be given to such, as shall
stand them in stead, for attaining of those dignities? But are they only thus
beggarly in their ambitious suing for their promotions? Nay truly some of them
are grown so extremely base this way, that if they be to change their See,
they pay not their first fruits, but by racking together in a filt^y fashion,
an alms from the poorest vicars, which yet must go under the name of
Benevolence, to make a cleanly cloak withal.

The price of simonie is not only a gift in the hand, of money, but also the
servile flattery of the tongue, prayers and solicitations, and officious
services of the body. Some Bishops have made their porters ministers, as the
author of the petition to the Queen does witness. Simonie is compared to the
leprosy of Gebezi, but they have a water to cleanse it, the Archbishops court
of faculties, where the Simoniacall person may be washed, by a gracious, but a
costly dispensation.

3. To grant a vacant benefice in title of trust (which they call a Commendam)
either for a time or during life.

We alleged before an example of him that was Bishop of Gloucester, and
withal commendatare of the Bishopric of Bristow 16. years altogether, by
the late Queens dispensation, P. 59. 597. Pelit. Anno 1603.
as witnesses Godwin of Landaffe in his commentary of the English Bishops.
Bishops are not content with commendams of Bishoprics, but to make their
Bishoprickss more corpulent and fat, they take also fat parsonages, vicarages,
and Prebends, in commendams.

4 That the son may succeed immediately to his fathers benefice.

If the son claim kindness, as we call it, to his fathers benefice, he ought
to be repelled, and no dispensation should further him: for the ministry does
not now descend by generation, as in the tribe of Levi. But if he be sought,
lawfully chosen, and called by the Church, he may very well be admitted to his
fathers benefice, without the dispensation of any Archbishop.

5 That for a time, and for some weighty cause, the beneficed person shall not
be bound to make residence, but may serve by another that is sufficient.

Beneficed men are licenced to take up the rents of the benefice, without
making residence on their cures, and charges. The Chaplains of the King,
Prince, Noblemen, and Bishops, take up the benefices of their parishes, and
live notwitstanding at Princes, Noblemen, and Bishops houses. Mr. Leaver
preaching before K. Edward 6. said, Now my Lords both of the Laity and Clergy,
in the name of God I advertise you to take heed, for when the Lord of all Lords
shall see his flocks scattered, spilt, and lost, if he will follow the ^racke
of blood, it will lead him straight way unto ^his Court, and your houses,
whereas those great thieves, which murder, spoil, and destroy the flock^ of
Christ, be received, kept and maintained. Hooper, preaching before the said
King, said, that his Majesty should begin at his own Court, and compel the
Chaplains to serve th^se souls, that labor for their livings, otherwise he
should put his own soul in danger. The Courts then of Princes, Nobles,
Bishops, and others, are the first denns of these soule-murtherers. The second
rank of dens wherein they lurk, is the universities of Cambridge, and
Oxford. There the fellows of their Colleges, benefice^ persons do make
residence, and not at the Churches to which their benefice^ belong: but, as a
Countreyman of their own ^aith, melting and dying there, like snayle^ within
their shelts. The third sort of Non-residents, are Deanes and Prebendaries,
lurking in their Cathedral Churches, as in dens, devouring the benefices of
Parishes lying farre^ off in the mean time. Others are permitted to take on
orders, and to receive a benefice, and after, as unsufficient to go to the
universitie to learn for the space of 3 years; and all this time the parish
does perish with the famine of the word. The beneficed parson who is
non-resident, oftentimes cannot preach, howbeit he^ were willing: Can. 46.
many other Non-residents there are, wandering vagabonds, which are not lurking
in any of those dens. Some have hirelings to preach monthly or quarterly
sermon^ for them, to their flocks: But because they ar^ hirelings, they carry
not true love to the sheep* but only serve for a little hire to the beneficed
parson, and performs the task agree^ on betwixt them; not thinking to render
account one day to the Sheep-master, but answer only to the Shepherd, the
beneficed person, whose wages he receives. Therefore he deals not with the
conscience, but perfunctoriously performs his prescribed task for his hire;
for he thinks the sheep not his charge. but M. Parsons. They are like the
Philistim Priests, which laid the Ark of God upon a cart, and hurled it with
Oxen, which they should have carried themselves. Although I speak herein too
favorably of the greatest number of them, which do not bestow so much cost,
as a new Cart, and a draft of Oxen will come too, 2 Repl. 1. part. p. 355.
says M. Cartwright. For they have learned their husbandry of him, says he,
which teaches that always it stands a man in least, which may be done by a
poor ass.

6. That a Layman studying to letters may retain a Prebend, and yet not be
compelled to take on the Ministry.

If the office of the Prebendarie be necessary, then the Prebend ought not to
be bestowed to another use. Then again, to bestow it on a Layman, and not to
prepare him for the use of the Ministry, is far from the intention of the
donatour.

7. That a man entered in holy orders, and otherwise qualified according to the
Laws, may enjoy two Ecclesiastical Benefices, if they be Benefices of Cure
within a certain distance; if without cure, without respect of distance.

Plurality of benefices does include also nonresidence. For the pluralist
cannot make residence at 2. or 3. ^astal. residence. 2.
diverse parishes at once. By statute made 21. Henr. 8. it was provided, that
spiritual men being of the kings Council, may purchase license or
dispensation, and take, receive, and keep three Parsonages or Benefices with
cure of souls, Chaplains to the King, Queen, Prince or Princes, or any of the
Kings children, brethren, sisters, uncles or Aunts, two parsonages or benefices
with cure of souls. Every Archbishop, and Duke may have 6. Chaplains, whereof
every one may have two Parsonages or Benefices with cure of souls: a Marquise
of Earl five Chaplains, whereof every one may have two Parsonages, or
benefices with cure of souls. Every Duchess, Marquess, Countess, and
Baroness, being widows, two Chaplains, the Treasurer and Controller of the
Kings houses, the Kings secretary, and Dean of his Chapel, the Kings Amner,
and the master of the Rolls, two Chaplains: the chief Justice of the Kings
bench, and the warden of the five ports one Claplaine, every one with two
benefices of cure of souls, Lords sons, Lords brethren, knights sons,
Doctors and Batchelers of divinity, Doctors of Law, and Batchelers of the Canon
law. Provided also that every Archbishop, because he must occupy 8 Chaplains
at cons^cration of Bishops: And every Bishop because ^e must occupy 7
Chaplains, at giving of orders, and consecration of Churches, may every one of
them have two Chaplains over and above the number above limited unto them,
whereof every one may purchase license of dispensations, and take, receive, and
keep as many Parsonages, or benefices with cure of souls. In the Record of
the worthy proceedings, it is said, that by the provisoes of that statute, the
Kings Chaplains may have as many benefices as they can get, P. 10.
without stint, and some others may have 4. benefices with cure at one time in
several counties, and some two benefices and yet be resident upon none of
them, so long as he attends upon his Lord and master, which is a thing
intolerable in a Christian common wealth.

One person will have a mastership of a College in one corner of the land, 1.
Reply p* 46.
a Deanrie in another, a Prebend in the third, as Mr. Cartwright reports. The
author of the petition to the Queen reports, that many have three or four
benefices scattered one from another an hundred miles. P. 71.
In the 41. Canon of the late constitutions, it is licensed only to such as
have taken the degree of a Master of Arts, Can. 41.
at the least in one of the universities, and be public and licenced teachers,
to have more benefices with cure, then one, providing the said benefices be not
more then 30. miles distant asunder. But what says Brightman to the like Canon
made before. What hurt have masters of Arts done thee, or how have they
offended thee, that thou should owe and do unto them this mischief, to make
them in the first place guilty of so great a sin? Thou confessest that
plurality is evil, and a thing to be suppressed, and yet thou give them
leave in thy indulgence to be infected with this pestilent disease. Doubtless
it is a notable privilege of their degree, that they may be naught before any
others. Plurality of benefice^ distant 30. mile, does include non-residence,
as well as of an 100 mile. The Sun is farther distant from us then the Moon,
yet it is not possible for us to touch the Moon. The last petition for
reformation relates that double beneficed men are suffered to hold some 2 or
3. benefices with cure: and some 2, 3, or 4 dignities besides. The defender of
the said petition does report, that their double beneficed men are almost sance
number. P. 132.
If benefices without cure of souls, require notwithstanding an office, and
attendance upon that office, he cannot lawfully enjoy it together with a
benefice of cure. It is observed by some, that there is not one almost of their
bishops, but he was first a Non-resident or pluralist, or else he could not
have had sufficient means to obtain the bishopric.

Generally: whence it is, that the Archbishop may dispense in all causes not
repugnant to the word, if heretofore they have been used or accustomed to be
had at the Sea of Rome, or if not accustomed to be obtained at the Sea of
Rome, if the Prince himself, or those who are of his secret council do
permit.

We heard of some special dispensations before: now we hear that the
Archbishop may dispense in all causes dispensed heretofore by the Pope of Rome,
and more also. The Pope was never duly qualified to be a lawful dispenser, no
more is the Archbishop. Where it is said, if the matter it self be not
repugnant to the word of God, it is to no purpose: for the Pope will not say,
that he dispenses in any thing repugnant to the word of God, howbeit he does
it in effect, and so does the Archbishop. For simonie, non-residencie,
plurality of benefices, readmission after the irregularitie of apostasy,
observation of superstitious days and times, not eating of flesh in Lent and
forbidden days, which are here expressed, are repugnant to the law of God.
Therefore he may take the like libereie in usurie, perjurie, incest, marriage
within degrees of the Leviticall law, and the rest of the cases and causes
which were reserved to the Pope of old.

It is not without reason then that the authors of the Admonition call this
Court a filthy quagmire, and poisoned plash of all abbominations, seeing the
filth of all these abominations are washed here, and the guilty person comes
forth after the Archbishops dispensation, as white as snow, leaving his filth
behind in that Court.

Beside the Prerogative Court, the Court of Arches, the Court of Audience, the
Court of Faculties, the Archbishop has yet another Court, called the Court of
Peculiars, which deals in certain Parishes exempt from the Bishops
iuris^iction in some Diocese, Camd. Brit* p. 181.
and are peculiarly belonging to the Archbishop of Canterbury. He has also
inferior Courts, such as other Bishops have. You see then, Canterbury is a
petie Pope, or according to Bancrofts reckoning, a vice-pope, made up of the
old spoils of comprovinciall Bishops and Synods, and also with the new spoils
of the Pope, being armed beside with the Kings delegate temporal power in the
High Commission, and so greater in his intensive power, then ever he was in
time of Popery. And when the union shall be accomplished, shall be greater in
his extensive power also, with his Courts overruling our Nation, and shall be
vice-pope of this little World, O if faithful Patriots would forsee and
prevent this. The least of their Ceremonies will prepare a way to this
mischief.

CHAP. 4. Of the Dignity, and Power of English Bishops.
IN the former chap^er we did only give, not grant superiorite of Bishops over
Pastors, which being supposed, we meddled only with the unlawful power and
dignity of Archbishops, but the truth is, that the superiority of Bishops
over Pastors is unlawful also. By divine Law, one Pastor is not superior in
degree above another, no more then one Apostle or Evangelist above another
Apostle or Evangelist. The name of Bishops was not appropriate to any eminent
rank of Pastors, but was common to all, as may be seen Act. 20. Philip. 1. 1.
Timoth. 3. Tit. 1. 1. Pet. 5. And that their office was also common may be seen
in the same places from whence Hierome in his Epistle to Evagrius does
conclude, that a Bishop, and Presbyter was all one, And in his Commentary on
the Epistle to Titus cap. 1. that communi Presbyterorum consilio Ecclesiae
gubernaba^tur, the Churches were governed by the joint advice of Presbyters.
Our Opposites say, that government was only private in the inner court, the
court of Conscience, not public in the external court, or Consistory. It
was so in the time of Popery, when the Priests were excluded from the
external government of the Church, which Bishops did vendicate to themselves,
and their Courts, the poor Priest having no further power, then to receive
privately auricular confession, ponder the weight of secret faults, and
accordingly to enjoyne penance. But Hierome speaks not of a several, but of
a common council, and joint care of many assembled together. For this private
government in the inner Court of conscience, was not only then, but continues
to this day, whereby every Pastor may deal with the consciences of any of his
own flock. But Hierome speaks of a government, which was altered after the
Apostles times, and different from the Episcopal government which followed,
When the Churches were thus governed in common, by joint advice of Presbyters,
they had not a perpetual President; or as we use to speak, a constant
Moderator, who had this preeminence during life set over them, to moderate the
common Meetings, but they choosed their Presidents, and changed them, as they
thought fit. No Pastor could claim this prioritie of order, and direction of
the common Meetings, as belonging to him of office. The Apostles did no where
institute this same small difference of Pastors, that some during life should
be moderators of the rest, let be that majoritie of rule, and superiority in
power, which Bishops do claim. The Pastors, who were at Alexandria, the first
we read to have set up a constant Moderator, to whom also they did appropriate
the name of Bishop. This was the beginning of that great mischief which
followed: This was the Cockatrice egg out of the which Antichrist himself was
hatched: For this perpetual Presidencie and prioritie of order, did degenerate
in superiority of power, and majoritie of rule, and the Bishops growing to some
grandeur, they behoved to have an Archbishop, and at last a Pope. So that if a
Bishop had not been, a Pope had not been, and if there had not been a Pope,
the great Antichrist had not been. cap. 2.
Boni-gratis, supposed to be the author of the Treatise de aetatibus Ecclesiae,
wondereth that the Popes Monarchy should arise from so small a beginning. But
the Apostle tells us, that that iniquity was a Mystery, and that this
Mystery was working under ground even in his time. For even the Apostolical
times wanted not a proud Diotrephes, loving preeminence. A little seed will
bring forth a great Tree. If the Discipline had not been corrupted, as well as
doctrine, the great Antichrist could not have risen. All the errors and
heresies in doctrine and matters of faith, which have entered in the Church,
could not have brought him in, unless error and corruption in the government
had entered in also; for unless this had been he could pretend no claim at all
to govern and rule.

I come therefore to our English bishops. Let a man travel through Italy
where the Pope is, or Spain where the Spanish Inquisition is, he shall find
no difference betwixt the power of an Italian, Spanish, or English bishop. The
English bishop is the same now for power and greatness that he was an hundred
years since in the time of popery. There are four things chiefly to be
considered in him: First, the derivation of his power: 2. the sole exercise of
his authority. 3. the deputation of this his authority. 4. his extensive
power. As for the first, they are not bishops, as we have said, iure divino, by
divine institution, or right, nor cannot be. Neither are they Bishops by
humane law, that is, the constitutions of the ancient Church, which imprudently
and unhappily set up the first bishops, erring in taking up right the nature of
Church government, and the qualities of the Antichrist, who was to be revealed
but in the full time. For they are not of that kind of Bishops, which ruled
together with the Presbytery or Ecclesiastical Senate, but they are bishops
by the Municipall law of the land only in the judgment of the laws. For all
their jurisdiction and power is united and anexed to the crown, from whence it
is derived, as from a source, unto them, and by law they are bound, to make
their process and writings, in the kings name, and not in their own names, and
that their seals should be graved with the Kings arms, as I have already
declared in the first chapter. It is true, that they make processes in their
own name, and use their own seals, but herein they transgress the forms
prescribed by lawTheir manner of holding in Capite, in chief of the king,
their Episcopal power and jurisdiction is not changed for all that want of
formalitie, as before I have cleared out of Bishop Farrars answer.

Sir Edward Cook in the 5. book of his Reports, does prove, That the
Function, and Jurisdiction of Bishops and Archbishops in England, is by and
from the Kings of England; and concludes, that though the proceedings, and
progress of the Ecclesiastical Courts run in the Bishops name, yet both their
courts and laws, whereby they proceed, are the Kings, as M. Sheerwood in his
Reply to Downam does report. So then all the acts of their Episcopal
jurisdiction are performed by authority derived from the King. If ye will call
that authority civil, then actions of a spiritual nature are performed by a
civil authority, which is absurd. But seeing this is impossible, that civil
authority can be elevated to so high a nature, it must follow, that it is
truly spiritual power, which is united to, and derived from the possessor of
the Crown, I mean, in the estimation of men and judgment of the Law: howbeit
in it self, and by Gods Law, it cannot be done. It follows therefore that
all the Jurisdiction properly spiritual, which the English Prelates do
exercise, as Prelates, is unlawful, how soever they have the warrant of men's
Laws. It is but only to save their own credit, that they have set Downam.
Bilson, and other their friends on work, to plead, that Bishops are above
Pastors jure divino, by divine Institution, which they are not able to prove.

Next is to be considered their sole authority, which is censured by Sir
Francis Bacon, now Chancellor of England, after this manner, There be two
circumstances in the administration of Bishops, wherein I confess I could
never be satisfied. The one, the sole exercise of their authority. The other,
the deputation of their authority. For the first, the Bishop gives orders
alone, excommunicateth alone, judges alone. This seems to be a thing almost
without exemple in government, and therefore not unlikely to have crept in, in
the degenerate and corrupt times. We see that the greatest Kings and Monarchs
have their council. There is no temporal Court in any land of the higher sort,
where the authority does rest in one person. The Kings bench, common pleas,
and the Exchequer, are benches of a certain number of judges. The Chancellor
of England ^ath the assistance of 12 masters of the Chauncerie. The master of
the Words has 4 Council of the court: so has the Chancellor of the Duchy.
In the Exchequer chamber the Lord Treasurer is joined with the Chancellor and
the Barons. The Masters of Requests are ever more then one. The justices of
Assize are two. The Lord President in the Marches, and in the North, have
Council of diverse. The Star Chamber is an Assembly of the Kings privy
Council, aspersed with Lords spiritual and temporal. So as, in all the
Courts, the principal person has ever, either colleagues, or assessours. The
like is to be found in other well governed kingdoms abroad, where the
jurisdiction is yet more distributed, as in the Courts of Parliament of France,
and in other places. No man will deny, but the acts, that pass by the Bishops
jurisdiction, are of as great importance, as those that posse by the civil
Courts. For men's souls are more precious then their bodies, and so are their
good names. Bishope have their infirmities, and have no exception from that
general malediction against all men living, Vae soli, nam si ceciderit, etc.
Nay, we see, that the first warrant in spiritual causes is directed to a
number, Dic Ecclesiae, which is not so in temporal matters. And we see that
in general causes of Church government, there are as well assemblies of all
the Clergy in councels, as of the Estates in Parliament, whence the^ should
this sole exercise of jurisdiction come? Surely I do suppose, and I do think
upon good ground, that ab initio non fuit ita, and that the Deanes and Chapters
were counsels, about the Seas and Chaires of Bishops at the first, and were
unto them a Presbytery, or Consistory, and meddled not only with the
disposing of their revenues, and endowments, but much more in jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical. But that is probable, that the Dean and Chapter stuck close
to the Bishop in matters of profit, and the worlds, and would not loose their
hold. But in matters of jurisdiction (which they accounted but trouble and
attendance) they suffered the Bishops to encroch, and usurp, and so the one
continues, and the other is lost. And we see, that the Bishop of Rome ( fas
est ab host doceri) and no question in that Church the first institutions were
excellent) performs all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, as in Consistory. And
whereof consists this his Consistory, but of the parish priests of Rome,
which term themselves Cardinals, a Cardinibus mundi, because the Bishop
pretends to be universal over the whole world. And hereof again we see
diverse shadows yet remain, in as much as the Deane and Chapter, pro forma,
chooses the Bishop, which is the highest point of iuris^iction. And that the
Bishop when he gives orders, if there be any ministers casually present,
calls them to join with him in imposition of hands, and some other
particulars. And therefore that seems to me a thing reasonable, and
religious, and according to the first institution, that Bishops in the greatest
causes, and those which require a spiritual discerning, namely the ordaining,
suspending, or depriving Ministers, in excommunication, being restored to the
true and proper use, as shall be afterward touched, in sentencing the validity
of marriage, and legitimations, in judging causes criminous, as Simonie,
incest, blasphemy and the like, should not proceed sole and unassisted: which
point as I understand, is a reformation that may be planted sine strepitu,
without any perturbation at all, and that is a matter which will give strength
to the Bishops, countenance to the inferior degrees of Prelates, or Ministers,
and the better issue or proceeding in those causes, that shall pass. And as I
wish thi^ strength given to your Bishops in Council, so that is not unworthy
your Majesties^ royal consideration, whether you shall not think fit to give
strength to the general council of your Clergy the convocation house, which
was then restreyned, when the state of the Clergy was thought a suspected part
of the Kingdom, in regard of their late homage to the Bishop of Rome* which
state now will give place to none in their loyalty, and devotion to your
Majesty. Where it is said here, that Deane and Chapters were at the first
counselors to Bishops, it is to be understood at the first time of erecting
Deane or Chapter, not at the first setting up a Bishop; far less at the first
form of Church Government planted by the Apostles. For Presbyters were before
Bishops, and when Bishops were set up at the first, they were set up by the
Presbytery, and that in the degree of perpetual Moderatorship and
Presidentship only: neither was there a particular choice made of some
Presbyters to sit in judgment with this President, nor another besides this
President Bishop, to be Deane of the Presbytery; for that had been to make a
President above a president and some Presbyters Cardinal Presbyters of more
esteem the^ the rest. Act. 1^.
In the Church of Jerusalem all the Presbyten governed, Act. 21.
not a selected number. D. Field, Of the chur. 1. 5. c. 28. p. 142. 143.
a defender of the hierarchy, acknowledges this, That for a long time there
was no more respect had to one Presbyter then to another, but all equal^y
interessed in the government of the Church, were indifferently called to the
election of the Bishops, and his consultations, it is most clear and evid^^t
A^^ this he proves in special of the Church of Rome by Cyprian. And the first
appearance of this difference, that not all, but Car^inall Pres^yters only
were called to the common consultations in the Church of Rome it self, that he
found, is in the time of Gregorius Magnus, that is, about 600 years after
Christ; yet he leaves this as uncertain. But certain it is (says he) that
all the Clergi^ had interest in the choice and election of the Bishop, even in
Gregory's time. As if now the whole ministry and Clergy of the city of
Lon^on should be admitted to the election of the Bishop, and not some few
Chapter men only. De clericis, cap. 8.
Yea Bellarmine him self says, Non enim jus divinum definivit* ut hi potius,
quam illi ex clericis eligant. For divine (...) has not determined, that such
and such of the Clergy more then others, should choose. But afterwords in
process of time, ^. 5. P. 143.
(says D. Field) the Cardin^lls only had interest in the election of their
Bishop, and they and no other were admitted to sit in Co^^cell with the Bispop,
all other Presbyters being excluded. By which means the dignity of these
Cardinals was greatly increased. Again, Now these Cardinal presbyters were not
only in the Church of Rome* P. 142.
but in other Churches also, as Duarenus shows. So the institution of this
difference was so far from being excellent, that it thrust lawful pastors
from the government of their own particular charges, and the joint government
of the church, and increased the dignity of Cardinals. These Cardinals were
but parish priests and Deacons, resident in their parishes and titles. So are
not our Chapitermen. But that assistance and council in process of time went out
of use also. So it is ever dangerous to depart from the right partern and shape
forms of government to our selves. Always this politician alleges very
pertinently to the shame of our bishops, and their sole government, that the
Bishop of Rome performs all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction as in Consistory,
We heard how Archbishops were made up with the spoils of the Synodes. So the
Bishops were made up with the spoils of the Presbyteries. Would you not think
it very absurd, to see the Moderator sit by himself, exercise all manner of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction without the Presbytery. Of the Deane and Chapter
we will have occasion to entreat aagaine.

The third thing to be considered in the English Bishop, is the deputation of
his authority. He has griped greedily, and taken in his own hands, all the
power of the Church, and when he has done that, because he is neither able nor
willing to discharge this burden which he takes on himself, he transferreth
his charge unto other officers under him. He has taken from the Pastors the
pastoral staff of government, which belongs to every shepherd, that is set
to keep Christ's sheep, and left them nothing but the pastoral pype, to preach
and minister the sacraments, and has put that pastoral staff in the hands of
strangers who are not the true sheepherds, that is in the hands of Chancelours,
Archdeacons, officialls, and Co^missariet, vicars general, and the rest of
that Antichristian^able of officers.

The 4. is their extensiue power. For whereas the presbytery choosed, and set
up a Bishop, and no presbyter was excluded from common consultation and
judgment, and their meeting behoved to be ordinary, for exercise of ordinary
jurisdiction in the Church, where they governed, the bounds of the Bishops
jurisdiction could be no larger nor the bounds of the presbyteries
jurisdiction, that is where all the presbyters might convene to exerce ordinary
jurisdiction. All the presbyters of a shire, or county could not convene
ordinarily and weeklie together to exerce ordinary ecclesiastical
jurisdiction. Neither is any where in the new Testamen^, a visible Church
endowed with power of ecclesiastical government taken for a whole shire, or
County. We read of the Church of Ephesus, Philippi, Jerusalem, Corinth,
Thessalonica etc. But to call the particular congregations in the countries
extended in length and breadth about these cities, the church of these cities,
is absurd, and no where to be found. H^ would be thought to speak
ridiculously, wh^ would under the name of the church of Saint andros,
comprehend all the congregations i^ Mers, Lothian, and ^ife: or under the name
of the church of Glasgow, all the congregations i^ Teviotdale, Nithsdale,
clidsdale, etc. Citi^ churches and town churches the scripture knows, but
not country churches. F^^ when the scripture speaks of a Province or
Country, it speaks in the plural number Churches, not Church, in the
singular. Seeing then there was no Diocesan Church, there was no Diocesan
Presbytery, nor Diocesan Bishop. No Church is above another. The Church of
Corinth had no superiority over the Church of Cenchrea, which was next
adjacent. And consequently the Presbytery of one Church has not superiority
over another Church, therefore the Bishop chosen by the by the Presbytery of
one Church, has not power over the Presbytery of another Church. Neither can
he possibly exercise ordinary jurisdiction in diverse Churches, and
Presbyteries, except ye will make him a Pluralist, and have him gallop from
one to another, to keep the ordinary meetings, which galloping was not kaowen
in the Apostles times. But Bishops have spread their wings over many cities and
towns, whole Countries, and Shires, that they are not able, suppose they were
willing to execute the power, which they claim, in their own persons, but
must of necessity depute others. And whom depute they, I pray you? Doctors of
the civil law, whom they make Chauncelours, Officials, Commissaries and other
officers of the Canon law. Suppose they should depute ecclesiastical persons
only, yet this should not free them of guiltynes. For it is a personal duty
which the scripture requires of the officebearers of the Church.

At the first Bishops were placed in little towns, as well as in great cities,
and were not so thin sown, as since that avarice and ambition have made them
to despise obscure places, and to strive who should have the largest Diocies:
Nay even in England the Diocies of old were not so large as now. The Bishopric
of York has devoured many smaller bishoprics next adjacent* as Camden
reports in his Brittannia. The Bishopric of Lincoln has likewise devovred
many bishoprics, which were in the time of the Saxons, and howbeit it has
been greatly impaired, yet there are 1247. parish churches in that Diocie at
this day, as is related by Camden. These generals being premitted, I will be
the briefer in the particulars.

Bishops considered simply as Bishops, of which in England there are 24. whose
estate is to be considered, eit^er in the commonwealth, or in the Church. In
the commonwealth, in that they have the title of Lords in respect of their
Baronie annexed to the Bishopric. 2. to have precedence before other Barons in
the convention of th^ee three Estates, or in other meetings.

They tell us that Elias and Elizeus, 1. King. 18. 2. King* 2 were called
Lords, and if the prophe^s were of old so styled, why may not they also? By
this reason all prophets and pastors should be so honored. But the tuth is,
that the name of Lord was given by the wife to her husband, Genesis 18. 12. and to
any man of honest account, howbeit to mean men, as to Philip. Ioh. 12. 21. to
Gardiners, Ioh. 20. 15. and was more common among the orientalls, then Sir is
with us. Elias and Elizeus were not Barons, and for their B^ronies styled Lords
above the common sort. But that style is with us attributed only to Lords of
dignity, to Noblemen, and other officers of State. As for Bishops, you may
see, that they are so styled in respect that they are Barons howbeit D. Downam
does aledge, Defens. 1. 3. p. 150.
that they are so styled in regard of their spiritual office and jurisdiction.
The first respect is forbidden; Luke 22. 25. as we have said before. The
second respect is as unlawful: for there are no Lords in the Church but one
Christ, who is Lord and King. Their ambitious and arrogant precedencie in
taking place before great Barons, is another part of their pomp. Their
stateliness and pomp is set forth also in their glorious palaces, and
sumptuous buildings. Their chambers do shine with guilt, 1. Reply p. 97.
their walls are hanged with cloth of Auris, their cupboards are laden with
plate, their tables and diets are furnished with multitude and diversity of
dishes, their daily dinners are feasts: They have 30. 40. 60. or more every one
of them of men waiting on them, some before some behind, whereof three parts of
them (set a part the carrying of a dish unto the table) have no honest or
profitable calling to accupie themselves in, two hours in the day, to the
filling of the Church and common wealth also, with all kind of disorders, as
Mr. Cartwright an eyewitness does testify. Many Churches lie desolate for
want of sufficient provisioes, whose impropriations are appropried to bishops
to maintain their pomp and statelines, and bestowed upon keeping great
horses, caroches, and trains of men. I need not to insist in this point, it is
so sensible to any man, who has but common sense.

In the Church by reason of their calling, or of their function. In their
external calling to the Bishopric, some things respect the Prince, some
things respect other Bishops. The Prince before election may 1. nominate. 2.
grant faculty to choose. After the election finished, 1. yields his Royal
assent, 2. directs his mandate to the Archbishop to confirm him and other
two, to consecrate, 3. exacteth the oath of homage from the new bishop, 4.
Restores to him the possessions of the Bishopric. Such things as respect
other Bishops, respect either the Archbishop, or him and others: the
Archbishop, as him who is to confirm the election. Him and two others, as who
are to consecrate him according to the direction of the book of orders.

When the bishops Sea is destitute, the Deane and Chapter make intimation to
the King of their want of a Bishop, and humble supplication for license to
choose another. The King by letters patents under his great seal, grants
them license: and with the letters patents sends a missive, commending the
person, who is to be chosen, some man who has waited long on the Court, and
promised to some courtier an annuitie out of his Bishopric during life, or
some other gift. After this election, which is made after the Papisticall
manner by Deane and Chapter, and a superficial manner, or pro forma, as Sir
Francis Bacon, now Lord Chaunlour, said, the Deane and Chapter do intimate
their feigned process of election to the King: again, praying the King to
yield his Royal assent to the Lord elected. The King directs his letter
patents for warant to the Archbishop, or some other whom he shall appoint, to
confirm and consecrate my Lord elect. The consecration being finished, and the
bishop having done homage, and sworn fealty, the Kings writ is directed out
of the Chancerie to the Escheator, to restore to him the temporalities of the
Bishopric. And the Bishop may procure another writ out of the Chauncerie,
directed to his tenants, commanding them to take him for their Lord. This order
of proceeding is thus described by the author of the Assertion for true Church
P. 274. 275.
policy. Here are many imaginary forms, and mockage, rather then sound
dealing. The liberty of election of Pastors, if Diocesan bishops were true
Pastors, is taken from the Church, and the Church deluded with a May Game.

Now as for his consecration, howbeit the Scripture does not teach us two
distinct forms of ordination, one called* consecration proper to a Lord Bishop,
the other by the general name of ordination, peculiar to a minister, yet we
will let you see the Rites of their consecration, how all are taken out of the
Popes Pontifical, as may be gathered by conferring the book of Orders with the
said Pontifical. A table is prepared for the Masse-book, and the pontifical:
so is here a table furnished with the service book, and the book of orders.
There two bishops are present to assist the Consecrator, ordained to have on
the Rochet, if not the Ro^che^, a surpl^ce. Here all the Bishops that be
present at the consicration of Bish^ps, should wear^ coapes and surplices,
having pastoral staves in their hands. They retain the surplice, seldom the
coape, but they never use their pastoral staves, says the Author of the
petition to the Queen And yet they have a staff to beat out a painful
minister out of the Church, if he take not on a surplice. But in the
abridgement of the ministers of Lincoln, it is said, that in the former
edition (of the book of ordination) which seems by the 36. P. 102.
article to be that, we are required to subscribe unto, and which; it may be,
some of the Bishops do still use, there are other corruptions, as that the
coape, albe, surplice, tuni^le, and pistorall staff, are appointed to be used
in ordination and consecration. There the elected is presented by two Bishops,
to the consecrator, who is sitting, and the elder of the two Bishops says,
Most reverend father in God, etc. So here he is presented by two bishops to the
Archbishop, or any other bishop having commission, to whom one of them says
Most reverend father in God, we present unto you this godly and learned man,
that he may be consecrate bishop. There none is consecrate till the commission
be showed: here likewise the Archbishop is careful to have the Kings mandate
anent his consecration, to be produced and read. There the elected takes an
oath upon his knees to the Pope, and another of obedience to the Archbishop: so
here they must take one oath concerning the supremacy, another of canonical
obedience to the Archbish. There the Archbi. demands some questions, so also
here. There is said, or song, Veni Creat^r; so here. There the Archbishop
together with the Bishops then present, laying on their hands, say, Receive the
holy Ghost: so here also, as if the one could give, and the other receive the
holy spirit from his finger ends. By the book of ordaining Prists and Deacons,
the Archbishop should lay the Bible upon the bishops neck, that is to be
ordained, and put a pastoral staff in his hand, says the author of the
petition to the Queens Majesty, but they put the Bible in his hand, P. 6.
and observe not the former direction, or else follow a later book of
ordinations. After these things being done, the consecrator and his assistants
communicate with the new consecrated bishop, so here also. The Gospels, the
Collects, the Epistles, the Letanie, which are here used for the most part, are
borrowed from the same Pontifical, and the Letanie interrupted here also as
there. There the consecrator says nothing more ordes^e, then is set down in
the book, either when he prays, or demands, or consecrateth; so here.
There the consecrator puts gloves on the hands of the consecrated. Here the
consecrated Bishop deals gloves, as I hear, to his friends: for why, now he
is married, and the marriage betwixt him and the Church, which was begun by the
election, is consummate, they say, by consecration. Should not then the
bridegroom deal gloves among his friends? That day that our Bishops were
first consecrated at London, their bride at home understood nothing of the
matter.

In respect of his function, either in things concerning Episcopal order, or
concerning jurisdiction. Concerning Episcopal order, as 1. to ordain Deacons
and Ministers according to the prescript of the book of ordinations, 2. to
dedicate Churches and burial places, 3. to confirm children.

The power of order as they call it, that is a power and authority which is
given to men sanctified and set apart from others, to perform such acts as
belong to the service of God, and the discharge of the pastoral function, it
acknowledged by D. Field, Of the chur. 5. c. 27.
as also by the sounder sort of the Romanists themselves, to be equal and the
same in all pastors, and that there is not a greater power of order in the
Bishops then Presbyters. If the power of order, and authority to intermedle in
things pertaining to Gods service, be equal and the same in all Presbyters,
who has power to abridge this their power, and limitate the exercise of it? To
reserve the exercise of it to the Bishop, as if he alone may give orders, or if
other ministers join either casually or by Canon, with him, that it is not for
consecration, but for consent and approbation only, or that a whole
Presbytery cannot ordain, that is, sanctify, dedicate or set apart any
person to the ministry, unless there be a Bishop present to utter the words
of consecration, is not only absurd, because it imports that God has bestowed
on them a faculty which they cannot put in execution, but also dangerous for
the Church of God, as experience of the last age has manifested. For then all
the Ministers in France, and other reformed Churches, who received not
imposition of hands by bishops, should not be lawful Ministers.

Their shift of the case of necessity, is no shift at all. For if they have
that power by divine right as they pretend, the other may in no case usurp it.
Further, seeing nature gives not faculties in vain, we must not think that
Christ gave a power or faculty to be idle. The gifts and faculties he gave,
he gave them, to be employed, not only in time of necessity, but at all
convenient times and occasions offered. Where do they find in all scripture
this exception of the case of necessity. Where the law of God does not
distinguish ought man to distinguish? The prayer out of the mouth of a divine
bishop, a minister appointed by the presbytery to moderate the action, is it
of less efficacy then the prayer out of the mouth either of an human or
Satanicall Bishop. As for imposition of hands, it is a rite only, which is
common to all, and not essential.

Seeing then to ordain ministers belongs to the power of order, as to preach
the word, and minister the sacraments does, and that this power is common to
all pastors, the validity or invaliditie of ordination, ought not to depend
upon a bishop, set up by man's appointment and invention; and that it was but an
invention of man, is clear, in that this reservation and restraint came in but
by corrupt canons. In the council of Ancyra a canon was made, to forbid the
presbyters of the City to ordain presbyters and Deacons without the bishops
permission, whereby appears, that before that Canon was made, they had
ordained some without the Bishops, either presence or permission: and yet their
ordinations were not made void: and that after the making of the Canon, they
yea it is confessed that this is reserved unto them, ^ontra Lu^eranos.
potius ad honorem sacerdetij, quam ob legis necessitatem, rather for for the
honor of their Priesthood, then the necessity of any law, at Hierome says.
(...) Psalm. 26.
Beda says in plainer terms, that for pride and arrogancy this as many
other things were not permitted to Priests, but reserved to Bishops. That which
the Jesuit Swarez says, ^n aqui. tom. (...) disput. 36. ^ct. 1.
concerning confirmation, Si prestyteri ex visuae ordinationis haberent
sufficientem potestatem ordinis ad hoc sacramentum ministrandum, sine causa in
universum prohiberentur illud confer, may be applied to that which I affirmed
of ordination, that God gave not faculties and powers to be idle. I have as yet
only supposed this their confirmation to be lawful. But let us now see what
it is. The bishop, or such as he shall appoint, apposeth the children in some
questions of a short catechism; for he takes not the pains to do it
always by himself. Then are they brought to the bishop, not by the minister,
but by a godfather and a godmother, for they must have a godfather and
godmother at confirmation, as at baptism. The Curate of the parish needs not
to come, but may send the childrens names in writing. In the first prayer the
bishop prays for the 7. gifts of the spirit, which the Papists say, they
receive in confirmation. Then the bishop will not lift up his hands and bless
them in common, as the Priests in the old law did, when they blessed a
multitude, or great number, but they must be brought to him one by one, that he
may lay his hand on every child severally. For there is some efficacy, say
they, in that sign. For they say, that imposition of hands is one of the
external means, by the which the holy Ghost is given? And howbeit that prayer
have the chief force, yet imposition of hands has some also. In baptism we
receive forgiveness of sins but the principal grace we receive in
confirmation, is say they, strength and defense against all tentations to
sin, and the assaults of the world. The Papists and they make the like
destinction betwixt baptism and confirmation. The Papists say, the comforter
promised by Christ to his Church, was bestowed in the sacrament of
confirmation. The same prayer for the comforter use they. The grace which is
begun in baptism, they say is per^ected in confirmation, as the Papist says:
as if, when we were baptized, we were but half Christians. In the prayer after
the laying on of hands, it is (...), that the laying on of the bishops hands,
is a sign, whereby the child is certified of Gods favor, and gracious
goodness toward them, a child of seven or eight years of age. If it be a
certifying sign, is it not a seal of grace; as the other sacraments are. All
that I have said* may be seen in Hooker, Hackwell, and their service book. None
must receive the communion till he be thus bishoped, and yet diverse bishops do
not use it. Then by order of law, these who are bishoped, may refuse to take
the communion.

In hallowing of Churches the Papists use crosses, taper light burning of
lamps, oil, ashes, and many ridiculous ceremonies; but let it be so, that
their dedication is more simple, then the Popish, yet it is superstitious. For
to dedicate, that is to dote and mortify to such a use, as to the congregation
to covein in, it is already done by the founders, who were owners of the
ground, and builders of the Churches, and the use is only civil to defend the
people convened from wind and weather, or other incommodities which might
impede them in the service of God. A second dedication, that is, an hallowing
of it, after it is set apart before it can be employed to divine service, as if
divine service were profaned, unless it were hallowed, is mere superstition.
Our Churches are not like the Temple of Jerusalem, which had a legal kind of
holiness, and was a type and figure of Christ, but like the Jewish Synagogues.
There is no more holiness in our Churches which contain the congregation,
then in the glebe land, which is dedicate and set a part to maintain the
minister, but that it should be kept clean and comely for the people which is
to convene in it. When the congregation is there at divine service, which is
but accidental, and may be performed on a hillock, then God indeed is present
in the midst of them. Out of this hallowing of churches, has proceeded
superstitious customs and canons of immunitie of churches. I hear they may
not carry a vessel through one of their cathedral Churches, or a bag under
their arms without reproof, as if their great Domes were like the Temple of
Jerusalem, Mark. 11. 16. The like may be said of Churchyards, or other burying
places: for all burial places are of a like nature, whether they be near the
Church, or removed fare from it.

Their jurisdiction is either delegate of ordinary. Jurisdiction delegate
sometime to the Bishop, not as he is Bishop, but as he is a citizen or subject,
as 1. if he be appointed a justice of peace, 2. if he be upon the kings secret
counsel. 3. if he be sent Ambassador to any foreign Prince, 4. if he have
any other civil office of countenance committed to him.

Besides that some of them are Justices of Peace and Quorum, some Councillors,
some at sometimes Ambassadors to foreign Princes, some of them have been
Deputies under the Presidents of Wales, as Whitgift late Bishop of Canterbury:
some of them sit in the Star chamber with the Chancellor and others of the
Council, together with other Lords and Barons upon notable riots,
counterfeiting of letters, taking away of maids within age against their
parents and Gardians will, etc. where the most usual punishment is
imprisonment, the p^llory, or a fine. They sit also in the high Court of
Parliament, pretending themselves to be the^ estate of the Realm, as if the
body and state of the commonwealth were not an entire and complete body and
state, without the body and state of the Prelacie, nor laws could not be made
without their consent. But the vanity of this their pretense is taken away by
the author of the Assertion of Christian Church Policy, who does prove that
laws have been made without their consent, yea and without their presence,
even since, they have been admtited to sit in Parliament. Their privilege to
sit in the Star Chamber, and to be Lords of the Parliament house* Camd. Bri^.
170.
some do think was granted by King Henry 2. Camd ^ thinks that this honor
was bestowed upon them by William the first, and that it is in respect of their
Baronies, which they hold in knight service, that they sit there. It is no
fundamental law then of the kingdom, far less does it agree with the law
of God, to give voice, and decide in criminal and civil matters in whatsoever
secular court. Is there any doubt to be resolved out of the word, they have
ever had a convocation of the Clergy in time of Parliament, with whom they
have advised in matters of religion. Are the Prelates for their riding in pomp
to Westminster, and sitting in their ^obes, more able to give advice, then the
whole Clergy assembled in a lower house? Or can they be more rice in their
judgment sitting apart from them? Or is it not enough to give advice unless
they also vote, and that in matters no way pertinent to their calling? Or is
the Church respected in their persons, when they shall have no place but as
Barons? Or shall they vote in the name of of the Church, not having commission,
but like the Nobles, who have place in respect of their birth. In the higher
house the Judges of the Realm, the Master of the Rolls, and the Secretary of
estate sit in the midst thereof* upon wooll-sackes. But these that sit on the
wooll-sacks have no voice in the house, P. 49.
but only sit there to answer of their knowledge in the law, when they be
asked, if any doubt arise among the Lords, says Sir Tho. Smith in his
commonwealth. This place, if any, better becomes them, then to sit high,
each in his rank, over against the Dukes and Barons, and to answer only of
their knowledge in the law of God, when they shall be required, for any matter
of Religion. But this, as I said, may be better done in the convocation house.
In time of Popery, the Spiritual Lords might not sit in Parliament,
whenever any statute was to be made touching felony, or treason, or the
loss of any member, or shedding of blood. If they might have been spared then
at such times, may they not be as well spared in matters of possessions and
unheritances. Our Prelates entered in parliament notwithstanding the cautions and
conditions condiscended upon were never insert in the act of their admission,
upon which condition only* the general assembly after great opposition made
to the Churches vote in Parliament, was induced for the most to consent. To be
Lords in Parliament and Council to govern countries, to sit in the
Star Chamber, to be Justices of peace and Quorum, to go in Embassage to
foreign princes, and to exerce other civil functions in the commonwealth, as
is here said, is to exerce offices incompatible with their spiritual calling,
to bear rule and dominion among the nations, to entangle themselves with the
affairs of this life, and to neglect that spiritual calling, to which they
were sanctified and set apart from the rest of the citizens and subjects of the
kingdom. It was said of old that the Psalter should never be out of their
hands. They take the charge of a great Diocie, more then they are able to
compass within the fadome of their arms, and yet turn it over to their
Vicars, officialls, Chauncellours, Archdeacons Commissaries, and take upon them
offices which they confess are not Episcopal, but delegate only by the
Prince. O what a confusion has the pride and ambition of Clergymen brought
into the Church of God!

In jurisdiction by ordinary law attributed unto them in their own Diocie, is
to be considered, either the sinews of exercising it, or the jurisdiction it
self. The sinews of exercising their jurisdiction, are Ecclesiastical
censures, which may either be infl^cted upon laymen and Ecclesiastical
persons, or peculiarly upon Ecclesiastical persons only. Of the first sort
are 1. interdiction of divine service, 2. admonition, 3. suspension, either
from entrance into the Church, or from partaking of the sacraments, 4.
excommunication, 5. the great curse Anathema against a pertinacious heretic.
Of the second sort are 1. sequestration of the fruits of a church, 2.
suspension either from office, or office and benefice, 3. deprivation, 4.
deposition, and that is either verbal by sentence, or real, which is called
degradation. Of all which censures, one, to wit excommunication, is inflicted
for contumacie, either for not comp^iring in judgment, or not obeying the
mandates of the Church. The rest are inflicted as well for contumacie, as for
other actual offenses.

By interdiction, says Mucket, De Polit. p. 318.
a communaltie for some public offense, is deprived of divine service,
burial, administration, and receiving of the sacraments. Interdiction of a
certain place, as of a city or whole country, for some public and common
offenses committed by them, or the superior Magistrates, to whom they adhere,
whereby Churches are closed, divine service is subtracted, etc. The Bishop of
S^alato says, it is an impious invention, not known nor heard of in the Church
for a thousand year, and that it bred in Pope Hildebrands brain: and
concludes after some reasoning, ^on ergo legitima est, De^ep. eccl. 1. 5. c.
9. nu. 38. 39.
sed spuria haec cens^va ac (...) abominanda, quam Ecclesia pro sua (...)
ignosit.

Excommunication is distinguished by the Canonists, in the lesser or greater
excommunication. The lesser, De polit. p. 316.
says Mucket, is suspension from intrance into the Church, or only from
partaking of the sacrament, which Cyprian calls Abstentio, and it is
inflicted for contumaci^, and other offenses, but chiefly for contumacie, in
not compeiring in E^^lesiasticall Courts, or not obeying their ordonances. D.
Field says, that lesser excommunication excludes only from the sacraments,
which when it is pronounced against them that stubbornly stand out, Of the
chur. l. 1. c. ^5.
and will not yield themselves to the Churches direction or disposition, is
properly named excommunication; but when it is pronounced against then that
yield when they have offended, and seek the blessed remedies of the evils they
have committed, it is not so properly named excommunication, but it is an act
of the discipline of repentance. This suspension from entrance in the Church,
is against all reason: for even persons excommunicate should not be debarred
from hearing of the word: for the word is the mean and powerful instrument
whereby offenders are recalled. The greater excommunication, says Mucket, is,
whereby the offender is not only debarred from receiving the sacrament, or
entry in the Chapter but also from the fellowship of the faithful. Doctor Field
describes it thus: The greater puts the excommunicate from the Lords body
and blood, and depriveth them of that comfort and strength of grace, which from
it they might receive, it denies unto them the benefit of the Churches
public prayers, and so leaves them to themselves, as forlorn; and miserable
wretches, without that assistance, presen^^ and protection which from God she
obtains for her obedient children. The terms being thus unfolded, we have
to consider in the use of this censure, these special points; First, the laws
made under the pain of excommunication ipso facto. For in time of Popery,
there were two sorts of excommunication, one inflicted by the law or Canon,
when a man committing the offense and fact inhibited by the law; was made
subject to excommunication, without the ministry and proceeding of a judge,
which was called also excommunicatio latae sententiae. The sentence was not
left to the judge to pronounce, but was esteemed pronounced in the very law it
self. The other excommunication is inflicted by a judge after citation and
cononicall forewarning, wherein the sentence condemnatorie is pronounced by the
judge. The former leaves nothing to the judge, but the sentence declaratorie,
to declare, that seeing he is gultie of such a crime, he is already
excommunicated. The Bishop of Spalato, howbeit their great friend otherwise,
condemns this kind of excommunication, as absurd, 5. c. 9. nu. 2. 23. 24.
and perceives in it, magnum Papatus arcanu^ latere, cui et rudes imperiti
Canonistae seu potius Decretistae spiritum and robur addere sunt conanati. For,
says he, Excommunicare etenim est actu aliquem ligare, non potentia. Non enim
ligatur, qui potest, aut debet ligari, sed qui reipsa ligatur. How can a man as
yet invisible, indemonstrable, unknown to him that binds, be bound? This
bond cannot bind without a binder, and the presence or knowledge of him that is
bound. When such a Canon was made, there was a binder, and a bond, but none
present, or known to be bound. When the offense is committed, there is one to
be bound; but where is the binder? And yet in their latest Canons, made in the
first year of the Kings entry, they have made excommunication ipso facto to be
the sanction of many of their Canons: exco^municating ipso facto all such as
shall affirm the form of their Church service to be corrupt and
superstitious, the rites or ceremonies established by law to be wicked,
Antichristian, or superstitious the government of their Church by Archbishops,
Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, etc. to be Antichristian, or repugnant to the
word, or that the form and manner of making, or consecrating their Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, is not lawful, etc. So that at this day, the better sort
both of the ministry and professors amongst them, do stand excommunicate by
this Popish guise.

The next thing to be considered, is the sole authority of bishops
excommunicating by themselves alone, or their Deputies, Officials,
Chancellours, Archdeacons, the ministers and professors in whatsoever Church of
their large Diocie. When Christ said, Tell the Church, Math. 18. was this the
meaning, Tell my Lord Bishop, or his Chancellor, the Archdeacon, or his
official. Can this collective name Church by any shift be drawn to signify
one particular person, Canterburies grace himself, or the great Pope himself?
Is the Pope the universal Church, or the Bishop the diocesan Church, or his
Chancellor? Christ makes a gra^ation from one to two, at last to many. The
Apostle reproves the Corinthians because they had not already excommunicated
the incestuous person. And do ye not judge them that are Within, says the
Apostle, 1. Corinthians. 5. 12. In the second Epistle, chap. 2. v. 10. he
declares that they ha^ power to forgive and reconcile the same incestuous
person. And writing to the Thessalonians, he wills them, to note the man who
obeyed or harkned not to his Epistle; and to have no company with him, that he
may be ashamed, 2. Thessal 3. 14. Now there was no Bishop at all either at
Corinth or Thessalonica, as they themselves will grant, far^ less an usurping
Prelate, drawing all the power to himself. It is one of the weightiest
judgments in the Church, and therefore not to be permitted to the pleasure of
one man. It is not only the Bishop tha^ has this power alone, to
excommunicate by himself, or his Deputy, but also the Deane, Prebendaries,
and Canons in welnigh all the cathedral and collegiat churches throughout the
Realm, Assertion (...) church (...), p 41 9. ^.
having certain Parochial churches exempted from the Bishop within their
exempt and peculiar jurisdidictions, by mere Pastoral authority (for
Episcopal authority by the laws of the Church they have none) may exercise
all manner of spiritual censures, and that as well by their substitutes, as by
themselves. Nay, i^ hich is more, in Cheshire, Lancashire, Yorksire,
Richmondshire, and other Northern parts, there be many Whole Deanries exempted
from the Bishops jurisdiction, wherein the Deanes and their substitutes, have
not only the prohate of wills, and granting of administrations, but also the
cognizance of Ecclesiastical crimes with power to use the Ecclesiastical
censures; yea this authority of the execution of Ecclesiatsticall censares;
have those Deanes either long since by some Papal privileges obtained, or
else by long use prescribed against the Bishops. Whereby again it is clearly
convinced, that Episcopal excommunication used in the Church of England, is
not of divine institution, but only by humane tradition: for were it of divine
right, then could the same no more be prescribed, or by papal immunitie be
poss^ss^d, then could these Deanes prescribe power, or be infranchised to
breach the word, or to administer the ^acraments. Ye see, Cathedral Deanes,
Canons and Prebendaries in cathedral and collegiat churches, and some rural
Deanes, may use the Ecclesiastical censures. But the Pasto^s of the Churches
set over their flocks to govern and rule with power of the keys, are deprived
of the other half of their pastoral charge, and the pastoral staff, as I have
said, is taken from them. Thirdly, they excommunicate for trifles. The last
petition which was made the first year of the Kings entry, reports, thae
they excomunicate for trifles, and twelvepennie matters. If a man pay not the
fees of their Courts, he shall be excommunicate. For the Chancellors and
Officials, the Registers, and the rest of that rabble, must not want their
unreasonable dues.

They do not excommunicate in the congregation where the offender dwells,
but in their Courts in form of a writ in Latin, proclaimed in the Bishops or
Archbishops name, Discover. 241.
as Barrow reports, and so also is their absolution. The excommunication may
perhaps he intimated a long time after in the congregation, and the people
warned to beware of the man, who was excommunicate in their Court, perhaps for
a trifle. The Admonition to the Parliament says, that whereas the
excommunicate were never received till they had publicly confessed their
offense. Now for paying the fees of the Court they shall by M^ Official or
Chancellor easily be absolved. 5 The manner is that if the apparitor cannot
persanally cite the person to be summoned, he uses leave word at his house. If
he come not at the day, he is forthwith excommunicate, as the defender of the
last Petition ^oeth report. p. 182.
6. They transf^rre this power of excommunication to lay men. their
Chauncellours and officialls, whereof we shall entreat in the own place.

The curse Anathema, some do not distinguish from the great excommunication,
but only in some solemnities, because it is uttered with some external signs
and ceremonies to strike a greater terror. Others do distinguish it, and
Mucket defines it to be that censure, whereby a pernicious heretic as Gods
public enemy, rejected, cursed, execrate, is adjudged and given over unto
eternal judgment and damnation. This is answerable to that anathema, which
the Apostle calls Maranatha, or the Talmudists schamatha. But such a censure
cannot be inflicted, unless it be revealed to the church, that the offender
has sinned against the Holy ghost. Besides the censures common to lay men and
ecclesiastical persons already mentioned, there are these two reckoned by
Mucket, corporal penance, and denial of burial in sacred places. Corporal
penance is inflicted upon the outward man. For to the public confession of
the offense, there is some bodily penance adjoined and enjoined the offender.
As for example to stand upon a Lords day bareheaded, and barefooted, clothed
with a white sheet, having a white wand in his hand at the porch of the Kirck,
and when he enters into the Kirck to prostrate himself, to kiss the ground,
P. 328.
and then to come to the midst of the church and crave forgivenes. This manner
is descrived by Mack. Lindwood in his Provincial reckons for corporal
pennances, l 5. poenis. cap. euenit.
thrusting in a Monastery, imprisonment, striping, and the imprinting of a
mark upon the person. Many more ^ere the popish pennances, which turned into
satisfactions. For reme^d of corporal penance, the offendour may obtain a
redemption for some peeee of money, and this is called commutation of penance,
and so the sheet penance is turned into a purse penance. If the corporal
penance be ordained to a spiritual end, as they say, to afflict the body or
outward man, for humbling of the soul, how can it be excha^ged in a pecuniarie
mulct, which has no such operation with it, especially with the greater sort?
or did they ever read of the like but in the dark days of popery? Burial
they deny to such, as are strangled for felony, usurers, and others
excommunicated by their offi^ialls, and Chancellours.

The censures and punishments peculiar to ecclesiastical persons, are not all
of one nature. For some arise upon their meddling with causes civil, howbeit
abusiuely called ecclesiastical; as the sequestration of the fruits of a
benefice, and giving them for a time to the custody of another, for to defend
some man's right, or to chastise the cotumacie of the owner, which sequestration
if any man violate, he is to incur the greater excommunication by the old
constitutions of the English Church, says Muck^t. But seeing the original of
it is but temporal, it belongs nothing to Ecclesiastical Consistories.
Deprivation is the removing of a beneficed man from his benefice. A benefice is
a man's freehold, and therefore seeing his livelihood consists it he ought not
to be removed from it at the pleasure or judgment of one man. There is no
difference betwixt deposition and degradation, but that deposition is verbal,
inflicted by the sentence of the judge: degradation is real, as when the
Ecclesiastical person is denuded, or unclothed of the garments and ensigns of
his order, in presence of the civil Magistrate, to whom he is relinquished to
be punished for heresy, or some other great capital crime. Until this be
done, they are exemed from the stroke of the Magistrates sword, after the old
papistical manner: for to what use else serves this degradation? This censure
of deposition, as the rest, is in the hands of one man alone. D. Field
affirms, howbeit otherwise one of their own, Of the Chapter ^5. c. 27.
that the Bishop may do nothing in matters of greatest moment, and
consequence, without the advice and presence of presbyters, and in especial,
that he may not deprive, depose, or degrade by himself alone, and proves it
out of the 3. and 4. Council of Carthage.

That by the late Canons, in pronouncing the sentence after the process ended
before the Chauncelour, Commissarie, Official, the Bishop should have the
assistance of his Chauncelour, the Deane and some Prebendaries, or the
Archdeacon, is no point of reformation, as they pretend, for these are only
their servants, and followers, which are to them as the shadow to the body It
is said in the Canon law, that the consistory of the Bishop and the
Chauncelour, or principal official is all one, and therefore a man may not
appeal from the Official principal to the Bishop, and the Archdeacon is
called oculus (...) the Bishops eye. Further they observe the Canon, but as it
pleases them, for there is no sanction added unto it.

These are the censures and punishments which are the sinews of their
ordinary jurisaiction, by as they are (...) commissioners, or have civil
callings committed to them by the Prince, they have their pr^sons, as Clinke,
Gatchouses, Colehouses, towers, and Castles, both for laymen, and
eccl^siasticall persons.

The jurisdiction it self, is either voluntary or contentious.

Voluntary jurisdiction is, when the person, with whom the Bishop deals, does
not stand against it. Contentious is, when such causes are handled against
which some party stands, or else dealt with thereby against his will. For it
is to be thought, that the party defendant, will not willingly compeir, and
unless he be compelled, and therefore is presumed to come against his will.

Voluntary jurisdiction is established, either by statute, or by the Municipall
law, or by the Municipal law, and confirmed by the ecc^^siasticall, or by the
ecclesiastical, and confirmed by the Municipall.

1. By the statute as 1. to grant license for a time to eat flesh upon
forbidden days, 2. that any being approved, ^ay exercise Ph^sicke, or
Chirurgetie, or instruct children in that Diocie. 3. to unite and consolida^e
lesser Kirkes according to a statute made thereanent. 4. to assist civil
Judges in executing certain statutes, which concern Ecclesiastical causes,
5. to collect tenthes and subsidies duc by Ecclesi^sticall persons, and that
either by taking a stresse, or by Ecclasiasticall censures.

The 1. is superstitious, the 2. is impertinent, except that part which
concerns Schoolemaisters, but that should not be at his sole disposition. P.
61
The petition to the Queen relates, that li^ences are granted to Scholmasters
for money to teach. The 3. likewise is not to be ordered at his will, and may
very well be ordered without him. So may the 4. if it were needful. The 5. is
not an office competent to his calling, neither is the manner of exacting to be
allowed.

By the Municipall law, as 1. to certify at the kings rescript, the civil
Judges of Bastardie and unlawful Births, of lawful and unlawful marriages. 2.
to require the kings rescript for burning a pertinacious heretic already
condemned. 3. to require the kings rescript for committing to prison the person
which persisteth with an obstinate mind excommunicate 40. days.

The 1. may be done other by them, or without them. The 2. for the kind of
punishment and form of proceeding is a part of the Maximinian law, which was
made in the time of K. Henry 4. whereof the ^ath ex officio is the other part.
The 3. is used after this manner. If one be excommunicate for the smallest
trifles in their Courts, or for a supposed offense, where there is none indeed.
if he stand wilfully 40. days together excommunicate, and accordingly
certified by the Bishop into the Chauncerie, that then he is to be committed to
prison, by virtue of a writ directed to the Sheriff, P. 8.
says the author of the Apology of certain proceedings in Courts
Ecclesiastical. Neither is intimation at the common law required, but these
certificats mention only in generality the parties coutumacie and
disobedience. The effect of the writ de excommunicato capiendo, is twofold, 1.
upon the certificate of the Bishop the party excommunicated is to be debarred
action in all the Queens Courts. 2. the party is to be imprisoned, and is not
to be delivered, unless he submit himself to the Bishop, except he has
appealed to a superior Ecclesiastical judge.

By the municipall law, and confirmed by the Ecclesiastical, as 1. to cause
the testaments of the deceased to be proved, and registrate, 2. to grant the
administration of the goods of him who died intestate, to the nearest kinsman.
3. when no man will enter here, to command to collect and keep in custody
Bona caduca. 4. to cause account to be rendered of the savd administration, and
to approve and reject the same, as law shall require.

All ^auses testamentarie, and their appendicles are impertinent for Episcopal
audience, or any Eccl^siasticall o^sistorie. Bona caduca is taken in the laws,
as when failing him to whom they belonged by law, the goods fall to another, as
the akorn which falls to the ground, when there is none to take it up, is
called Caduc^ glans.

By law Ecclesiastical, and confirmed by the Municipall, as 1. to confer
benefices, or to institute into a benefice at the presentation of others. 2. to
command the persons institu^ed to be inducted. 2. to command the fruits of
vacant benefi^es, to be gathered and kep^ in su^e custody by some indifferent
man, to the use of the next successor. 4. to assign a competent portion to a
vicar^ 5. To grant dimissorie or testimonial letters. 6. to visit every third
year the Diocie.

O^ institution, collation induction, we shall entreat in a fitter place. As
for the third, the sequestration of the fruits of the vacant benefices, the
author of the Assertion of the true Christian Church policy, thus writes. By
the interest where by the Bishop challenges to be custos Eccl. siarum, there
happen as bad, if not worse, then these* for there is no sooner a Church void,
but a post is sent in all haste with letters of sequestiction to sequester the
fruits, to the use of the next incumbent; which next incumbent for the greater
care taken to preserve the fruits to his use, before he can obtain to be put
in real possession, must pay 10. shillings, or a mark, or more, for these
letters of sequestiation, with as much more also for letters, so called, of
relaxation, besides 2 pence 3 pence, or 4 pence a mise for pottage Somner* ^
And from hence, as ^ take it, is the Patron very much (...): For he being, as
appears by the Statute of 25 Edm. 3. Lord and Avower of the Benefice ought to
have the custody, and possession, thereof during vacancie. The fourth should
not be at the Bishops carving, but it is no great matter what be modified to
them, seeing they are for the most part hirelings or blind guides. As for the
fifth, it is agreeable to good ordour, that no Clergy man passing from one
Diocese to another, should be admitted to take on any cure without letters of
commendation, and a Testimonial of their honest life and conversation, and
sufficient qualification: but that this should be in the Bishops power is
against reason, and therefore no wonder if many abuses and inconveniences arise
upon their flight Passe-ports. Visitation is needful, and it were better for
the Church, if it were annual: But that the Bishop, or any other should be
sole Visitor, is hurtful. A number is more able to make a sharp inquiry, for
more eyes see better then one, and would not be so foone drawn away with
corrupt partiality.

The chief part then of voluntary jurisdiction, is every three year to visit
the Diocie, and to enquire by the Churchwardens and Sidemen, of the excesses,
and defects, either of the minister, of the Church wardens themselves, or the
rest of the parishioners. Or the Minister, as he is Minister, or as he is
another sort of man. As Minister, either in respect of his public function, in
committing, or omitting what he ought not: or in respect of his private life;
for many things are tolerate in lay men, which do not bes^eme Ministers. Or
the Churchwardens themselves, and that concerning their office, either in the
Kirk or temple, or out of it. O^ the rest of the Parishoners, ^ither as having
some peculiar function, or any other Christians. As having peculiar function,
Physicians, Chyrurgians, Schoolemasters, Mid-wives, if they exercise their
function, not being approved, or use ^^rcerie or superstition: keepers of
hospitals, when according to their foundation, the Bishop is only appointed
visitor or no other. Of the other Christians offending against pie^ie,
righteousness, sobriety. Against piety, as by blasphemy against God, or the
holy scripture, idolatry, superstition, s^rcerie, if it be such, as by civil
laws of the kingdom is either not at all corrected, or by order and dir^ction
of the laws, is made also subject to Ecclesiastical censures, Breach of oath
(called Laesio fidei) made before an Ecclesiastical Judge, or voluntarily to
any private man, Heresy, error against the Articles of Religion set forth in a
National Syno^ holden the year 1562. and confirmed by royal authority,
sch^^me, unlaw^ul conventicles, absence from divine service in their own parish
upon the Lords daye^, or other festival days, where there is not a lawful
impediment, unlawful abstinence from par^aking of the Lords Supper, which is
to be celebrated thrice every year. Against justice, calumny contumely,
r^proach anent any cause Ecclesiastical, Simoniacall suing for sacred orders
or degrees, or of a benefice. Usury above the rate often in the hundred by
year. Temerarious administration of the goods of the deceased, subornation of
perjurie* falsehood or forgerie committed in any Ecclesiastical action,
violence to a minister, de^eining of that which was left in legacy to the use
of the poor, or of goods due to the public uses of the Church, d^^apidation
of Ecclesiastical goods, and buildings. Against sobriety, as incontiniencie
whatsoever, committed with one of his kindred or blood, or of alliance, either
of them within the 4. degree, exclusive, according to the computation of the
civil law, which is called incest, or adultery, or committed with a widow,
which is called stuprium, or where both be single, termed fornication, fi^thy
speech, solicitation of another chastity, drunkenness, clandestine
marriages, either in respect of consent of parents or tutors not obtained, or of
the private place, or witnesses more* then two not being present, or the bannes
not proclaimed three several times, upon the Lords days, or holy days in
lawful distance.

In this table we have an enumeration of offenses belonging to Ecclesiastical
cognizance, but it is unsufficient. For there are many more, then are here
expressed: as Theft, Sacrilege, Murder, Profanation of the Sabbath. Sodomie,
disturbance of divine service, Polygamie, Diffamation, etc. as by opening of
the 10. commandments may be drawn out to a great number, which ought to be
censured by the Church. This partition wall of crimes made in the Canon Law, to
make some crimes temporal, others spiritual, has made the crimes reputed
Ecclesiastical to be neglected by the Magistrates, and many crimes not
reputed Ecclesiastical, on the other side to be neglected by the Church. As
Adultery, howbeit by Gods law it be capital, and so ought to be also by the
law of man, is not made capital by their laws, but referred to the
Ecclesiastical Courts, as proper to them; many sins of witchcraft, and
sorcerie likewise: And on the other side a Thief should not pass uncensured
by the Church, howbeit he be overseen by the Magistrate. For the church ought
to deal with every scandalous sinner, to bring the sinner to repentance,
notwithstanding the Magistrate pardon, or neglect to punish. Next they have the
offenses there reckoned up only for the fashion, and of others not their
mentioned, they take a severe^ account. As for example, Mucket does add these
following: Delay of Baptism at the point of death, contempt of Episcopal
confirmation, not bowing the knee at the Letanie, and at the name of Jesus,
reproaches against the Liturgy, the government of the Church, etc. Profanation
of the Chalice and the plate: Profanation of the Churchyards with Markets or
Faires, with weapon showing, with dancing, etc. In the Admonition to the
Parliament it is said, Now great sins, either not at all punished, as
blasphemy, usurie, drunkenness, etc. or else slieghtly passed over, as with
pricking in a blanket, or pinning in a sheet, as Adultery, Whoredom, etc.
Again such as are no sins, as if a man conform not himself to Popish orders,
and ceremonies; if he come not at the whistle of him who has no authority to
call, we mean Chanscellours, Officials, and all that rabble, are grievously
punished, not only by Excommunication, Suspension, Deprivation, and other, as
they term it, spiritual coertion, but also by banishing, impris^ning,
reviling, taunting, etc. So howbeit the offenses; which are abovementioned in
the Table; belong to Ecclesiastical inquiry in respect of the slander, they
are taken from the lawful iudicatorie of the Church, and transferred to the
Bishop to enquire, as he thinks good. And therefore it is but pro froma, that
they are here set down. Simonie is one of the number, and yet what Simonie is
committed, and how that may be dispensed with, we have already manifested.
Where is horrible blasphemy so rife? It were longsome to go through all the
particulars. But this I cannot pass with silence, anent the profanation of
the Lords day, howbeit it be not here expressed. The Bill for the better
observation of the Sabbath, 27 Elizabeth, being ^assed by both houses of
Parliament, was notwithstanding gainesaid, Assertion of ^rist Poli. ^ag. 187.
and withstood by none so much as by certain Evangelical Bishops, and which,
as there men generally conceived, was only stayed from being made a Law by the
Queen, upon their counsel and perswaasion. When the Bshop does visit, he
does not visit every parish by it self as our Presbyteries wont to do, but
all the Parishes in the bounds of four or five rural D^anries at once. When
his lordship comm^th to some principal Kirk of one of the Deanries, then the
Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen within the bounds of those Deanries are
to repair to that place, Mucket 325. 326.
The Parishes which perhaps have just matter of complaint against their
dissolute Minister, of Church wardens, are not warned to be present at this
Visitation. The Bishop being set on high, and the rest standing before him: the
Churchwarden touching the book and kissing it, is enjoined at an appointed day
to make known to the Bishop, or his Vicar, such offenses as in a book of
Articles given them are expressed. For he has his Chancellor or Vicar and
Archdeacon, to assist him. At the appointed time the Churchwardens come, and
give up their bills of presentiments, the names and dwelling places of the
delinquents. The delinquents are sent for, if they can round over the matter
with the bishop, or his chancellor, or vicar, there is no more of the matter;
but if not, then is the delinquent enjoined to take an oath: suppose there be
no evidence of the crime* but only a slanderous report and bruit, and if he
free not himself by an oath, he shall be holden as guilty: yea further, he
must have six or eight besides to swear at a set day, their oath of
credulity, that they persuade themselves he has sworn the truth, and thus he
is purged by canonical purgation. Thus are they very careful, when the matter
is not rounded over. For, as Lindwood, Canterburies principal Official, who
wrote about 200. years since, says, De vit^ and honest. (...) little. ^. 1 S a
crapule verb vigilan^er.
Vigilare non curant proelati quamplures ut obseruentur statuta nullam
utilitatem bursalem inducenti^: Many Prelates are not vigilant and careful to
have statutes observed which bring no purse profit with them. Many abuses and
corruptions are in their V^sitations, no doubt, which have not as yet come to
my knowledge, but you must be content good Reader with the little, that I have
delivered.

In contentious jurisdiction, are to be considered either the persons, or the
causes judged, or judgment it self. The persons, either the ordinary judge,
or else his surrogate, or the parties, the pursu^r and def^ndant: and they do
plade, either by themselves, or by others; as by the advice of advocates, or
the diligent travels of their Procurators. The things judged, are either of
public, or private interest: of public, as I contribution for reparations of
the Church fabric, and Churchyard dike, and for acquiring any other thing
which is l^cking in the Kirk: or 2 punishment some Ecclesiastical offense, or
contumely.

It is true, every Church ought to be careful to hold up the fabrik of the
Church, and to furnish it with all necessary utensils: but if the Parishioners
who ought to be contributories, be slack, they ought to be pursued for the
money in the Kings Courts, not in Church consistories. If a man holding land
which usually paid a pound of wax to the Church, do withhold it, the
Churchwarden may very welpursue before a civil judge. Suchlike if the Church
be uncovered, or the churchyard unclosed. Church officers may not impose
taxations.

Of private interest in causes of 1. matrimony, 2. succ^ssion to the goods of
the deceased, 3. Ecclesiastical rights. Of matrimony. either by action, or
for supporting* or dissolving of it. By action, either to conciliate and knit,
as when we sue at law, that matrimony may be celebrate and consummate
according to the contract, or that after the celebration, the mutual marriage
duties may be performed, which is called Actio directa, or when we intend
actio^ of lactication of ma^^mony against another, who falsely pretends a
matrimonial contract to our prejudice, which is called Actio contraria. For
supporting or upholding of matrimony, as when aft^r the marriage, we sue for
the money promised in dowry with the Bride. For dissolving of matrimony,
either for a precontract matrimonial of either of the parties, with some
other, or perpetual and incurable frigiditie, or consanguinitie or affinity
by lawful or unlawful copulation, or adultery, or for rigorous dealing, in
which case separation from the bed, and bo^rd, but not from the bond is
granted.

Such matrimonial causes as are mere civil, belong not to Ecclesiastical
courts, as debts and dowries promised in marriage are not properly demandable
in Ecclesiastical courts. Matrimony as it is a civil contract, may be
ordered by civil laws, seeing upon it depends the right of inheritances
providing that nothing be done repugnant to these conditions, which God in his
word has superadded to that contract, as to determine within degrees
prohibited, or polygamie to be lawful. So far as it is divine, in that God
conjoyneth and interveneth as third person, and setts down conditions both of
conjunction and dissolution, in the word, the Church is to see, that that order
and these caveats be observed, which are contained in the word. For it may
fall out, that both in binding up of marriage they may commit incest, and in
dissolving without a just cause may offend also. It is the Churches duty to
prevent and remove such offenses. But of other laws civil and municipal, they
are not executors. These laws which are divine, are of a mixed nature. These
which are civil, belong only to the civil Magistrate. The Churches part is
transferred to the cognizance of officials, to whom it does not belong. And
therefore Beza concerning this abuse writes thus. Sed quorsum hoc ad
officiales, Volum. 2. D^^repudijs and Divortjs. p. 3^5.
promotores, procuratores, totam denique illam procorum colluviem, quae
Ecclesiam Dei i^mpride^ devastat, quorsum hoc ad illa non Ecclesiae tantu^modo
Christianae, verumetia^ universi mundi de- But what makes this, says he, for
officialls, promoters, Proctors, and all that filth of swine, which now a long
time does waste the Church of God? What is this to these shameful stains, not
only of the Christian Church, but also of the whole world. Further, beside the
Churches part, which is to take heed to offenses and breach of Gods law, they
have taken the Canon law for the rule of their proceedings, both in spousalls,
marriages, and divorces. And thirdly, have taken in debts and dowries, goods and
chattels, which are accessorie to marriage, to judge upon, and this must be
called Ecclesiastical cognizance. Lastly, these causes are of such weight,
that they are not to be committed to the skill or conscience of one base
official.

It is observed by the author of the Assertion for Christian policy, that men's
inheritances many times hang in suspense upon question of l^gitimation or
illegitimation of their children, to be allowed or disallowed by the Canon law,
and that many Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen do complain, and bewa^le the
stealing away, and marriages of their daughters, neeces, near kinswomen, or
wards. Couples have been married, and lived together 4 6, or more years as man
and wife, and upon a new and sudden dislike and coffeehouse, or upon a
surmised precontract, pretensedly proved by two suborned witnesses, by virtue
of the Canon law the husband was adjudged no husband, and the wife no wife.
Another example he relates of one solemnly married to a wife, and after by
reason of a precontract, solemnly divorced from the same wife, and compelled by
censures of the Church to marry her for whom sentence of precontract was
adjudged, and yet authorized by the same consistory about ten or twelve years
after the divorce to resummon, recall, and rechallenge his first wife, she
having a testimonial out of the same consistory, of her lawful divorce, and
being again solemnly married to another husband. Licenses of marriage have been
granted out of their Ecclesiastical Court with a blanke. So the party
licenced was enabled, if it had been their pleasure, to marry another man's
wife, or his wives sister. Many more gross absurdities are there alleged by
the learned author, which the Reader will s^arce believe. But I omit them, and
many other things which might be said anent the particulars set down in this
Table.

Succes^^on to the goods of the deceased, is either or him, who has made his
testam^nt, or who has died intestate. The first (...) her universal, when the
plea is for proving or improving the testament exhibited, or particular when
the suit is for to obtain a cer^ain lega^ie. The second is, either properly,
when no testament is made, or by way of in^estate, as when there is none who
will take upon them the burden of executorie. In either of the cases the
action is either to obtain the administration of the goods, and that either
simply, or with the later will annexed, that it may be fulfilled, or wit^ the
tutorship, and to the use of the Min^r^ or else the action is against him that
ingyreth himself into the administration, and intrometteth with the goods of
the deceased, not being enabled with any warrant.

Causes testamentarie, and their appendicles, are mere civil and temporal,
and therefore do not belong to spiritual Courts. It is by the grant of Kings,
not by Ecclesiastical right, that Church consistories have meddled with such
causes. Because Bishops were supposed to be men of good conscience, and that
they would be careful to see the later will of the deceased performed, then
others, therefore they were reserved to Episcopal audience, and cognizance of
Ecclesiastical Courts. But this respect was not founded upon Gods word. For we
must not look so much to conscience, as to a lawful calling: or else all
civil causes pleaded before a Judge should be referred to Churchmen, because
of their supposed good conscience. And the truth is, it is but supposed indeed.
For a Bishop or pastor that will meddle in matters impertinent to his calling,
has but a bad conscience. Such a man will never make conscience of it, more
then another religious Christian. And what conscience they made of the matter,
may be seen, in that they transferred that which was committed to their
trust, to a base Official, who has as bad a conscience as the Bishop
himself, and badder, if badder may be. And as for skill in deciding such
causes, no man will deny, but the civil judges are more able to cognosce and
determine in them, then Churchmen. By the common law, says Lindwood, these
causes were not committed unto the Church, but by the free grant of Princes:
And therefore in the laws alleged by him, approbation and insinuation of
testaments are forbidden Clergiemen. Et ratio redditur in juribus illis
allegatis, De testamen^ (...) cap. ^em verb. extorqueant.
quia opprobrium est clericis, si peritos ostendere vel^^t rerum for ^ense^^^.
May not matters of legacies, and bequests of goods, as well as of lands, be
determined in remporall Courts? Cannot the Judges in temporal courts discern
upon proofs, and other presumptions, whether the testator was of perfect
memory, or distracted, as they do in questions of lunacie, madness, or
idiocie, in men living? Can they not define of two wills, which is the first,
which is the later will, whether the legacy remain, or be recalled; whether
it be pure or conditional. If a creditor may recover his debt due by the
testator in the te^porall Court, what should hinder a legatarie to recover his
legacy in the same Court? P. 105. 106
This point is made clear, and amplified in the Assertion of true and
Christian Church policy.

To conclude then, probates of wills, committing of Administrations,
sequestrations of the goods of the intestate, recovering of legacies, taking up
of inventaries, etc. belong not to a Church Consistory, and it is a very great
abuse that such Consistories should be called Church consistories, and that
spiritual censures should be put in execution by them.

Ecclesiastical dues and rights, are 1. tithes, which are either Praediall,
Personal or Mixed.

Praediall tithes are such, as come of the fruits and crop of the ground, as of
corn, or fruits of trees. Personal are such, as are paid by reason of the
person himself, out of the gain that he makes of this trading, handicraft,
hunting, warfaring, etc. The Mixed is added by some as a third kind, but others
reduce them according to their diversity to one of the first two, and such are
the birth of bestiall, wool, milk, whether they be fed at home, or be at
pasture in the field. Tithes of whatsoever kind, are but temporal goods, not
spiritual, howbeit they be annexed to spiritual things, and be appoyn^ed to
uphold and maintain divine service, and spiritual functions. Tithes were of
old recovered in the Kings Court, not in Ecclesiastical, as is averred in a
treatise alleged by the author of the Apology of proceedings in Courts
Ecclesiastical. ^^art. 1. p. ^.
We think that the Kings Courts be put out of iu^^sdiction for tithes, by a
custom of the Realm, and not by the immediate power of the law of God. And
again. That suits for tithes shall be taken in the spiritual court, is only
grounded upon a favor that the Kings of this realm, and the whole realm have
in times past borne to the Clergy. That the kings Courts of his Bench, and
common pleas, and also other inferior courts were put out of jurisdiction for
tithes, and suits for tithes were granted to spiritual Courts, was a favor,
it is true, granted to the Clergy, inabling them with power within themselves
to recover tithes destinate to their maintenance, but we must not look so much
to the commodity we may reap by the grants of Princes, as whether Church
consistories should meddle with such controversies concerning things temporal.
This man owe me a cole, that man a sti^k, the third two stone of butter, the
fourth such a number of Saffron heads, the fifth so many sallow Trees: such, and
such suits, were very pertinent for a Presbytery to sit upon; for the
Presbytery is the true and right Consistory. Now change this Consistory as
ye please, and make the Bishop alone to be the Church consistory, it is all
one For the causes themselves being temporal, the quality of the person does
not alter the nature of the cause. In the Assertion for true and Christian
policy, it is said, That by a statute 32. Hen 8. c. 44. it is enacted, That
the Parsons, P. 99.
and Curates of five Parish Chu^^hes whereunto the Town of Royston did extend
it self and every of them, and the successors of every of them, shall have
their remedy by authorit^ of that Act, to sue, demand, ask, and recover in
the Kings Court of Chancerie, the tithes of corn, hay, wool* lamb, and
Calfe, subtracted, or devyed to be paid by any person, or persons. Are the
tithes of other Parishes more spiritual then these of Royston? But admitting
such pleas to be pertinent for a spiritual Court, they should not be turned
over to a Civilian, the Bishops Official. And what favor is granted to Church
men by Princes, when a Doctor of the Law shall determine in these pleas!

2. Oblations due of custom either every quarter of the year, or in
baptismes, or at blessing of marriages or at Churching of women, or at burials:
3 Mortuaries* 4 Indemnities, 5 Procu^a^ions. 6 expenses laid forth for the
repairing of Ecclesiastical buildings decayed by the negligence of the
Predecessor, 7. Synodalls, 8. wages and feel due for causes judicial, as to
the Judge, the Advocate, the Proctor, the Clarke. Or for causes out of
judgment, as to the Curate or Sexten.

A procuration is the furnishing of necessary expenses for the Archbishop,
Bishop, Archdeacon, or any other having power to visit in respect of their
visitations. For howbeit the Bishops have great temporalities and possessions
Ecclesiastical, that does not content them, but they must be sustained besides
in their traveling. They say, they must have great riches, because they have a
great burden, and must not discharge their charge still in one place, but
through the whole Diocie. And yet when they have gotten more then may suffice
reasonable men, they will not travel without a new pension, and their expenses
borne. For no man is bound, say they, to go on warfare on his own cost. And
so with a new trick they got procurations annexed to their visitations, as
proper stipends due to visitors. At the first, the visitor and his retinue, had
their sustentation in victuals for the day which he visited the particular
Church. Afterward the procuration was rated to some value of money, answerable
respectively to the dignity of an Archbishop, or Archdeacon: for their retinue
was prescribed in the Canons and Constitutions. The Archdeacon was appointed to
have only to have 4. persons on horseba^ke, and one Sumner. What think ye then
shall be the retinue of the Bishop or Archbishop, if this be moderate in the
Archdeacon. Farther, whereas they ought not to have procurations, except they
visit every particular Church. They will visit 30. or 40. churches in one day
at one place, and yet receive the diet in money of 30. or 40. churches or
days. They make commodity of their visitations otherwise also, as ye have
heard. Synodals are another pension due to the Bishop by every Church in the
Diocie for convocating Synods. And yet their Synods are not worthy the name of
Synods, for the Diocesan Bishop is only Lord and Judge, the rest are to be
judged, rather then to partake in common with his power. A Mortuarie is the
second beast, that the deceased person has within the parish, if he have
three, or above, the best being excepted and reserved to the just owner. If the
three be of one kind, or of diverse, the parish Priest must have the second: and
wherefore I pray you? for recompensation of the personal tithes, or offerings
withholden, while he lived, yea howbeit ignorantly and unwittingly, L. 1. de
consuetud (...), statutum.
says Lindwood, and to what end, pro salute animae suae, says Simon Langham
Bishop of Canterbury in his Provincial constitution. For the safety of the
soul consists in remission of the sin, says Lindwood in his gloss upon
that constitution, which is not remitted, says he, unless that which is
withholden be restored. These are the Mortuaries, as ye see, which are
demandable in their spiritual courts. Oblations should be free from
compulsion, and superstition, not offered immediately to God upon the Altar, as
sometimes they do, nor exacted under the color of maintenance of the
ministry, whereto the tithes are already bestowed to that use. The rich
parson, yea the Bishop himself claims a right to these oblations, as well as
the poorest Priest. To compel men to offer by the censures of their Courts, is
against the nature of a free offering. The fees demandable in their Courts, as
due to the Judge, the Register, the Advocates, the Proctors, are unreasonable.
Large fees are paid for the Judges sentence, for the Register and the proctors
pains, above the rate set down by their Canons, as the defender of the last
petition does affirm. P. 113.
What is there obtained without paying a fee? They have fees for
excommunication, Assert. of Christ. poli. p. 73. 74.
for absolution, for institution and induction, for letters of sequestration,
and relaxation, for licenses to preach, for subscription of a testimonial, for
commutation of penance, for license to marry without bannes, etc.

The judgment it self, in which is to be considered, 1. the calling for the
parties to law, 2. Litis contestation, 3. cognition of the cause, 4. the
sentence, 5. such things as follow the sentence, as execution, or appellation.

These things are common to every court of contentious or litigious
jurisdiction. Here is to be observed, that such a litigious kind of pleading
for things civil and temporal, becomes not the Church of God. Nos scimus,
says the Bishop of Spalato, Lib. 3. cap. 8. number. 13.
quia 1. Cor. 11. contentione^ faciendi Ecclesia Dei cons^etudinem non habit,
nisi postquam facta est p^ne tota temporalis, and pervenerint ad papatum
inquieti and theologiae expe^^^ juristae. Here also is to be remembered the
longsomnesse of Ecclesiastical suits, depending in their Courts. P. 219.
Now the Judge, Register, Advoca^t, Proctor, are all agreed to prolong suits
for their advantage, and so as the Prophet says, they wrap it up, Mich. 7. 3.
says the Defender of the last petition. Where he does also insinuate that
suits have been prolonged above two years in their consistories.

We have seen what civil causes, and after what manner they are handled.
Criminal causes are brought in judgment, either by accusation, when there is
one to accuse, or by denunciation, as when the Churchwardens make their
presentiments into there courts, twice in the year, and at the visitations, or by
inquisition, when the judge of office does inquire into offenses. What are the
offenses and crimes punishable in Ecclesiastical Courts, and what are these
which they chiefly search out and punish, we have declared in the table of
Visitation.

CHAP. 5. Of Archdeacons, Chancellors, Commissaries Officials, and Vicars
general.
NOW follows the jurisdiction exercised by the Bishops Deputies, and
Archdeacons, whereunto I will premit the rest of Sir Francis Bacon now Lord
Chancellor his censure.

For the second point, which is the deputation of their authority, I see no
perfect and sure ground for that neither, being somewhat different from the
examples and rules of government. The Bishop exercises his jurisdiction by his
Chauncellor and Commissary, Officialls, etc. We see in all laws of the world,
officer of skill and confidence cannot be put over or exercised by Deputy,
except it be specially contained in the Original granted, and in that case it
is dutiful. There was never any Judge, in any court, made a Deputy. The
Bishop is a Judge, and of a high nature; Whence comes it that he should
depute, considering that all trust and confidence, (as was said) as personal,
and inherent, and cannot, and ought not to be transposed? Surely in this
again, Ab initio non fuit ita. But it is probable, that Bishops* when they
gave themselves too much to the glory of the world, and became Grandoes in
kingdoms, and great Counselors to Princes, then did they delegate their proper
jurisdictions, as things of too inferior nature for their greatness, and then
after the similitude of kings, and Count Palatines, they would have their
Chauncellors and Judges.

But that example of Kings and Potentates gives no good defense. For the
reasons why kings administer by their Judges (altho^gh themselves are the
supreme Judges) are two. The one, because the offices of Kings are for the
most part inheritance, and it is a rule in all laws, that offices of
inheritance are rather matters, that sound is interest, then in confidence,
forasmuch as they may fall upon women, upon infants, upon lunatickes, and
Idiots, persons not able to exercise Judicature in person, and therefore such
offices by all laws, might ever be administered by delegation, The second
reason is, because of the amplitude of their jurisdiction, which is as great,
as either their birthright from their Aun^estours, or their sword-right from
God, makes them. And therefore Moses, that was governor over no great people,
and those collected together in a camp, and not scattered in Provinces, and
Cities, himself l^kewise of an extraordinary spirit, was nevertheless not
able to suffice, and hold out in person, to judge the people, but did by the
advice of Ie^hro his father in law, approved from God, substitute Elders and
Judges, how much more other Kings and P^inces.

There is a 3 reason likewise not much from the present purpose, and that is,
that Kings either in respect of the commonwealth, or of the greatness of
their own patrimonies, are usually parties in suits, and then their Judges
stand indifferent between them and the subject. But in the case of Bishop,
none of these reasons hold. For first, the office is E^ective and for life, and
not patrimoniall, or hereditarie. An office worthy of science, confidence, and
qualification. And for the second reason it is true, their jurisdiction is
ample and spacious, and that their time is to be divided between their
labors, as well in the word and doctrine, as government, and jurisdiction. But
I do not see, supposing the Courts to be used uncorruptly, and without any
indirect course held to multiply causes for gain of fees, but that the Bishop
might very well for causes of moment supply his judicial function in his own
person. For we see before our eyes, that one Chancellor of England
dispatcheth the suits in equity of the whole kingdom, which is not by reason
of the excellency of that rare honorable person, who now holds that place,
but it was ever so, though more or less burthenous to the suitor, as the
Chancellor was more or less able to give dispatch, and if heed be taken to
that, which was said before, that the Bishops labor in the word must take up a
principal part of his time, so I may say again, that matter of state have
ever taken up most of the Chauncellours time, having been for the most part
persons, upon whom the Kings of this Realm have most relied for matters of
Counsel. And therefore there is no doubt, but the Bishop whose circuit is less
ample, and the causes in nature not so multiplying, where the help of
references, Certificates, to and from fit persons, for the better ripening of
causes in their near proceedings, and such ordinary helps incident to
jurisdiction, may very well suffice his office. Yet there is another help: for
the causes that come before him are those, tithes, legacies, administrations,
and other testamentarie causes, causes Matrimonial, accusations against
Ministers, tending to their suspension, deprivation or degrading. Symonie,
incontinencie, heresy, breach of Sabbath, and other like causes of scandal.
The first two of these differ in mine opinion, from the rest, that is, tithes
and testaments, for those be matters of profit, and in their nature temporal,
though by favor and connivencie of the temporal jurisdiction, they have been
allowed and permitted to the Court Ecclesiastical. The one, to the end the
Clergy might sue for that, that was their sustentation, before their own
Judges, and the other, is a kind of piety and religion which was thought
incident to the performance of dead men's wills. And surely for these two, the
Bishop in mine opinion may with less danger, discharge himself upon his
ordinary Judges. And I think likewise, it will fall out that those suits are
in the greatest number. But for the rest which require a spiritual science,
and discretion in respect of their nature, or of the scandal, it were reason
in mine opinion, that there were no audience given, but by the Bishop himself,
he being assisted, as was touched before. But it were necessary also, he were
attended by his Chancellor, or some other his officers, being learned in the
civil laws, for his better instructions in points of formalitie, or the
courses of the Court, which if it were done, then were there less use of the
official Court, whereof there is now so much complaint. And causes of the
nature aforesaid being drawn to the audience of the Bishop, would repress
frivolous suits, and have a grave and incorrupt proceeding to such causes, as
shall be fit for the Court. There is a third form also, not of jurisdiction,
but of form of proceeding, which may deserve reformation, the rather because
it is contrary to the laws and customs of this land, and state, which though
they do not rule this proceeding, yet may they be advised with for better
directions, and that is the oath ex officio, wherein men are forced to accuse
themselves; and that is more, are sworn unto blankes, and not unto
accusations, and charges declared. By the laws of England, no man is bound to
accuse himself. In the highest causes of treason, torture is used for
discovery, and not for evidence. In capital matters, no delinquents answer
upon oath is required, no not permitted. In criminal matters not capital,
handled in the Star Chamber, and in causes of conscience, handled in the
Chauncerie, for the most part, grounded upon trust and secrecy, the oath of
the party is required. But how? where there is an accusation, and an accuser,
which we call bills of complaint (from which the complaint cannot vary, and
out of compass of the which the defendant may not be examined) exhibited into
the court, and by process certified unto the defendant. But to examine a man
upon oath* out of the insinuation of fame, and out of accusations secret or
undeclared, though it have some countenance from the civil law, yet it is so
opposite ex Diametro, to the sense of the common law, as it may well receive
some limitation.

This wise Politician makes this overture, supposing that the Bishops ample
and spacious circuit will not be contracted, and that these causes, which in
their own nature are temporal, wlll not be drawn from the ecclesiastical
Courts. For such a reformation is not, nor may not be (...) at in these days,
at least Politicians will not hazard their places and hopes in seeking of it,
le^t Caesar ^tart. But their is a day coming for the Antichrist, and them also.
What we have spoken before against meddling with civil causes, their large
Diocie, and excluding the Presbytery from the common government here not
m^lled with, I need not to repeat. Always the reader may take up very solid
reasons against the deputation of their authority.

The ordinary Judges, who under the Prince execute judicial administration in
name of others, are the Bishops deputies, to wit, the Vicar general, for the
universitie of causes belonging to voluntary jurisdiction, 2. The official
principal, for the universitie of causes belonging to contentious
jurisdiction. 3. The Comm^ssary, for certain^ causes, within a certain part of
the Diocie.

The persons having judicial admininistration not brought in by any law, have
it either by Royal composition, or privilege, or prescription of time. By
prescription of time as 1. some in exempt jurisdictions. 2. Archdeacons, whose
office constitute by law, is to enquire in the repairing and covering of Kirks,
and their implements, in ecclesiastical enormities to be punished, to refer to
the ordinary matters or greater moment to induct into benefices. 2.
jurisdiction, as they have it by prescription. It is ^xerced e^ther by
themselves, or by their Officials.

(...) Bishop has a two fold power, one of order, another of jurisdiction. The
power of order he commits to his Suffragane Bishop, as ordaining of
ministers and Deacons, Bishoping of children, dedication of Churches and church
yards etc. Their jurisdiction, is either voluntary, or contentious. The
voluntary he commits, when he is absent, to his Vicar general, the
contentious he commiteth to his Chauncelour, and Com^^ssarie. The Vicar
general then in absence of the Bishop may visit the Diocie, De sequest^. c 1.
veodo Vicarios.
or any part thereof, give certificates into the Kings Courts of bastardie and
of excommunicates, l. 5. p. 153.
commit administrations, give license to eat flesh upon forbidden days, and
do all that may be done by the Bishops voluntary jurisdiction, whereof we
have entreated already. D. Field says, that Bishops had Vicars general, that
might do all things almost that perteyne to the Bishops jurisdiction. And
Lindwood says, that they might not only enquire into, but also punish and
correct offenses. The other deputies of the Bishop may be also called his
Vicars, yet are they designed (...) distinct name, because they have a distinct
office, to wit, the Chancelour, and the Commissarie.

The Chauncelour is the Bishops principal official, deputed for his
principal Consistory. The Commissarie is the Bishops official. also, but in
some remote part only, or some places, exempted from the Archdeacon, and he is
called in the Canon law, (...) juris ^anonici. 92.
Officialis foraneus, id est extraneus, says Canisius. This distinction
betwixt the Chancellor and Commissarie, is made clear in Cowells
interpreter, as follows. Officialis in the Canon law, is especially taken for
him, to whom any Bishop does generally commit the charge of his spiritual
jurisdiction. And in this sense one in every Diocie is Officialis principalis,
whom the statutes and laws of this kingdom call Chancellor, Anno 32. Henr.
8. c. 15. the rest, if there be more, are by the Canon law called Officiales
foranei, gloss. in Clement. 2. de rescriptis, but with us termed Commissaires
Commissarij, as in the statute of Henr. 8. sometimes Commissarij foranei. The
difference of these two points you may read in Lindwood. tit. de sequestra, c.
1. But this word Official in our statutes, and common law, signifies him whom
the Archdeacon substituteth in the executing of his jurisdiction, as appears
by the statute above mentioned, and many others places. Again, Commissarius is
a title of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, at least so far as his commission
permits him in places of the Diocie, so far distant from the chief city,
as the Chancellor cannot call the subjects to the Bishops principal
Consistory, without their too great molestation. This Commissarie is of the
Canonists termed Commissarius, or Officialis foraneus, Lindw. de accusat. c. 1.
in glossa, and is ordained to this special end, that he suplieth the Bishops
jurisdiction and office in the out places of the Diocie, or else in such
parishes as be peculiars to the Bishop, and exempted from the jurisdiction of
the Archdeacon. For where either by prescription, or composition. there be
Archdeacons that have jurisdiction within their Archdeaconries, as in most
places they have, there this commissarie is but superfluous, and most commonly
does rather vex and disturb the country for his lucre, then of conscience
seek to redress the lives of offenders. And therefore the Bishop taking
praestation money of his Archdeacons yearly, pro exteriori jurisdictione, as it
is ordinarily called, does by superonerating their circuit with a Commissarie,
not only wrong the Archdeacon, but the poorer sort of subjects much more, as
common practice daily teaches, to their great woe. The Bishops Chancellor
and Commissarie, and the Archdeacons official, are all three termed officialls
in the canon law, the Chancellor the principal official, the Commissarie,
Officialis foraneus, the third, the Archdeacons official, or by the general
name of official. In the laws and statutes of England, the first is called
Chancellor, the second Commissarie, the third by the general name of
Official. Lib. 5. p. 15.
The name of Chancellor in this sense, is not so ancient as that of
Official, says D. Field, and that in a general signification it is used for
any one that is employed for the giving of answer to suitors, for keeping of
records, and notes of remembrance, and generally for the performance of some
principal duties pertaining to him, whose Chancellor he is said to be. The
principal official, that is, the Chancellor, howbeit he be but only a
Deputy, yet by fiction of the law, when he cognosceth any cause, he is
interpreted to be but one person with the Bishop, and to make but one
consistory with him. So that howbeit the Bishop be not present there, yet it
is his consistory. Such fictions of law have been made by, cosening and
deceitful Prelates, to deceive the world. And therefore say the Canonists,
there lies no appellation from the principal Official to the Bishop, but to
the Archbishop: yet from the Commissarie, who is Officialis foraneus, there
lies appellation. Regularly appellation also may be made from the Archdeacon,
and other inferior Prelates, to the Bishop, says Canisius, ^anisius in (...)
page ^1. 92.
unless the custom of the country has brought in another order. The
Archdeacon has a certain circuit of the Diocie, wherein he exercises his
office and jurisdiction. For every Diocie is divided into certain
Archdeaconries, comprehending about the fourth part of the Diocies, if they be
great Diocies. sucket, p. ^4.
But if they be lesser Diocies, they have but one Archdeacon, as Canterbury,
Rochester, Gloucester, Bristow, Worcester, etc. The Archdeacon by virtue of his
degree and order, has no jurisdiction, but only by prescription of time, that
is a papal custom, which is yet retained in the English Church. Id Evag.
^^st. 85.
In Hieroms time at Rome the Deacons began to exalt themselves above Ministers,
against which usurpation and evil custom of the Church of Rome, he inveigheth
with great vehemency, as a thing unsufferable, that the ministers of tables,
and to widows, should be lifted up with pride above the minister of the word
and sacraments, and opponeth to the custom of the church of Rome, the custom
of all the churches in the world. And yet the old corruption of that one
church, (wherein there institutions ye see if they were excellent) has spread
over the whole church, and grown to a great height. So that the Archdeacons
will not, Reply. p. ^.
says Mr. Cartwright, take the best Ministers of the church, as their equals.
They are called Archdeacons, not of one particular Church, but of a whole
shire, whereas Deacons were appointed in several churches. It is true, that
many of their Archdeacons are also ministers, but yet they exercise their
jurisdiction over a whole shire, ministers and others within the bounds of
their Archdeaconrie, not as Ministers, but as Archdeacons. When the Bishop
should have visited his Diocie, and inquired into needful reparations of the
church, and what other things were out of order, he sent his chief Deacons to
visit for him. At the first they were sent only to visit and make report, Lib.
5. p. 15* 153.
but not to sententiate in any man's cause, says D. Field, or to meddle with
the correcting and reforming of any thing: but afterward in process of time
they were authorized to hear and determine the smaller matters, and to reform
the lighter and lesser offenses. Hence in time it come, that Archdeacons much
used by Bishops, as most attendant on them in the visitation of their churches,
and reforming small disorders, at length by prescription claimed the correction
of greater things, at having of long time put themselves into the exercise of
such authority. So the Archdeacons in the end became greater then the Deanes,
let be common Ministers. The lazy Bishop sent his Deacon to enquire into the
life and conversation of the Clergy and Ministers, which was not his office,
yet ye see from what a small beginning he is risen to so great a height. It is
dangerous to depart from the right pattern showed upon the mount. Again, to
make a Preacher of the word a Deacon, is to conioyne these two offices, which
the Apostles did separate.

Archdeacons then almost through all England by papal prescription have
jurisdiction within their bounds, and power to visit, to inquire into
offenses, to receive presentiments, and to punish with ecclesiastical censures,
to substitute officialls to supply their rooms in their Consistories, whereby
it has happened, that the subjects have been molested for one and the self
same fault by the Bishops Chauncelours, and the Archdeacon or his official.
Canon 101.
In a Canon lately made anno 1603 they have transacted the matter so, that they
shall not meddle with the presentiments, received at others visitations; how the
transaction is kept I cannot tell. It is to be observed that Chauncelours and
officials are Civilians, ^etition to ^be Queen. 70.
Ministers do sometime also bear these offices, but utterly ignorant in these
faculties. For these Courts being confused Courts wherein matrimonial,
testamentarie and other causes of temporal matters are handled not belonging to
ecclesiastical cognizance, no wonder the Minister be ignorant in them. But on
the other part, it were a shame if a Civilian should know better how to deal
with an offender, and to bring him to repentance. Again what a gross
absurdity and intolerable abuse is it in the Church of God, that Chauncelours,
Commissaries, and officialls being Civilians should meddle with the censures of
the Church. The Bishop has vendicate to himself the whole power of
excommunication, and then he transferreth this his power by a general
commission to another, which he may not lawfully do, no not to a minister, far
less to a Doctor of the Civil law, whom he appoints to be his Chauncelour,
or the Archdeacon to him, whom he appoynteth to be his Official.

They have found out a new trick, which will not serve their turn. The
Civilian, the Chancellor, or official, when he is to excommunicate, he has
a minister to assist him, who pronounces the sentence. The defender of the
last petition tells us, P. 175.
that the minister assistant to the Chancellor, who is for the most part of
the meanest and simplest of the clergy, is but a cyphar, he does nothing but
his masters direction, excommunicateth and absolveth at his pleasure. The
Minister is not judge here, the sentence is set down in writ to him in Latin,
which he must rehearse. A memorable example we have in the Assertion for true
and Christian church policy, P. 387. 388.
together with the Article made anent this matter. Anno 1584.
Vniusquis^ Vicarius generalis, officialis ceu commissarius, qui ordines
Ecelesiasticos non susceperit. etc. Every Vicar general, official, or
Commissarie, which has not taken upon him Ecclesiastical orders, shall call
and associate unto him, some learned Presbyter, who being armed with sufficient
authority from the Bishop in his jurisdiction, or from the Archdea, being a
presb. in his jurisdiction shall denounce, and that by the prescript of the
judge present, the sentence of excommunication for contumacie. The example and
practice of this precept follows. Dr. Hone the Archdeacon of Surrey his
official, being to excommunicate certain persons, had a silly Curat, Mr.
Rowland Allen to attend his service, and to denounce the lesson which was
written to him in paper to read, Johannes Hone, legum Doctor, officialis
vener^bilis viri Domini Archidiaconi Surr. omnibus and singulis Rectoribus,
etc. salutem. Cum nos rite and legitime procedentes, omnes and singulos, quorum
nomina etc. in non comparendo, ^oram nobis, etc. ceu saltem in non
satisf^ciendo mandatis nostris, etc. pronunciaverimus contuniaces, ipsosque ex
communicandos fore decreverimus. Cumque ^iscretus vir Magister Roll. Allen
Presbyter, (...) omnes et singulos subscriptos ex officio nostro ex
co^municaverit in scriptis iustitia id exigente, vobis igitur committimus etc.
quatenus eos omnes sicut prefertur ex officio nostro excommunicatos futsse, e^
esse palam denunci^tis Datum sub sigi^o officialitatis nostrae 19 die Decembris
Anno Domini 1587. John Hone Doctor of the laws, official of the venerable man
the (...) of Surrey, to all and singular persons etc. greeting: Whereas we
otherwise rightly and lawfully proceeding, all and singular, whose names are
(...) in not appearing before us, or at least (...) in not satisfying of our
mandates, have pronounced contu^ci^us* and decreed them to be excommunicated.
And whereas, also the discreet man Mr Rowland Allen Presbyter, out of our
office, has excommunicated (...) and singular underwritten ^i^stice so
requiring. Wherefore we charge, that openly you denounce, and declare them, and
every of them, so as aforesaid, out of our office to be excommunicated. Given
under the seal of our officiality, the 19 of December 1587. The poor curate,
says this author, jerked these, whose points soever the other untied. Now in
this case it cannot be said, that it was only the poor Curate, who (...)
excommunicate. For he is but the hangman, the other is the Judge. Poor Rowland
Allen rehearsed the sentence by the prescript of Doctor Hone. Doctor Hone
^^ted, pronounced them contumaciously absent, and upon the con^umacie decreed
them to be excommunicated, prescrived the lesson to poor Rowland Allen,
without which things the sentence should be a nullsentence. D. Hone the
Archdeacons official, has power to call and associate unto him, P. 392.
and to prescribe Rowland Allen presbyter, and another man's hireling Curate in
Southwarke to excommunicate, not only the parochians of another Pastors
charge, but also any other Pastor whatsoever, subject to the Acchdeacons
jurisdiction. If it be lawful at the voice of a lay stranger, that an hireling
and stipendiarie Curate should chase another man's sheep out of his own fold,
how much more is it lawful that a true shepherd should disciplinate his own
sheep, feeding and couchan^ within his own pasture, and within his own fold.
Ye see then whereto this alteration of discipline will turn in the end. The
censures of the Church as a matter of no worth or moment, shall be put in the
hands of base Officialls, and blind Rowland Atlens. An Ox and an Ass shall
plow together in the Lords field. The Chauncellors, Commissaries, and
Officialls, have power to convent a minister before them, and if he compeir
not, first suspend, and then excommunicate him, as is evident by their latest
Canons. Can. 12^.
Thus shall the worthiest of our ministry be brought under bondage. The
Reader may see how unworthily the Archbishops, Bishops, and Archdeacons deal
with the Church, which not content themselves to use tyranny over it, and to
take upon them of their private authority, which belongs unto other with
them, have also brought it into bondage under their servants, and servants
servants, 2 Reply, 2. part. page 96*
I mean Chauncellours, Commissaries, etc. says Mr. Cartwright. The
Commissarie court is but a little stinking ditch, say the authors of the
admonition to the Parliament. P. 17.
In this Court one alone does excommunicate, one alone sits in judgment,
and when he will can draw back the judgment which he has pronounced, having
called upon the name of God, and that for money, which is called the changing
of penance. In this Court for none payment of two pence, a man shall be
excommunicate, if he appear not when he is sent for. This Court pouleth
parishes, scourges the poor bedge-priests, ladeth Churchwardens with manifest
perjuries, punishes whooredome and adultery with toyish censures, remitteth
without satisfying the congregation, and that in secret (...) gives out
dispensations for unlawful marriages, and commits a thousand such ^ike
abomina^^^; where the Judges, Advocates, and Proctors are for the most part
papists. And as for Scribes and Notaries, as greedi^ as Cormorants: If they all
should perhaps see this writing they would be as angry as Wasps, and sting
like (...). Three of them would be enough to sting a man to death, for why,
they are high Commissioners. P. 50.
Again, who be their Chauncellours, but most suspected Papists. I hear not of
one of them, but he is a br^^er. Who be their Sumners, but the veriest varlets?
What are the Canonists? what are they but suspected Papists, and where have
they the most countenance, but of the Bishops? To be their chief doers, and
high Commissioners, with them to wr^g their brethren, if they be Gods
children, and to ^et papists pass free, or to be punished lightly. How are
matters dealt with in their Courts, but all for Mistres Money. What a charge
are they to the Clergy? and what a sum have they yearly, that might be
saved, and it is no small matter that maintains their Courts. P. 58.
Again, It would grieve a chaste ear to hear the bawdie pleading of many
Proctors and Doctors in those Courts, and the Sumners, yea and Registers
themselves. Mr. Archdeacon and Mr. Chancellor are even feign to laugh it out
many times, when they can keep their countenance no longer. Suppose our high
commission were never so odious, yet the Bishops shall be sure of such servile
varlets Commissaries, Officialls, and Chauncellours to sit with them, for why
they shall be their own creatures. It is no wonder they be bribers, for the
Bishops and Archdeacons, set in farm their jurisdiction to them. Some
Chauncellours and, P. 213*
officialls pay 20. some 30. some 50. pounds yearly for their place, Registers
some an hundred, some two hundred pounds, some more. How then is it possible
but they should extort in their office, and by unreasonable and untollerable
exactions make up their hard rents? as it is said in the Defense of the last
petition for reformation. Many grievous complaints have been made against
Officialls, Commissaries, and Chauncellours from time to time, in Germany,
France, and other countries, which I might produce to make this bondage yet
more sensible.

CHAP. 6. Of Suffraganes, Deanes, and Cathedral Churches.
WE have seen in the former Tables, what persons have judicial administration.
Now follow,

Persons having no Judicial administration. Those are either Ecclesiastical
persons, or laymen. Ecclesiastical persons are the Deacon, and the Minister:
and they have their function, either without perpetual title, as Curates, or
with title. The second sort, either have a peculiar function beside their
common function, or have not a peculiar function. These who have a peculiar
function beside the common, either have it through the whole ^^iocie, or but in
a part of it. Through ane whole Diocie, as the titular Bishops, who were of old
called Chorepis^opi, that is, Rural Bishops, now they are called Suffraganes.
They are to be considered either according to the place, which they hold in
the Commonwealth, to wit, next unto Barons, or according to the place which
they have in the Church, to wit, that they are Bishops both in calling and
order, but wanting jurisdiction, 2. Dedicate Churches, 3. confirm children,
instructed before in the Rudiments of Christian religion, and that in a Diocie
allotted unto them.

That which is here said of Suffraganes, that of old they were called
Chorepiscopi, is controlled by Mucket himself. Cap. 9. page 339.
For he says, that the Rural D^^nes are like the old Chorepiscopi. De^^ni
(...) is Ecclesiae Chorepiscopis and A^chipresbyteris Regionarijs haud
absimiles. Bleyni. introduct. p. 422.
And so does Bleynianus also in his introduction into the theorie and practique
of benefices. At the first, where the Gospel was spread through the Country
towns and villages, as it was through Cities, so they had Coun^rey or rural
Bishops, as well as Bishops in cities. But ambition and pomp in City Bishops
increasing, it was thought a disgrace that such a dignity should be obscured
with a mean place of residence. Se Damasus, Decretal.
Therefore it was decreed, that it should not be lawful to ordain any
Bishop, either in villages, little forts or small Cities, lest the name and
authority of a Bishop should wax vile. Satan was advancing this way the
great mystery of iniquity. Because he would make of Bishops young Princes,
he went about, as is well observed by Mr. Cartwright, 2. Reply. 1. part. p.
525.
with robbery of the rest, to lift up the head of one: otherwise the great
pomp which they were striving for, could not be maintained. At the first, the
country or Rural Bishop had the same power in his circuit which the City
Bishop had in the city and suburbs of it. Hierome says, Ad Eva^^.
that the bishop of an obscure city has as much authority as he of the most
famous city. The Presbyters who were ordained by them, their ordination was
not made void and reversed, until they were thrown down through the pride
and dispite of city bishops, to the order of priesthood, which is an argument
sufficient, that they were in estimation and judgment of the Church, bishops
of that same sort and kind, that the city bishops were. Being spoiled of the
greatest part of their power, and name also, they there called Archipresbyteri,
at the last, Country or Rural Deanes, and were made subject not only to
Bishops, but also to their Archdeacons, No propter subrogationem in locum
Chorepiscoporum superbirent Archipresbyteri, and idem, sibi quod antea
Chorepiscopi arrogarent, si immediate Episcopis supponerentur, says Bleynianus
a Papist. This is his conjecture, that the Archpresbyters were thrust down to
a degree lower then Archdeacons, lest if they had been immediately subject to
Bishops, they might perhaps have claimed the power of the old country Bishops,
to whom in place they succeeded. For justly Archpresbyters may claim by their
order, that which Archdeac. cannot do. For howbeit they be inferior to
Archdeac. in Popish dignity, yet they are greater then Archdeacons in respect
of their order. Country Bishops at their first erection being equal to City
Bishops, were not their Deputies. In the later, and corrupt ages, proud
Prelates, and loytering Lords, addicting themselves to the world, seeking ease,
or intangling themselves with wordly affairs, as they committed the
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to Chauncellours and Commissaries, so that which
is most proper to them, as they pretend, as ordination of Priests and Deacons,
confirmation of children, and dedication of Churches, they committed to
Suffraganes, that they might give themselves to ease, and wait upon Counsels,
Parliaments, and other civil Courts: and reserved nothing belonging to their
own charge, that might trouble their ease, or draw them from attendance upon
Princes Courts, and civil employments. D. Field alleges against these
Suffragane Bishops, L. 5. p. 158.
Melchior Canus a papist. Such Bishops Melchior Canus entreating of Counsels,
and the persons whereof Counsels consist, says, they are so far from having
any place, or voice in counsels, that they neither have, nor ought to have any
place in the church at all. The Bishops he speaks of, he calls annular
Bishops, happily for that whereas full Bishops had both staff and ring
expressing their jurisdiction, as well as their espousing to the church, these
had the ring only. That Suffraganes may ordain Priests and Deacons, Can. 35.
6^
and confirm, in their Church, is evident by their latest Canons. Now if
Bishops may transfer these things which belong to their order to one
Suffragane, they may transfer it also to more, and consequently to all the
Cathedral and country Deanes, and restore the country Deanes to their old
liberties again. It depends only upon some new Canon. The Bishop of Spalato
says, Imo si vult Epis^opus, L. 2. cap. 9. n^m. 15.
and canones non prohiberent, potest suos parochos plene Episcopos facere, and
ordinare ut omnes sui or dini^ actus pl^ne possint explere: and simul ac in
soli (...) cum ipso Ecclesiam gubernare. The Bishop may make all his parish
priests, not only half but full Bishops, that they might govern the Church
in common with him, says he, if the Canon law were not an impediment. The
parish priest may curse this Canon law, that h^ndreth them of that which Gods
law allows them. But that which Divine law has given to every pastor,
neither Canon nor civil law should take from them.

In a part of the Diocie, as Archpresbyters whom they call rural Deanes, and
now they are employed for the most part, to convocate their Classis, 2. to
intimate to them something directed by missive from the ordinary, as occasion
shall require. 3. to Induct into benefices in place of the Archdeacon, being
busied in some remote part.

There were two sorts of Acchpresbyters of old. The city Archpresbyter, who is
now called the cathedral or city Deane, and the Country Archpresbyter, who
is called now the rural Deane, who was at the first institution moderator of
the classis, or country Presbytery, and thereafter made a country Bishop, or
Chorepiscopus within his own circuit, as the city Bishop was at the first but
President, or moderator of the Presbytery of the city and suburbs. For we
must not think that the country Bishop ruled alone without his classical
Presbytery, more then the city Bishop did. In process of time the city
Bishop grew to this great statelynes, which now we see, and the o^^
Chorepiscopus decreased, and was thrown down by degrees, till at last he is
come to this poor estate of a rural Deane. He it not ranked in this
hierarchy amongst the persons having judicial administration, but among those
who have none, as ye see, to intimate to the Priests with in his Deanrie, what
is the Bishops pleasure either severally, or to convocate them together to that
effect, or to put any person in possession sometime of his Benefice, Pueket p.
24.
for the Archdeacon. Every Diocie in England, as we heard before out of
Mucket, is divided in Archdeaconries, more or fewer according to their extent:
Achdeacour. into Deanries. The Deanries comprehend ten Parishes, sometimes more,
seldom fewer. But cathedral and collegiat churches are exemed out of the
Archdeaconries, and rural Deanries. Over these Deanries are set rural Deanes,
qui^us praeficiuntur Dec^nirurales, antiquis Archipresbyter is non multum
^issimiles says he. Then again in every Diocie there are jurisdictions
exempt either from the Archdeacon, and subject immediately to the Bishop, or
exempt from both, or from the whole Province of the ArchBishop, and subject
immediately to the King in respect of appellations, They want no corrupt order
of government, which they had in time of Popery: no not so much as their
exemptions. To return then to the rural Deanes. These rural Deanes upon the
Bishops, or his deputies warrant cited such within their Deanries, as were to
compeir before the Bishop, or his deputy, and this their citation under the
seal of their office they were to certify to the Bishop, or his deputy. But
Lindwood says, De iudicijs cap. Quidam.
quod per eos potius quam per alios, qui hibent sigilla authentica, multae
multae fiebant frauds, and that they colluded with the party in sealing the
certificates of their citations, when as they had not made any due citation,
and therefore John Peccham Archbishop made a constitution, that every year
they should swear to give out no certificates without due citation. They were
sworn every year says Lindwood quit quolibet anno mutantur Decani, 1. 5. p.
150.
et fiunt noui. They were to hold Chapiters in a set course four times in the
year, and at other times, as often as occasion should require says D. Field
out of Lindw. But Lindwood writes thus, De Consti^utionth cap Qui^^ verb
^^pitulis.
Et horum capituloru^ quaed^m tenentur de tribus hebdomadis in tres; qu^, dam
semelin quarta anni, and haec dicuntur, Capitul^ principalia propter majorem
confluen^i^m Cleri, and quia in his de negotijs arduioribus tracteri consuevit.
Some did meet every three weeks, some every quarter of year. Their Chapiters
convening every three weeks, were our presbyteries which do meet in some place
every week, in other places in two or three weeks, especially in winter. These
chapiters were called capitula ruralia, country or rural Chapiters, says
Lindwood, because they were assembled in the country towns. In these Chapiters
the Deans did publish the decrees of Provincial and Episcopal Synods. For the
Bishop himself did not demit himself so far, as to be present: and therefore
sent one to make intimation, or to the Deane to do it. Praesertim cum non
deceat statum pontificalem in singulis capitulis hujusmodi interesse, says
Lindwood. D. Field proves that of old, they had power to visit their circuit
twice every year, and to suspend laymen from the sacraments, and clergy men
from the execution of their offices. This was a remainder of the old power of
the Country Bishop. Now his office is only to intimate decrees of Synods, or
the Bishops will in any matter, without any jurisdiction reserved either to
him, or to the ministers of the Deanrie assembled together in chapter, or as
we speak in scripture language, presbytery. So that their Deanries are a
footstep of that which have been, and a shadow of that whereof we had the
substance. This alteration of government among us, will in the end turn to the
same desolation. There are some Deanes exempt, which are subject immediately to
the Archbishop, and these have Archi^^aconall jurisdiction, says Lindwood. We
have before made mention of some rural Deanes exercising spiritual
jurisdiction, but that is not common; next it is Episcopal, for they do it by
themselves without the Chapter.

Those which beside the common have no peculiar function, are placed either in
so^e cathedral or collegiat Church, or in a parish Church. In some Cathedral
or Collegiar Church, whereof they are members, or no members. Of those who are
members, the chief is the Deane, then in some Churches of ancient foundation,
other dignities also, as the Subdeane, the Chancellor, the chief Chaunter,
the Thesaurer. Lastly, the Canons or Prebendaries, of which in the Churches
which are more ancient, some are Residentiaries, some not. The greater
Residentiaries administrate, and govern in all things with the Deane in that
Church, and they have a seat in the Quire, and the power of a voice in the
Chapter. Canons or Prebendaries no^ Residentiaries, have a seat in the Quire,
but not a voice in the Chapter. Those who who are not members, serve either to
the administration of the public Liturgy, or Sacraments, as the petty Canons
or Vicars chorall, or by assisting those who do celebrate, as the Pistler and
the Gospeller.

There are also others bearing office in cathedral Churches, but they are
ranked among the lay sort, by the composer of the tables, such as are singing
boys, vergerers, Ballifs; and others set down afterward. The author of the
admonition to the parliament does thus muster the Droanes of these Cathedral
Churches. Page 15.
We should be too long to tell your Honors of the cathedral Churches, the
dens aforesaid of all loytering lubbers, where Mr. Dean, M. Vicedeane, Mr.
Canons, or Prebendaries, the greater, M^pettie Canons, or Canons the lesser, M.
Chancellor of the Church, M. Treasurer, otherwise called Judas the
Purse-hearer, the chief ch^unter, singing men special favorers of religion,
squealing Qui^isters, Organ players, Gospellers, ^ialog. l. 4. 26.
pistlers, pensioners, vergers, etc. Wicl^ffe says, there ^e 12 disciples of
the Antichrist; Popes, Cardinals, Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops,
Archdeacons, Officialls, Deans, Monk^s, Canons, Friars, and Pardoners. He
reckons ye see the Deans and Canons among the disciples of the Antichrist.
And in truth what are they else but idle lubbers, lying in the cloisters of
their Cathedral Churches having either no necessary or profitable charge in
the cathedral church, where they loyter, or else have a charge in other places,
but under color of their prebends, absent themselves from the churches where
they are bound to a cure of souls, and that which they spoil and raven in
other places, Reply. pa. 3. 164. 165.
there, says M. Cartwr, they spend and make good cheer with. And again he
says, they should indeed be the rewards of learning, if they were converted
unto the maintenance, and bringing up of Scholars, where now for the most part
they serve for fat morsels, to fill if might be, the greedy appetites of
those, which otherwise have enough to live with, and for holes and dens to
keep them in, which are unworthy to be kept at the ch^ge of the church, or else
whose presence is necessary, and dutiful in other places, and for the most
part unprofitable there. The Deane, and Canons or Prebendaries, are not
sustained with the Ecclesiastical rents and possessions of the city, where
they loiter, but for the most part of the rents and possessions of their
charges in the country, to their ruin and desolation, the great steeples
devouring the little steeples, the great Quires overthrowing the final
pulpits. It was done no doubt in a foolish and pretensed imitation of the
temple of Jerusalem, to appoint such idle serving and singing men to uphold in
the cathedral Church daily chaunting and singing, as was the custom in the
temple of Jerusalem. But all the people in the land had communion of worship in
the said temple, and repaired to it thrice in the year to that effect and
purpose, beside that the daily worship was for the use of all those who were
upon several occasions to repair unto the said temple, and therefore the
whole people of God is called the church of the Jews; because they had
communion of worship in one place. But there is no such place in the Christian
churches appointed either for countries, counties, or shires. Every church even
the meanest, has as great interest and privilege to all the points of Gods
worship, as the greatest cities, let be the Cathedral seats, which are not
ever the greatest. Then again their curions singing and chanting serves not
for edification of the soul, but rather to hinder true devotion, and carry
away the mind from heavenly meditation with a carnal and sensual delight. He
that sings should be liker pronuncianti quam canenti to one who pronounces
the word, then to one that sings. Psalms as sung by course* and side after
side: some few singing, the rest of the people resrayned from singing: One half
sung with the heart, the other half with heart and voice. Then again their
musical instruments were unknowen to the church of God for 800 years. Yea it
appears that they were not brought in, in the days of Aquinas. For he says,
sed instruments musica sicut cytharas, (...). 2. quest. (...). art. 2. ^^g. 4.
et Ps^teria non assumit ecclesia in div^nas lauds ne videatur iudaizare. The
Church then it seems used no musical instruments in his time lest it should
seem to Iudaize. Yea amongst the Jews themselves these musical instruments
were not used in their synagognes, but only in the temple, which was the
theater of all the ceremonies of the leviticall law. Again that one should
read the gospel another the epistle, what an idle distinction of idle officemen
in the church is this? for by this reason they may make a third sort also for
reading of the law. (...)* 336.
The Treasurer, Chancelour, Vicedeanes offices are not all alike in every
cathedral church, says Mucket, but diverse according to the different statutes
of diverse places. It is hard therefore distinctly to define particularly their
offices. The Deane of the cathedral Church succeeds in the room of him, who
was called Archipresbyter urbanus, the city Presbyter, as the rural Deanes
do the Country presbyter. But the cathedaall chapter does not consist of the
presbyters of the city, as the rural chapter did consist of the presbyters
within the rural Archpresbyter his praecinct: yea they were bound to sit in
chapter with the Deane, Lib. 5. p. 15^*
says Dr. Field. But all the Presbyters of the cathedral city do not at any
time sit in chapter with the cathedral Dean as I gave a lively example before
of the city of London, where the Ministers of the several parishes do not
sit in chapter with the Deane of Paul's, but only Canons and Prebendars, who
for the most part ought to serve at parishes perhaps 20. or 30. Page 151.
miles from the city. The cathedral seat of Canterbury has 12. or 13.
parishes, but not 4 able preachers, says the author of the Assertion for true
and Christian Church policy. I have been in some of their cathedral cities,
where they have no parish minister to preach, but only the watering of some
prebendarie, who comes to attend on service in the temple, and neglects his
own charge with cure of souls. Again, suppose this chapter did consist of
parish ministers within the city, yet that some should be made cardinal to
sit in chapter, either with Bishop or Deane, and others secluded, having as
great interest in the common government of their stocks, as it is not grounded
on the word, so it was not known to puret antiquity, Page ^0*
as we have already made evident. And it is acknowledged also by Bellarmine,
howbeit he does conjecture upon a false ground, De Clerici cap. 16.
what was the cause of it. Nam a tempore Apostolorum per multos annos, imo
etiam per aliquot soecula, quia pauci erant Presbyteri and Diaconi, omnes simul
ad electionem Episcopi, and ad concilia vocabantur, neque opus erat tunc
distinguere a Cardinalibus non Cardinales sicut etiam in alijs Ecclesi^s non
disting^ebantur Canonici a non Canonicis. And yet there were many Presbyters at
Rome in Cornelius time, as they themselves confess, yet even then this
distinction was not made, as Bellarmine in that same place does acknowledge.
Farther, this same chapter has not any meddling with jurisdiction in common
with the Bishop. The Deane and Prebendaries in many places have power severally
to excommunicate in their parishes* which belong to them in peculiar, but they
convene not chapiterl^e* to exercise spiritual jurisdiction, and inflict
spiritual punishments, and censures, upon every delinquent within the Diocie,
yea or cathedral seat only, either with the Bishop, or without him. Alienation
of church lands, or setting of takes, and such like, which concern the
possessions of the Church, may not pass without them, but for spiritual
jurisdiction they are content that the vicar general, and official principal
part that betwixt them. To what use then serves the cathedral Deane, and his
Canons or prebendaries, etc. but to wear copes and caps, tippets, and hoods,
rochets, surplices, to pipe on organs* to sing curiously, to read gospels and
epistles, according to their several offices, and in their several turns and
courses. In the 24* canon of the last constitutions, when the communion is to
be celebrated upon principal feast days, if the bishop himself be not present,
then the Dean is to administer the communion with a cope. And notwithstanding
of all this, the Deane must sit in some chief place of the Church, with his
velvet cushion before him, and cloth of estate, and be brought to his place
with a silver Mace before him.

CHAP. 7. The calling and function of English Priests and Deacons.
THE name of Priest to signify a minister of the Gospel, is usual with them,
even in their latest Canons. Howbeit it seems to be derived from the Greek
word Presbyter, yet seeing it has been used to signify a sacrificing Priest,
such as the Mass Priest was thought to be, and is still retained in their
latest translations of the Bible, to signify a sacrificing Priest, their
pretext of the original of the name, is frivolous, for either they should
translate the Leviticall Priest sacrirficer, if they would retain the proper
signification of the word priest, or else abstain from, or alter the name of
Priest, seeing they may have choice of names.

The Ecclesiastical persons in the Parish Church are, the minister, and
Deacon. In the minister are to be considered, his external calling, and his
public function. His external calling is, either to the order and degree, or
to the benefice, and place of the ministry. The external calling to the
order and degree is seen, either in things preceding the ordination, or in
the ordination it self. In things going before the ordination, as 1. public
intimation made by the Bishop, in the most famous places of the Diocie of the
day of ordinations, 2. Letters testimonial to the Bishop ordainer, from men of
good credit and religion, as well of the conversation of him who is to be
ordained, as of his birth, that that he is not a bastard, or bondman. 3. the
examination of him who is to be ordained, either of his education, whether he
were brought up in a common School, or in an Academie, or of his progress in
humane literature, or theology, in which is to be considered, either the
proficiencie it self to be tried by the Bishop himself, or the Archdeacon, or
some other appointed for him: or else, the degree which he has taken on in
the Schools. The ordination it self consists in prayers for him, who is to
be ordained, 2. in exhortations to him, and 3. in imposition of hands.

You may see, that they make the calling to the ministry, and the calling to
the place, two diverse actions distinguished in time, whereas none ought to be
admitted to the ministry, but when and where there is a place void. The
Apostles ordained not ministers to rove abroad through a whole province, but
appointed them town by town, Tit. 1. 5. Act. 14. 23. The Council of
Chalcedon decreed, that no presbyter should be ordered loosely, that is,
unless (as it is there added) it be in some congregation or city. The word
Apole^ymeno^s they interpret without a title, but then by a title they mean,
not a particular charge, but some possession or living to be maintained by. But
who will ever admit (says Mr. Calvin) that the title which the Council
requires, Instit. lib. ^^ cap. 5. Se^^
is a yearly revenue to maintain himself with? In the latest canons this
Popish interpretation is approved, where are set down the titles of such as
are to be made ministers. If he be provided to a place in some cathedral, or
collegiate Church, or if he be a Fellow, or in the right of a fellow, or if he
be to be a conduct or Chaplain in some college in Cambridge, or Oxford; or if
he be a Master of Arts of five years standing, Can. 33.
that lives of his own charge in either of the universities, or if by the
Bishop himself that does ordain him, he be shortly after to be admitted to
some benefice, or curatship then void, is he said to have a title, howbeit he
have not as yet a particular flock, which was not the meaning of the council
of Chalcedon, far less the meaning of the holy Ghost in the scripture. They
have made 60. 80. or 100. at a clapp, Page ^.
and sent them abroad into the country, like masterlesse men, say the authors
of the admonition to the Parliament. And again, When they have made them, Page
15.
either they may tarry in their college, and lead the lives of loytering
losels as long as they live, or else gad abroad with the Bishops Bulls* like to
Circumcellions to preach in other men's charges, where they list, or else get
benefices by friendship, or money, or flattery, where they can catch them: or
to conclude, if all these fail, that they may go up and down like beggars,
and fall to many follies, or else as many have done, set up bills at Paul's, or
at the Royal Exchange, and such like public places, to see if they can hear
of some good masters to entertain them into service. In the late Canons
foresaid, the Bishop is ordained to maintain him in all things necessary, who
has not one of these titles, till he prefer him to some Ecclesiastical
living, which is but one of the rotten Canons of the Canon law. If this were
kept, 3. or 4. Bishops in this realm would have kept such houses, as never any
did in this land, as is said in the foresaid admonition. Their order in making
Priests, is this. First they must be Deacons before they be made Priests, for
so they interpret the words of the Apostle, 1. Tim. 3. 13. they that have
ministered in the office of a Deacon well purch^se unto themselves a good degree,
that is, say they, a step to the ministry. The Apostle says not that they
who do the office of a Deacon well shall get a good degree or standing, but
that in so doing, they get themselves a good degree, that is, authority and
estimation in the church, and consequently great boldness in the faith. For a
man may have gifts sufficient for a Deaconship and yet never have gifts
sufficient for the ministry. But admitting the office of the Deacon were a
step to the ministry, that he who is a Deacon may be a Minister, it
follows not that there is not access to the Ministry, but by this step of
the Deaconship. And therefore not to admit a man to the ministry, ^nlesse he
first take upon him the office of a Deacon, is a na^gh^ie device. It was
decreed in their lat^st Canons, that no Bishop should make any person, of what
qualities or gifts soever, a Deacon and a Minister both together upon one day.
Not that always every Deacon should be kept from the Ministry a whole year,
when the Bishop shall find good cause to the contrary: but that there being
now four times appointed every year for the ordination of Deacons and
Ministers, there may be ever some time of trial of their behavior in the
office of a Deacon, before they be admitted to the order of Priesthood. Yet
they are not so nice, Page 309*
but this order may be dispensed with, and that one may take on both the orders
upon one day, as Mucket does record. When the time of giving orders draws
near, the Bishops Bull is set up upon the Church door, to give warning, that
if any be minded to receive orders, let them repair to the Bishop at such time
and place. This is, says Mr. Cartwright, like the sound of a trumpet to gather
an Army. But the Bill which is set up upon the Church door, is in latin, so
that the people cannot understand the sound of the trumpet. This Bill does not
desire the people to come, and object against the persons to be ordained. And
suppose that were the end, it were but a deluding of the people: for either they
have a Priest or Curat already, and then they have not need to object, or else
the place is void, but they know not against whom to object, for amongst 40,
50, or 100. perhaps they know not who is the man, that is appointed for them.
The Bishop and the patron out of the whole number will choose afterward when and
whom they think meet. And howbeit there were not one void Church in all the
Diocie, but incumbents in every one of them, yet the Bishop will give orders.
And again, if none of them have ever been conversant in these vacant parts,
how can they stand up and object against them. The day of giving orders being
published, which is ordinarily upon the Lords days, after the Ember weeks,
then there is repair to the city or village where the Bishop is to give
orders. He that can purchase the letters commendatory of some nobleman, or
knight, shall come best speed. Then is he to be tried by the Archdeacon, who is
but a Deacon only in respect of his Archdeaconrie. Howbeit sometimes the
Archdeacon be also a Priest, beside that it is a confounding of distinct
offices, it is not by virtue of his Priesthood, but of his Deaconship, that he
trieeth the persons who are to be ordained. They are tried by some questioning,
but as the Archdeacon pleases. Their pastoral gifts of utterance, doctrine,
and exhortation are not tried either by the Archdeacon, or any particular
church: may these gifts are not needful in an English priest; for a bare
reader is sufficient to be an English minister. The Archdeacon is sometime in
one part of the country, and the bishop in another. ^^stract. p.
The Bishop making ministers at Exceter, and his Archdeacon at Oxenford, or the
Bishop making ministers at Leichfield, and his Archdeacon at Durham. When the
day of ordination is come, after an exhortation made, and the communion
celebrated, the Epistle and Gospel read, and the hymn, Veni creator sung or
said, the Archdeacon presents to the Bishop all those who are to take on the
order of Priesthood that day, with these words, Reverend father in Christ, I
present to you the persons here present, to be admitted to the order of
Priesthood. Then after some demands and answers, of the Bishop, and the other,
who is to be admitted, he demands of the people who are present there, where
he gives orders, if they know any impediment which may hinder any of these
present to be admitted to the order of priesthood, which is a manifest
mockage. For it may be, that none there present ever heard or saw any of them,
or all of them, before that day. But these words import that ordinations of old
were performed before the congregation, whereunto he was to be appointed.
Thereafter the oath of the Kings supremacy is taken, then again after an
exhortation, follow other demands an answers. After that the people who are
present, are desired secretly to commend the business to God, for which cause
they are all silent for a little space. After that the Bishop reads a prayer,
which being finished, they who are to be ordained, sitting on their knees at
the Bishops feet, the Bishop and the rest of the Priests who are present, lay
hands severally upon the heads of every one of them, the Bishop uttering these
words, Receive the holy Ghost, whose sins thou do forgive, they are
forgiven, and whose sins thou do retain, they are retained: and be thou a
faithful dispenser of the word of God, and of his holy sacraments. In the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen. He commands
the ordained to receive the holy Ghost, as our Lord and master did when he
breathed on his Disciples, bestowing in very deed the gifts of the spirit when
he breathed upon them. Ordinary pastors cannot con^erre the gifts of the
spirit, whether breathing as Christ did, or by laying on of hands as the
Apostles did. They may as well imitate Christ's breathing, as they may usurp
these words. Whether the ordained receives the holy Ghost or not, let the
world judge. Calvin says of the Popish Priests, ex equis fieri asinos, ex
fatuis phre neticos, quicunque in sacerdotes consecrantur. Is any of their
Curats after the pronouncing of these words, either the holier, or more apt to
teach, and yet beside this blasphemy, they will the ordained to dispense the
word of God, who cannot divide and cut it aright. Where it is said, whose
sins ye forgive shall be forgiven, etc. a power to retain and forgive is
given them separate from the preaching of the word, as in the Roman Church an
infinite number of Priests cannot preach, yet all have power to absolve from
sins. So may the blind English Curates. Sicklike it is a mockage, ^hen after
that the bishop delivers to each of them the Bible in his hand, saying, Take
thou authority to preach the word of God, and to minister the holy sacraments,
in the congregation where ^hou shall be appointed. He should rather have put
the service book in his hand. For either they are ignorant and cannot preach,
yea not tried in that faculty: or if they can, they may not till they get a
license of the Bish, and whether they shall be appointed to any congregation, or
not, they are uncertain, because it depends upon the p^trons pleasure.
Reply, 1. ^rt. p. 298.
So that, if either the forethinking himself, like the shop better then the
Church, or if the Patron will keep the doc^e shut against such insufficient
men, which the Bishop opened so wide, or as sometime falls out, they cannot
agree of their market, it comes to pass that he is made a minister, which
either cannot, or will not, not only not fulfill, but not so much as lay hand
of that Ministry whereunto he was appointed, says Mr. Cartwright. When all
this is done, the company convened sing the Creed, and they go to the
communion, which all they that receive orders take together, and remain in the
same place, where the hands were laid on them, until such time as they have
received the communion. The celebration of the supper went before in the
beginning of the action as is enjoined in the book of ordering Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, but they communicate not till the end of the action. The
first celebration then was nothing but a consecration, as they call it, of the
bread and wine, without the pertaking of the communicants, and all the rest of
the action must intervene before they partake: for to what end else is there
made twice mention of the communion. So the first is like the offering of a
sacrifice, the last is liker to the supper. Is not this great confusion betwixt
the first and second part of that holy action, to intermingle another action,
yea as some say, another sacrament, confounding two sacraments together. Their
Letanies and Collects, for brevities sake, I pass by.

The external calling to the benefice, or certain place of the ministry, is
either to a parsonage or a vicarage. In each of them is to be considered, 1.
nomination, either when the right of presentation is in another person nor his,
who does nominate, as sometime it falls out: or when the right both to
nominate and present belongs to him. 2. The Bish. trial of his gifts and
qualification, whether he be capable or not of such a Benefice. 3. Admission
either to the title it self, as when the Bishop does institute at the
presentation of another, which is called Institution, or when the Bishop
himself who does institute has the right of patronage, which is called
Collation: or else admission is to the possession it self by inducting, which
is either done by the Archdeacon himself, or by his deputy.

After they have thus received their order of Priesthood, and are ordained at
large in nubibus, they pay for their letters of Orders (for their admission to
their Ministry must not be free of fees) and run abroad through the whole
Diocese, where they please, preaching any where, if they have gotten after
their Ordination another license to preach. For they must not preach by virtue
of their order of Priesthood in the intendment of the Prelates, but must have
the Bishops warrant to that end. They are put in remembrance at their
ordination in the Bishops interrogatories, and exhortations, in the Gospels and
Epistles, and at the deliverie of the Bible in their hand, of the duty of
preaching and teaching. But that is only for a fashion, for they read of the
book these Gospels, Epistles, Exhortations, which were used of old, and are
retained still in the book rather to be a monument of that which has been,
then for their right use and end. For in the Roman Church, when the Mass
Priest is to receive orders, by the Epistles and Gospels, etc. he is put in
remembrance that he must bless, govern, preach, baptize, (...) doctrine
should be spiritual medicine to the people of God* that the Church of God is
to be edified both by preaching and good example. These are pieces of the
ancient order, which was in the Church, lying still in their corrupt
pontificals, to be rehearsed in the form of a service. But when they come to
the action it self, wherein the order of Priesthood is actually conferred at the
laying on of hands, there are no such speeches used. So in the English, much is
said of preaching and teaching before they come to the laying on of hands, but
then there is a general word used, Be thou a faithful dispenser of the word
of God: not mening to dispens by preaching, for they know that many of them
cannot teach, but to dispense it, as it is divided and set in order to be read,
and sung in the service book. Or else they mock God, his word, and his Church,
after the old Popish manner, not intending the right dispensing of the word by
preaching. When he is to be set in a certain place, he seeks the Patrons
favor, or makes some simonicall paction with him, as we have already heard
out of Brightman, and a little before out of M. Cartwright. The Patron
presents the man whom he thinks fittest for his own humor, and the Bishop
does try his gifts, and qualification. Here the liberty of election is taken
from the Congregation, and given to the Patron and the Bishop. That the Patron
should be some way acknowledged for his liberality toward the Church we do
not gainesay. Therefore jus utile, that is, if he be redacted to poor estate,
that he be relieved with the rents of the Church, and jus honorisicum, right to
a fear in the Church, and jus onerosum, to have a care that the rents be not
dilapidate, as also to be guardian and keeper of the rents of the Church during
vacancie, or what other thing else, not savouring of superstition, or
ostentation we grant unto them, but the right of presentation of Clerks to
the pastoral office we cannot grant. The Church may not resign this liberty
of election in the hands of another man, but is ever bound to retain in her
own hands the freedom to choose the fittest person to have charge of their
souls. This liberty of Election was acknowledged to be so equitable, and
grounded upon the principles of nature, that there should be more Clerks then
one tried when a Church was vacant, where this order might be had, that in the
Council of Trent, some others also chosen by the Synod beside the Bishop,
were ordained to examine and chose the fittest of those who offered themselves,
or were offered to a trial, and this is called examen per concursum. But in
our neighbor Church they have no such constitution. The Bishop himself tries
or appoints whom he pleases, none is depute by a Synod to join with him.
And where the Bishop himself is Patron of a benefice, he makes not, nor yet
receives any offer of a leite of many that the worthiest may be chosen, but
the Church is under the same bondage, whether the Bishops or Laymen be Patrons.
Now what is this examination of the Bishop, surely very superficial, and
imaginary. The request of any in authority is able to obtain the Bishops
institution, suppose he be unsufficient. And indeed there is no extreme suite,
the door is not so hard locked, says Mr. Cartwright, 2 Reply 1 part, p. 133.
there needs but the lifting up of the latch. And in another place he says,
that many say, that for a dish of fruit of the golden griffe, they lease out,
and make all manner of merchandise of the Lord Orch^rds, that he which has no
gift in the heart, p. 110.
yet if he have a gift in the band, need no other key to open the Church door,
and enter into a benefice. Abstract p. 83.
He that came to the Bishop of Winchester to serve in his Diocese, borne at
Norwich, and made a Minister at Peterborow, knew not how many Sacraments there
were, and requested a days respite to answer the Bishop, what the office of a
Deacon was, may be one for example, to let us see, what manner of men may* p.
236. 237.
receive orders amonst them. Have not the Bishops chosen, sent, and commended
unto us, says the Author of true and Christian Church-policie, such as know
not a Be from a Battle-dore, or the Lords prayer from the Articles of faith,
of which sort of Ministers, the Parson of Haskam now living, a Chaplain in
Winton Diocese may be produced for a witness, omni exceptione mayor. It is
related there, that this Parson at the instant request of a Knight, was
demanded by the Bishop, which was the first petition of the Lords prayer, after
he had a pretty space pawsed and gased toward heaven, at length made this
answer; I believe in God the Father Almighty, etc. This profound Clerk,
howbeit he could not obtain the institution at that time: yet afterward, p.
238.
says this Author, by corruption of the same Bishops Chancellor he was
instituted in the same benefice, and to this day possesses it quietly, though
he can hardly read English to the understanding of his people. I could inform
him also of many other such Clerks, ^^siant and beneficed in that Diocese,
etc. That which the Bishop could not do at the first, by reason of the Knights
opposition, he did afterward at his Chancellours desire. Lest any man should
think, that there has been but a few of these examples, let us hear what Mr.
Cartwright says, 2. Reply. 1. part. p. 537. 148.
I am well assured, that all the^ Ecclesiastical stories extant, are not able
to furnish (...) of so many unworthy ministers chosen by all the churches
throughout the world, which have been since the Apostles times: as have swarmed
these few years out of the palaces, as out of the Trojan horse, of that small
number of Bishops, which are in England. Of the other side, if a man will cast
his eyes to France, both in persecution and peace, and from thence look into
the Churches of some parts of Savoy, and yet stretch them out further to some
certain commonwealths in Germany, and come home to our neighbors the Scots,
and compare generally the ministers chosen of the Churches, with the most part
of these, which the Bishops make: (if he love not himself too much, and be not
a stubborn defender of that he has undertaken) he shall be compelled to
confess, as much difference betwixt the one and the other, as between gold and
copper, or any other refuse metal. The people which are fed, are to the
people which are unfed with preaching, like an handful to an house-full, or an
inch to an ell, says the author of the Assertion for true Chapter policy. P. 245.
These are the fruits of the Patrones presentation, and the Bishops sole
election, institution, or collation. The person duly chosen, and lawfully
ordained, should have testimonial under the hands of the Pres^yterie, and
chief of the people, to certify, that he is duly and lawfully chosen, and
ordained, that is, that he has the just title to the temporalities, and in
place of the Archdeacon the kings officiaris appointed to that effect, being
certified by this testimonial, may by another writ confirm, and really induct
into the possession of manse and glebe, and other possessions. So the
Archdeacons pretty signet should give place to the kings great seal, says the
author of the Assertion. For as the order does stand, there falls out many
contentions, and suits in law, sometime between the Patron and the Bishop,
Assertion, p. 258. 259.
sometime between two Clerks presented by two Patrons: sometime between the
Clerk presented, and the Bishop, the Clerk calling the Bishop by a double
quarrel before the Archbishop, or the judges of the court of audience, for not
granting institution: sometime between the Clerk instituted, and the
Archdeacon not executing the Bishops inductorie mandate, because the Church is
not vacant, and betwixt him who pretends the title, and the real incumbent,
whereupon do fall out many foul riots, breaches of the kings peace, and
unlawful assemblies upon entries. and keeping of possessions. What a great
hinderance the patrones power to present, is to the planting of churches with a
learned and faithful ministry, not only the Church of God in former ages,
but also our own since the reformation in a part, can bear witness. This is
the difference betwixt us and them in this point, that they defend this right
of the Patron, which takes away liberty of Election, we craved a
reformation of it, and were more careful to try and sift the person presented,
yet this is the inconvenience, that seldom it fell out that the worthiest were
nominated, where patrons had a right to present. You see then, what ways a man
comes to the ministry, and a benefice. First, Assertion, p. 259.
he must receive orders, and pay well for them. For it can not be denied, but
the Bishops Secretary, Gentleman Usher, groom of his chamber, Butler,
Pantler, Porter, and other the Bishops menials (besides his own and his
Registers fees, and his Clerk for expedition) do usually (all, or most of
them) challenge and receive fees (some more, some less) before the poor
minister with his box of orders can be suffered to pass by the porters lodge.
When all this is done, what crooked mean^s he must use before he come to the
possession of a benefice, ye have heard also, and how the Congregation is all
this time neglected. This cannot be denied, that there is not any one man, or
woman, P. 252.
amongst 40. in any one parish among 40. that can tell that ever he, or she,
did see or hear of the Minister appointed, and sent by the ordinary to be
Parson, or Vicar, of the Parish Church vacant, before such time, as he did
hear, or see the Parish Clearke to trudge with the Churchdore keys to let in
the S^xtin, to ring the bells for the said Parson or Vicars induction, and
real possession.

The public furction of the minister, is either in preaching, or in the rest
of his administration. In Preaching, either with license granted him for that
part after the Bishops approbation, and that either to his own flock, or
without to Clergy, or people, or without license ^b^eined to that effect, as
if being master of Arts, or in any superior degree, he preach to his own
flock without license.

We see then that the giving of orders is not a giving of power to preach, for
then every one who receives orders may preach without any further license, as
well as a Master of Arts, who is n^w come from Cambridge from his Rhetoricks
and Physics. This license granted to some, and not to all; yea, not to the
most part, declares that they do not esteem preaching any essential part of
the Priests function, more then the Papists do, and the practice among the one
and the other is just the same. For none of their Priests do preach, but such
as are licentiate. The author of the Petition to the Queen says, Where the
Bishops ordeine one minister that can teach, P. 5.
they make twenty that cannot teach: and so idle shepherds are set up in the
room of true Pastors. They that can teach are bound hand and foot till they
get a license: But sithence Christ bad his Priests preach, who should forbid
them preaching, said Wickleffe, in the exposition of his Conclusions exhibited
to the Bishops. When they have gotten license either they loyter: or if they
preach, their preaching is hedged in with penalties, injunctions, caveats,
canons, advertisements, that they may not deliver the whole counsel of God: or
else they play the part of profane Orators, P. 52.
with affected eloquence; or make the people laugh with merry tales, as the
Author of the Admonition to the Parliament does relate. To conclude then, a
bare Reader of the service book in English, is sufficient to be an English
priest.

In the rest of his administration, according to the prescript, either of the
Q. Injunctions, so that they be not repugnant to the laws, or of the Liturgy
set forth by public authority.

This Liturgy maintains a Reading Ministry: for it requires nothing
necessarily to be done by the Minister, C. 1 Repl. 104.
which a child of ten year old cannot do, as well, and as lawfully, as that
man wherewith the book contenteth it self. Preaching is but accidental and
accessorie, without the which their office does, and may consist. And indeed
boys, and senseless Asses, ^dm. p. 47.
are our common Ministers for the most part; for common reason may serve the
turn, and do this feat well enough. It is indeed less busy, then the Popish
Priests service, because the Calendar, and the Rutricks of the book are fewer
and plainer, then his Portuise, and Pic were. So that less Clerks, then (...)
pri^sts which had but some blind Latin in their belly, may serve for our
store, say the Authors of the Admonition to the Parliament.

The administration according to the prescript of the book of Liturgy does
concern, either the Bishop or the Church, or the Minister himself. The
Bishop, to wit, in confirmation of children: The Church, either in certain
rites, as bowing the knee, or in certain answers.

Of Bishopping we have entreated before. The Congregations part stands in
some rites, and gestures, or in some answers: Now the people sit, ^^. 93. lm.
p. 14.
now they stand up. When the old Testament is read, or the lessons, they make
no reverence, but when the Gospel comes, then they all stand up; they think
that to be of greatest authority, and are ignorant that the Scriptures come
from one Spirit. They make courtesy when Jesus is named, either in Sermon,
lesson, or otherwise, uncovering their heads, and making a leg, with such
scraping on the ground, that the Minister or Reader cannot be heard for a space
thereafter. And yet says the Author of the Petition to the Qu. The Bishops and
their Chaplains seldom use this, P. 65
unless it be at reading of the Gospel, as if the Gospel were more holy then
the rest of the Scripture: especially they forget it, when lustily and bravely
they swear by the name of Jesus. The name of Jesus is more reverenced, then
the name of Savior, which is of the same signification; or other titles of
Christ, as when he is named Messiah, Christ, Mediator, the Son of God, etc. or
when God is named: as if the Apostle had meant Philip. 2. that every knee
should bow at the naming of Jesus, when as he only says, At the name of
Jesus: that is, every creature shall be made to acknowledge his power, and
authority, which is his name, as the word is often taken in the scripture. It
is not the sound of syllables, but his divine power that is meant. Then again
for answers, the people are appointed at diverse prayers to rehearse word for
word after the minister, whereby an opinion is engendered in their minds, that
other prayers do not so much pertain to them, as those which they utter with
their own mouths. As the minister is the mouth of God from God to the people:
so should he be the mouth of the people from the people to God. Sometime the
minister says one part, and the people another. And in sundry parts of the
Letanie, the people make the prayer, and the minister only directs them what
to pray for. At the communion one of the people is allowed to make the general
confession in the name of the whole congregation. At some prayers they are
enjoined to kneel devoutly, and not at others.

In the administration which does concern the Minister himself, or to be
considered, either the substance of the book it self, or certain directories.

As for the substance of the book, it is taken out of the Popes portuis, with
some rubricks, and glosses of their own framing. The same matter which is
contained in the English, is also contained in their service book, with some
little addition. The same form is also observed with a small alteration,
whereas our form of service should be as different as may be, from the Popish.
And for length, it is so wearisome, that many times it shuts out Preaching,
viz. when Baptism, the Communion Marying, Churching, and Buryal, con^urre
together, as often they do in great Congregations, (...). ^0.
as it is said in the Abridgement of Lincoln Ministers. Divine service in the
Apostolical Church was not spent in reading prayers, Psalms, Epistles,
Gospels, etc. but for the most part in doctrine and exhortation. When the
Congregation assembled, their Pastor was with them, and he spent not the time
in reading lessons, prayers, collects, etc. but uttered some word of
exhortation, and doctrine, upon the parcel of Scripture which was read; as was
the custom also in the Sinagogues. And suppose it had been omitted at any time
in the Sin^gogue, we read not of any such lame Liturgy in the Christian
Church, in the days of the Apostles, nor in many ages following, till
blindness, ignorance and laziness, made the chief part of divine service to
be omitted, and a prescript form to be made, for (...) and ignorant Priests.
For shall we believe that as long as Pastors were able to teach and exhort, that
they posted over a number of prayers and lessons, etc. and no farther? No The
bells of Aaron should give a sound, as often as the Lords Priest enters into
the Sanctuary. Or do they think, that their Pastor was abroad at his
pleasures, when the flock was at their pasturage, as devine service, and some
other reading minister serving them. The Apostolic Church, and purer
Antiquity, knew no such minister. Out of the lessons, or Psalms, which were
read, the minister took the argument, and ground of his sermon, beginning after
this, or the like manner: Ye have heard brethren the book of, etc. read. The
book is read, wherein it is prophesied. We hear brethren, when the Gospel
was read, the Lord saying that etc.

The directories are contained, either in the Calendar, or the Rubricks. In the
Calendar, to direct the minister in such things, as belong either to the
minister himself, or to the whole Parish. To the minister himself, either in
reading some Psalms each day of every month, or of the rest of the Bible,
partly out of the Canonical Scripture, partly out of the Apocrypha books, and
that within the year.

The reading of Psalms, and other parts of Scripture, is not preaching, but
the word read is like a loaf unbroken, or not divided in pieces, and morsels.
And therefore it is not a right set form of service to prescribe all the
Psalms to be read within the space of a month, or so many lessons of the
Scripture within a year to take up the time, which should be spent in
preaching. Less Scripture read, and withal explained, and opened up to the
use of the hearers, is more profitable. And if the other prejudge this, howbeit
the matter be good, for it is the good word of God, so much as is canonical,
yet the form is naught, and in this case unlawful. Then as for the reading of
the Psalms, they make daily prayers of them, when as they be not all prayers,
or else the matter of these which are pra^ers, does not agree to the present
time and state of the Church, but are read hand over head. The Apocrypha books
should not receive that honor, as to be read publicly in the Church, as
canonical Scripture is. Because they contain sundry false and frivolous
things; and suppose not, yet they are not the trompets which are set apart and
sanctified by God, to be blown by his priests in his temple. The church of
the Jews read no other scripture but Canonical, Moses and the Prophets, and
the Psalms: and the Christian Church in the purer times, onley the monuments
of the Prophets and Apostles. The Council of Laodicea decreed the same also.
The reading of them in the Church has made the people believe, that they are
portions of the old and new testament. 66.
Sundry of the Prelates take texts out of the Apocrypha, says the author of
the petition to the Queen. Diverse chapters of the Apocrypha are appointed to be
read for extraordinary lessons upon Feast days, and some parts of the
canonical Scripture are omitted.

The directories, which direct in such things, as belong to the whole Parish,
are anent observing feast days, and days of abstinence from flesh.

They have a number of feasts, and fasting days, more then the Jews had
appointed to them. The holy days observed by them, besides the weekly
Sabboths, are these following, the days of the Feasts of the Circumcision, of
the Epiph^^ie, of the Purification of the blessed Virgin* of S. Matthias the
Apostle, of the annuntiation of the virgin, of Saint Mark the Evangelist, of
Saint Philip and Jacob the Apostles, of Christ's Ascension, of the nativitie of
John Baptist, of S. Peter the Apostle, of James the Apostle, of Bartholomew the
Apostle, of S. Matthew the Apostle, of S. Michael the Archangel, of S. Luke
the Evangelist, of S. Simon and Jude the Apostles, of all Saints, of Saint
Andrew the Apostle, of Saint Thomas the Apostle, of Christ's Nativitie, of S.
Steven the Martyr, of S. John the Evangelist, of the holy Innocents, Monday and
Tuesday in Easter week, and Monday and Tuesday in Whitson week. This is their
number and order as it is set down in the beginning of their service book.
They keep the same order in the observation of them, that the Popish church
observes, with the same distance of time from other, upon the same days,
Gospels, Epistles, Collects, and proper lessons the same, howbeit some time
fewer, with the like observation of rest. And howbeit S. George be left out in
this reckoning, yet is his day honored. This Saint, says Barrow, Discov. p. 8^
has no small entertainment with his solemn procession (and that by no small
estates, Disco. p. 82.
but even the greatest of the land) with Cornets, Trumpets, Harbe, Shackebuts,
Ps^lteries, Du^^imer, and all instruments of music, etc This Saint beside his
noble ordour of Knighthood has also his peculiar Chaplain Palatine of the
order who it to wear a gold ring on his thomb. The holy days are dedicate to
the Trinite, to Christ alone, to Saints, to Angels. As for the day dedicated to
the honor of the Trinity, De cultu ^anctor. c. 15.
Bellarmine does confess that it is recent, that it was not observed at Rome
in the days of Pope Alexander the third. It was celebrated in some particular
Provinces, but not received into Rome, till the time of Pope John the 22. It
was thought needless, seeing the Trinity was remembered, either one way or
other in the daily service, but especially upon the Lords day: for the Preface
of the Trinity day was of old sung upon the Lords day; and the Creed wherein
the Trinity is remembered, was not omitted. If there should be a holy day for
every great mystery of our religion, then must we have many more holy days,
then we have yet had. If a particular day for the Trinity entered but of late
in the Church, for the respects foresaid then what mystery of Religion is
remembered frequently on the Lords day, in hymn, prayer, confession, creed, or
sermon needs not a special day, and a set service with bodily rest for that
mystery. You see then, that the feast which was rejected a long time by the
Popes themselves, the English do retain. As for the feastgoelonging to the
life and death of Christ the most ^enoumed, and most ancient, is Easter, and
yet it was not observed by the Apostles. The hot contentions about it, whether
it should be observed upon the day of the full Moon, or the Sabbath after,
declares that they did not institute it: for they could have easily decided
that question, whether shall we be conform to the Jews in observing the same
day with them or not: yea, the Apostle, 1. Cor. 5. 8. speaking of the
celebration of our Easter, tyeth us not to a certain number of days, as the
Jews were, who after the eating of the Lamb; might not have any levened bread
in their house for seven days, but says, ours is all the year long to be
observed, ye through our whole life, and with other kind of unleavned bread,
both by particular Churches, and persons. No where does he refer us to
anniversary Easter. The Christian Pentecost was not observed by the Apostles,
howsoever sometime some of the^ went up to Jerusalem at the Jewish Pentecost,
to confirm or ^ucrifie the Jews, as long as the Temple stood. If the Apostles
themselves, upon whom the gifts of the H. Spirit were powered that day, did not
observe it themselves, who were the receivers of the benefit, what warrant have
we to observe it. If neither Easter nor Pentecost were Apostolical institutions
far less the Ascension day, and the Nativitie. The feast of Circumcision
Bellar. says is very recent, and it is to be observed that they have a service
day, or holy time for Christ's circumcis. but not for his Baptism for upon the
E^iph, day they make mention of the 3 wisem. and the star, but nothing of Chr.
Baptism in their G^spels and Epistles. In a word all the days dedicate to
Christ's several acts are all humane inventions, some later, some more ancient,
and Jewish forms, wherewith that people was brought up under the pedagogie of
the law, a rudimentarie kind of instruction, not beseeming the Christian
Church, nor answerable to the clear light of the Gospel. The Jews
anniversarie days were abolished not only for their peculiar service, or
signification of things to come, but altogether, howbeit memorials of bypast
benefits. Christ and his Apostles did institure no day for remembrance of a
particular benefit, no not the weekly sabbath, let be an anniversary day. For
the weekly Lords day was not appointed for remembrance of the particular
benefit of Christ's resurrection, but for the whole worship of God. If the Lords
day were referred directly and expressly to the commemoration of the
resurrection, then should it be the proper and peculiar service of the Sabbath,
then should we not have at all a day determinate in the new ^estament, and
institute to worship God for himself, and all his works in general. There
was then no memorial days appointed in the new testament, but a moral day
for the worship of God. The sacrament as often as it is celebrate, it is a
memorial of his passion. When the word is preached, Christ is crucified before
our eyes. But days of particular commemorations of some special actions with
solemnity and cessation from work, we have none, nor was it the intention of
Christ, or his Apostles. If there be no warrant to dedicate anniversarie days
to Christ, far less to the virgin Mary, and the rest of the Saints, and of
Angels. Their holy days of Saints are called the Saints days as well as
Christ's days are called his. And they have their collects, gospels, epistles,
as well as Christ has his: and what reason have they to have some anniversarie
remembrances of so many Saints of the new testament, and never one for any of
the old? Can they give any reason of this difference, but a ^opish one? And
among these of the Christian Church, why is Timothy and Titus, and many ^oe not
remembered as the rest are? Is the (...) purification of our Lady upon the
candle^masse day, a matter of such moment, that it is to be honored with some
special day, and actions of greater importance are not so to be celebrate.
This night the Mayor of London kneeleth down at S. Edwins tomb in P^ules
Church, and says a P^ter noster, Discov p 84.
as Barro^ reports. If I should insist upon every particular day, and rip up
their collects, gospells, pis^les, hymns and songs, I should be too pro^ixe.
For we should fall upon many fooleries, and impertinent application of the word
of God. In the collect from Christmas to Newyeares day, they are appointed to
say, that Christ was borne upon this day, when as it beloved him to be borne
only upon one day, (...) it is grounded upon an erroneous conceit of Zacharies
high priesthood, that he was born ^n the 25. day of December. In the collect
upon Innocents day, it is said that the infants whom Herod murdered, were Gods
witnesses. Athanasius creed is to honor the high days, (...) not the common
creed, and is appointed to be read only upon certain holy days, it must not
grace other days Venite may not serve at Easter, as it does all the year
before, and after follow Domine labia mea. They have no reason for these and
other like superstitious vanities, but such as Durandus, or any other papist
can give them, out of their reasonless^ Rationalls. What holiness they place
in their holy days may be seen in that they have a stricter rest enjoined
upon them, not they urge for the sabbath, whereas the Lord required a stricter
rest upon the Sabbath, then upon other days appointed by himself. Then again
their principal feasts have Eaves and devout fastes going before. Thirdly they
say they will not change them, to let us see that they may be changed; but
retain the same days which the papists observe, and which, they say, were
consecrate and made more holy then other dayies, be the actions, which were
wrought on these days, as the manger and cross of tree was with the truth of
Christ's body. Even howbeit this reteyning without change, does nourish in the
people both a superstitious and popish conceit of the holiness of the day and
the erroneous conceits, that Christ was borne on such a day, John Baptist on
such a day, that Zachary was high priest etc. To let pass other popish
opinions of worship, and merit. The most part observe it with masking,
dancing, gluttony, games, enterludes. For the which superstitious, and
erroneous conceits, and incorrigible abuses, they ought to be abolished,
suppose in themselves they had been never so indifferent.

Besides their Eaves they have their ordinary fridaies, Ember weeks, and lent
fast. And if they say that abstinence from flesh only is commanded for some
political respects, I would demand wherefore is the minister or Curate
enjoined after sermon, homily, or exhortation, to declare unto the people,
whether there be any holy days, or fasting days the week following. Are not
the people commanbed likewise to repair to the Church to pray, and to hear
divine service. Their lent begins as the popish does upon Ashwednesday,
with a terrible co^mination, where are pronounced many bitter curses and the
people answer and ratify every one of them with their own mouth saying, Amen.
The priest before he utter the curses, after the lettanie is said, goes to the
pulpit, to imitate the levites who pronunced curses upon mount Ebal, and never
but once, and he says, Brethren, in the primitive Church there was a godly
discipline, that at the beginning of lent, such persons as were notorious
sinners, were put to open penance, and punished in this world, that their
souls might be saved in the day of the Lord: and that others admonished by
their example might be the more afraid to offend. In stead whereof until the
same discipline, may be restored again, which thing is much to be wished etc.
it is thought good that at this time should be read the general sentences of
Gods cursings against impenitent sinners. Ye see that corporal and afflictiue
penance is commended for good discipl. for the disci. of the prim. church, for
the discipl. of lent, and espetially on ashweonesday, and that it is wished to
be restored again. I believe the^. It is displing, ashes, shriving, and such
other gear that they would have. In the last collect upon the first day of
lent, or ashwednesday, the priest, or Curate says, Be favorable to thy
people, which turn unto the in weeping, fasting, and prayer. Is this to fast
for civil respects only, for the main tenance of sea faring men, and
preservation of cattle. The Priests and Clerks kneeling say the Psalm,
miserere mei Deus. The prayers, and special exhortations tend to begin their
repentance that day. The week before Easter has a prescript service, epistles,
and gospells for every day, which no other week in the year has, say the
ministers of Lincoln in their Abridgement, p. 90. 91. They observe likewise
that not one day in all they care has three collects. but good Friday, the
Friday before Easter. May we not see then, that the end of their Lent fast is
the same with the Popish, to wit, that they may be prepared to receive the
communion at Easter, as if that communion needed a greater preparation then at
other times, or had a greater virtue: Item, to be prepared against the
celebration of the feast of the resurrection: to repent for the sins of the
whole year: to imitate Christ's fast of 40. days, which was a miraculous fast,
a fast of another kind, for it was without hungring, a fast for one time, and
not used again either by himself or his Apostles, Mat. 9. The Ember weeks,
which were called Ie^unia quatuor temporum, ^an. 31.
are appointed, they say, for praying, and fasting, because the Bishop is to
give orders upon the Sundays immediately following, as it is said in their
latest Canons. They tie the giving of orders to set seasons of the year, when
as ministers should be thrust out into the Lords harvest, whenever there is
need. Then again such are enjoined to fast, as have no need of a pastor, for
all the parishes of the Diocie are not destitute. Where there is no feel of a
want, the prayers will be cold. It is expedient indeed that the particular
congregation which has need, humble themselves. Thirdly, this their fast is
but abstinence from flesh, but not from fish, or any other delicacies which
they can get, as if flesh were an unclean creature, and polluted. So their
fast in all the orders and rites of it, is the Popish fast. Lastly, they join
not fasting and giving of orders together, as they should do, if they followed
aright that example which is set down, Act. 13. 1. 2. but they observe their
ceremonious fast, or rather superstitious abstinence from flesh on the week
before, and not upon the Lords day following, when they give orders. For upon
the Lords day they think it unlawful to fast. And yet they will rather sever
their ceremonial fast from the action, then that it should not be performed
upon the Lords day: for why? that was the day on which the fiery tongues came
down upon the Apostles: and they observe the third hour of the day commonly,
that is about nine a clock, because it was about that time that the gifts of
the holy Ghost were powered on them. For the Bishop must say to the Priest,
Receive the Holy Ghost. And so one superstition is at jarre with another, and
great confusion there is, and disorder in their rites and ceremonies, and no
wonder, for they are Babylonish. Yet for all their apish imitations, the cloven
tongues come never down upon any of their silly Curates. The Friday fast is
like the rest, and depends upon their mother good Friday, which has bred
them. These are their set and superstitious fasts. Extraordinary and
occasional fasts for urgent calamities, and the miseries either of their own
Church, or other Churches abroad, they have none, or very rare.

Other directories are contained in the Rubrickes, which serve to direct in the
manner of administration, either of some parts of the liturgy, or of the
sacraments. Of some parts of the liturgy in such things as concern all which
are of that congregation, or some only. Of such as concern all, as in the
public prayers, or reading of sacred homilies. In public prayers either
ordinary or peculiar to some time, and occasion.

Their prayers are to be consi^ere^ both in matter and form. In the matter, as
when in the collect upon the 12 sunday after Trinity sunday, it is said,
Almighty and everlasting God po^re do^ne upon us the ab^ndance of ^hy mercy
giving unto us that, that our prayers dare not presume to ask. There is nothing
which is needful for us and lawful, but we dare and should ask it. They
pray to be delivered from thundering, and tempest, when there is no appearance
of danger. The third part of their prayers concern the commodities or
incommodities of this life. They crave to be delivered from all adversity, as
if the petition in the Lords prayer, deliver us from that evil one, or wicked
one, to wit, the Divill should be translated, from all evil. In S.
Bartholom^w his collect they pray that they may follow his sermons, and there
is none of them extant. Why say they, O Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, praise
the Lord, more then O Peter, Paul, and virgin Marie, praise the Lord. The form
of their prayers is set down as a lesson for the minister to read. So that the
gift and exercise of the spirit is stinted, and circumscribed with their
prescript prayers. For howbeit he could pray with the tongue of an Angel, he^
must be tied in time of their service, to the words which are set down in the
book. Sometime the Minister is enjoined to begin the Lords prayer with a
loud voice. Sometimes the Clarks and people are directed to say the Lords
prayer with a loud voice at one time, and not another. Then again their
prayers are shred into many small pieces, T ^ 1. Repl p. 108.
They pray in two or three lines, and then after having read some other thing,
come and pray as much more, and so to the 20 or 30 time, with pawses between.
Prayers should be continued together; not cut off and interrupted, or cut in
small pieces. They do with their prayers, as they do with their Gospels and
Episties; which they rent from their contextis, which would serve for memory
and greater edification. They multiply words tending to the same effect; using
repetitions and babbling. How many Kyrie eleeson and Christ eleeson will they
have at one time. Abridg^ p. 35.
At one and the same meeting of the Assembly, the Lords prayer is to be
repeated 8 several times, and Gloria patri 12 times. May not the Papists
justly defend their beads. Survey of the B. of common prayer, p. 47.
Glory to the Father, etc. is not said after Te Deum laudamus, as after
Benedicite, Magnificat, and nune dimittis. They have their times to kneel at
some prayers, not at others. The Minister is ordained to stand in the
accustomed place, or at the discretion of the Ordinary. So that is left to the
discretion of one man which tends to the edification of many. The accustomed
place is the Chancel. Thereupon, says M. Cartwright, the Minister in saying
morning and evening prayer, 1. Repl. page 105.
(...) in the Chancell with his back to the people, as if he had some secret
talk with God, which the^ people might not hear. And hereupon it is likewise
that after morning prayer, for saying another number of prayers, he climeth up
to the further end of the Chauncell, and runs as far from the people, as the
wall will let him, as though there were some variance between the people and
the minister, or as though he were afraid of some infection of the plague, and
indeed it renueth the memory of the Leviticall priesthood, which did withdraw
himself from the people into the place called the holiest place, where he
talked with God, and offered for the sins of the people. The chauncel
distinguished from the body of the Church, is their holy place for the Priest,
and He has a peculiar door to this chancell, through which none might pass
but himself, Disc. p. 131.
says Borrow, For the ch^piters and letanie, there is commandment given, that
they should be read in the body of the Church, p. 105. ^. part. p. 187.
says M. Cartwright in his first Reply, In his second Reply, he says, I am
assuredly persuaded, that the tenth Church in England has not all the service
said in that place, where the whole Church may hear it. They will rather stick
to the Jewish or popish rites, and imitate Mass priests, then edify Gods
people. For marriage he comes to the body of the Church, for Baptism to that
part, which is over against the Church-dore, and so trudgeth from place to
place. The Letanie must not be used but upon Sundaies, Wednesdaies, and
Fridayes, except the Ordinary appoint other days: the Minister propounds
things to be prayed for, or against, the people perform the prayer, saying
with a loud voice. Good Lord deliver us, Survey of ^he B. of (...) pray^^ ^^.
we beseech thee to hear us good Lord, and this they often repeat. And yet
one suffrage is put out of the letany, which was in it before, to wit, From the
tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable enormities, good Lord
deliver us. They say certain Psalms and prayers over the corn and grass,
and certain gospels at crosse-waies, Disc. page 6
says Barrowe, In the service book, the Curate is thus directed anent
Homilies. After the Creed, if there be no Sermon, shall follow one of the
Homilies already set forth, or after to be set forth by common authority. Who
knows what is hereafter to be set forth. The Survey of the book of common
prayer does relate, that many points of Popery and Lutheranisme, P. 6^.
are broached in Court, and city pulpits, and yet not called into question, as
be Doctrines tending to the Reformation of Popish ceremonies. Judge then what
corrupt Homilies may be set forth. And yet Ministers are urged to subscribe to
the book of common prayer, notwithstanding of the foresaid Rubrickes. It is the
office of a Pastor to preach, and not to read Homilies. He ought to cut and
divide the word aright, and apply it to particular sores, which cannot be done
by homilies. What was said against Apocripha books, may be thrown against
them. The reading of homilies is a cushion for idle or blind Priests to rest
upon. What say you to the Vicar of W. who upon an holy day in stead of
preaching the Word, Assertion the true ^ Christian pol. page ^.
which he could not, or reading of homilies which he would not (to terrify his
Parishoners with the judgments of God, and to move them to repentance)
solemnly read, and published a counterfeit fable out of a little pamphlet,
entitled, Strange news out of Calabria, pretended to be prognosticated by M.
John Doleta.

The parts of the Liturgy which concern only certain persons are ^nens. 1.
Celebration of matrimony.

In the first words uttered to the married persons by the Priest it is said,
that Matrmonie signifies unto us the mystical union, which is between Christ
and his Church. Then again in a Collect after the conjunction it is said, O
God which have c^nsecrated the state of matrmonie to such an excellent
mystery, that in it is signified and represented the spiritual marriage, and
unity betwixt Christ and his Church. Is not this to apply these words, Ephesians.
5. 32. This is a great Mystery, to the conjunction of man and wife, which the
Apostle utters of Christ and his Church, by which interpretation the papists
have made mattimonie a Sacrament, and the band betwixt the married persons
inseparable, and not to be dissolved but by death. In the first part of their
homily of Swearing, Baptism, and Matrimony, are called Sacraments. The
minister receiving the woman at her fathers, or friends hands, is to cause the
man to take the woman by the right hand, and give his troth to the woman. Then
are they to loose their hands again, and the woman taking the man by the right
hand, gives her troth. Then shall they again loose their hands, and the man
shall give unto the woman a Ring, laying the same upon the book, with the
accustomed duty to the Priest and Clerk. And the Priest taking the ring shall
deliver it unto the man, to put it upon the 4 finger of the woman's left hand.
And the man taught by the priest shall say, (...)
with (...) thee wed, with my body I thee worship (...) worldly goods I thee
(...) name of the Father, Son, and H. ghost, Then the man leaving the ring upon
the fourth finger of the (...) left hand, the minister shall say, set us pray.
O eternal God, etc. In the prayer, the ring given and received is said to be a
token and pledge of the vow and convenant made betwixt them. Is there not here
an heap of toys, and yet never one wants a signification. The ring must be
put upon the fourth finger of the left hand, because say they, there is a nerve
which runs from that finger straight to the heart. The ring must be laid on
the service book, I know not to what end, except it be to sanctify it, in
stead of that blessing and sprinckling with holy water, which the Popish Priest
used, Rituale R^ manum, p. 174. 175.
as may be seen in the Roman Rituall. Then again what sense can be made of
these words, with my body I thee worship, One of a thousand does not understand
them, their P^elats have not explaned them. The words of the Apostle Peter, 1.
Epi. 3. 7. giving honor to the wife, as to the weaker vessel, do signify
only honest care and follicitude, and to bear with her infirmities, she being
the weaker vessel. For honor after the Hebrew phrase is largely taken. To give
honor as to the weaker vessel, and to worship her with the body is far
different, as the word worship foundeth in our Language. The Apostle 1 Cor. 12.
23. says, And those members of the body which we think to be less
honorable, upon these we bestow more abundant honor, that is, with greater
carefulness we cover, then we do other members: But we are not to worship the
members, which are less honorable. The Priest is appointed to say to God in
his prayer, that the ring is a token and pledge of covenant made betwixt them.
If the ring had been used only at the contract, as a civil rite, it might
have been comported with, but to bring it into the Church, I mean to divine
service, is either to profane the same with civil ceremonies, or pollute it
with Popish and superstitious rites rather, as these are. For they were counted
in time of popery holy and religious rites of a holy Sacrament. The married
persons must communicate also, as was the custom in time of blindness, where
every holy action behoved to have a Mass: and so that action, which should be
common to the whole Congregation, who are members of one body, is made private
and particular to a few, howbeit in a public place. Then again they have
their forbidden times to marie in; yea, more then the Papists have, at least, so
many as have embraced the decrees of the Council of Trent, from Advent to the
Epiphanie, from Septuagesima sunday to the octaves of Easter, from the Rogation
week to the octaves of Pentecost, amounting in all to the third part of the
year: as if marriage which is called honorable, did profane these holy
times. The council of Trent has dispensed with the Pentecost and the second
they begin at Ashwednesday. Now notwithstanding of these forbidden times,
they may get a dispensation for some money, and then it shall be lawful
enough, and these holy times shall receive no pollution; for money has a great
virtue with it.

2. Thankesgiving after childbirth.

This is commonly called the Churching of women. I^ stands more in Psalms,
suffrages, and collects, wherein help is craved at God, not notwithstanding he
take upon him authority to (...) from sins. Then there is a Psasme, and (...)
prayers read. The silly curat can give no more comfort, then the few set words,
which he must read, can minister to the departing soul. If the (...) person can
get some to communicat^^^ with him (...), as being ashamed to looke-up for some
folly committed. When she comes to the church she must kneel down high
unto the place where the table stands, that is, nigh unto the Quire door, as
the Rubric in 2. Edward bears, as the women did who after the days of their
purification were ended, were appointed to bring their offering to the door of
the Tabernacle, Levit. 12. 6. unto the Priest, who shall make atonement for
them. Then the Priest reads over her the 121. Psalm. and assures her, that
the Sun shall not burn^ her by day, nor the Moon by night. Is not this a very
pertinent Psalm for the purpose? The Lords prayer being said, and some
versicles and answers, and then another prayer, she does offer her accustomed
offerings: and if there be a communion she receives the communion. Call this
churching a thankes-giving, yet what reason is there of public thanksgiving in
the Church more for deliverance after childbirth, which is ordinary, then from
drowning, or other extraordinary dangers, or diseases? and of women more then
of men? were not that the imitation of the Jewish purification is the Mystery
of it. And so was this service entitled in the book 2 Edw. The order of the
purification of women, P. 147.
as is reported in the Survey. This superstitious service is not voluntary,
but enjoined: When they come to the grave, while the corp^ is made ready to be
laid into the earth, they sing, or say again another parcel of Scripture out
of Job: then while the earth is cast upon the body by some standing by, the
Priest again says something, and confidently affirms that God has taken his
soul and is of assured hope (...)

3. The visi^a and comfort of the sick.

The Priest entering into the sickmans house says, peace be in this house, and
to all that dwell in it. When he comes to the sickmans presence, he kneeleth
down, and prays his prescript lines for forgivenes of sins, with two kyrie
eleesons, and one Christ eleeson, the Lords prayer, and some other versicles
and responsories; when as yet he has not spoken a word to the diseased, or
understood, whether he be sleeping or waking. After the exhortation read
which he may break if need be, and the Creed rehearsed, he desires him to make
his will, and also declare his debts, what he owes, and what is owing him.
Thereafter he moves him to liberality. Then shall the sick person make a
special confession, if he feel his conscience troubled with any weighty
matter, after which confession the priest shall absolve him. When he absolveth,
he says. By his (that is, o^r L. I. Christ) authority committed to me, I
absolve thee from all thy sins, in the name of the father, and of the son,
and of the H. Ghost. Amen. He absolveth like a judge, as the Popish Priest
does, giving out a definitive sentence, and absolutel, does forgive, not by way
of deolaration. This absolution is severed from the preaching of the word. For
the dumb Gurat cannot preac^ in thansgiving. This help is to live and walk^
faithfully in their vocation, as if they were made unclean by their childbirth
to enterprise any thing. She will not stir out of the house suppose she were
never so strong, till the complete time be expired, that is a month commonly.
When she comes forth, she is muffled (...) him, the communion. If others may
not conveniently come near him, yet the minister and he alone may communicate
together: and for shortness of time, they have but one collect pistle and
Gospel. Thus are the people nourished in an opinion of the necessity of the
sacrament, and the action which should be public, and solemn, as the
institution bears, and the practice of the Apostolical Church declares is
made private, and administered peculiarly in a corner, as if there were no other
mean to eat the flesh and drink the blood of Christ, of that grace were tied
to the external signs.

4. The Burial of the dead.

They have a threefold peale enjoined in their latest canons. (...)
When any is passing out of this life, a (...) is to be tolled, after the
parties death, a short peal is rung, another before the burial, and another
after the burial. When the time of the funerals draws near, the Priest and
the clearks make them ready. The Priest puts on his surplice, and then
comes to the Church style to meet the corpse. Then the Priest shall say, or
the Priest and cleark shall sing and so go either to the Church or toward the
grave. The words which are said or read alowd by the Priest, or sung by the
Priest and clearkes, are 2 or 3 small sentences of scripture. For any part of
scripture is sung by the^ as well as Psalms, in their services. and the Bishops
have punished women for not being churched, says the author of the petition
to the Queen. P. 62.
Some are churched at home by the Priest, P. 149.
and thereby says the Surveyer They confirm women either in pride, if they be
able to go to church and will not, or in superstition if being not well
recovered, they yet must needs be chur(...) of his resurrection to (...) again
is said or sung a sentence out of the Revelation, after the lesson, two Kyrie
eleesons, with one Christ eleeson betwixt them, after that the Lords prayer:
then the Priest prays, that God might histen his kingdom, that we with our
brother, and all other departed in the true faith of thy holy name, may have
our perfect consummation and bliss, both in body and soul. Is not this to
pray for the dead brother? When he is laid in the grave, he is laid east and
west, in such manner, as that he may rise with his face to the East, for why?
they look for Christ to come from the East, and it is no easy matter to turn
about if one rise with his face toward the west. This ceremony is not enjoined
in the book, yet it is usual, as many more, as a white or bla^ke cross upon
the mort-cloath, candles burning over the dead corpse in the house, the
^etwand, cakes sent abroad to friends. The priest must have his offering, and
beside that the ^ortuarie, whereof I made mention before. Whosoever is not
buried after this manner in church or churchyard, howbeit in a peculiar buryall
place of his own, he is ill deemed. But this you must note, ^isc. p. 127. 128.
says Barrow, neither rich nor poor, neither young nor old, can get bury all
without money in the church of England: N^ penny, no paternoster there please
the Priest, and then he will bury his brother, and pray for, and over him,
whatsoever he be, so far as his book will go. The minister is so tied to this
office, that if he neglect it at any time, he is to be suspended from his
ministry by the space of three months. So they make that a part of the
Ministers function, which is not a ministerial duty, nor at any time, let be
ordinarily, performed by ministers in the Apostolical Church. Howbeit the
Jews had not so clear a light in the resurrection as we have, yet did not the
priest read prayers, and fragments of Scripture at burials; nay, they are
expressly forbidden to be present at them. Funeral Sermons cannot be made
without acceptance of persons. For if it be the Ministers office, he ought to
make them as well at the buryall of the poor, as of the rich. It is required,
and so is made to serve more for pomp or superstition, then for edification of
the living. Men that never were greedy of a sermon all their life long, must
have one then, to grace their funerals in the eyes of the world. M. Cartwright
testifies, that there are none more desirous of funeral Sermons, 1. Reply p.
16^.
then the Papists. What lying commendations are made of the dead, howbeit
never so vicious, all men do know. Neither do these hired Orators, or
Sermon-mongers, lie for nothing. They must have either a mourning gown, or a
noble. Page 16^
I will say nothing, says M. Cartwright, of the great abuse of those, which
having otherwise to live on the Church, take nobles for every such Sermon, and
sometime a mourning gown, which causes the papists to open their mouth wide,
and to say that the Merchandise of Sermons is much dearer, then of the Mass:
for that they have for a gr^ate, or six pence, and the Sermon they cannot have
under ^ rounder sum.

The Rubricks serving to direct to the manner of administration of the
Sacraments, are for the administration of Baptism, or the holy Supper, and
that either in the church, or in a private house.

In the administration of the Sacraments there are two things generally to be
observed: First, that power is given to an ignorant Curate, or reading
Minister, who cannot preach, to administer the Sacraments of Baptism and the
Lords Supper: Next, it is said in their Catechism, that there be only two
Sacraments, as generally necessary to salvation, that is to say, Baptism, and
the Lords Supper: implying that there are other Sacraments peculiar, not
general, as matrimony, and orders: and others general, but not necessary to
salvation, as Confirmation. In the Preface before Confirmation are set down
these words: And that no man shall think that any detriment shall come to
children by deferring of their confirmation, he shall know for (...) that it is
certain by Gods word, that children being baptized, have all things necessary
for their salvation, and be undoubtedly saved. These words imply three things,
first, that all children baptized be undoubtedly saved; secondly, that children
unbaptised be not undoubtedly saved; thirdly, that confirmation is not
absolutely necessary to salvation. Estius a papist, says the like of
Confirmation. That the custom of the universal Kirk does prove sufficiently,
lib. 4. sent.
that confirmation is not necessary to salvation, is it. 7.
otherwise the godly and careful mother the Kirk, would not neglect to see
this Sacrament ministered at the point of death.

1 Of Baptism.

In the preface to baptism they commend the ancient custom of baptizing only
at Whitsuntide and Easter, except in the case of necessity, which was a
superstitious and damnable custom. They say in this Preface, they will follow
this custom, as near as they can, therefore do ordeine, that Baptism be
ministered only upon Sundaies, and holy days. Upon any ordinary preaching day
then, they must not baptize, except it be coincident with an holy day: as if
baptism were not as holy a Sacrament ministered upon an other day, as upon an
holy day. The child must be baptized at the font and therefore the Priest must
come to that part of the Kirck, where the font is, over against the church
door, for that wants not a signification; to signify the entry of the child
into the church. He must not be baptized, where the minister stood in time of
divine service, or with water out of a basin. The godfathers and godmothers
standing at the font, the Priest does ask, if the child be baptized or no. In
the first prayer the priest says, that God by the baptism of his Son, did
sanctify the s^oud lordan, and all other waters to the mystical washing away
of some; as though virtue were in the water to wash away sin, or as though
Christ's baptism at one time, and not Christ's institution, which serves for
all times, did sanctify the element. In the second prayer he says, that they
coming to thy holy baptism may (...) remission of their sins by spiritual
regeneration, when as the rem^ssion of our sins does standin notimputation of
them, and not in regeneration. The questions which were wont to be demanded of
converts from paganism, who were able to answer to the questions demanded:
absurdly and foolishly now they demand of the infants, or their godfathers in
their name. The interrogatories are these, do thou forsook the Divill and
all his works etc. Do thou believe etc. Will thou be baptized in this faith?
The child has not understanding, nor faith, nor desire of baptism. And how be
it the child had faith, can the Godfather tell absolutely, and in particular,
that this child whom he presents, does believe, desire baptism, or forsake
the Devil. It is a foolish thing therefore, and great mockery of Gods service
to demand that of infants, which was at the first demanded of such, as were
come to years of discretion, and were converted from gentilisme. The children
of faithful parents are within the covenant of grace, whereupon it is that they
are made partakers of the seal of the covenant. The covenant being made with
the parents in their faith, and not the faith of the child, the parents should
give confession of their own faith, and not of the faith of the child, which
is not, because their own faith is the condition of the covenant upon their
part, whereupon God promises to be their God, and the God of their seed,
Whereupon also it follows, that the father of the child should present the
child, and give confession and not another, because the covenant is made with
him, and his seed, and the child is his seed, not the seed of another, whom
(...) proper godfather. Others may be witnesses of baptism, but that the
father should, or can resign this duty to another, I deny. Before the Priest
dip the child in the water he says in his prayer, grant that all thy servants,
which should be baptized in this water, may receive the fulness of grace. This
prayer was read in 2 E. once every month at the changing of the water in the
font, as is said in the Survey. Howbeit it be now placed in the baptism it
self, it seems to be directed to the same end, to the hallowing of the water,
which is then in the font. After that the child is dipped, and baptized in the
name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. the Priest makes a cross upon the
child's forehead, saying, We receive this child into the congregation of Christ's
flock, and do sign him with the sign of the cross, in token that hereafter
he shall not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ cru^ified, and manfully
to fight under his banner, against sin, the world, and the devil, and to
continue Christ's faithful soldier, and servant unto his lives end. He says
not we have received, but we do receive, as if the child were not received by
baptism, but by crossing, or as if the child were again received by crossing
which was before received by baptism. This signing with the cross is no
decent gesture: It is rather like a Iugglers gesture, then a gesture of
decency, and comeliness. It must then be used, as a symbolicall, and
significant rite. But we have no such sign set down in the word, as to make
two cross lines in the air with our fingers, to represent the cross of tree,
or to signify unto us that we should not be ashamed to confess the cross of
Christ, etc. Thou shall make unto thy self no image, that is, any
representation forged in thy own brains to be set up in the worship of God.
Admit once the aereall cross in baptism, ye cannot refuse to set up the the
material cross, and the Rood in the Kirck, nor the wooden or stone crosses
in the high ways. For all may signify the same thing, that the cross on the
forchea^. And by this reason every one may wear a Giver cross upon his
forehead also. Further not only other significant crosses material may be
brought in upon this ground, but also all the rest of the beggarly ceremonies
of baptism, to deface and deforme the purity, plainnes, and siniplicitie of
Christ's institution. As to put salt in the mouth of the child, to annoint with
oil the breast and shoulders, and the top of the head with holy chrisme and to
put a burning taper in his hand, etc. for these toys had their own glorious
significations as well as the Cross. Lastly what does in signify, but that
which is already signified in baptism. The same valor and courage and
constant prosession and fightiug under Christ's banner, is a part of that grace,
which is sealed by baptism. But beside that it is a significant toye, Can. 3^.
it is also esteemed effective. For they say, that by it, the infant is
dedicated to the service of him that dyed on the cross. Who did sanctify this
sign for such an use? Are men able to do it? It was made also a consecrator
of water, bread, and wine, and all other holy things in time of popery, for
the which corruption we ought to abhor it. Again, we sign that (...) in
token, that he shall continue Christ's saithful soldier to his lives end: these
words (shall continue is his lives end) compared with the like in the Epistl^
of the 22. Sunday after trinity) God shall continue the work in you to the
end show unto us, that we use the cross for a pledge to give assurance to the
child to continue in grace to the end; which if it be so then it serves to
work faith, 1. Part. p. 34.
and is used effectively, L. 5. c. 65.
says Parker. Hooker says, that there cannot be a more forcible mean to
avoid that which may deservedly procure shame. If in be in some sort a mean to
secure from confusion everlasting, then is it in some sort effective of grace.
In a word, suppose there were no sinful use of it for the present, the
horrible abuse of it in times bypast, and the danger and peril of these same
abuses are sufficient to remove it out of this holy sacrament, where it is set
up in such honorable state beside the Lords own altar. After the signing with
the cross, the Priest says, Seeing now dearly beloved brethren, that these
children be regenerated, and grafted into the body of Christ's congregation,
and not before the crossing. Private baptism is administered in private houses,
sometime by a private person, sometime by a public. Howbeit it be not enjoined
by law, not prescribed by their service book, that lay men or women shall
baptize in time of necessity, yet it is permitted and allowed in their
practice, and has been defended by Whitgift and Hooker in print. When it is
administered, they call upon God, and say the Lords prayer, if the time will
suffer. Then if the time will not suffer they omit prayer. So that not only
they omit preaching, and the doctrine of the sacrament, but also praying, if
there be haste. If the child live, it is brought to the Church, and the manner
of the private administration is tried. The minister demands, by whom was the
child baptized: and because some things essential to this sacrament may happen
to be omitted through fear or have in such time of extremity, he demands of
those who bring the child, with what water and words was the child baptized,
and whether they think the child to be lawfully and perfectly baptized. If a
lawful minister did baptize the child, these demands were needless. We may
perceive also to what indignity and profanation the sacrament is exposed, in
that it must be ministered with such haste, and fear, that the ministration of
a sacrament being intended, yet it may prove to be no true sacrament, because
it is marred with haste and fear. The Lord does not allow his sacraments to be
so profaned, but to be administered with gravitie, with due time and leisure,
without fear, that may make the minister miscarry in the action. If after
trial he find all right, he receives the child as one of the fleck with
certain words which he pronounces. After the Gospel is read, the minister
together with the godfathers, and godmothers, say the Lords prayer. Then he
asks of them, the questions whereof we made mention before in public
baptism. If these, who bring the infants, do make uncertain answers to the
Priests demands as that it cannot appear that the child was baptized with
water in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, the
Priest baptizeth the child. Then howbeit that it appear not, that a lawful
minister did baptize, that shall not move the priest to baptize the child:
whereby we may see, that baptism by lay men, and women is not made null by
their service book, but stands for good and sufficient. When after uncertain
answers the priest baptizeth, he uses this form of words: If thou be not
already baptized, I baptize thee in the name of the Father of the Son and of
the Holy Ghost, Amen. But what if the child be already baptized, is it not now
re-baptised in public. Again, in private baptism the Congregation is
neglected. The Church has interest in the baptism of the child, as well as
the Minister, for the child is received into the Congregation to be a member
thereof. And therefore the confession of the parents should be given
publicly, before that the child receive the seal of the covenant. We see
then, what are the fruits of private baptism; baptism by private persons,
laymen and women, unworthy handling of such a Mystery for fear and have,
baptism by supposition, and rebaptization, etc. Add, that it does foster an
opinion of the necessity of baptism, or rather is grounded upon it. It is
said in the Preface before Confirmation, It is certain by Gods word, that
children being baptized have all things necessary for their salvation, and be
undoubtedly saved. Ye see, they affirm that all baptized children be
undoubtedly saved, and again, do imply in these words, that for all such as
are not baptized, we have no sure warrant, hat any of them shall be safe. The
Bishop of Canterbury in the Conference at Hamp^on Court, affirmed, that, If an
Infant die baptized, there is evident assurance, that it is saved, whereas the
state of an infant dying unbaptised is uncertain. Is not this sound Divinity?
The Surveyer of the book of common prayer relates, that by occasion of
private baptism, many children be baptized by Mass Priests after the Popish
manner, and many bastards concealed. Many pretend infirmity, when they need
not, and the solemnizing of private baptism in public is often omitted.

2 The Holy Supper.

The Sacrament of the Supper, as also of baptism, may be ministered amongst
them without any Sermon made, or doctrine upon the Sacrament which is to be
ministered; yea, it is ministered by such as cannot teach. In their latest canons
it is said plainly, that both the Sacraments be equally effectual, Can. 57.
whether they be ministered by a Minister that is no Preacher, or by one that is
a Preacher? In the same Canon, they are are said to be seduced by false
Teachers, who refuse to have their children baptized by a minister that is no
preacher, and to receive the holy Communion of his hands in the same respect,
as though the virtue of these Sacraments did depend upon his ability to teech.
And therefore it is ^r^a^^ed in that canon, that they shall first be suspended,
persisting in their wilfulness, and then after a months obstinacy
excommunicated. A Minister it is true is no part of the essence of the
Sacrament, as a Sacrament is defined to consist of outward signs, and
invisible graces, yet is a Minister necessary to the right and lawful
ministration of the Sacrament, and is of the essence of it, that is, he is of
the essence of the Sacrament, as it is defined to be an holy, and sacred
action, for he is appointed by Christ to be the minister of the action. Now we
acknowledge none to be a lawful Minister, but him who is able to teach. Christ
joined preaching and baptizing in his commission, Matthew, 28. To whom he
committed the dispensation of the charter, and the word of reconciliation: to
those also he committed the dispensation of the Seals, and to those only.
Trial and particular examination of the communicants they have none, to try
their knowledge in the mysteries of religion, and growth in Christianity. It is
enough that they were once bishoped, when they were little children, as in time
of popery. The communion table is not only covered at the time of
ministration, with a fair linen cloth, but also in the 82 canon it is
ordained, that the same tables shall from time to time be kept and repaired in
fufficient and (...) manner and covered in time of divine service, with a carpet
of silk, or other decent stuff thought meet by the Ordinary of the place: as
if the communion table were to be regarded more the other common tables after
the action is ended, whereas the very elements themselves extra usu^, out of the
use of the Sacrament, are but common. This is done in imitation of the popish
rich altar cloths. The table being covered with a fair linen cloth, and placed
in the Church or chancel where morning and evening prayer are appointed to be
said, the Priest must stand at the northside of the table, he must not stand at
the head, or the southside. He begins with the Lords prayer and a collect,
then he rehearses distinctly all the to command. and the people kneeling, after
every command. ask forgivenes. The people of Israel kneeled not when God
himself pronounced the Law from mount Sinai, howbeit they saw the mountain
smoking, and lightnings, etc. Gods word uttered by man then should not be
received with kneeling. VVheras the last prayer is sufficient to conclude with:
the repetition of it at every commandment is superfluous battologie. Then the
Priest says the collect of the day, and another for the King, standing up.
After the collects, he reads the Epistle and the Gospel. The epistle and the
gospel being ended, he says the Creed, after the Creed, if there be not a
Sermon, he reads some Homily already set forth, or that shall hereafter be
set forth. After Sermon or homily, the people is forewarned of the
Holy Days, or fasting days of the next week following, and are earnestly
exhorted to remember the poor. Then the Churchwardens, or some other by them
appointed gather the devotion of the people, for so is the alms called, and
upon the offering days appointed, every man and woman pays to the Curate the
due, and accustomed offerings: then the Priest prays that God would accept of
their alms, and for some other things. Then he reads a short exhortation:
then a general confession is made in the name of all those that are minded to
receive the Communion. And this is allowed to be made, either by one of them
who are to communicate, or one of the Ministers, or the Priest himself: So a
Lay man is allowed to pray in the Church in name of the rest. This confession
is made kneeling. Then he stands up again, and turns him to the people,
and prays some few words again. So they have prayer following immediately
after prayer, without any new actio^ intervening, standing at the one, kneel.
at the other so comely is their disorder. The after some versides and answers,
and proper prefaces for holy days, the Priest kneeleth down again, says a
prayer in name of all them who are to receive the communion. As soon as that
is ended, without any other action intervening he stands up again and says
another prayer. In this prayer he rehearses the words of the institution to
God, as the priest does when he consecrateth the bread and wine in the Mass.
For he does not first end this prayer, and then turn him to the people to
inform them of the institution, by rehearsal of the words, but utters them
in a continual tenor with this prayer speaking to God. O horrible
profanation of the Scripture, and superstitious consecration! Then without any
farther he and they communicate kneeling, after the Popish manner, that is,
with a gesture of Adoration, when they are beholding the signs, taking,
eating, drinking, and inwardly in their minds, should be meditating on the
signification, and the fruit and benefit which they reap by Christ crucified,
and consequently cannot without distraction of mind from this employment of the
soul and meditation, pray a set, and continued prayer to God, or cannot
meditate and be employed in the present action without distraction of mind
from the prayer, and therefore either they pray unreverently, which they will
not grant, or do communicate this gesture of adoration to the other
employments of the soul, and of the outward senses, and members of the body,
about the objects presented, which they must grant, and so nill they will they,
must be forced to confess, that they commit idolatry. Kneeling is no decent
gesture for a table: for commodity, they say, makes decency, but this
gesture is confessed not to be commodious, as sitting is. It is then enjoined
for another reason, to wit, fot reverence: but to kneel for reverence and
religious respects is ever adoration in the highest degree. To kneel for
reverence, that is to adore, is not enjoined here for prayet, neither may
prayer lawfully be enjoined in time of another action and part of Gods worship
to be performed by the same person. And suppose it were enjoined for the short
prayer uttered by their priest, yet are not the outward senses, and inward
faculties, employed principally on that prayer; but upon another action,
principally, and directly intended in the Institution, whereas the other is
only superadded by man. Let them frame their canons and acts as they please,
and suppress, that they kneel for reverence of the Sacrament, common sense
may teach us, that it is done for that respect, either totally or principally.
But let it be in the least part, yet that least part is idolatry. Beside the
idolatry of this gesture, it cannot stand with the right manner of celebration
and rites of the institution. For when they kneel for adoration, they cannot
carry the cup from hand to hand, nor divide the elements amongst themselves, as
Christ has commanded. In many places the people are raised from their
kneeling, to come about the table there to receive kneeling, and then are
directed to their places again, says the Author of the Survey. ^. 72.
The Priest gives the bread and the wine to every one severally out of his own
hands. When the cup is to be carried from one to another, the communicant is too
profane to reach it, the priests holy hand must take it from one, and give it
to the other. But Christ willed his Disciples to divide it among themselves,
and it was carried from hand to hand indeed, after the manner of the last
paschal cup, which was changed in this communion cup. When Christ therefore gave
the bread and the wine, he said in the plural number, Take ye, eat ye, etc.
The English priest speaks in the singular number, when he gives the
elements, he annexeth not Christ's words containing a comfortable promise, and
uttered in an enunciative form, but other words invented by man, and in form of
a prayer, converting one part of Gods worship in another, or else confounding
them. Then the Prisayth the L. prayer, and the people repeat every petition
after him. Is not the minister the mouth of the people in prayer to God? And
now they will with their own mouths pray again. When the minister prayed, did
they not in heart pray with him? if they did, wherefore repeat they every
petition? And when they repeat, does the minister pray again the same words in
his heart, which before he uttered with his tongue? Or is the tongue in this
exercise both of minister and people divided from the heart, exercing their
functions severally, and at distinct times? this is the second pater noster. So
I must speak, seeing they use the L. prayer as the Popish priest does his
pater. After the L. prayer they have another prayer. P. 81.
At westminster the communion is ministered in wafer cakes, as the author of the
Survey reports; who also does conjecture by this, that the prelates intend to
advance superstition by peecemeal in all places. The like may be said of some
superstitions used in the K. Chapel.

We have seen the particulars of the Priests function, P. 344.
whereunto Mucket does subjoyn that he must wear a surplice in the
administration of the particulars foresaid, that is, in reading morning and
evening prayer, churching of women, celebration of matrimony, at burialls,
administration of baptism, and the Lords su^per. And if he has taken on any
degree in the University, he must wear such a hood as appertains to that
degree. In cathedral and collegiat charches, Can. 24.
the communion is to be administered upon principal feast d^^es, sometimes by
the Bishop if he be present, and sometimes by the Deane: and at sometimes by a
Canon, or preben darie the priacipall minister using a decent cope, and being
assisted with the Gospeller and Epistler. The rich cope then is not a vestiment
for common kirks, and ordinary priests. No minister being no graduate may wear
a hood under pain of suspension. Notwithstanding it shall be lawful for such
ministers, as are not Graduats to wear upon their surplices in stead of Hoods,
some decent tippet of black, so it be not of sil^k. For their ministering
garments we say first, they cannot be said to be enjoined for distinction. For
the place they occupy in the time of their ministration, does of it self
distinguish them from all others, who see them at service. They serve not for
comeliness, and gravitie, but are rather ridiculous, and stagelike, meeter for
fools and comedians, then for ministers. And if gravitie were respected in
them, they should be worn ordinarily, and out of the true ministration. For he
must not cast off his gravitie, when he has ended divine service. It is then
for mystery or signification, that they wear them. The white color of the
Surplice signifies angelical purity, for the Angels appeared in white. So
are they painted with wings to signify their readiness to do their office.
But significant garments belong to the priests of the Leviticall tibe, and not
to the ministers of the new testament. It is beside a lying sign of that
pureness which is not nor cannot be in sinful men. In the angels it might
have represented as well their glory as their pureness from sin. The Surplice
was esteemed so holy in time of poparie, that no priest might say service, nor
do so much as make holy water, without it. And among themselves, the Surplice
is well known to be esteemed by many people in all the parts of the land so
holy ^ thing, as that they will not receive the sacrament from any but such as
wear it, as is said in the abridgement of the ministers of Lincoln. By what
reason the Surplice and cope are retained, P. 5^.
by the same reason the rest of the Massepriests and Bishops vestiments may be
reduced. The ministers of the Gospel should not be made conform in fashions,
let be in mysteries and significations to Popish Priests, not wear their
badges, either in or out of the ministration of divine service. It is to be
observed, that in time of preaching he is not urged to wear a Surplice, as
(...) of service, belike because preaching is no ^ecessarie part of his
function, as is the saying and singing of service: or else why should he not
use these apish and significant garments at the one, as well as at the other.
In their 17. Canon students in colleges are ordained to wear Sarplices in
charches St chapels upon all Son lays, holidayes, and their E^^es. The
original of this is observed in the abridgement fore sa^ to be this. P. 37.
It is enjoined to all that are admitted to the very lowest degree of their
clergy, which they call primam tonsuram. And this was it which brought that
custom into the universities, that every student should at certain times
wear the Surplice in divine service, because they did in their matriculation
receive this primam tonsuram, and first entry into the clergy. I may may not
insist upon this point, nor the rest that follow, being forced to end within
this sheet.

In the Deacon is likewise to be considered his external calling and function.
His external calling is either to the order and degree, and that in every
respect, as in the minister, except in some things: or to the benefice,
altogether as in the minister. His function is, 1. to have an oversight of the
poor, 2. to assist the minister in celebration of the supper, 3 to bless them
who are to be married, 4. to bury the dead, 5. to baptize, and preach, if he be
called thereunto.

In the book of ordering Priests and Deacons, the Deacons office is said to
consist chiefly in assisting the Priest in divine service, specially in
celebration of the Supper, and distribution of the sacrament, in reading
Scripture and Homilies, in instructing children in the articles of the faith,
in baptising of infants, in the preaching of the word, if the Bishop think him
fit, and in inquiring into the state of the poor, and the sick, and intimating
the same to the minister. After imposition of hands, the Bishop delivers him
in his hand the new testament, saying, Take thou authority to read the Gospel
in the Church of God, and to preach the same, if thou be thereto ordinarily
commanded. He needs not a new calling to the ministry, and thereby be
enabled, but remaining still a Deacon, he may by the Bishops warrrant and
license be authorized to preach. The Apostles instituted Deacons to an other
end then to preach, and severed them from preaching, because one person could
not conveniently be a minister of the word, and a minister of Tables, yet they
will confound them. For so they found them confounded in time of popery, and it
pleases them to retain them so, and not to distinguish the functions, as the
Apostles did. Why are they permitted to baptize more then to celebrate the
supper? Is the one sacrament of greater excellency then the other. May the one
be ministered by any Church officer, who may not minister the other? When the
Apostle 1. Tim. 3. descriveth the office of a Deacon, requires he either
ability to teach, or power to baptize? What in effect may their Deacon not do,
that the priest does, except the ministration of the communion? What can be the
reason of this exception, but that in this ministration there was somewhat
esteemed in time of popery, proper to a priest, to wit, the offering of a
sacrifice. The Deacon then is not half a minister, but almost a whole, and he
may preach with license, or at command of his ordinary, as well as the Priest.
What need I to insist upon such gross absurdities?

CHAP. 8. Of the administration of Laymen.
THE laymen having some administration, have it either in a cathedral or
collegiat church, or else in a parish church, etc. In the cathedral church,
laymen having administration, are the receivers of the rents, Bailiffs, takers
up of accounts, overseers and measurers of land, stewards of courts, and
liberties, overseers of the fabric of the temple, of the sa^ctuarie, of the
bibliotheke where the book of Homilies, and service book lie, vergerers,
bellmen, singing men and boys. Many idle and chargeable officers are fed in
these dens to uphold the pomp of a cathedral church, and that to the great
detriment of other churches. In the Parish church they have not a Senate of
Elders to join with the Pastor for governing the same, but two or three
Churchwardens to see the Kirk be watertight, and furnished with all the
ornaments and utensils, to provide for the book of common prayer, and
Homilies, and the elements for the communion upon the expenses of the parish,
to keep a Register of the christnings, weddings, and burialls, together with
the Priest, to intimate any contribution which is to be made for some public
work: and lastly, to be the Bishop and Archdeacons spy, to delate or present
offenders, howbeit for the most part they be perjured, and offenses are winked
at, and suffered to pass without correction. No wonder, seeing the discipline
is taken out of ^he hands of the right officers, and put in the hands of
Officials, Commissaries, and Chancellors, to whom these perjured Churchwardens
are made officers and servants.

The possessions are either public, or private, etc.

Here are reckoned for the possessions belonging to the Church, books,
vestiments, the ornamentsand implements of the Kirk, the Kirk it self, houses,
mannours, woods, forests, parkes, ponds, fountains, rivers, meadows,
pasturage ground, arable ground, Baron courts Hundreds, and Lathis, Tithes,
oblations, obuentions, pensions for indemnit^e, procurations, Synodals, fees,
immunities, liberties, privileges, etc. It were ^edious to insist upon the use
of every one of them in particular. They are either superfluous and excessive,
or unlawful, or bestowed upon the wrong person.

The constitutions anent both persons, and possessions, etc.

There is a controversy among the Lawiers, what Canons and Constitutions of
the Canon Law be in force among them. Some of best judgment think it to be
altogether abrogate, except so much as is particularly ratified by Statute.
They themselves do hold, Mucket p. 299.
that all the former canons of the canon law, all the constitutions, and
decrees, national or provincial, which were in use before in the
Ecclesiastical Courts, which are not repugnant to the Statutes, and municipall
laws of the Realm, or to the late constitutions established by publiqu
authority, nor prejudicial to the Kings prerogative and privileges, make up
the Ecclesisticall laws of England, and accordingly put the same in practice.
There Canon law, the popes Testament then, is there principal Law book.

Think not, good Reader, that I have made a perfect Discovery of the English
Church-policie: for that requires the skill and pains, of the most judicious
and painful among themselves. Therefore take in good part, that little which I
have in great have gathered for thy information, and consider how dangerous it
is to yield to a few of their Popish corruptions. Some few will draw on the
rest, and the whole will make way for full Popery to re-enter, in the own
time, which approaches very near in outward appearance, unless the Lord
prevent. He that persevereth to the end, shall get the Crown.

BIshop Spotswood has spread a rumeur, that M David Calderwood is turned
Brounist, but I assure thee, good Reader, it is not true. That old impudent
^yar, has together with his supposed Author, a young man, trimmed up a tale
with many circumstances, to make the mis-report the more credible. But if ever
he required by letter, the judgment, either of that supposed Author, or of
any other man else, anent their opinions, then let him never be reputed for an
honest man hereafter. If he had dou^ted, he would not have sought resolution
from young scholars, and unsettled brains. The ground being false, all the rest
of the circumstonces builded upon it are knovish forgeries also. If either
Spotswood, or his supposed Author, persist (...) their caluninie after this
declaration, I shall try if there be any blood in their foreheads.

FINIS.

