THE WIDOWS JOY. OR CHRIST his comfortable SALVTATION To a comfortless Widow:
Being Observations no less profitable then comfortable for the loss of our
deceased friends.

By W. C.



LONDON, Printed for JOHN HODGETS.

1622.

LVKE 7. verse. 13. When the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said
unto her, Weep not.
THE Prophet David tells us, that heaviness may endure for a night, but joy
comes in the morning: and our Savior himself pronounces a blessedness to
them that mourn, for they shall be comforted: which comfortable doctrine he
having immediately in the Chapter going before delivered in words, he does now
here by his deeds, make good on the behalf of a poor Widow miserably
mourning, and lamenting for the loss of the staff and comfort of her life;
her son, her only son, now upon the Biere, carrying to the place of
burial: Whom when the Lord saw, he had compassion on, etc.

The Lord] This shows unto us his power: [saw her] here is his providence:
[had compassion] here is his mercy, power, providence, and mercy, meet all
together to comfort this comfortless Widow, Weep not. His power was seen in
raising her dead son: his providence, in that he saw her: his mercy, in
commiserating her grief; her grief, and the death of her son, work both
together for her comfort: for the Lord seeing her, has compassion on her: And
thus are we brought into the Text.

Which I may fitly term a Comedy; it begins with sorrow, and ends with joy:
acted by two persons, which I make the two parts of my Text: 1 a miserable
woman [her] 2 a merciful comforter, [The Lord.] The woman is a Widow, the
comforter is Christ: The woman acting a mournful Tragedy, Christ making it
end with a joyful Plaudite: In the one there is great misery, in the other,
endless and boundless mercy: Great misery; for here is a voice heard of
mourning, weeping, and great lamentation; a Widow weeping for her only son,
and could not be comforted, because he was not: greater mercy; for Christ (...)
puts on the bowels of compassion, and without any entreaty, restores
miraculously life to her son, and unexpectedly comfort to her self. First,
of her, the woman, and her misery.

Touching the history, it stands thus: Christ having finished his Sermon in
the Mount, he came down unto the city of Capernaum, where he healed the
Centurions sick servant, and the next day he went unto Naim, of which city
this woman was an inhabitant: as he was entering into this city, there met him
a great multitude, carrying a Coarse, and this woman the mother, attending it
with weeping eyes, whose misery, and cause of sorrow will appear to be just
and great, if we do weigh these subsequent passages.

First this [her:] this woman was not of the meanest or inferior sort of the
people of the City, whose daily wants and necessities so inures and accustomes
them with patience to bear many crosses and miseries, insomuch that unto them
they seem less burdensome: for mali consuetudinem mali amaritudinem adimit.
And as they that are always accustomed to live in marish and fennie places,
are not so much offended with noisome foggie smells, as are they that live in a
more delicate and pure tract of air: So they whom their meandness of estate
and condition, must many times make to want, yea in their greatest abundance
to be full of wants, go more lightly away with the burdens of misery and
misfortune, then such as have these outward blessings of the world in greater
abundance. This woman (I say) was not like in any probability to have been
of the meaner and inferior rank; for then she might have been better able
to have passed this sorrow, as necessity had made her subject to many a
former: but she was of good esteem and account in the City, which may be
gathered by this circumstance, that she went not alone, or with some few unto
the grave, but (...), a great troop and multitude, which we know is either out
of honor and love to the deceased, or out of respect unto the living: it could
not be altogether out of honor and respect to the dead, for he was but (...)
a very young man, and not as yet of any desert in the City, and therefore we
may more then probably conjecture, that it was done as an honor unto this
VVidow, the mother of this young man, being some honorable and wel-respected
Matron; yet this woman she loses her son, she feels the smart of misery.

To teach us this lesson: That there is no sex, no age, no estate or condition
whatsoever, which is, or can be exempted from sorrow and misery: not only
the poor beggar that has but from hand to mouth, but even the greatest
Potentate or Prince that ever lived, must have his cares and causes of grief.
Crosses and afflictions are not tied or limited to any climate or country, to
any family or kindred: age cannot privilege a man, wisdom cannot protect,
policy cannot prevent, riches cannot purchase immunitie, but as God causes
the Sun to shine over all the world, on the unjust, as well as on the just:
so does he send crosses, and causes of vexation and sorrow, as well to the
honorable and rich, as to the poor and ignoble. We will look no farther
then to Salomons censure of this: I sought in my heart to enjoy whatsoever was
had by any of the sons of men; I have made me great houses, etc. and
whatsoever mine eyes desired, I withheld it not from them. Then I looked on
all the works that my hands had wrought, and on all the travel I had labored
to do, and behold, all is vanity and vexation of spirit. All those his
delights and pleasures, riches and treasures, could not give him so much
content, as to counteruaile the sorrow, anxiety, and vexation of spirit which
he was continually subject unto. And therefore Lawyers define life by weeping.
The crying of children is a lawful proof of their living, to possess the
miseries of this world: and at our going out God is said to wipe off tears,
that is, to take away labor and sorrow together.

Whereby is justly reproved the wonderful sottishness of worldly men, that
dote so much upon the momentary and sinful pleasures of this sinful world,
and look for no other content, then what they make unto themselves in the
enioyment of worldly things: Oh show wonderfully have men their hearts glued to
every small contentment they find here, and think if they have gotten much
goods, and store of treasure, and have laded themselves with honor and
dignity, that then they are out of the reach of crosses. No, let no man think
these outward things to be any better then Adams fig leaves, to hide our
nakedness, and to shelter us from those crosses, which are incident unto us.
Let no man put their trust in these, for they will prove like unto a Reed, on
which if a man lean, it will run into his hand.

Secondly, as this woman was wealthy and of good esteem, so she was a widow;
she had been before a married woman, and as she had participated of those
blessings which attend VVedlocke, so she had many times felt those cares,
which are incident unto those who have the care and charge of a Family; and
being made a mother, felt no doubt the truth of Gods sentence, I will greatly
increase thy sorrow, in sorrow shall thou bring forth thy children; and yet to
add more unto her grief, and which may seem the greatest grief of all, her
husband, one half of her self dies; and that not in his old and decrepit age,
when all his pleasure was gone, and life it self grown to be but labor and
sorrow: but in the flower of his youth, and not long after his marriage, which
probably may be gathered by this, that he left but one only son, and this
our Savior calls (...), a young Stripling, all which must needs make her
widow-hood the more grievous (widow-hood in it self being a cross great
enough) insomuch that the Prophet David reckons, and puts it among his
Imprecations and curses on Gods and his enemies. Let his children be Psalm. 109.
fatherless, and his wife a Widow. So the Prophet Jeremy, Lam. 1. 1.
Lamenting and bewailing, the miserable estate of Jerusalem, speaks thus; How
does the city remain solitary that was full of people. She is as a widow:
And Chapter 5. 5. We are fatherless without fathers, and our mothers are
Widows: yet all this while she bears these crosses manfully, she yields not
unto the^, she breaks not into open weeping, but comforts her self, calling
to mind those many and sweet promises, and comforts made by God unto Widows:
for God has promised to defend the fatherless and widows. The Lord your God
is God of gods, which does right unto the fatherless an Widows. And Psalm
146. 9. The Lord keeps the Stranger, he releeueth the fatherles and Widows;
Yea, the Lord commits the care of them unto Magistrates, charging them and all
others, Ex. 22. 22. You shall not trouble the widow nor the fatherless child:
yea, the Lord out of his love and care toward them, appoints part of the
Tithe, for their relief. Deuteronomy. 14. 29. He would have them to be remembered in
their Feasts; He menaceth a curse against him that Deuteronomy. 27. 29.
wrongeth the widow: Cursed be he that hinders the cause of the stranger, the
fatherless, and VVidow. And Jeremy 5. 25. he reckons the neglecting of the
widow, one cause of the destruction of the people.

With these and many other promises which she found in Scripture no doubt but
she did continually comfort her self in her widow-hood, that though she were
young, yet she did not affect a second marriage, and besides she took it as a
pledge of Gods great favor unto her, that he had given her a son to be a
stay, and a comfort unto her in her widow-hood: But see, to add yet more unto
the complement of her misery; God, who knows how to give us tearesto drink
in measure, and knows best when he has laid sorrow and affliction enough
upon his children, leaves not the widow thus. As not she, so neither are we
worthy to know whereunto we are reserved. This her young son dies, who was
the light of her eyes, and the joy of her life. To show unto us thus much by
the way; that not only old men must, but the youngest that is may die, we are
no sooner come into the world, but we hasten out of the world: The pace of
death is soft and sure, and every man is a dying man till he be dead. And
therefore, we must so set our mortality before our eyes, as to think every
day our last day, and labor carefully to redeem the time ill past, because so
uncertain is the time of our abode.

But what had this young man done, thus untimely to be cropped off in the budde
of his years? He was but (...) a very young man, as his tender years could
not patronize good counsel, and want of gravity give authority to his
person, to be a president of virtue, so it is likely he was not yet misled by
the errors of youth, much less could he have been a ringleader unto evil.
Or why should we lay sin to his charge, when the holy Ghost lays none; but
rather charitably, yea confidently persuade our selves, that he that was now
about to do so much for his body, had before done much more for his soul.
Happily, God took him away, that he should not see the evil to come. And
truly, if the mother had rightly considered this, it had been a cause rather
to mitigate, then any way to exasperate or aggrauate her grief, that God had
so timely thus well provided for her son; that though she had lost a son, yet
heaven had found a Saint, and though he had been never so dear and precious
in her eyes, yet to have rejoiced, that she had laid up her treasure in
heaven. Had he been an unnatural Cain, a profane Esau, a proud aspiring
Absolon, an usurping Adonijah; this might have redoubled her grief, to
consider, that from her loins a chip should have been hewn, to make a
firebrand in hell. But to have a godly young Josiah, to be taken away in his
tender years, that he might not see the evil to come; might cause her rather
to magnify his mercy, then to whine under the rod of correction. And hereof
should all parents make a comfortable use, when at any time God shall deal
with them in the like case, by remoouing their hopeful young plants, from out
of his nursery of grace here, and transplanting them into his Orchard of glory
in heaven, there to flourish as Palms for evermore.

But had this her son bin taken away in his infancy, her sorrow had been the
less; she had sustained pain and sorrow in bringing him into the word, care
and fear in his nurture and education, and now that she thought to have
received some comfort in him, for whom she had often both wearied, and
disquieted her self; behold, he dies.

Thus it pleases God many times to deal with his dearest children, to lay
affliction after affliction, putting into all their cups of comfort and
contentments, bitter drams of sorrow and grief. Whence we may learn, first
how uncertain a thing it is to expect any certain comfort in this world, we
are all subject to vicissitude, change and alteration. We must not expect any
perpetuity of felicity here, lest we should forget to look after any other
heaven then here on earth. Do not we see by experience, that kingdoms have
their declensions, and Crowns and Scepters their crosses? and shall private
and particular persons expect greater stability? Secondly, it must teach us how
to entertain comforts, when God sendes them; even as the Apostle bids us the
world, so to use them, as though we used them not. So to resolve of them, as
if to morrow we were to take our leaves of them. As crosses and afflictions are
not of the nature of those diseases which men shall have but once, and
therefore we are so to take our leave of them to day, as to morrow to expect
their return: so on the other side those comforts which men enjoy in this
world, are not perpetual residensaries, but even like man himself, of short
continuance, their days are but a span Psalm. ^9. 6.
long, they are always in transitu, suddenly vanished and gone, and therefore
we must resolve no otherwise on their company, then of passengers and
trauailers, here to day, and to morrow no more seen.

Yea, but this was not all, it was not only the fruit of her body that was thus
untimely cut off, but it was her only son; the holy ghost emphatically ad
des, that she was a widow, and this was ((...)) her only begotten son,
she never had any other, Solum hunc in doloribus nouerat, solum suis
lactauerat vberibus, neither had she any hope of more, for her husband was
dead, and this only son left unto her as a pledge and remembrance of her
husbands love; the sight of whose lovely face she used (as Saul did David's
music) to drive away the vexing spirit of sorrow and grief: yea more, she
was not only hereby destitute of comfort, but altogether hopeless of
posterity; for this her son was bacculus senectutis, stirps generis,
ramusculus successionis, and now the inheritance was left for ^^^^ng on to
inherit. Was not here cause of grief? I might say, almost of despair.

It Is true; yet happily God did deal thus with her, even because it was her
only son, thereby to punish some sin in the mother; it may be she had
taken too much delight in this her son and therefore God caused her to
sustain much sorrow for him dead, whom happily living, she did too much
affect; her motherly care was turned into an ouer-prized indulgence; now God
makes that her greatest cross, wherein she expected greatest comfort; because
she made that her pride, which should have been her care. The most lovely
flowers of hearts-delighting joy, eftsoons prove the untimely and unexpected
seeds of bitter sorrow, and God willing to weane our childish affections from
that ouer-weening opinion we have of earthly delights, many times so brings to
pass, that in the fruition of what things our joy has abounded, in the loss
of the same, our sorrow should much more abound. But let not me here lay open
a pit of despair for any afflicted soul, nor add sin to her sorrow; the
holy Ghost lays none to her charge, then why should I? but rather say with our
Savior, Neither did this young man sin, nor this widow, but that the works
of God might be manifest John 9. 3.
in them, as hereafter we shall hear. Only let this teach us Christian
wisdom, so to temper our affections in a godly mediocrity, and so dispose and
order our love and delight in earthly things, that it never carry us beyond
Religion, beyond our selves, so shall we make the yoke of Gods afflictions
easy unto us, so shall we with a great deal of patience part with our
greatest and most endeared delights.

Well, admit this was inflicted on her as a punishment for her sin, why was
not she strooken with death her self, that as living she could not expect
many crosses, so being dead, might never feel more sorrow? No doubt, her love
was as great to this her only son living, and her sorrow for him dead, as
ever was David's to Absolon when he cried, Oh my son Absolon, 2 Samuel 18. 33.
my son, my son Absolon, would God I had ayed for thee. Had it been in her
own election, she would have redeemed her sons life with the loss of her
own. But God deals many times with his children, as wife Tutors unto Princes
children, strike them whom they most affect, and though he does not correct
them in his wrath and fury, yet he chooses so to smite, the smart may longest
remain.

By this time I think you have heard of a miserable (Her) a distressed widow,
and you may well join with her, and she with Eliah, It is enough, O Lord, take
my soul. For 2 Kng. 19. 4.
it is not to be doubted, but while her son lay sick on his death bed, the
mother sat daily on or by the bed, with sad fighes, with fervent and devout
prayers, soliciting God, that now it was high time to put to his helping hand,
and to be mindful in the performance of those most gracious promises that he
had made unto widows, that now it was seasonable to make good that doctrine
which the day before he had delivered in words, Blessed are they that mourn,
for they shall be comforted, but yet she is not heard, her son dies: By whose
death she was plunged into such a depth of grief, and almost swallowed up in
a gulf of despair, that now she could no longer contain, but needs must
break forth into open weeping, manifestly showing thereby, that either the
promises of God were vain, and of none effect, or that she was cast off, and
forsaken of God, and so his promises did in no wise appertain unto her: for
these two (widdowhood, and want of issue) were accounted among the Israelites
to be two great curses. Yet more, her misery was so great, that it moved all
the City to commiseration: for they went out with her unto the grave, and now
there was no hope of any effect of Gods promises, touching comfort to this
mournful widow.

Whence we may learn, that God does suffer his children many times to be so
much crushed under the yoke of affliction, and outward crosses in this world,
that not only to the eye of men they seem to be forsaken, but even in
themselves they feel no comfort, find no hope. Thus was David many times so
heavily burdened, that he seemed unto himself, as though he were forsaken:
Has the Lord forgotten to be merciful? has he shut up his mercies in
displeasure for evermore? So our blessed Savior himself when he was in the
flesh, felt the hand of his Father so heavy upon him, that it made him in the
bitterness and anguish of his soul to cry out, My God, my God, why have thou
forfaken me? This is the doing of the Lord, and it may seem maruailous in our
eyes, until we consider the reasons; which may be reduced to these three heads:

First, because extremities are the best trials of a Christians faith: ordinary
crosses, as they are common, so is it more facile to bear them. To hope well
when we see no danger, or to believe Gods promises, when we see them either
already performed, or at least a probable and likely means to effect them; it
is easy, any man can do it* but to hope when we see no hope of safety, and
to believe Gods faithfulness, when we see no other means, but as to raise
children out of stones, to fetch water out of a flintie Rock, to hold out a
three years famine with an handful of meal, and a little oil; here indeed
is a true hope, and a noble trial of a strong faith: for hope that is seen is
no hope, and faith grounded on, or guided by the blind leader of carnal
reason, is no faith. Thus God tried Abraham's faith in that great extremity,
when he commanded him to offer up his only son. Thus was Jobs faith,
patience, and constancy tried by those extreme crosses on his body, goods,
and children. God deals with his children, as Fencers with their scholars;
they first begin with wooden cudgels, after they go to weapons with blunted
edges and points, and last of all, as they grow in skill, and to put their
skill to the trial, they play at sharp, and many times fetch blood. So God
inures his children, first unto petty crosses, and so inflicteth greater and
greater, at last he will strike with the sharp, and draw blood from their
souls, only to try what proficients they have been in the school of faith
and patience.

Secondly, because he would make the deliverance the more joyful, when it
does come: for the greater are our afflictions, the greater shall be the weight
of glory, and the more welcome unto us: as the Apostle speaks concerning
sin in the godly: so it is true concerning affliction, God many times so
bringing to pass, that where sorrow has abounded, there joy should much more
abound: So that afflictions, they are but preparatiues to greater comforts.

Vintners we see oftentimes set before their guests that have dainty palates,
brinish and salt meats, that so their wine may have the better taste and
relish: So because it is man's nature too slightly to esteem of the mercies,
favors, and comforts of God, as either to forget, or to extenuate and lessen
them, he does many times give them full cups of bitter sorrow, to the end
that they may the more highly esteem and prize his mercies and favors when he
bestows them.

Thirdly, God seems to leave his without all hope of comfort, because they
should ascribe all the praise and honor of their deliverance unto him only.
Man is of a dogged nature; as in adversity, like the dog that snarles and
bites at the stone, and never looks to the hand that threw it: so in
prosperity, when we fare well, and obtain any blessed and comfortable
deliverance from any evil, we are ready presently to share glory with God,
saying, This have I gotten by my care, industry, and wisdom, or else
attribute it unto second causes, and never look up unto God to give him the
glory. But let us know, that God is a ielous God, he will not part stakes with
any man; and therefore he will many times suffer us to sink so low, that all
means in the world shall fail, before he will raise us up, to the end we may
acknowledge, that God is above, and beyond all means.

The use of this shall be none other then those words of Saint Peter, Dearly
beloved, 1. Pet. 4. 12.
think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is among you, to
prove you, as though some strange thing were come unto you: but put on Jobs
resolution, Though the Lord Job 13. 15.
slay me, yet will I put my trust in him.

Thus have you seen a tragical scene of sorrow, personated and acted in and
by a miserable and mournful widow, lamenting the loss of her only son: now
we are come to make it end in a joyful plaudite, while we look upon Christ
her merciful comforter; for he seeing her, has compassion on her, and says
unto her, Weep not. Wherein we may observe these parts: 1. The time: When
the Lord saw her: 2. The author, The Lord: 3. Two antecedent causes of of her
comfort: first, Christ his omniscience or providence, he saw her; and this I
may call the seed of her comfort: secondly, his mercy, he had compassion on
her: and this I may call the ground, into which it was cast, and where it took
root. 4. The comfort it self, which is first verbal only, Weep not: and
here it is sprung into a blade: Secondly real; for she received her son
again, as the History shows: and thus it is grown to an ear.

When the Lord saw her. Was there a time when Christ did not know her misery?
no: Christ knew before he came to see her, and by his Almighty power, whiles
her son lay upon his deathbed, could have prevented his death, and his
mothers sorrow, but he deferres it until this time; to teach us this lesson;
That God alone best knows when to wound, and when to heal; when to kill, and
when to make alive, when to afflict with sorrow, and when to send comfort: we
are not to limit God to times and seasons, nor yet to prescribe unto him when
we should have deliverances from dangers, and comfort in crosses and
afflictions. My times (says David) that is, times of prosperity and adversity,
are in thy hand: that is, to order and dispose according to thy wisdom, to
thy good will and pleasure. And therefore though the Lord may seem a long time
not to give audience, nor yet to behold the afflictions of his Saints; yet
there will come a when, a time, that will bring comfort unto them.

The Lord: Here is the Author. All true and sound comfort comes from God in
Christ, and from him only is to be expected; he is the Father of mercies,
and God of all comfort: it is he that sendes comfort in afflictions, yea life
in death it self, by his power and mercy he sweetens the bitter waters of
death, with the wood of his Cross, making that which is seen, as though it
were not: so that though he has not taken away death it self, yet he has
taken away the tyrannical power of death, insomuch that through him we may
insultingly say, Oh death where is thy sting. Christ is the true herb of
grace, which does mitigate (if not wonderfully sweeten) all those cups of gall
and vinegar, which are the portion and the potion, of the children of grace
here, before they can be the children of glory in heaven.

The Use whereof is, first, to stir up every one of us, to seek only unto
God for comfort, and to satiate and delight our selves only in him, as in the
God of all comfort and consolation: If he send us comfort, if he be the rock
upon whom we build our consolation, no affliction can discomfort us, no fear
can afright us, nor death it self can dismay or appall us; unto him therefore,
and only to him, let us seek for comfort.

Secondly, hereby is discovered and reproved, the ungodly practice amongst
many now adays, that in the time of sorrow in stead of going to God for
comfort, they run a clean contrary way to the devil. They will go to an
Ale house to drink away sorrow, or else get themselves into some jouiall
company, and to pass away the time. And so likewise, in the time of
sickness, in stead of looking up to heaven, they take hell for comfort; by
seeking to beguile the time, and pass away the tediousness of the pain, with
idle tales, cards, dice, or some such like vanity.

Thirdly, it yeeldes matter of comfort unto Gods children, when they shall
consider that God is their comforter, what need they fear, who be their
tormentor? If we had the keeping of this comfort in our own hands and hearts
only, as Adam had his innocence, we might easily leese it as Adam did his,
and Satan who was ever envious of man's good, would be ready to pick and steal
it away from us; but God keeps it for us in heaven, and as he did unto the
children of Israel in the wilderness, daily renew showers of Manna, so does he
distill drops of heavenly comfort daily, into the hearts of true Israelites, in
this their wilderness, and vale of tears.

Thus of the Author, now of the Causes: The first antecedent cause, or the seed
of the woman's comfort was, that the Lord saw her. As not she, no more can any
Saint of God be in any distress, but he sees it, and good reason; for he
that made the eye, shall not he see? He that made the ear, shall not he hear?
and he that made the heart, shall not he understand the sorrows of every
afflicted soul? Yes, he sees, he hears, he understands all. Neither comfort,
nor blessing, cross, nor curse can come unto us, but by Gods providence and
foresight: not a hair of our heads can be diminished, nor a cubite can be
added unto our stature, without the providence of our heavenly Father. It is
neither constellation of stars, influence of the Celestial bodies,
conjunctions of Planets, nor any such notionall fantasy of a Mathematical
brain, that can work our weal or woe. It is not the malice of the devil, or
wicked men, can hurt Gods Church, or children; for God sees, his providence is
above all. And this providence of God, has as well a restrayning, as ordaining
power: for if either strength, or policy, could prevail against Gods Church
it could not stand, if either the curses of men, or the endeavors of the
powers of darkness should be effectual, all would be hell: but God sees,
and his providence disposes.

The Lord saw her; He did not shut his eyes, nor turn his back upon her, but
sees her, takes especial notice of her; to teach man what he should do, to
turn his eyes from beholding vanity, and look upon the poor saints of God
in misery. What Is the reason men should now adays, so much degenerate from
Christ their Lord? Men now adays are grown like the Ostrich, that while her
eggs are in the sand, she will not look on them; she leaves them, she
forgets them. When the clouds of adversity arise, men's sights are dimmed, they
cannot see: when David is in adversity, his friends and his acquaintance stand
afar off; What Is the reason? Surely, men either have their eyes, through
self-love turned inward, only to look upon themselves; or else the profits
and pleasures of this world, play the Philistims with Sampson, clean put out
their eyes, and so they are become idols; eyes they have, and see not the
miseries of Gods saints. Let such take heed, least the Lord give them also a
sorrowful mind, and a trembling heart, and they look for comfort in vain,
till their eyes fall out. Deuteronomy. 28. 61. For he that hides his eyes from the
poor, shall have many curses.

The Lord saw her: Mark the gradation which here the holy Ghost uses, it is
worth the noting, he spoke comfort unto this woman, Weep not. But first, he
had compassion on her, and before he had compassion on her, he saw her; not
that any thing in God is first or last, for all things with him are coeternall,
and admit no prioritie of subsistence, but only as he does actuate them
toward men. First, he sees, then he is moved with compassion, then he
speaks comfort, Weep not.

To show us that God may see, though he have not compassion, he may have
compassion though he do not presently comfort; if he comfort not, yet he
may have compassion; and though he show not compassion, yet certainly he
sees: which may serve for admirable comfort to Gods children, when the swelling
waters of sorrow are clean gone over their souls; though the Lord does not
presenly send thee comfort, yet he may have compassion on thee; and though as
yet he has not compassion, yet certainly he sees: and seeing thee is a cause
to move him to compassion, and his compassion will certainly in the end
bring comfort. The like gradation God uses in his justice, toward sinners,
which may be a terror to every impenitent person; first he sees their sins,
then his wrath is kindled, and his jealousy waxes hot, and then he strikes,
and therefore though he does not plague a sinner presently, yet he is angry,
and though he seem not to be angry, yet certainly he sees him, and the
sight of his sins will kindle his wrath: and who knows the power of his
wrath? surely it will being a fearful judgment.

Secondly, God does first see our misery, before he is moved with compassion,
and send comfort? let it teach every Christian that desires comfort; first of
all to make his misery known unto God. We are all beggars, and they we know
use to lay open their ulcers and sores, to move the passengers compassion. Let
us not be so proud as to scorn to lay open our wants unto God, for except God
see our misery, how can he have compassion? to conceal thy misery from God,
is to stop the fountain and wellhead of Gods mercy. The Prophet David proves
the truth hereof unto us, When I held my tongue, that is, while I concealed my
misery, and did not make it known unto God, my bones consumed: that is, my
sorrow increased, I found no comfort, then I acknowledged my sin unto thee,
neither hid I mine iniquity, for I thought, I will confess against my self my
wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the punishment of my sin. Upon
his confession God saw his misery; seeing it, was moved with compassion; and
this brought comfort. It was his practice: for Psalm. 51. before, in the 12,
verse he prays, Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation. In the 5. verse. he
first inuites God to see and look upon his misery, Behold, I was borne in
iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me. God grant the like practice
may be ours.

The Lord saw her. God has a fourefold eye: First of Majesty, Secondly of
Justice, Thirdly, of Prudence, Fourthly, of Compassion. With the first he
looks on himself only, and this no man can see and live, as God told Moses.
With the second he looks upon sin and sinners, and this is an eye of
terror, it sparkles with fire of revenge, in regard whereof, every man has
cause to pray, Turn thy face away from our sins. With the third, he looks
on all his works, and by it he orders all things in weight and measure.
With the fourth, he looks on the fatherless and widows, and all his poor
and needy Saints: for seeing them, he has compassion on them, and they like
the Sun in the Firmament gives both life and light to all sublunary bodies,
by this is every afflicted soul abundantly rejoiced, and invited with
boldness to come unto the Throne of grace, and cry Abba, Father. And for this
may every sinner safely pray, Lord show us the light of thy countenance.
Graciously look upon our afflictions, Pitifully behold the sorrows of our
hearts. And with this eye did he look on this widow: for seeing her, he had
compassion on her. Here is the second antecedent cause of this woman's comfort,
and may be called causa subalternata, as Logicians term it, because it is both
an effect, and a cause, an effect, in respect it proceeded from Christ his
seeing her; and a cause, in that it produced and effected her comfort. First
let us consider it an effect: Christ did not see her in misery and pass by her
without any regard, but (...) puts on the bowels of compassion, and is touched
with the sense of her sorrow, when he saw, he had compassion on her. The Priest
may see the wounded man, and pass by on the one side, the Leuite may come
near the place, go and look on him, and pass by on the other side, but the
good Samaritane Christ Jesus, when he sees him, he has compassion on him.

The use hereof is for exhortation, with those words of the Apostle, Let the
same mind be in you that was even in Christ Jesus. If we are Christians, let
us imitate our Master Christ Jesus. He saw her, but what manner of sight was
this? There is a good sight, and a bad sight. The good sight is threefold,
First, of discretion or discerning. Second, of contemplation. The third, of
commiseration; the last is the best, especially when it has the misery of Gods
Saints for i'ts object: and the brighter our eyes are thus to see, the nearer
we come to God the Father, who is the God of mercy; and to God the Son, our
Lord and Master, who never sees his servants in misery, but (...), has
compassion on them, and to God the holy Ghost, who is the comforter. But men
now a days are quick sighted, but slow to have compassion. They see as Cham
to deride, as Michal to mock, as Jobs friends, to epsy out their sins, to
aggrauate their infirmities, to add to their sorrow, to trample under their
feet the comfortless and dejected soul, in stead of pouring wine and oil
into their wounds like Christ, like his tormentours give gall and vinegar to
drink. Is this Christianisme? t's contrary to the practice of Christ. Is it
Religion? no; for pure Religion before God the Father, is to visit the
fatherless and widows in their adversity. Surely then we may conclude, that
more bear the name, then have nature from Christ; more profess, then practice
Religion; otherwise how can we behold the misery* of Gods Church and children
without compassionate, and relenting hearts? How can we see the afflictions of
Joseph, and yet drink wine in bowls, and sing to the sound of the vial? How
can we see those Foxes which destroy the vineyard, and not be moved with
compassion to pray unto our Spouse to take them? How can we see that man of
perdition Sampson-like send Foxes with firebrands in their tails into the
Lords corn, and not be moved with compassion to pray unto the Lord of the
harvest? How can we see in our neighboring countries abroad, the beauty of
Sion to be defaced, and her walls beaten down almost even with the ground,
and not be moved with compassion, nor have any pity on the dust thereof? Let us
beware lest the like happen unto us, and there be none to pity, nor to have
compassion on us. How can we at home see so many poor, needy, naked, sick,
and comfortless Christians lie in misery and want, and we pass by like so
many Priests and Levites without any remorse, any compassion? Blessed are the
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy: mercy and compassion it is one badge
of a true Christian here on earth, by this shall men know that you are my
disciples, if ye love one another. It is the only Brand-mark that I read of,
by which Christ at the last day shall know the sheep from the goats, Come ye
blessed of my Father, for I was hungry and ye fed me, naked, and ye clothed
me, in prison and ye visited me.

He had compassion on her: Now consider it, as it was a cause of her comfort,
or as the ground whereinto the seed of her comfort was cast and took root.
Christ was not sent unto, to come to raise her dead son, and being come, was
not entreated or sued unto, but voluntarily, and out of his own accord; for
he was moved with compassion, it was his mercy and compassion that was the
cause of her comfort. To teach us, first, that what blessing or comfort soever
either spiritual or temporal we enjoy, Gods mercy is the cause of it. It must
be his mercy alone, that must feoffe us in all blessings and comforts
whatsoever, and except this mercy of God in Christ, feoffe us in blessings and
comforts, as our sins do in crosses and curses we perish. Secondly, that God
of himself is so ready to have mercy that before we call be will answer; and
whiles we speak, he will hear: he loves not only to exceed our sins, but
our very desires in mercy. Thirdly, we may see the gradation of Christ his love
to his saints, descending upon them by a ladder from heaven, by three steps
or rounds: 1 in heart, 2 in word, 3 in deed: in heart, for he has compassion:
in word, with a noli flere, weep not: in deed, for he restored her dead son
to life, but first it begins at the heart. Philosophers teach us, that life
natural first begins at the heart; so grace, the life spiritual, is first
feated in the soul; the heart is first moved to compassion, then the tongue to
pity: for (ex abundantia cordis) out of the abundance of the heart, the
tongue speaks; and he that has not a compassionate heart, cannot have a
pitiful tongue, but from the teeth outward, and not to speak comfortably, or
show comfort, by word or deed, or both, is an evident sign of a hard heart;
and from hardness of heart good Lord deliver us.

You have heard the causes of her comfort, Christ his seeing her, and Christ's
compassion on her, now hear the effect of both, he says unto her, Weep not.
He saw her: here the comfort was but in the seed. He had compassion: there
the seed was cast into the ground, and took deep root. Weep not: here it
is sprung into a blade. This good Samaritan Christ Jesus, contenteth not
himself to see this wounded woman, (for indeed she had a wounded spirit) and
to have compassion on her, but goes unto her, binds up her wounds, poures wine
and oil into them, and takes care for her farther comfort, weep not. To teach
us, that it is not sufficient for us, when we see any in misery, only to be
moved with compassion, but we must speak some words of comfort in due season:
it is the Apostle his rule, our tongues must utter the tender affections of our
hearts; and our hearts, as they are, or should be the ground, where mercy must
root, must sometimes show, that there is life, by sending fourth some buddes
into the tongue, which is the hearts best interpreter, and commonly speaks the
language of the heart; if the heart conceive compassion, the tongue must utter
weep not.

Weep not. Here comes our Savior now, and makes good in performance his
comfortable doctrine, which was in words and promises; Blessed are they that
mourn: he comes with a towell in his hands, and wipes away the brinish tears
from the blubbered and furrowed cheeks of this sorrowful widow, and turns her
sadness into gladness, her fasting into feasting; her sobbes and sighs, into
songs and praises of deliverance: such is the power, providence, and mercy of
our gracious Lord, and merciful Savior, to raise up unto his children in the
midst of sorrow, sudden and unexpected comfort.

But here some sad dejected Christian, co-partner with this widow in the same
or like cause of grief, may yet refuse to be comforted, and justify both the
cause and act of sorrow: for the Prophet Esaias complained in his days, that the
righteous man perished, and no man considered it in his heart: besides, it is
not found through the whole sacred Story of our Saviors life, that ever he
was seen to laugh, but to weep often: and besides all, this woman lost her
son, and therefore a senseless stupiditie in her, not to have mourned, would
have argued not only want of love, but of nature and humanity, or to have had
(...), courage above and beyond the strength of nature: for how quiet soever
the moral Doctors have made themselves, yet their rules have never
counteruailed all their troubles. The wisest and most resolute Moralist that
ever was, looked pale, when he was to taste his poysonfull Hemlocke, and why?
because to grieve at crosses, and to fear death is natural, is to be a man;
why then does our Savior forbid her, saying; Weep not.

We must know for all this, that the God of nature will have us sometime,
(though not to deny) yet to curb nature; and grace must teach us to do that
sometime which nature cannot, for courage and constancy against all crosses,
and then to be least shaken, when most assailed, comes from the rules of an
higher art then natural wisdom was ever able to teach. Not that grace would
make a man not be affectionate, as not to mourn with them that mourn, and
weep with them that weep: for even this is a lesson which every man must
learn in the school of grace; but direct us to moderate the inordinate, and
ouer-passionate affections of nature, that they should not meurne as men
without hope, for them that sleep in the Lord.

Weep not. Here (me thinks) I am taken with admiration, to conceive in what
amazement this sorrowful soul, and all the mournful company stood, to see
one silly man, and that a stranger, to come with such a song of melody into a
house of mourning, and to present such a dissonant and discording dittie to so
doleful a tune, and yet I cannot choose but admire more, how suddenly their
sorrow was turned into comfort, and mourning into mirth; while I consider, who
it is that says unto her, weep not. Vox hominem sonat, oh Deus certe, the
sound of the voice bewrayes him to be a man, but the matter that he speaks,
mightily declares him to be the Son of God. God speaks by his Son, the
brightness of his glory, and the engraued form of his Person, out of his Word
unto all, both good and bad: but it is not the sound of the voice of God, but
the matter which he speaks, that argues love: he may speak unto an enemy as
unto Satan, Satan whence come thou? Job 1. in anger, as unto Adam, when he
called him to an account, Adam where art tbou? Genesis 3. He speaks peace to none
but to his own: it is unto them and unto their souls that he says, I am thy
salvation: It is with them that he does indent, I will be their God, and they
shall be my people: and happy that soul unto whom in the midst of sorrow,
Christ shall utter this comfortable voice, Weep not.

The Church of God is compared to a ship sailing on the sea; every Christian is
a passenger in this Vessel, Christ is the Pilot and Steeres-man, he still sits
at the Helm, let the weather be never so foul, let the sea and waves of
crosses rise one upon another with never such swelling surges, yet if my
Savior say unto my soul, I am thy salvation, I will never despair, if my
steeres-man say unto me as unto his Disciples, Fear not, O ye of little
faith, that little faith I have shall make me so confident as not to be
dismayed, if my Savior meet me, though not in the flesh, yet but in his
word, as he does here this comfortless widow with a noli flere, weep not,
though he take away from me father or mother, brother or sister, my nearest
and dearest comfort in the world, I will not mourn as without hope, but
comfort my self in his comfortable promises.

Thus have you seen a sorrowful mother, following her dead son with
tearedewed cheeks, a passionate multitude attending this pensive widow, a
compassionate Lord stopping their mouths, wiping their eyes, and cheering
their hearts, with a comfortable noli flere, Weep not. But this is not all,
let me add something farther then my Text, yet not beyond the Text, for it is
in the Hystory he gave her her son alive again; and thus the blade is
grown to an ear, from a verbal to a real comfort. To teach us first, that
it is not sufficient for us to have a tender heart and a bemoaning tongue, to
those that are in want and misery, but our hands must be enlarged, our hearts
toward poor needy Christians must be so affected, that some work of charity
and mercy, might be effected.

Secondly, and for conclusion of all, whereas this woman in the depth of her
sorrow found comfort, and the young man in the midst of death found life, we may
learn, that both to live, and to live comfortably, are in, and from Christ
alone.

But some sorrowful soul may yet farther object and reason, that well might
this woman receive a great deal of comfort, for she had the real and bodily
presence of her blessed Savior, whose very looks were able to revive a
drooping and languishing soul; and besides to his presence, he annexed his
Power, miraculously raising her dead son to life, and thereby unexpected
comfort to her self, but now Christ is ascended into heaven, and there shall
remain till his second coming; besides miracles are now ceased, how then
shall I by this example any whit comfort my self; how shall I expect
restitution of my loss, restoration of my comfort.

I answer, these doubts proceed but from the weakness of our faith; shall the
eyes of the body minister comfort to the soul, and shall not Faith the Eye of
the soul do much more? Rub but the scales of infidelity from these eyes;
and then, even now by faith thou may see thy Savior, sitting at the right
hand of God, making continual intercession for thee. But why do I grant that
Christ is absent from his Church and children? He is not; as Abraham in the
Parable answered Dives, They have Moses and the Prophets, so I say, we have
Christ still; have we not his own promise: Lo, I am with you to the end of
the world. Does he not daily speak unto our souls, by the Spirit, the
Comforter, and to our ears by his holy word, as comfortably as ever he did
unto this woman, when he said unto her, Weep not. May not we daily hear
him say; Blessed are the poor in spirit; Blessed are they that mourn for they
shall be comforted; Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden, and I will
refresh you, and you shall find rest unto your souls. As for the comfort this
woman had, by the raising of her dead son, know, that this was but a
temporal and short life, and when he badde her not to weep, this comfort was
as short, if not shorter then the former; for certainly afterward so long as
she lived, she would have cause to weep, by daily renewed causes of sorrow.
But we howsoever we loose our friends now, shall one day see a more blessed
raising of them, never any more to be deprived of their society: and then
shall Christ pronounce words which shall bring more durable comfort then these
to this woman, for then shall all tears be wiped from our eyes never to feel
more sorrow. Till which time the Lord give us grace to live religiously, and to
wait patiently.

FINIS.

