THE PASTOR and the PRELATE, OR REFORMATION and CONFORMITY shortly compared By
the Word of God, By Antiquity and the proceedings of the Ancient Kirk, By the
nature and use of things indifferent, By the proceedings of our own Kirk, By
the vveill of the Kirk and of the peoples souls, And by the good of the
commonwealth and of our outvvard estate: with The Answer of the common and
chiefest objections against every part: showing Whether of the two is to be
follovved by the true Christian and Countrieman.

Joshua 24. 22. And Ioshuah said unto the people, Ye are witnesses against
your selves, and they said, We are witnesses. But 1 Kings 18. 21. it is said,
And the people answered him not a word. ANNO M.DC.XXVIII.

To the Christian Reader.
FOR no other is this intended: not for him that reads not, but casts it
by, or cloaseth his eyes least he see truth, judging of things controverted by
his own conceits, or upon report, and not upon trial. Neither for him that
is either so Antichristian, that he has not the patience to read on page
written against Prelates and their Hierarchy, or that is so unchristian, that
his earthly designs are his highest intentions, and esteems all motions
about religion that cross him, or comfort him not in these, to be either
seditious commotions, or nothing but idlements of indifferency. But for him
who above all things loves to see the truth, and above all things loves the
truth, when he has seen it, that is even for thy self (Christian Reader)
have we entered into this Comparison of the Pastor and Prelate, and at thy
hands do we exspect the performance of two christian duties: one is for thy
own good; That thou vvilt labor with thine heart for more feeling now,
then thou had faith at the first, when it was often foretold from the word
of God, and the vvoefull experience offormer times, That this transcendent
Hierarchy of Lordly and lording Prelates, brought in upon the Kirk of Christ
without precept or example from himself, would prove at last the ruin of
Religion. Now may be seen what was said before, that Perth assembly Preface.
the government of the Kirk and the worship of God are like the tvvinnes
spoken of by Hippocr. and that the one of them dvvyning away, and dying among
us, the whole face of the other looks pale and pitifully proclaymeth (if the
cry of our sins would suffer us to hear) that religion her self is sick at
the heart: for what are the daily increase of old papistrie, the spreading
gangre^ of new heresies, the scoffing at holiness in stead of imitating, the
laughing at sin in stead of lamentation, but the unseparable effects of this
prelacie, and the ordinary practices of our Prelates, the Symptoms of the
sickness of Christian religion, and the causes of this cloud of wrath, that so
long hangs and hovers above us. Consider that (according to Bernard his
observation of these blind vvynding stairs that lead down to destruction
Quid non evertat consueiudo? quid non assiduitate duretur? quid no^ usui cedar?
Primu^ tibi importabile videtur aliquid, processu temporis, si assuescas,
judicabis no^ adeo grave, paulo post and leve senties, paulo post nec senties,
paulo post etia^ delectabit. Ita paulatim in cordis duritiam itur and ex illa
in aversionem. Rernard. ad Eugen.
) this Hierarchy which in the beginning seemed a weight so insupportable,
that they who took it upon them could not hold up their faces for sin, and
for shame, did appear soon afterward albeit heavy yet tolerable, of heavy
it became light, of light insensible, of insensible delectable, and of
delectable it is at last become a matter of gloriation. That which was a
glory is become a shame, and that which was a shame is accounted a glory.
Of late Ministers could not be found to fill the void places of prelacie: now
prelacies cannot be found to fill the void hearts of the ministers: so far
have we turned from that which we even now were, and in so fevv years,
that which was nothing else but a rope of disgrace, is wonderfully changed
into a chain of pride. As thou love Jesus Christ, and thine own soul, and
would be loath to communicate in all the sins, and to involue thy self into
the guiltines of all the evils that this Prelacie has produced: take heed
that thine eye be not dazeled with the vernice and splendour that the world
has put upon it (for in substance it is the same it was at the beginning, and
in the fruits has proved far worse then at the first was feared) labor to
keep thy judgment sound and affection sincere, still thinking of the painful
Pastor and proud prelate, as they were thought on since the reformation, and
praying to God, as good men did of old, in the corrupt times of the Kirk.
Expurga Domin^ Vineam tuam sentibus undique and labruscis oppletam: fac ut olim
slagellu^ de funiculis and de templo tuo sancto nummularios expelle, vende^tes
ejice, ementes exturba, cunctos impios mercatore^, nisi panitentiam egerint.
Giezitas lepra percute, Simonitas alte volantes, Satanaque ministerioin
excelsum elevatos illide, ac dejice, etc. Nicol. Clemangis.
That he would put to his hand, and purge his vineyard, That he would whip
buyers and sellers out of his Temple: That he would strike Giezites with
Leprosy, and that he would bring lovv such Simonites as now are so high,
being lifted up by the ministry of Satan.

Another Christian duty (Christian Reader) we expect at thine hands, for the
good of the Kirk, That whatsoever be thy place, higher or lovver, farther or
nearer unto his Majesty's person, who gladly would acquainte his Majesty
particularly with the estate of the Kirk, in his Majesty's Kingdom of
SCOTLAND, as what it was once, what it might have been before this time,
what it is become of late, and what it is like to be ere long: But either can
not for want of occasion, or dare not for awe of the Prelates, whose
courting is more to be feared then their cursing: That thou would do what
thou may to make this follovving Treatise come to his Majesty's hands: for we
his Majesty's loving people of Scotland who Ephestion (...), Craterus. (...)
both love his Majesty's person and Croune, acknovvledging the duty we owe
to his Majesty, commanded in the first Commandment after the first Table, to
come nearest unto that religion and piety, whereby we worship God himself,
1 Timothy 5, 4.
who neither love Schisms in the Kirk, nor witty reconcilements of truth
and error, but would keep the truth in peace, who neither are Puritanes, nor
Brovvnists, nor Anabaptists, nor seditious, as men calumniate: but Professors
of the Religion as it was at the first reformed amongst us, and as it has
furnished unto us all the hope that we have of eternal happiness, we would
shevve his gracious Majesty, that according to the saying of Solomon, When the
righteous are in authority the people rejoice, etc. Proverb. 29. 2.
Our hearts were filled with joy, and our mouths with laughter, when at
the first beginnings of his reign, we did not only hear the fame of his
princely Inclination to equity and righteous judgment, but did perceive the
noble proofs thereof, in trying the truth of things controverted, while his
Majesty, with that worthy King, kept still one ear shut for the other
party, and with that vvyser King, when he declared that the wisdom of God
was in him to do judgment, would have both parties to stand before him at
once, that hearing both, they might speed best, and go out most cheerful
from his Majesty's face, who had the best cause. By this we were confident,
that his Throne should be established, the Nations svveyed by his Scepter
exalted, and our cause, which is no man's particular, but Christ's own cause,
should be heard at last, and righteously determined, that everiething in the
house of the God of heaven might be done after the will of the God of heaven,
then which there can be nothing more reasonable, and which is the sum of
all our desires. Our adversaries upon the contrary, out of the experience they
find of his Majesty's disposition to equity, and out of the conscience they
have of the iniquity of the cause that they maintain, only because it
maintains their greatness, have used all means to prevent his trial, have
stopped so far as may be, all ways of information, and (according to the
crafty counsel given to Pericles) not being Pericle dicente, non invenire se
quo pacto ministry rationem redderet, atque ideo co^flictarie ergo inquit,
Alcibiades, quare potius quemadmodum ratianem non reddas. Valor. Max. lib. 3.
cap. 2.
able to make account, have done what they can, that they be not called to
account. When Commissioners were to go to his Majesty, they would have none
but their own, and when some that were not their own were chosen by a
meeting of the Kirk, they would not have them to go. which has made us
after long waiting in silence and many essays to resolve in end, there being
no other way left unto us, with all submission of mind, to send up our
Pastor and Prelate in print, who have been impeded by the Prelates to come
together in person. Neither can it offend the Prelate, that the Pastor speak
the truth this one time for himself and the Prelate, since the Prelate so
many times has spoken his pleasure for both. Our silence and ceasing in the
cause would give greatest vvorldly ease to our selves, and greatest
contentment to our adversaries, who now cry nothing but peace, peace, that
is, a peaceable possession of their honors and wealth, and a cruel
oppression of their brethren. Si pacem non potest habere cum fratre nisi
subdito oste^dit se non tam pacem cupere, quam sub pacis conditi^n vindictam.
Hiero^ ad Theop.
But vvithall would prove us, to be unfaythfull, both to our God, and to our
King, for beside the obligation that is commune to us with other reformed
Kirks, we stand bound by solemn oath, covenant and subscription, published to
the world, to defend the doctrine and discipline of this Kirk, and to oppose
the Hierarchy, and all rites and ceremonies added to the worship of God.
Silence in such a cause may be sin to other Kirks, but to us it is perjurie
in the sight of God, and would also prove us unfaithful to our King. For
howsoever the Prelates profess in public, That no Ceremony no Bishop, no
Bishop no King, and do suggest in secret the service that they can do to
Monarchy; they do but mind themselves, and their own Idol. That
government of the Kirk is most useful for kings and kingdoms, which is best
warranted by the Word of God, by whom Kings reign, and kingdoms are
established. The pillars of his Majesty's Throne are of Gods own making,
Religion upon the right hand, and Righteousness upon the left. The pomp of
Ceremonies, and pride of prelacie are pillars artificially wrought by the
vvitte of man, for setting up and supporting the Popes tyranny, No Ceremony no
Prelate, no Prelate no Pope. When his Majesty's wisdom has searched all
these creitis of this controversy, let us be reputed the vvorst of all men,
let us all be censured, silenced, consined, deprived or exiled, as some of us
are, and have been for a long time. If the cause that we maintain shall be
found any other, but that we desire that God beserved, and his house ruled
according to his own will, and if it shall not be found, that the Kirk of
God perfect in order, and office-bearers without Prelates and their
ceremonies, may be governed upon a small part of their great rents, with more
honor to God, with more hearty obedience to the Kings Majesty, with
greater riches and glory to the Crown, with greater contentment to the body
of the whole kirk and kingdom, greater peace amongst our selves, and greater
terror to Satan and all his train of heresy, profaneness and persecution, as
we shall be ready to demonstrate particularly (if this which follovveth be
not sufficient) whensoever his Majesty shall be pleased to require: and
which we are assured his Majesty vvil perceive upon small consideration, for
a mind inclined by divine power to religion and piety, will not at first
sight discern, and be possessed with the love of the heavenly beauty of the
house of God, they both proceeding from the same spirit. God alsufficient
bless his Majesty both in peace and war, both in religion and justice,
with such success, as may be seen even by the envious eye of the enemy, to
be from the finger and favor of God, and may also make his happy gouvernment
to be a matter of gratulation to the Godly, and to be admired and remembered by
the posterity, as the measure and example of their desires, when they shall
be vvishing for a religious and righteous King.

THE FIRST PART.
The Pastor and Prelate compared by the Word of God.
THat the Worship of God and the Government of the Kirk, The form of worship,
and government, to be learned from the Word.
which is the house of God, are to be learned out of his own Word: it is a
truth against the which the gates of Hell shall never prevail. For we ought
to give this glory to God, that all his books are full, and written on both
sides; as the book of nature, the book of providence, and the book of
conscience is perfect, so also the scripture, which is the book of grace, is
perfect. We ought to give this glory to the son of God: that as he is a
perfect high Priest for reconciliation, he is also a perfect Prophet for
revelation, and a perfect King and lawgiver for ruling of his own Kirk and
kingdom. We ought also to give this glory to the Spirit of God, that as he
purposed to set down a Covenant, a Testament, and a perfect Canon, so in
fulness of wisdom he has performed his purpose. We ought humbly to
acknowledge, that the Kirk has no power (whether by translation of divine
ordinances from the old to the new Testament, under pretext of piety, or by
imitation of the enemy, seem it never so charitable, or by man's invention let
it appear never so plausible) to make new laws, or to institute any new
office or office-bearer, What then is the kirks part.
any minister, or part of ministration in the house of God. Polycleti regula ad
Reges, Lesbia regula ad aequitatem opus. Bodinus (...) method.
But that it is her part to see the will of God obeyed, and to appoint Canons
and Constitutions, for the orderly and decent disposing of things before
instituted. We call here the Prelates and Pastors of Conformity to a threefold
consideration. The Prelate (...) not among the^ selves.
FIRST that they agree not amongst themselves about the matters in question:
Iure divino di^sciplinam Hierarchicam tuentur alii, alii jure humano tantum:
alii no jure divino, sed Apostolico, alius and (...): ali^ episcopalem
majoritatem mutabile^^ contendunt, ali^ tuentur immutabilem, ut ex Iuello,
Saravia, Hooker^, Dounamo, Barles, Bilsono, Bancrofto. Tileno, and aliis
hierarchicis satis est maniffestum.
some of them affirming, that their Hierarchy is warranted by divine
authority; others confessing, it is only by ancient custom: and a third sort
defending neither of the two, but that it is Apostolic. Again some of them
make the form of Kirk government to be universal and perpetual, others
holding it to be conformable to civil policy, as if man might prescribe unto
God, what form of government is fittest for his house: for that which is
highly esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God. He that has
the seven eyes sees better in his own matter, then man that sees nothing
but by his light. Wisdom that has built her house, and hevved out her seven
pillars, can not be content that man's wisdom should devise and hevve out the
eight pillar. SECONDLY, They halt betwixt two.
they should consider, that the arguments and answers that we give to them
against their Hierarchy and ceremonies, are the same that they are forced to
use in defense of the truth against the Papists: and the answers and
arguments that the Papists give them for traditions, for the Popes monarchy,
and for their vvill-vvorship, they are forced to use them against us in defense
of their cause: resting thus in their luke vvarmnesse, and halting betwixt
two, for the love of the world. Which has made the Papists to say, that the
Prelates disputing against them are Puritanes, and while they dispute against
the Puritanes they are Papists, They would make a new ceremonial law.
and turn to their side. THIRDLY, they should consider, that the form of
Government, and divine ceremonies under the Law, were not removed to give
place to the inventions of man under the Gospel. What is beside the particular
precepts of God in Scripture, is against the general Commandment: Thou shall
not add to the Word, that I have commanded, etc. And therefore let us say
with Augustine: Quid litigamus? fratres sumus. Non intestatus mortuus est
pater, fecit testamentum, and sic mortuus est and resurrexit. Tam di^
contenditur de haereditate mo^tuor^, quamdiu testamentum proferatur in
publicum, and cum testamentum fu^rit prolatum in public^, tacent (...) ut
tabula (...) and recitentur. Iudex intentus audit, advocatisile^t, praecones
silentium faciunt, etc. Augu. in Psalm. (...).
We are brethren, why strive we, Our father died not intestate, but made a
Testament, and dyed and rose again: The father lies in the grave without
sense, and yet his words are in force, Christ sits in heaven, and his
Testament is contradicted on earth, let it be read etc. Let the Pastor and the
Prelate be presented before the Law and Testimony. Let the authority of the
one and the other be po^dered, not in the weights of vvorldly avarice and
ambition, but in the balance of the Sanctuary, and let us measure their
callings and carriage, not by the cord of the Canon Law, but by the golden
reed of the Temple, and we shall soon see, whether of the two has
vvarrant from God.

J. THE PASTOR acknowledges no offices in the Kirk, The perpetual and due
off^cebearers in the Kirk.
after the extraordinary of the Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists, but the
ordinary 1 Corint. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11.
of Pastors, Teachers, Elders and Deacons, appointed by Christ, as sufficient
for the weill of the Kirk, and of every member thereof in all things
spiritual and temporal.

The PRELATE sets up one hierarchy of Archbishops and Lordbishops: having
for the head the Roman Antichrist, and for the train Suffraganes, Deanes,
Archdeacons, Officials, etc. never named in Scripture, nor known in the purer
times of the Kirk, No difference in Scripture between a pastor and a Bish.
against the weill of the Kirk, and of every member thereof, both in things
spiritual and temporal.

2. The PASTOR, according to the Scripture, puts difference betwixt the
names of the Office-bearers in the New Testament, Barnabas is called on Apostle
act. 14. 4. and 14. because he was an Apostle as Paul was, Titus and other two,
2 Cor. 8. 23. and Epaphroditus, phil. 2. 25. are apostles, or messengers of the
Kirks Act. 20. 28. phil. 1. 1. 1 timothy 3. 2. tit. 1. 7. where in the Syriack for
the name of By. is put the word that signifies the Elder. 1 pet. 5. 1. 2. No L.
Bis. in script.
never calling the ordinary by the name of the extraordinary, nor the
inferior by the name of the superior, as the Pastor by the name of the Apostle
or Evangelist: but never puts difference at all betwixt a Pastor and a
Bishop: making every Pastor to be a Bishop, and taking the Pastor and Bishop
always for one.

The PRELATE makes a confusion of names, that he may put himself in the place
of the Apostle, as the Pope will be in the place of Christ: but against all
Scripture will make so great difference betwixt a pastor and a bishop, that he
will have no Pastor to be a Bishop, and that there be no bishop but the Prelate.

3. The PASTOR can see no Only Christ Lord in his own house. Ioh. 13 13. Heb.
3. 6. Mat. 20. 25 (...), but Luke 22. 2^. the simple word (...), that is denied
to the Apost. which was granted to kings, which the sons of Zebedeus sought,
and for which the Apostles did contend.
Lord Bishop in Scripture, No By. of Bishops, or pastors in Scrip.
but the Lords Bishop only, a name of labor and diligence, and not of honor
and ease.

The PRELATE will admit no other bishop but a Lordbishop, which he has made a
name of honor and ease without labor or diligence.

4. The PASTOR is a bishop set over a flock, in respect whereof he is called a
Bishop, Act. 15. 2. and 20. 1^. (...) 1. 1. 1 pet ^. 1.
and not in relation to other Pastors.

The PRELATE sets himself as a Bishop over pastors, and in respect of them
is called a Bishop, and not in relation to any flock.

5. Every Pastor in scripture huth his own particular flock, none is without a
flock, nor with a Diocie.
The PASTOR is set over a Kirks of Judea Gal. 1. 22. kirks of Galatia Gal. 1.
2. of Asia, Macedonia etc. ever in the number of multitude as for Act. 7. ^8.
it is spoken of the whole nation of the Jews in the wilderness camping about
the arc.
particular flock, that may convene together in one place, amongst who^ he is
to exercise the whole parts of the ministry, as preaching, prayer,
ministration of the sacraments and discipline, according to the trust
co^mmitted to him by the Son of God, in whose name he is Ambassador, from who^
he deriveth his power, on who^ he depe^ds in the exercise of his ministry,
and to who^ he must be cou^table, and to no other Past. or Bis.

The PRELATE both ordeyneth Pastors at large, without assignaio^ of a
particular flock (as if he were either making Masters of Art and doctors of
physic, or as if ordination should go before election, which is as absurd,
as first to crown a king, or install a magistrate, and then to choose him) and
sets himself as a proper pastor over a whole provinces, and over many kirks
in diverse provinces, as well of those that he never saw, as of that where his
seat is, esteeming the pastors to be but his helpers and Substitutes, as
having their power from him, being obliged to render accounte to him, and whom
he may continue and displace at his pleasure.

6. The PASTOR, The pastor has power of ordination, which the prelate
appropriateth.
with his fellow presbyters, as he is put in trust with the preaching of the
word, and ministration of the sacraments, has received also of Christ the
power of ordination of Pastors, 1 Timothy 4. 14. neither does the Ap. deny that to
Presbyters, which he did himself with them, and which he ascribes to
Timothi^. 1 Timothy ^. 22. 2 Timothy 2. 6. neither the Prelate himself denies the
power of ordinatio^ to the presbyter, but the exercise of the power which he
arrogateth to himself. Ordinat Deus per ecclesiam ordinat ecclesia per
presby^erium, ordinat presbyteriu^ per episcopos, and pastores suos; singuli
conferunt in unum quae sua sunt. Iun. animad. 1187.
where presbytery never used in the new Testament to signify the office of
priesthood or order of a presbyter, can be no other thing but the persons, or
company of pastors laying on their hands, and that not only for consent, but
for consecration, of which number any one may pronounce the words of blessing.

The PREL. for the honor of the priesthood, that is, out of his ambitious
humor, takes the power of ordeyning pastors to himself: denying that a whole
presbytery without him may ordain a pastor; excepting the case of extreme
necessity, as women are admitted to baptize; whereby in a manner he calls in
question the lawfulnes of our ministry, these sixty years past, since the
reformation.

7. The PASTOR has committed to him by Jesus Christ not only the keys of the
inward and private court of conscience, The Past has the power of
jurisdiction, which the Prelate usurpeth and appropriateth.
but also of the outward and public court of Act. 15, 6. and 16. 4. and 20.
28. 29, 1 Cor. 5. and 14. 32. 40. 1 These. 5. 12. Tit. 1. 9. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Heb.
13. 17.
jurisdiction, for decyding controversies, making of constitutions, and
inflicting of censures, they being both but one and the same power of binding
and loosing. He has the shephards staff in his hand, as well as the Shepherds
pype at his mouth.

The PREL. keeps the staff in his own hand, and arrogateth to himself,
even amongst them who never heard him, all power of jurisdiction (whether
Decyding of controversies, making of Canons for order, or censuring of offenses.
Domgatick, Diatactick, or Crytick, as it is distinguished) which the Apostles
themselves, notwithstanding their extraordinary gifts, would never do, but in
all these parts of jurisdiction behaved themselves as presbyters.

8. The Pastor, No such majoritie of power of one pastor over another, as the
Prelate claims.
finds it to be so far against the word of God to claim any authority over
his brethren, that albeit there be a divine order in the Kirk, whereby there is
one kind of Ministry, both ordinary and extraordinary, in degree and
dignity before another, as the Apostles before all others, the Pastor before
the Elder and Deacon, By scripture no Apostle has power over another Apostle,
nor Evangelist over another Evangelist, nor Elder over another Elder, nor
Deacon over another Deacon: but all are equal.
yet he can find no Minister ordinary or extraodinarie, that has any
majoritie of power over other inferior Ministers of another kind: as the
Pastor over the Elder and Deacon, far less over other Ministers of the same
kind, as the Pastor or Bishop over the Pastor.

The Prelate, finds it to be so far against his place to quite his
authority over his brethren, that albeit he has no warrat for any other kind,
or degree of Ministry then the Pastor, yet he usurpeth majoritie of power
over Pastors, and takes upon him, both direction and correction, and that not
sociall, but authoritatiue, to beat them at his pleasure.

9. The Pastor medleth not with matters civil, but the Prelate is more in the
world, then about Christ.
The Pastor is separate from the Deu. 33. 8. Eze. 34. 1. Zach. 11. 17 Matthew.
23. 6. Luke 9. 59. and 12. 13. and 22. 24. Ioh. 21. 15. Acts 6. 2. Romans 1. 1. 2 Timothy 2. 4.
World to the Kingdom of Christ, which is not of this World: He will not be
called gracious Lord, nor strive for the right hand or the left, he should not
follow the pomp of the world, but must shine in knowledge, diligence, and godly
simplicity: he may not assume an other ecclesiastical office, far less take
upon him a secular charge: he may not divide the inheritance, nor burden
himself with worldly affairs.

The Prelate is separate from the Kingdom of Christ, and thrusts himself
into the throng of the World, he would be called My Lord, and Your Grace, and
without respect of age or gifts, prefers himself to the most reverend
Pastors: He robs the nobility and Magistrates of their places and dignites,
and will have his Cuschion, his Coach, and his courtly train. He is a Lord of
Parliament of Counsel and session, a Barone, a Steward, a Judge of civil and
criminal causes: and why not Bishop of the order of the Garter, and Count
Palatine, that at last he may have both swords, and the triple Crown, as the
Abimelech-like brambles of the world have done before.

10. The Pastor and prelates form of prayer.
The Pastor takes the sum and forms of prayer from the directions of God,
from the Lords prayer, and from the prayers of the godly in diverse places of
Scripture, Mat. 6. 7. 8. 9. etc. Luke 11. 1. Exodus 32. 11. Number 14. 13. Acts 2.
5. and 16. 16. etc.
the particular arguments and petitions from the present purposes, persons,
places, times, and occasions, which as the mouth of the congregation, according
unto the grace given unto him from the H. Ghost, he presents before the
throne of God the Father in the name of Jesus Christ.

The Prelate would tie the Pastor, albeit he had the tongue of an angel, and
occasions never so contrary, to certain words, and a set form of Leitourgie,
and would divide the prayer betwixt Pastor and people, and by many idle
repetitions, Their preaching.
would bring both Pastor and people under the guiltines of vain babbling, and
popish superstition.

11. The Pastor thinks it the principal part of his ministry to labor in
the word and doctrine, because Act. 28. 23. R^. 10. 15. 1 Cor. 1. 21 1 Cor. 9.
16. 1 Pet. 4. 11. 2 Ioh. 10. 1 Cor. 3. 12. etc.
woe is unto him if he preach not the gospel. And when he preaches he will
have Gods Word only to found in his own house, reading nothing but the
Canonical text, and comparing Scripture with Scripture for edification, Music.
that he may save himself and those that hear him.

The Prelate thinks of preaching as accessorie, and would have it worn out
of use by a long dead leitourgie. In reading he would have no difference
betwixt the Apocrypha and the Canonical Scripture, and likes best of such
Sermons, as are stuffed with Philosophers, Poets, Orators, Scoolemen, and
ancients in Greek and Latin, that he may preach himself, and be admired of
those that hear him.

12. The Pastor loves no 2 Chronicles. 29. 25. Not in the Synagogues, but at the
temple, and for that time of ceremonial worship. 1 Cor. 14. 19. and 26. Ephesians.
5. 18. 19. Collos. 3. 16.
Music in the house of God, but such as edifieth, Baptism.
and stops his ears at isntrumental music, as serving for the Pedagogie
of the untoward Jews under the law, and being figurative of that spiritual
joy, whereunto our hearts should be opened under the Gospel.

The Prelate loves carnal and curious singing to the ear, more then the
spiritual melody of the Gospel, and therefore would have Antiphonie and
Organes in the Cathedral Kirks, upon no greater reason then other shadows of
the Law of Moses, or lesser Instruments, as Lutes, Cithernes, or pypes might be
used in other Kirks.

13. The Pastor ministers Math. 28. 19. and all other places, showing baptism
to be a note discerning Christians from infidels. 1 Pet. 3. 21 and such places
proving Baptism to be a sign of Christian profession, Matthew. 3. The baptism
at Jordan solemn, and what was done privately, by the Apostles, at sometimes
was in the infancy of the Kirk which cannot now be a rule to us in a Kirk
constituted.
Baptism in the place of the public assemblies of Gods people, it being a
note of our Christian profession, and a protestation of our faith, and
therefore should be celebrate publicly, as well as ordination of ministers,
excommunication, confession of converts, or reconciliatio^ of penitents.

The Prelate has given place to private Baptism, and thereby entertayneth the
superstitious conceit of the necessity of Baptism, brings in the absurdity
of conditional baptism, and makes a ready way for private persons and
midwiues to baptize.

14. Celebration of the Lords supper.
The Pastor, Matthew. 26. 26. Mark. 14. 22. Luk 22. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 23. out of
which compared together the whole institution is to be learned and not from the
last place alone, since it cantaineth not all things belonging to the
institution, Mat 14. 13. Luke 24. 30. 1 Cor. 10.
as the words of the institution prescribe, and after the example of Christ and
his Apostles, has a Table prepa^ed for the celebration of the Lords supper: he
sits down in a public communion with the congregation, in the most
customable and comely form of sitting: far from all danger of Idolatry:
when he has given thanks, he breaks the bread sacramentally when he
delivers the elements, he utters the words of promise: This is my body,
This is my blood, demonstratiuely: The people distribute the bread and cup
among themselves lovingly. They eat and drink in such measure, as they may
find themselves refreshed sensibly. And as before the action they were prepared
by diligent examination, and powerful sermons for trying themselves, so in the
time of the action their ears and their hearts are filled with pertinent
readings, and pithy exhortations, and after the action dismissed with joy, with
strength, and with spiritual resolution, to the great honor of God, the
enlargement of the kingdom of Christ, the terror of Antichrist, the peace of
the Kirk, and unspeakable comfort of their own souls.

The PRELATE pretending the words of the 95 Psalm, and after the example of
Antichrist and his followers, has turned the Table into an Altar-like
cupboorde, the table gesture of sitting, into the adoring gesture of kneeling
(with no better excuse of idolatry, then is expressed in the obscure terms of
abstractive ab objecto, and objectum a quo significative) the public communion
into a private action betwixt him and the communicant, the sacramental
breaking into a preparatiue carving before the action, the enunciatiue words of
the institution into a form of a prayer or oblation, the christian
distribution into a stewardlike partition, the refreshment of eating and
drinking into a pinched tasting, the preparatorie examination and preaching
into a schismatic disputation about kneeling and sitting, the spiritual
exhortations in the time of the action, either in a dumb guyse, and
comfortless deadness, or in a confusion of the Readers reading, and his own
speaking at the giving of the elements, both at one time, and the spiritual
joy, strength and resolution after the action, into terrors of conscience in
some, the opinion of indifferency in all matters of religion in others, and of
looseness of life in many, to the mocking of God, the reentrie of Antichrist,
renting of the Kirk, obduring of the Papist, stumbling of the weak, and grief
of the godly.

15. Observation of the sabbath.
The PASTOR thinks it no Judaisme nor superstition, but a moral duty Genesis
2. 2. 3. Exo. 20. Deu. 5. Number. 15. 32. Nehem. 13 15. Isa. 56. 2. and 58. 13.
Joel 1. 14. Psalm. 110, 3. Ioh. 20. 16. 26. Act. 2 1. and 20. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 1.
Gal. 4. 9. 10 Colos. 2. 16. 17. Revel. 1. 10.
to observe the Sabbath: because first the observation of one day of seven,
albeit it be positive divine, yet it is not ceremonial nor for a time, but
unchangable, and obliges perpetually, as is manifest by the time when it was
appointed before the fall, when there was no type of redemption by Christ, and
by numbering it amongst the ten precepts of the moral law, written by the
finger, and proclaimed by the voice of God, which cannot be said of any
changable law. Neither can it be called perpetual and moral in this sense,
that a certain time is to be allotted to divine worship, for then the building
of the Tabernacle and temple, the new moons, and other legal festivities
containing in them a general equity, might as well be accounted moral.
Secondly, the change of the Sabbath from the last to the first day of the
week, is by divine authority from Christ himself, from whom it is called,
the Lords day, who is Lord of the Sabbath, who did institute the worship of the
day, and rested from his labors that day, whereon all things were made new by
his resurrection, and sanctified it, even as in the beginning God rested from
all his works on the seventh day, and blessed it. He thinks it no more
contrary to Christian liberty, then it was to Adam in his innocence to keep
one of the seven, and therefore he labors to make the Sabbath his delight,
observes it himself, and by his doctrine, example and discipline teaches
others to do the like, and to cease uot only from all servill works, which
require great labor of the body, but from all our own works whatsoever,
drawing our minds from the exercises of religion, and serving for our own
gain and commodity, except in the case of necessity, caused by divine
providence. He would have it well considered, wherein the Jews were more
strictly obliged then Christians, and what liberty we have, that they had not.
Beside the Sabbath he can admit no ordinary holy days appointed by man,
whether in respect of any mystery, or of difference of one day from another,
as being warranted by mere tradition, against the doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles, but accounts the solemn fasts and humiliations, unto which the
Lord calls, to be extraordinary Sabbaths, warranted by God himself.

The PRELATE by his doctrine, practice, example, and neglect of discipline,
declares, that he has no such reverend estimation of the Sabbath. He doteth
so upon the observation of Pasche, Zuile, and festival days, appointed by
men, that he prefers them to the Sabbath, and has turned to nothiug our
solemn Fasts, and blessed humiliations.

16. The PASTOR finds that every part of his office, Residence.
and every name, whereby he is called in Scripture Caranza proves the
necessite of the residence of Bishops by five places of the old Testam by three
out of the Evangelist, and five out of the apostolic uritings: and how can he
be a bishop, a shepherd, a watch man etc. that is a non-resident.
does call upon him to be personally resident, and where he resideth to be a
terror to the wicked, and a comfort to the godly.

The PRELATE either waits upon Counsel, Session, or Court, or dwells so
far from his charge, that (...) ^each of Caranza (proving the necessity of
the personal residence of ^^^ops) may be applied to him: He is a Bishop but
without overseer^, an Ambassador, but runs where his errand lies not, a
^^ptaine and Soldier, but far from his station, a Father and steward, but
suffers the children to perish for want of food. Or if he happen to be
resident, his Lordship is a protection to the Papist, to the carnal professor,
and to the Idoll-Minister and Idle-belly, and such a vexation to the vigilant
Pastor, that he had much rather he were a Non-resident.

17. The PASTOR must be so unblameable, Life and conversatio^ ^2 Cor. 1. 12. 1
(...) 3. ^. to 8. and 4. 12 2 Timothy 1. 13. Tit. 1. 6. and 2. 7.
that he have a good testimony of them that are without, he must rule well his
own house, having his children in subjection, with all gravitie, not accused
of riot, or unruly. He must be sober, not given to wine, he must not be greedy
of filthy lucre, nor covetous: he must not be a brauler, a stryker, nor fighter.

The PRELATE mocketh at conscience, gravitie, sobriety, modesty, patience,
painfulnes etc. and calls them Puritanizing.

18. The PASTOR labors to keep faith in a good conscience, The presence and
blessing of God.
and by the blessing of God upon his labors finds the increase of the gifts
of God in his old age, y 1 Timothy 1. 19. Ier. 12. 10. and 23. 1 -- 5. Ezec. 34.
2. -- 23. Zac. 11. 15. 16. 17 2 Pet. 2. 15. 16. Jude 11. Revel. 2. 14.
and the grace of God growing in the hearts of the people.

The PRELATE by loosing a good conscience makes shipwreck of faith, and by the
curse of God upon his sloth and defection may find himself like Balaam, who
seeking horns did loose his ears, that is seeking preferment he lost the gift
of prophecy, and may see grace decayed and worn out of the hearts of the
people.

The Prelates objection.
THe Prelate will object, Object Bishops are warranted by the word.
notwithstanding all the evil that has been said, or that ye can say against
him, That the name, the calling, the power, and the life of the Bishop is set
down in the Word.

The Pastors answer.
THE question is not of the Bishop, Ans. Showing that the Prelate has no
warrant in the word and the manifold difference betwixt the divine, and
diccesane bishop.
but of the prelate or Diocesane Bishop, whether he be the divine Bishop. Haman
could think upon no man but himself, when the man was named whom the King
would honor: even so the Prelate imagines no other Bishop to be spoken of in
Scripture but himself. And as Alexander the great took Jupiters ominous
salutation (...) O Child, or Babe, for (...) O son of Jupiter. (...), dixit
Arist. in metaphys.
even so in the Prelates ambitious ear, every word of a Bishop sounds honor
unto him. But the truth is, that the pastor and not the Diocesane Bishop is
the Bishop divine.

1. The Diocesane Bishop is but one in a Diocie over many kirks. The divine
Bishops may be many in one city, and over one Kirk.

2. The Diocesane bishop has a form of ordination of his own, different from
the ordination of the pastor. The divine Bishop has no other but the
ordination of the pastor.

3. The Diocesane Bishop preaches at his pleasure, and is not obliged to
preach by the nature and necessity of his calling. The divine bishop is bound
by his calling to preach with all diligence.

4. The Diocesane Bishop has no particular congregation for his flock, to
feed with the Word and Sacraments. The divine bishop is tied to a particular
flock.

5. The diocesane Bishop is for the greater part a secular person. The divine
Bishop is a person merely ecclesiastical.

Therefore the diocesane bishop is not the divine bishop, neither does the
Word of God acknowledge any diocesane Kirk, or any prelate or diocesane bishop
charged with the care of many particular congregations, and having majoritie of
power to direct and correct other Pastors.


THE SECOND PART.
The Pastor and Prelate compared by Antiquity, and the proceedings of the
Ancient Kirk.
WE reverence the hoarie head, Antiquit^e, the primitive Kirk, the Fathers of
two sorts.
and name of Antiquite: but withal we know, that there is antiquity of
truth, and antiquity of error, and therefore would make difference betwixt
original antiquity, or that which was from the beginning, and of the first
institution, and antiquity of custom, or that which is of long continuance.
They that take themselves wilfully to custom against the first institution
resolve Licet Christus po^^ caenam instituerit, and suis discip. ministraverit
sub utraque specie panis and vini hoc venerbile Sacramentum: tame^ hoc non
obstante, sacroru^ Canonu^ autoritas and approbata co^suetudo ecclesia^
servavit and servat, etc. Caranza summa conc. Constable. sess. 13. distinguitur a
Iuristis, ipsa primativa ecclesia in primam and secundam.
not unlike the Council of Constance, when they set down their blasphemous
act, Non obstante. We do not misregarde the practice of the Primitive Kirk
after the Apostles, especially it being compared with the ages following. But
would have it in comparison of the Apostolical Kirk to be esteemed, but
dirivatiue, as which admitted many changes from better to worse both in
doctrine and discipline. We honor the Fathers, but so that we give the first
honor to the Father of fathers, besides whom we have no father. To his son
Jesus Christ the only Prophet, whom we should hear. To the Holy Ghost, who
only teaches us the truth, and to the Holy Scripture, which only carries
their divine authority. Wishing all that are studious of the truth in the
point of the controversy in hand, to take notice of these two things: The
mainteyners of Conformity forgette themselves about antiquity three ways.
First, that the maintainers of conformity many vvayes forget themselves in
the matter of the authority of the Fathers. For albeit they daube us with the
Fathers, the Fathers, the ancients, and all antiquity, yet they themselves
will not hear the voice of the Fathers in their disputes: whether against
Papists, whom they answer with the same exceptions against the Fathers,
which we bring in this cause against them, Whitgiftus, Socratem Novatianum
and Puritanum vocat. Saravia contra Bez. dicit Hieronimum aperte Arianu^ esse,
Dounamus contra omnes patres, negat Petrum R^mae Episcopum fuisse, etc.
or in their disputes with us, when the Fathers make against them: and thus
while they profess that they honor the Fathers, they do but mock them,
sometimes putting upon them the purple robe of authority, and at their
pleasure pulling it off again. Next they forget themselves in this, that
albeit they know, that the witness and not the testimony is to be believed,
they allege notvvithstanding Quales sunt, auter libri, qui canones Apostoloru^
inscribitur, Clemens, Romanus, Ignatius, Dyonisius, Areopagita, Egesippus,
Dorotheus, etc. De quibus Mortonus co^tra pontisicios, Larvatiisti autores
pueris terriculame^to esse possunt, viris autem cordatis, esse ludibrio del^ent.
some counterfeit, some corrupted authors, and some late schoolmen, for the
ancient Fathers against us. B^canus, Calvin, Beza, Martyr, Iuell etc. bring
them against the Papists, who deny not their authority. And thirdly, they
misregard the order of divine dispensation in the course of time, not without
ingratitude to God for his gifts, and to good men for their labors, Vitium
malignitatis humanae, ut vetera semper in laud, praesentia sint in fastidio.
Tacit. Miraturque nihil, nisi quod Libitina sacravit Horat. Nec nossumus Nani,
nec illi g^gantes, sed omnes ejusdem statura, and quidem nos altius evecti,
eorum beneficio, maneat modo in nobis quod in illis studium, attentio animi,
vigilantia and amor very, qua si absint, jam non nanisumus, nec in gigantum
hnmeros sedemus, sed homines instar magnitudinis humi prostrats. Ludov. vives
de causis corrup. art. lib. 1.
by preferring the meanest, that carries the name of Antiquity, unto the
worthiest instruments of that blessed work of Reformation, who had above
all that went before them many great helps of the languages, of humane
literature, and of printing, and to whom many secrets were made known by
the accomplishment of prophesies, especially concerning the Antichrist, who
being conceived in the Apostles times, was brought forth, and brought up
unvvittingly by the Fathers, who looked for the Antichrist from another
quarter, which makes them to be incompetent judges in the matter of
Hierarchy, and Ceremonies thereof. The Romanists themselves, who profess to
be the greatest favorers of the ancient Fathers, are forced to blush at many
of their gross and shameful absurdities, and to confess, that many things,
that were of old either doubtful, or altogether unknovvne, are now to the
meanest become clear and certain. Some of them have exploded it as an
impertinent similitude, that we being compared to the ancients, are as
dvvarffes upon the shoulders of Giants. The other thing, that we would have
the studious reader to take notice of, is this, That of the Prelates and
maintainers of conformity, seeking the fountain of antiquity, and uncertain
where to find it, some go back to the old testament, to bring the Prelates
pedigree from thence, some would bring his descent from Christ, some from the
Apostles, and a fourth sort from the primitive Kirk. But before they get a
sight of their own Prelate, in his pomp, in his power, and in his bu^ke of
Ceremonies, they must go farther down the stream, till they come in sight of
the Antichrist, and there they shall see him not far of, waiting on, as may be
apparent by this which follovveth.

THE PASTOR acknowledges the difference of the Kirk and ministry of the old
and new Testament, seeks neither type, The pastor is not older then the N.
Testament, the prelate would fetch his prelacie from the Old Testam.
nor pattern of his office from the Leviticall priesthood, but brings his
oldest warrant from Christ and his Apostles, and exponeth the Ancients, as
Jerome and others, who insist in the similitude of the ministry of the old
and new Testament, Mutato sacerdotio mutatur and lex heb. 7. 12. Ex sigura
communi, fine exemplo, nihil co^cludi necessario potest. lun. de pontif.
as speaking by the way of allusion, and not from any warrant of divine
translation.

The PRELATE searching the fountains of Nilus, would bring his descent as high
as from Levi, as if the chief priests, who had no episcopal authority over
their brethren, were turned now into prelates: the inferior Priests into
pastors, and the Levites, who had no proper care of the poor, were changed
into our Deacons. He brings the ancients to reckon this Genealogy, but with
such success, as the sons of Habijah had, when they failed in reckoning
their line from Aaron, and so proved unworthy of the priesthood Nehem. 7.

2. The PASTOR has an ordinary and perpetual office appointed by Christ, The
pastor and not ^he prelate warran^^d by Christ.
but the office of the Apostle and Evangelist was extraordinary, and to
continue but for a time. So that (howsoever antiquity uses the words of
Apostle and Bishop amply, calling the Apostles Bishops, and Bishops or pastors
Apostles, and successors to the Apostles) yet neither is the one kind of
office compatible with the other, nor can the one properly be said to succeed
the other. Apost. and Euang. ^^mumofficia, de^^de duo extraordinaria,
significant Officiu^ Apostoli and Euang. continet in se officium presbyteri
eminenter, sed non formaliter, officiu^ aute^ episcopi hierarchici, nec
eminenter, quia non datur episcopatus extra apostolatu^, quem contineat
eminenter, sicut datur presbyteratus.
So different are they as well in respect of charge, as of gifts and discharge
of duty. For the Superior does not only do that which the inferior may not
do, but his manner of doing, of that which is common to both, is far higher
and more eminent.

The PRELATE repelled by the officebearers of the Old Testament, seeks to
enter with his directive power and jurisdiction among the ministers of the
Gospel, but with like success. For a pastor and doctor, his power over
pastors and doctors suffers them not to be. He urges to be taken in with the
Apostle or Evangelist, and to be esteemed In gradum (...) succes^it Apostolis
and Euang. in caput succedunt pastores ordinarii.
successor to them, but his office and theirs are not compatible. For formally
their office was extraordinary, and without succession, and materially his
office is not contained in their offices, as is the office of a pastor, there
being no example in Scripture, without the office of Apostle or Evangelist of
such power as the prelate claymeth. Whether his life and form of ministration
be apostolical, all that know him may discern.

3. The PASTOR and not the prelate is the first minister (by the prelates own
confession) whom the Apostles appointed in Kirks, when they first planted them.
The Past. and not the Prel. warranted by the Apostles.
The pastor and not the prelate is the minister, whom the Apostles in their
time do approve, and the Pastor and not the prelate is the last minister, to
whom the Apostles, when they were to remove, or were near unto death, did
recommend the care of the Kirks, and therefore the Pastor and not the prelate
is the minister warranted by the Apostles.

The PRELATE denied of Christ, would father himself upon the Apostles, and
finding no warrant from their doctrine or practice in Scripture, albeit the
Acts of the Apostles contain the history of many years after Christ's
ascension, Intervallum ill^^ ab ult. c. Act. Apost. ad medium, Trajans imperium
plane cu^^ Varrone (...) voca^^ potest. Joseph. Scalig. prolegom. in Chronic^^
Eusebii.
He seems to be sure of the ecclesiastical history recorded in the Apostles
times, and by Apostolic institution, a begun succession of Bishops in
Jerusalem, Rome, Alexandria, Antioch etc. But here also he stands without,
because the bishops of those places were either Apostles, and therefore could
not be properly Bishops, or else ordinary pastors of no greater place nor
power, except for age and gift, then other presbyters laboring with them: Such
were Linus, Clemens, Cletus, Anacletus, fellow presbyters at Rome at one time,
one of them living some space after another, and to show the order of
succession from the Apostles against Heretics, who urged it, they were
numbered, as if they had not lived at one time, and in the line of succession
were called Bishops, by Eusebius and others after him, Vt hiatum euplere^
Eusebius. (...), Clementis nescio cujus (non est enim ille eruditus Alexandrinus
(...)) and (...) Hegesippi, non melioris scriptoris sint delectu, ea
deprompsit. idem.
agreeable to the corruption of their own times, when now men had of their
own head put a difference betwixt a Bishop and a pastor, and not according to
the purity of the primitive times, of which they did write, when a pastor and
a bishop was one and the same.

4. The PASTOR is the divine and Apostolic bishop, The Pastor keeps his
place, and authority in the primitive Kirk, when the prelate begins to
work, and to be constant moderator, or perpetual president.
of the lawfulness of whose calling, and power in the primitive Kirk after the
Apostles there was no question. The pastor by consent of antiquity (when now
by humane wisdom the constant moderator was brought in and called the Bishop)
had right and power, not by grant but by his office, not only to preach the
Word, minister the Sacraments, and use the keys in binding and loosing the
conscience, but also with the fellow presbyters Who dare condemn all those
worthy ministeri of God, that were never ordained by presbyters in sundry
Kirks of the world, at such times as bishops (...) those parts where they
lived, opposed themselves against the truth (...) God. Field book 3. cap. 39.
to ordain ministers, and in the presbyteriall, provincial, and national
assemblies, to decide controversies, to make constitutions, to inflict
censures, even upon Bishops, and by his pastoral authority to do all things
necessary for the edification of the Kirk. And this right and power, that God
gave him, he maintained in some Kirks in the most corrupt times, when now
Antichrist was set on his chair, and prelacie for the most part, of humane was
become satanicall.

The PRELATE holden at the door by Christ and his Apostles after their times
Paulatim quamvi^ patribus nihil minus cogitantibus, gradui episcopali aditus
humanitus apertus, per qu^^mox ingressa (...)* (...) istum ini^^ quidem in
Oligarchia^, ac tandem (...) horrendam illa^ ^ntichristiana^ tyrannidem
oecumenica^ evexit, haud satis scio an unqua^ abolenda^ nisi semel sublatis
quibus eo ascendit gradibus, in ordinem divinae institutionis redigatur. Bez.
de grad cap. 23.
by the ambition of some pastors; and simplicity of others, when he had long
hung on, got in the foot to be constant moderator, but not finding entry at
the first, for his great head, made up of sole ordination, of monarchical
jurisdiction, of civil power, worldly pomp and superstitious ceremonies, he
hydeth his miter in the mystery of iniquity, going on with it foot for
foot, and draws in by fraud and force, one limme after another, till at
last, after many ages, and much working (for he atteyned not to the degree of
an Archbishop, till after the Council of Nice) he shows himself Lord in the
house of God, having no more of the first institution of a Bishop, then the
ship Argo had of her first buylding, when after her expedition she had lain at
a full sea some hundreds of years, or the beggars cloak patched with many
clouts and colors, that has passed through some generations, which he it may
be, makes more of, then of a parliament robe, has of the first shaping.

5. The PASTOR as became the humble servant of Christ, The pastor seeks no
honor but by his doctrine and life; the prelate forsakes this way and takes
him to the world.
and a minister of the New Testament, procured and maintained the dignity and
true honor of his ministry, by holding forth the glorious light of the
Gospel in his doctrine, and the shyning light of holiness in his conversation:
esteeming the preaching of the glad tidings of peace, to be the beauty of
ministers, and righteousness their robe and ornament.

The PRELATE took him to the contrary course, for his credit, and
transformed the beautiful simplicity of Christ's Kingdom into the glory of
the kingdom of the world, albeit when he was of his old stamp, his greatest
dignity was his chair, and faithful teaching the flower of his garland: yet
now degenerating from his first sincerity, and being infected with secular
smoke, he came to be cast in the mould of the first Beast, his chair gave
place to his Consistory and throne; his jurisdiction and government, honored
with the title of pre-eminence carried all the credit, Teaching as a base work
was given over to the petty presbyters, and every office in the Kirk was
counted a dignity worthy of honor less or more, as it had more or less
jurisdiction annexed, as these are more or less honorable in the common
wealth, that have more or less civil authority. And thus prelacie came up,
and preaching came down, and the Kirk became more worldly then the world it
self.

6. The PASTOR when all was going wrong, The pastor witness for the truth in
the time o^ defection, which is wrought by the prelate, perverting all after he
is once entered.
some raising contentions, others gaping after honors, the brains of many
being big with heresies, all given to heap up superstition and Atheism, and
the prelate with his popish hierarchy, possessing both the holy city and
outward court, he then gave testimony to the truth, kept still the temple,
and within the temple kept in the light, as two olive trees growing up by the
sides of the candlestick, and dropping down from the branches oil into the
lamps, for the comfort of such as Jehovah Shammah had chosen for life, and
would save from the deluge of defection.

The PRELATE once possessed into the Kirk, never ceased, till he had changed
the Kirk into a court, power ecclesiastical into civil policy, the Scripture
into tradition, the truth into heresy, sincerity into superstition, the
worship of God into Idolatry, as the worship of images, Saints and
bread-worship, the pure ordinances of God into Masses, Altars, Images,
Garments, Fasting, and follies of Paganism and Iudaisme, like a smoke out of
the bottomless pit, growing grosser and thicker every day, and in the
midst of the mist built up his greatness, upon the ruins not only of the
Kirks, but of the commonwealths of the world: for when the stars of heaven
fell into the earth, the mountains and Islands were moved out of tbeir places,
and as this unhappy milt swelled big in the body with wealth and honor, the
life of religion became faint, the Princes and Nobles of the earth like the
noble parts in the body decayed, and the meaner ones like the hands and feet
withered away. The Popes felicity was the whole worlds misery, and so was the
Prelates to several nations and provinces.

7. The PASTOR and with him the godly of the time wearied with long opposition,
The past, complained of that which he could not mend and the prel, persecuted
them that complained.
poured out their heavy complaints, Ecce in pace amaritudo mea ama rissima,
amaraprius in nece martyru^, amarior post (...) conflictu hereti^^rum,
amariss^^^ nunc in mori^^^ domesticorum* (...) Bern. super Cant.
that the grief of the Kirk was more bitter in peace, then either under
persecution or heresy, that she had brought up and exalted her sons, and
they had despised her. If a professed Heretic should arise, she could cast him
forth of her bosom, if a violent enemy, she could hide her self from him,
but now whom shall the Kirk cast out, or from whom shall she hide her self, all
are friends, and yet all are enemies, al are domestics, and yet none seek her
true peace, for all seek their own things, and not the things of Jesus
Christ. They are the ministers of Christ, and serve the Antichrist. He
complayneth, Devotio peperit divitias, and filia de voravit matrem. idem.
that devotion had brought forth riches, and the mother had devoured her
daughter. Olim fuerunt lignei calices, and aurei sacerdotes: nunc contra sunt
aure^ calices and lignei sa cerdotes, vulgo jactitatu^.
That of old the Bishops were of gold and the cups of wood, but now the bishops
have changed their metal with the cups. Olim habuisse christianos obscura
templa, sed lucida cordainu^c co^tra habere lucida templa sed obscura corda.
and sequentia.
That of old Christians had dark Kirks, but lightsome hearts, but now
lightsome kirks and dark hearts. That the prelates inquired what rent the
bishopric rendered, and not how many souls were to be fed in it. That their
bodies were clad with purple and silk, but had threedbare consciences. That
their care was greater to empty men's purses, then to extirpate their vices.
That when they consecrate a Prelate, they kill a good man by advancing him.
That no greater evil could be wished to any man, then that he be made pope.
That in the estate of the Kirk Heaven is below, and earth is above. The spirit
obeys, and the flesh commands. That in the mouths of the Prelates was the
law of vanity, and not the law of verity, and that the lips of the priests
under them kept secular, and not spiritual knowledge.

And when he searched the causes of the Kirks misery, he condescended upon the
neglecting of Scripture, and multiplication of men's inventions, the ignorance
and idleness of prelates, like dumb dogs, that could not bark; their
covetousness above the Pharisees.

They suffered doves to be sold in the temple, but these sell both Kirk and
sacrifice. Their pride and ambition declared in their great horses, and other
superfluous pomp, and that as sons of Belial they have cast off the yoke,
not enduring that any should ask them, why they do so and so, the unequal
proportion seen in the Kirk, when one is hungry an other drunk, some so
enormiously overgone in riches and pomp, that the weakness of the rest is not
able to bear them.

The PRELATE still mad of avarice and ambition stood upon the four corners of
the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that they should not blow, and
opposed himself against the doctrine and complaint of the Pastors, condemning
them for Heretics, giving out against them decrees of corrupt councels,
thundering them with anathematismes: and persecuting them by fire and sword. He
punished the clergy under him more severely for the neglect of a ceremony
then for sacrilege or adultery, and finally least his fraud and falsehoode
should be known, he forbad all men the reading and using the holy Scripture.

8. The PASTOR and all good men, The Past. desired, and urged a reformation,
which by (...) means the pre^^^e refused.
that longed and labored for the reformation of the Christian Kirk, for the
space of five hundred years, D. Reynold his ^^^ter to S. Francis Knolles*
concerning D. Bancrofts sermon 1588. makes this clear.
as the Waldenses, Marsilius Patavinus, Wickleife, and his scholars, Husse and
his followers, and all such as the Lord used for instruments in working the
reformation, as Luther, Calvin, Brentius, Bullingerus, Musculus etc. did teach,
that all pastors are of equal authority by the word of God, and all that
space of time urged this point of reformation, as without which no success
could be expected in the reformation of the doctrine and worship.

The PRELATE knowing, as it was often preached and written, all that time of
500 years, that the maine cause of the corruptions of the Kirk was his own
place, his pride, and his avarice, and that the desired and urged reformation
of the Kirk, which was now brought to that pass, that as one says well, she
could never bear her own disease, nor yet suffer remedy, behoved to begin
at himself, the greatest byle in all ehe body, by all means held off
reformation, as his own ruin, and when several nations were bringing it
about, he could never be moved to give his consent, so dear was his myter and
bellye unto him.

The Prelates objection.
THE PRELATE will confess, Obj. The Christian Kirk for 300 years, had such
bishops, as we have now.
that it were better to have no Bishops then such monsters, as the Roman Kirk
brought forth, but prydeth himself in antiquity, and affirms, that the
Christian Kirk in all places for the space of three hundredth years after
Christ and his Apostles had Bishops in every thing like himself, and that
afterward the shepherds became wolves.

The Pastors answer.
THAT which Tertullian in his time said unto the Gentiles may be replied to our
Prelates; Ans. Showing in many particulars the difference betwixt the primitive
Bishops, and our prelates, who are liker unto the Roman Bisops, in the most
corrupt times.
Ye boast of antiquity: but your daily life is after the new fashion. Master
Phantastico at Athens, whenever he perceived any ships entering into the
harbor, he strongly apprehended that they were his own, and used to sease
upon them, as if they had been his own indeed. So deal our Prelates with
the ancient Bishops, they come no sooner in their sight, but they take them for
their own, albeit they be very unlike unto them, for were they living they
would blush, and be ashamed, that such should be called their successors, as
Angelo the famous Italian Painter pourtrayed Peter and Paul for the use of a
Cardinal at Rome, with read and high colored faces, showing thereby, that if
they were living, they would blush at the pomp and pride of the Prelates of
that time. Our Prelates are rather of the late Roman cut, and not so like
unto the primitive, as unto the popish Bishops, who comparing themselves with
others before, and ours now come after them might say with the Poet: Aetas
parentum, pejor avis tulit nos nequiores, mox d^turus progenie^ vitiosiorem,
Horat.
Our parents age worse then their predecessors,
Has brought us forth more wicked their successors,
Ere it be long, if we continue thus,
We will bring forth a brood more vicious.


1. Ex his Ambrosij and Hieronimi constat primu^, in ipsix ecclesiae primordiis
nullos tales episcopos fuisse, quales postea instituti fuere, scilicet qui suo
jure reliquis e clero praeessent: unde colligitur and non esse id ipsum a
Christo, and apostolis institutu^: and (quando quidem in eccl. id sit optimm
quod primumu^) ecclesiae fore consultius, ut omnes presbyteri pari censerentur
and jure and gradu. Secundo constat ne tu^ quidem, cu^ hic episcoporum a
presbyteru distinctorum ordo, sive gradus est constitutus, fuisse episcopos
tamquam monarch^s, etc. Chamier. de^ oecumen. pontis. lib. 18. cap. 5. sect. 6.
Respondeo patrum authoritem nihil efficere, ratio, quia non ostendunt nullum
unquam tempus extitisse cum essent episcopi pares presbyteris, sed tantum
inaequalitatem esse vetustissimam, ae vicinam apostolirum temporibus, quod nos
ultro fatemur. idem Chamier. lib. 10. cap. 6. sect. 24.
For the Primitive bishops (after that the name of Bishop common to all pastors
began to be impropriat) were neither ordained by bishops nor metrapolitanes,
but only chosen by pastors, to be their constant moderators, or perpetual
presidents, but without warrant from God or his truth.

Our Prelate must first by a simulate form of election be made my Lord Elect,
and then receive a new consecratiou, with a new guise of Ceremonies drawn from
the Roman Pontifical, as little known to poor antiquity, as the words
themselves of ordination, consecration etc.

2. The Primitive Bishops looking more to the beauty then dignity, suffered
violence, and were constreyned by pastors and people, whether they would or
not, to receive the charge.

Our Prelate when the Bishop is an old man, then he stands diligently and
learneth fast, but only how to make credit at court, and when after long
exspectation the place is void, by posting, promising, and propyuing, he
procures himself to be chosen first without the knowledge and syne, against
the will both of Pastors and people.

3. The primitive Bishops knew not such a creature, as was designed afterward
by the proud name of an Archbishop, who should be a Bishop of bishops, having
power over Comprovinciall bishops his suffraganes.

Our Prelate prydeth himself in this proud title, and will have one and the
same creature to be Metropolitan Archbishop and primate, that what he may not
do as Metrapolitane he may do as Archbishop, and what he may not as
Archbishop, he may as Primate and as another Pope.

4. The primitive Bishop was in the presbytery like the Consul in the Senate,
as first amongst the presbyters he moderated in their meetings, reported
matters done before, asked the voters, and what they concluded, he did see it
executed upon others, and was subject to it himself.

Our Prelate in the Presbytery will be like a king in his Counsel, and
thinks his authority no less without the presbytery then with it, and what
the Synod may do with the Archbishop, that he may do without the Synod.

5. The primitive bishops dwelled so near together, that six of them convened
in a cause that concerned an Elder, and three for a deacon. In a Synod they
convened in great numbers. Privatus was condemned by 90 Bishops. Against
Novatus were convened 84 bishops. In some Synods 217, in some 270.

Our Prelate spreads his wings over some hundreds of Kirks, lying in diverse
provinces also wide as Mers, Louthian, Fyffe, Angus, Mernes etc.

As therefore our Prelate was showed before, not to be the Lords bishop,
authorized by Scripture, so is he not man's bishop made up in the primitive
times of the Kirk, but the same that we had before the reformation, the same
with the Italian, Spanish, or French Prelate under the Pope, and the same with
the Antichristian Prelates, in the most corrupt times of the Kirk, especially
the last 500 years, excepting his subordination to the pope, by which
exception our princely prelate is made greater then the popish. And what was
written of the popish prelate in those times, is of new again reverified of
ours, as of their civil offices and advocations.

Vintoniensis armiger,
Praesidet ad Scacanium,
Ad computandum impiger,
Piger ad Euangelium,
Sic Lucrum Lucam superat,
Marcam marco praeponderat
Et librae librum subjicit.
Some Bishops Metropolitan
Presides at the Exchequor,
For counting he is a busy man,
To preach the Gospel slacker.
Lucre worth is more then Luke,
and marks the^ mark weigh better
He sets the pound above the book,
And cares not for the matter.
Of their zeal in urging ceremonies upon others, while they failed in
substance themselves, the old Poem, called Asini poenitentiarius, wherein the
wolf confesses himself to the fox, and the fox to the wolf, and both are
absolved, but the poor ass trusting to his innocence for absolution, was
condemned to dye by the other two, for no other cause, but that in his extreme
hunger he had been so profane, as to eat the straw garters of a religious
pilgrim.

Immensum scelus est injuria, quam peregrin^
Fecisti: stramen surripiendo sibi.
Non advertisti, quod plura pericula passus,
Plurima passurus, quod peregrinus erat?
Non advertisti, quod ei per maxima terrae
Et pelagi spatia sit peragranda via?
Totius ecclesiae fuerit cum nuncius iste,
Pertulit abstracto stramine damna viae.
Cum sis confessus, cum sis convictus, habes ne
Quo tales noxas occuluisse queas?
Es fur, ignoto cum feceris hoc peregrino:
Scis been, fur quali debet honor mori.
How great a sin were this to thee,
A Pilgrim poor to wrong?
Had thou not mind what dangers he
Had traveled far among?
Could thou not think, that he dull ass
B'hou'd pass through Sea and land,
That nunce of holy Kirk he was
Running at their command,
Thou have confessed, convinced thou art,
Nothing thy crime can hide:
Thief thou did eat his straw garters
Death shall thee now betyde.
THE THIRD PART.
The Pastor and Prelate compared in their judgment and practice about things
indifferent.
BESIDE the speculations of the Schoolmen divided amongst themselves, Many
controversies and contentions about things indifferent.
in their subtilties about things indifferent, which work mightily upon men's
wits, but more weakly upon their affections, then to make any great division,
There has been much ado in the Kirk since the beginning about adiaphorismes,
and things indifferent. 1. In the Apostles times.
First in the infancy of the Christian Kirk the heat and the contention was
great betwixt the converted Jews and Gentiles, about the keeping of the
Ceremonies of the law, which before were commanded, afterward were
forbidden, but in that tract of time were in a manner indifferent. Concerning
which we find, that the Apostles never imposed them upon any people or
person, that judged them unlawful, that they thought that every man should be
persuaded in his own mind, and should do nothing against, or without the
vvarrant of his conscience; that by all means scandal should be avoided, as
which brings vvoe upon him by whom it comes, and destruction upon him
upon whom it comes, and many such rules of conscience and Christian
prudence, which serve to the Kirk for direction in matters indifferent to the
coming of Christ. 2. At the first reformation, among three sorts of men.
Secondly, there was great business about ceremonies, and things called
indifferent, in the infancy of the Reformed kirks, in the time of the Interim,
when with so great power and persecution the Romish corruptions were
forced again upon them, under the name of indifferency: at that time
politics and vvorldly men, more careful of their own wealth then of Gods
truth, gave themselves to serve the time, and received all that was obtruded
under the said cloak of indifferency. These were accounted friends to
Augustus. Others of great gifts and esteem in the Kirk wished from their
hearts, that these ceremonies had never been urged, yet thought it a less
evil to admit some thing in the external part of Gods worship, and thereby
uniformitie in religion with the enemies, then by a stoicall stifnes (as they
call it) and an obstinacy to provoke authority, and thereby to bring upon
themselves banishment, and upon Kirk and common wealth desolarion. Such men
looking more to unity, then to verity, and more to the event, then to their
own duty, were called ca^nie, wise and peaceable men. A third sort
setting aside all sophistication, and collusion with the enemy, taught
plainly by word and writ from Scripture, and not from the grounds of policy:
that when any part of Gods worship is in danger, that then for the honor of
God, confirmation of the tr^eth, and edification of the Kirk, Confession is
necessary. He that confesses not me, he that is ashamed of me before men,
etc. They taught, that it was not lavvfull to symbolize with the enemy; that
in the case of confession the smallest ceremonies are not indifferent: that at
such times the Kirk should stand fast to her liberty, against such as would
bring her into bondage: that yielding to such ceremonies was a great scandal,
it being a returning to the vomit, the patching of an old cloute upon a new
garment, and making the vveake to think that the reformation of the Kirk was
not a work of God, but of man: that the untimely change of ceremonies was a
shevve of defection from the whole reformation: that when the enemy urges
uniformitie, his intention should be looked to, because he never rests, but
proceeds from the corruption of outvvard worship to corrupt the doctrine, and
to leave nothing sound. Men that taught after this manner were accounted by
the former politics, and peaceable Formalists, to be contentious spirits, and
troublers of the peace of the Kirk. 3. Among Reformed Kirks this day
Thirdly, albeit the reformed Kirks agree now for the most part in the
general, about the nature and use of things indifferent, yet they go far
asunder in the application of the general to their particular practices. The
Lutheran Kirks hold some things for indifferent, which the Kirk of England
receives not, and England holds a multitude of ordinances about discipline
and ceremonies for indifferent, which we tabe to be unlawful, and beside
the word. Every Kirk judging, or at least practicing, according to their
own measure of reformation: all crept not forth of that Roman deluge equally
accomplished. No marvel that some of them should smell of the wine of
fornication, vvherevvith they all for so many years were drunk. But
obstinacy against the ingyring light, and the refusing of a further degree of
Reformation, is fearful, what is it then to draw others back from their
reformation, and to bind them up again into their old chain of darkness.
These manifold contentions about things called indifferent, and ceremonies have
proved so pernicious by defacing the kingdom of Christ, setting up the
tyranny of Antichrist, dividing Pastors, offending people, dismembring the
Kirk, and almost putting out the life of true piety, that we may truly say,
nothing has proved less indifferent to the Kirk, then the contentions about
things indifferent, and many have been more hot for them, then for the heart of
religion, because they concern the face of the Kirk, and as Erasmus said in
another cause, the crowns and bellies of Kirkmen. Whether our old Pastor, or
new prelate has here the greatest guiltiness, will appear by this little
that follovveth.

THE PASTOR, The pastor rests not in the estate of a Kirk; that is
indifferentgood, but would be at further Reformation: the prelate inclyneth to
defection.
ever fears defection, and still urges Reformation, till every thing be done
in the house of God, according to the will of God. He accounts the
constitution of a Kirk, that is but indifferent good, or midway betwixt
idolatry and Reformation, to be but like the lukewarmnesse of Laodicea.

The PRELATE pleases himself in this, that there be many Kirks in worse case,
rests in his indifferency, and lukewarmnesse, and rather inclyneth downward
to further defection, then aymeth at any higher Reformation, like the Priests
of Samaria, that were al so earnest against the true worship at Jerusalem, as
they were against Baal and his idolatry.

2. The PASTOR looks not to the world but to Religion in matters of Religion,
The past thinks not that indifferent which does good or evil to the peoples
souls: the prelate accounts that indifferent, which does neither good nor
evil to his worldly estate.
and therefore thinks not that indifferent in Religion, which brings good
or evil spiritual upon the Kirk, and the souls of the people, albeit in
their worldly estate immediately it do them neither good nor evil.

The PRELATE esteems many things indifferent in Religion, because they
neither bring good nor evil to his worldly estate, albeit they do good or
evil to the Kirk, and to the souls of the people, and looks more to the
world then to religion in matters of religion.

3. The PASTOR acknowledges three degrees of matters of faith, The past,
thinks nothing indifferent that is warranted by the word: the prelate
everything that is not fundamental.
some to be of the foundation and first principles of the doctrine of faith,
some to be near the foundation, as the conclusions clearly following upon the
former* and the third to be of all other matters warranted by the word, and
what is of this third rank, were it never so far from the foundation, and
never so small in our eyes, not to be a matter indifferent, but to bind the
conscience, and to be a matter of faith.

The PRELATE professes the first and second to be matters of faith; but when
he comes to the third he esteems the^ to be no matters of faith, but
indifferent and wondereth that a wiseman should be so precise and puritanicall,
as to stand upon matters that are not fundamental, but indifferent. For so he
distinguishes, making every thing either fundamental or indifferent.

4. The PAST. The pastor finds the direction for ceremonies to be as perfect
under the gospel, as it was under the law but the prelate adds unto it, as if
it were unperfect.
comparing the worship of God under the gospel with the worship under the law,
finds that the commandment Deu. 12. 32. Every word that I command you, that
ye shall observe to do, thou shall not add unto it, neither shall ye deminish
from it, does equally concern both. That the mind of man permitted to it
self would prove as vain and foolish under the Gospel, as under the law, and
that Jesus Christ was faithful as a Son in all the house of God, above Moses
who was but a servant, and therefore albeit the ceremonial observations under
the Law were many, which was the burden of the Kirk under the old Testament,
and ours be few, which is our benefit, yet the determination from God in all
the matters of his worship he finds to be all particular, the direction of
all the parts of our obedience to be as clear to us, that now live under the
Gospel, as it was to them that lived under the Law.

The PREL. as if either it were lawful now to add to the word, or man's mind
were in a better frame, or the Son of God were not so faithful as Moses the
servant, or as if direction in few ceremonies could not be as plain as in
many, would bring into the Kirk a new ceremonial law, made up of translations
of divine worship, of imitations of false worship, and of inventions of
willworship, to succeed to the abolished ceremonies under the Law, which he
interprets to be the liberty and power of the Christian Kirk in matters
indifferent, above the Kirk of the old testament: but is indeed the great
door, whereby himself and others, strange office-bearers, whereby days,
altars, vestures, cross, kneeling, and all that Romish rabble his shadow, have
entered into the Kirk of Christ, and which will never be shut again till
himself be shut out, who while he is within holds it wide open.

5. The PASTOR gives no power to the Kirk to appoint other things in the
worship of God, The past. appoints no new thing in the worship of God: but
the prel. is a new lawgiver.
the^ are appointed already by Christ the only Lawgiver of his Kirk, but to
set down canons and constitutions about things before appointed, and to
dispose the circumstances of order and decency, that are equally necessary in
civil and religious actions, and therefore resolves first, that nothing
positive, or that flows merely from institution, can be indifferent, or can
be appointed by the Kirk. Secondly, that reason may be given from Christian
prudence, why things are appointed by the Kirk thus and no other ways. And
thirdly, that the constitutions of the Kirk about things indifferent can not be
universal for all times and Kirks, and therefore can not be concluded upon any
moral or unalterable ground, which made the ancients to observe, that albeit
Christ's coat had no seame, yet the Kirks vesture was of diverse colors, and
that unity is one thing, and uniformitie another.

The PRELATE as a new Lawgiver will appoint new rites, and mystical signs in
the Kirk, that depend upon mere institution, and are not concluded upon any
reason of Christian prudence for such a time and place, but upon grounds
unchangable, and therefore obliging at all times and places, as is evident by
the reason that he brings for festival days, kneeling in the sacrament etc.

6. The PASTOR distinguishes betwixt the nature and use of things indifferent,
The pastor is so far limited, that he thinks nothing to be in use
indifferent: but the prelate accounts that to be precisenes and puritanisme
and confesses with all the learned, that albeit many actions be in their
nature indifferent, yet that all our actions in particular (at least such as
proceed of deliberation, which is the exception of some of the Schoolmen) are
either good or evil, and not one of them all indifferent in matters most
indifferent, which obliges him to seek a warrant from God, for that which he
does, that he may do it in faith, to walk circumspectly, to take heed to
his words, gestures, etc. and to do all that he does to the glory of God.

The PREL. abhors this doctrine as the foundation of Puritanisme, the
restraint of his licentiousnes, and the ruin of his monarchy, and therefore
to the contrary sins with a bold conscience, and makes the people to
sin, some with erring, some with doubting, and some with a contradicting
conscience.

7. The PASTOR gives ear to the H. Ghost, The pastor fears to give offense
in things indifferent: but the prelate is bold and scandalous.
charging that we put no occasion to fall, nor stumbling block before our
brethren, (for that is to destroy him for whom Christ dyed) commanding the
strong to bear with the infirmities of the weak, and not to please themselves
with the neglect of their brethren, and threatening woe to them, by whom
offenses come, against which no authority of man can stand, because it can
neither make scandal not to be, nor not to be sin, nor not to be his sin
that gives the scandal.

The PRELATE stopping his ear against the commandment charge and threatening
of the H. Ghost, whether he intend to give scandal or not by his manifold
abuse of things indifferent, and especially by recoiving into the Kirk again
things called indifferent, which for their great abuse were abolished, gives
offense to all sorts: as the boldness and increase of papists, the contempt and
mocking of the profane, the superstition and perplexity of the simple, and the
grief and crosses of the godly do declare, against which he never had any
excuse, but the pretext of authority.

The Prelates objection.
THE PRELATE will still object, Object. None but puritanes are precise in
matters indifferent.
that ye were more wise to quit the name of conscience in matters so
indifferent, as the controverted articles, and others of that sort be; then
still to talk of conscience, conscience, and that ye are, but a part of
puritanes, that are so precise and singular beyond your neighhours in matters
indifferent.

The Pastors answer.
THE prelate persuading to put away conscience, is not unlike the fox, Ans.
Distinguishing betwixt two sorts of precisians or Puritanes.
who through his evil guyding having loosed his tail, would have persuaded all
his neighbors to part with theirs, as an uncomely and unprofitable burden,
that all being like himself, his deformity might no more appear. A good
conscience would please God in all things in substance and ceremony, but with
due proportion. It first and most stands at Camels, and yet next it straineth
gnats, when the light of Gods truth makes them discernable. When he calls us
precisians, he is quite mistaken: for he that is so self precise* that he will
rather part with the purity of Gods worship, and a good piece of the truth
too, then want a complement of his Lordly dignity, or piece of his worldly
commodity, or disch of his delicacie, and not he that is so precise in the
matters of Gods worship (wherein he has no power to be liberal) that he will
forsake all to follow Christ, he and no other is the right precisian. He
calls our pastors and our professors Puritanes, and consequently Heretics,
but blessed be God, can not name their heresy: They are still in profession
that which he was not long since, when he was farther from Heresy then he is
now. This calumny constreyneth us to distinguish betwixt two sorts of
Puritanes; the one is the old heretical Puritan, who from the author of his
sect, was called Novatian, and from his heresy, Catharist, or Puritan: such a
one our pastor is not: for 1. The Puritan denied the baptism of infants. The
Pastor waits on baptism, as a special part of his calling, which the
Prelate does not.

2. The Puritanes had their own Prelates and liked of prelacie. The Pastor in
this is no Puritan, but the prelate the Puritan.

3. The Puritan condemned second marriage as unlawful. The Pastor mainteyneth
the honor of marriage against the Putitane, the Papist, and the Prelates
manifold matrimonial transgressions.

4. The Puritan denied reconciliation in some cases to penitents. The Pastor
would be glad to see the Prelates repentance, notwithstanding his great
defections, and that in the time of peace, without the least essaye of
persecution: and therefore our Pastor is not a Puritan.




The other sort is the new nicknamed Puritan in our times, wherein the Papist
calls it Puritanisme, to oppose the Roman Hierarchy. The Arminian accounts
it Puritanisme, to defend Gods free grace against man's free will. The
Formalist thinks it Puritanisme to stand out against conformity. The
Civilian, not to serve the time, and the Profane thinks it essential to the
Puritan to walk preciesly, and not to be profane, and so essential is it
indeed, that if all were profane there would be no puritan: for the profane
and the puritan are opposed. He then is the new Puritan that stands for
Christ against Antichrist, that defends Gods free grace against man's free
will, that would have every thing done in the house of God according to the
will of God (which is his greatest heresy) that seeks after the power of
religion in his heart (and this is his intolerable singularity) and that
stands at the staffes end against the sins of the time (and this is his
pride and melancholy) after this way that the world calls heresy serves he
the God of his Fathers, who have all been Puritanes of this stamp since the
beginning. Abel, who was hated for his holiness: Enoch, that walked with God:
Noah, that was a perfect man in his generations: Heber, that made Peleg his
name a testimony, that he was free of the building of Babel: Moses, that
stood upon an hooue: Mordecay that would not bow his knee; Daniel, that would
not hold his window shut: Eleazar, that would not eat one morsel, Paul that
would not dispense with one hour, nor with an appearance of an evil: Marcus
Arethusas, that would not redeem his life with the giving of an halfpenny to
idolatry: Caius Sulpitius, who was esteemed ever by the Pagans a good man, but
that he was a Christian, etc. were they living at this time, they would not
escape this censure, and would be accounted good men, if they were not
Puritanes. The Widow of Sarepta, who enterteyned Eliah, the Shunamite the host
of Elishah, Annah who for multiplying to pray, and povvring out her heart
before God was rashly censured, to be a daughter of Beliall: Annah the widow,
that served God with fasting and prayer night and day, and spoke of Christ: The
godly women that waited on Christ, ministered unto him of their substance, and
told the Apostles of his resurrection: Lydia, that constreyned the Apostles to
abide with her: Lois and Eunice, that had a care, that their children should
have grace: The elect Lady, the famous Hildgardis, who lived in the 12
Centurie: Mechthildes, Elizabeth the Germane: and many more, who censured the
corruptions of the Kirk, and especially of the Prelates of those times, and
prophesied of the Reformation, which they longed to see, were they now living
would be censured, for holy sisters, and doting Puritanes, and that the rock
and spindle had been fitter for them. Can any man or woman be vexed with the
filthy conversation of the wicked 2 Pet. 2. be stirred up in spirit against
Idolatry, Act. 17. be hot in religion, Revel. 3. fervent in spirit, Romans 12.
walk precisely, Ephesians. 5. fear an oath, make the Sabbath his delight, Esa. 58.
love the brotherhood 1 Pet. 2. Take the kingdom of God by violence, Matthew. 11.
and keep a good conscience in all things Act. 24. and not be made the
drunkards song, the byword of the poeple, and mocked for a Puritan. It was the
saying of Petrach. Simplicity carries the name of foolishnes, malice the name
of wisdom, and good men are so mocked, that almost none can be found to be
mocked.

THE FOURTH PART.
The Pastor and Prelate compared by the Reformation, and proceedings of our
own Kirk.
AS no family or civil society, where the fundamental laws are neglected,
and the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life are
followed, can continue long, except it be reformed. Even so the Kirk of God,
through the misregard of the laws of God and ^irection of Scripture, and
through the ambition and cove^ousnes of Kirkmen did fall away so far from
the first inte^^^itie, that there was a necessity of Reformation, and nothing
more certainly looked for, and more plainly foretold a long time before any of
our reformers, How Reformation was ^^rought.
or Luther himself come in the world. This reformation that could no longer be
delayed was often urged, but never likely to be obtained in a general
Counsel, nor with consent of the Clergy and Court of Rome, to whom
Reformation was a certain ruin. And therefore in several kingdoms,
countries and states of the christian world, it was wonderfully wrought by
the Lords mighty power in his vveake servants. Such were amongst others
Baldus of Franco, Hus of Bohem, Jerome of Prage, Luther of of Germany,
Wickleife of England, and our Knox of Scotland. Whereupon it came to pass,
that although one part of Christendom knew not what another was doing, yet
they all agreed (as may be seen in the Harmony of Confessions published to
the world) in the most essential and fundamental matters of faith: because
the Lord was master of that work: but had also their own differences and
degrees of Reformation, because men were the instruments, and they were not
Angels, but men that were to be wrought upon. For whose diverse dispositions
in sundry nations there behooved to be diverse disadvantages to the work. We
are not riged censurers of other Reformed Kirks, nor are we Separatists from
them: but this we think that a tvvofold duty lies upon us, A twofold
duty of the reformed Kirks.
and them all, whatsoever be the measure of Reformation: One is (albeit there
be ever some Catholic moderators, that will be Trysters betvvixte us and
Rome, and think to agree Christ and Antichrist) that we all with one heart
praise God for separating us from Sodom, resolving never to return again,
where there be so many heresies, both against the common principles and
particular articles of faith, so manifold idolatry both against the first and
second commandment, so proud a Hierarchy as can neither stand with the
spiritual Kingdom of Christ, nor the civil Kingdoms of Princes, and so
bloody a tyranny against all who refuse to believe their heresies, to
practice their idolatry, and to be slavish to their hierarchy. Returning to
any point of theit profession is an approbatio^ of their cruelty against them
that have denied it. And whosoever approve their worship, they bring upon
themselves the blood of so many Saints, and faithful martyrs of Christ, who
have testified the word of God, and have vvashed their Robes in the blood of
the Lamb. The other duty is, that albeit there be ever some adiaphorists,
who for their own particular make many things, and shevve more things to be
indifferent in the worship of God, that under this pretext they may bring them
back, that have been advanced before them in the work of Reformation: that we
all praise God with one heart for the measure that every one has atteyned
unto, The Reformation of our kirk.
and they that are behind in reformation, whatsoever their outvvard splendour
be, envye not them vvo have run before, or study to dravv them back to their
degree, least both return to Rome: but that all against all impediments press
forvvard to further perfection, ever reforming some what according to the
pattern, there being no staying neither for the Christian nor for the Kirk.
The Kirk of Scotland has little cause to be pleased with herself, when she
looks upon her late sudden and shameful defection, but great and singular
cause to praise God, when she looks to his gracious dispensation. For as
Scotland, albeit far from Jerusalem, was one of the first nations, that the
light of the Gospel shyned on, when it appeared to the Gentiles, and one of the
last that kept the light, when the shadows of the hills of Rome began to
darken the earth. So when the sun came about again at the Reformation, if
this blessed light shyned first upon others, all that had eyes to see both at
home and abroad, have seen and said, that it shyned fairest upon us, Divine
providence delighting to supply the defect of nature with abundance of grace,
and to make this backside of the earth, lying behind the visible sun, by the
clear and comforting beams of the Sun of righteousness, to be the sunnie
side of the Christian world, whereof these follovving testimonies are
sufficient proof.

One of M. George Wishart martyr:
This Realm shall be illuminated with the light of Christ's gospel, as clearly
as ever was Realm since the days of the Apostles. The house of God shall be
builded in it, yea it shall not lack (what soever the enemy imagine to the
contrary) the very top-stone; the glory of God shall evidently appear, and
shall once triumph in despite of Satan. But alas, if the people shall be
after unthankefull, then fearful and terrible shall the plagues be, that
after shall follow. Hist. of the Kirk of Scotland page 108.


Another of Beza.
Magnu^ est hoc Dei munus quod una and religionem puram, and (...), doctrinae
viz. retinendae vinculum in Scotiam intulistis, Sic obsccro and oltcstor haec
duo simul retinete, ut uno amisso, alteru^ diu permanere no^ posse
semper-memineritis. Sicut episcopi papatu^ pepereru^t, it a pseudoepiscopos.
papatus reliquias, epicureismu^ terru invecturos: hanc pestem caveant, qui
salva^ ecclesiam cupiunt, and quu^ illa^ in Scotia in tempore profligaris, ne
qu^so illa^ unqua^ admittas, quantumvis unitatis retinendae specie, quae
veteres etia^ optimos multos fefellit blandiatur. Bez. epist. 79.
This is a great gift of God, that ye have brought into Scotland together pure
religion and good order, which is the band to hold fast the doctrine: I heartily
pray and beseech for Gods sake, Hold fast those two together, so that ye may
remember, that if the one be lost, the other can not long remain. So Bishops
brought forth popery, so false bishops, the relics of popery, shall bring
into the world Epicureisme: Whosoever would have the Kirk safe, let them beware
of this pest, and seeing ye have tymely dispatched it in Scotland, I beseech
you, never admit it again, albeit it flatter with show of the preservation
of unity, which has deceived many of the best of the ancients.

A third of the body of Confessions of faith:
Est illud Ecclesiae Scotanae privilegium rarum prae multis, in quo etiam ejus
nomen apud exteros fuit celebre, quod circiter annos plus minus 54 sine
schismate nedum heresi, unitatem cum puritate doctrinae servaverit and
retinuerit. Hujus unitatis adminiculum ex Dei miscricordia maximum fuit; quod
paulatim cum doctrina Christi and Apostolorum disciplinam, sicut ex verbo Dei
est praescripta, una fuit recepta, and quam proxime fieri potuit, secundum eam
totum regimen Ecclesiasticum, fuit administratum. Hac rati^ne omnia schismatum,
atque errorum semina qua^ primum pullulare, aut so exerere visa sunt, in ipsa
quasi herba and partu sunt suffocata, and extirpata. Det Dominus Deus pro
immensa sua bon^tate Regiae Majestati serenis^ima, omnibusque ecclesiarum
gubernatoribus, potestatibus ecclesiae nutritiis, ut ex Dei verbo illam
unitatem, and doctrinae puritatem perpetuo conservent. Amen. Corpus Conf^s.
fidei page 6.
It is the rare privilege of the Kirk of Scotland before many in which respect
her name is famous even among strangers, that about the space of four and
fifty years, without schism, let be heresy, she has kept and holden fast
unity with purity of doctrine. The greatect help of this unity of the
mercy of God, was that with the doctrine the discipline of Christ and his
Apostles, as it is prescribed in the Word of God, was by little and little
together resumed, and according to that discipline, so near as might be, the
whole government of the Kirk was disposed. By this means all the seeds of
Schisms and errors, so soon as they began to budde, and show themselves,
in the very breeding and birth were smothered and rooted out. The Lord God of
his infinite goodness grant unto the Kings most gracious Majesty, to all the
rulers of the Kirk, to the powers that are nurcers of the Kirk, that according
to the word of God, they may keep perpetually that unity and purity of
doctrine. Amen.

The fourth is of King James our late Sovereign:
Ba^^llc. Doron.
The religion professed in this country wherein I was brought up, and ever
made profession of, and wishes my son ever to continue in the same, as the
only true form of Gods worship etc. I do equally love and honor the learned
and grave men of either of these opinions, that like better of the single form
of policy in our Kirk, then of the many ceremonies in the Kirk of England etc.
I exhort my Son to be beneficial to the good men of the ministry, praising
God, that there is presently a sufficient number of good men of them in this
kingdom, and yet are they all known to be against the form of the English
Kirk.

Basilic. Doron to the Reader: He praised God, for that he was borne to be a
King in the sincearest Kirk in the world, etc. Assembly anno 1590. The
Prelates themselves and the mainteyners of conformity dare not for shame open
their mouths against the work of God in the Reformation, and against the
purity of their mother Kirk, and therefore would have her to open her mouth in
their defense of there Hierarchy and ceremonies, and do wrest her authority
and proceedings to that sense. Let us then ask of herself, whether she
likes better of the Pastor or of the Prelate.

1. THE PASTOR and men of God at the acceptable time of Reformation, The
discipline and government of the Kirk at the first, began to be reformed, and
the prelate to be cast out.
as they were moved by the spirit of God, labored to reform, not only the
doctrine sacraments, and whole worship of God, but also the discipline and
whole government of the house of God by abolishing the jurisdiction of
prelates, and all that Roman Hierarchy: as is manifest Books of discipl.
by their acknowledging no other ordinary and perpetual officebearers in the
Kirk, but Pastors, doctors, Elders, and Deacons: by their petitioning, that the
rents of the Prelates, and of their train should be converted to other uses.
An. 1566.
By their subscribing the Helvetick Confession, which censureth prelacie for
the invention of man, Beza to Knox an. 1571.
and by the letters which they received from foreign Kirks, gratulating, that
they had timely purged the Kirk of this proud prelacie, that they had received
with the doctrine, the discipline of Christ and his Apostles, and willing and
obtesting them to beware of the pest of prelacie, as they loved the weal of
the Kirk.

The PRELATE not only in respect of his popish Religion, but also in respect
of his papal and episcopal jurisdiction, was one of the great evils, that
cried for reformation of the Kirk: and therefore, albeit he kept still the
title, the rent and civil place of the prelate (which the Kirk could not take
from him, and which makes many to mistake his descent) his ecclesiastical
authority was so far abolished, that neither were their Successors designed to
such prelates as continued obstinate Papists, nor was Episcopal authority
continued in their persons that were converted, nor were Superintendents
ordained to be new prelates: only some of the converted prelates, for want of
means to furnish others, were designed to be commissioners of the Kirk, as
other ordinary Pastors were, but with bad success. For never one of them did
good to the Kirk.

2. The PASTOR and men of God proceeding in the work of reformation, The pastor
proceeds in this point of reform^tion, and the prel. in his avarice and
ambition.
acknowledged no government of the Kirk by the Lordly domination of Prelates,
but by the common consent and authority of assemblies, which were of four
sorts, National, Provincial, Parishionall, and Presbyteriall. To these the
Superintendents were subject by an act of the assembly anno 1562.
The lineaments of the last were drawn at the first, when the weekly
assemblies were appointed for exercise of discipline, and interpretation of
Scriptures, but were not, nor could not be accomplished, and perfectly
established, till the light was spread, and particular Kirks were planted in
the several quarters and corners of the Land, that they might make a number,
and conveniently assemble in presbyteriall meetings.

The PRELATE is restless, proceeds whither his avarice and ambition carry
him, and willing in those times rather to be a Titular or a Leith 1571.
Tulchan (as he was then named) then to be no body above his brethren. He
takes upon him the Title Bishop, with a small part of the rent, permitting
the greater part to my Lord, whose bishop he was, and proudly again arrogates
anthoritie over the Kirk.

3. The PASTOR and men of God learning, At last prelacie is rooted out with
consent of the whole Kirk.
not from Geneva, but from Scripture and daily experience, that the government
of Prelates was full of usurpation, and of all sorts of corruption, whereof
many did complain, Edinburgh anno 1575.
that it had no warrant, and was never like to have any blessing from God,
resolve at last to strike at the root, and therefore after many disputations
in private and public, consultations with the greatest divines of other
reformed Kirks, and after long and mature deliberation, the second Book of
Discipline, pronuoncing the jurisdiction and office of the Prelate to be
unlawful, was resumed by consent of the whole Kirk, an ordinance made that
Bishops betake them to the charge of one Congregation, that they exercise no
civil Jurisdiction. The Confession of Faith sworn and subscribed, wherein
they oblige themselves to continue in the doctrine and discipline of this Kirk.
The same year Dundie. an. 1580
it was declared in the general assembly, that the office of the Prelate was
unlawful in it self, and had no warrant in the Word of God, thereafter renewed
in covenant.

The PRELATE and men of that disposition, having in the end nothing to oppone,
professed that they agreed in their consciences, consented to the Acts of the
Kirk, swore and subscribed the Confession of faith, renewed the covenant with
the Kirk, and helped to put on the coap-stone of the Kirk of God with their
own hands, Trenent. anno 1604.
Like as the same Confession of faith was subscribed by those that are now in
the proudest places of prelacie, and who have proved since the chiefest
instruments of all the alterations in the Discipline and external worship of
God, and ringleaders in the defection of the Kirk, with what consciene may be
seen by their unhonest excuses, their poor shifts, and shameless raylings,
against that which they did once so much reverence, all to be seen, as they
are published in print.

4. The PASTOR and men of God desyring to testify their thankfulness, The
Kirk now reformed in doctrine and discipline uses he authority against all
sorts of finne, till men of episcopal disposition make a new division again.
for so singular favor vouchsafed upon this Kirk and nation, and to employ the
benefit of the discipline now established for the liberty of the kingdom of
Christ, and against the tyranny of sin and Satan, addressed themselves all
as one man with great fidelity and courage for the work of God, urged
residence and diligence in ministers, kept with success from heaven their
public and solemn humiliations, made the pulpits to sound against papistrie
and profaneness, and set all men on work, as they had grace or place, for
purging the country of all corruptions, and defending the Kirk against her
professed enemies, who never ceased by negociating with the Pope and Spanish King
unnaturally to labor for their own and her ruin, whereof the divine
providence had disappointed them in 88.

The PRELATES authority at this time lay dead, and men of that disposition
made no great Dinne. But the Kirk then (unlike that which she is now) comely
as Jerusalem, terrible, as an army with banners, against all her enemies did
stand whole and sound in unity and concord of her ministers, authority of her
assemblies, divine order of her ministry, and purity of external worship,
with great power and presence of the Spirit of God in many congregations of
the land, till at last, for unity division entered into the Kirk, prelacie that
had slepte before, as wakened again, and this mystery begins to work of
new, neither by any cause offered by the pastors of the Kirk at the 17 of
December (as the enemy calumniates) for after long trial they were found
faultlesse, and faithful by his Majesty's own testimony. Nor yet upon that
occasion, Perth. 1596.
for the meeting of the Kirk for making that charge was indicted before that 17
day. But the cause was a plot contryved before, for procuring peace to the
popish Lords, to make war amongst the ministry, and to divide them amongst
themselves. For this effect 55 Problems were framed, to call the established
discipline of the Kirk in question, and as one and the same time way was made
for reconciliation of the Popish Lords, and for restitution of the popish
prelates. And the Schism of our Kirk so well compacted before, began at that
time, not upon their part who stand for the discipline, but by some of the
Prelates disposition, that is, of flattering and worldly minded Ministers, who
gave other answers to thirteen of the fifty five articles concerning the
government of the Kirk, then their worthy brethren desired: So that, if the
cause or occasion makes the Schismatic, the Prelate is the Schismatic and
not the Pastor.

5. The PASTOR and men of God as they had been diligent to establish the
government of the Kirk, The pastor stands to the reformation against
Episcopar^s which the Prela^^ attaineth unto (...) last by many degrees, and
much working.
according to the will of Christ, and after it was by the blessing of God
established were faithful in using it for the honor of God, and good of the
Kirk: so now, when it began craftily to be called in question, were careful,
according to their office and oath, to stand to the defense thereof, both
against professed enemies, and against the Schism begun by their own
brethren: albeit they could not at the first have been persuaded, that their
brethren would ever so foully forget themselves, as against their great oath
in the sight of God and the world, to take upon them the dominion of Prelates,
and for their own back and belly to trouble the Kirk, and mar all the
worship of God as they have done.

The PRELATE through the Schism at that time begun by himself, savouring
the sweetness of wealth and honor, forgets his oath, his office and all,
follows greedily upon the Sent, and clymbeth craftily by degrees, and betime
to the height that he could not advance himself to at once. Dundie anno 1597.
May, and March following, Falkland a. 1598. Halyrudhouse anno 1599. Montrosen
anno 1600.
First with much ado, and many protestations, that he meaned nothing against
the discipline established, but desires to vindicate the Ministry from
poverty and contempt, gets liberty for to vote in parliament for the Kirk,
but with such caveats, as would have kept him from his present prelacie, if he
had kept them as he was obliged. Linlithgo 1606.
Secondly, five years thereafter he was made constant moderator, and that of
the presbytery only where he was resident, and not of the Synods, upon as
fair precepts, and with the like protestations and cautions. An. 1610 Febr:
Thirdly, being Lord of Parliament, Lord of Council, patron of beneficens,
Modifier of Ministers stipends, he was armed also with the power of the High
commission, and having two swords, might do against the Kirk what he pleased.
Glasgow 1610. June.
Thereafter incontinent he usurped the power of ordination and jurisdiction.
An. 1610. November.
And at last, albeit without consent or knowledge of the Kirk of Scotland went
and resumed consecration in England, and since that time has taken upon him,
and has exercised the plenarie power and office of a bishop in the Kirk, no
less, then if the assembly of this Kirk had chosen him to the name and office
of a Bishop, which as yet they have never done, the most corrupt of their own
assemblies granting only the negative power of ordination and Jurisdiction to
them, who were never called Bishops by any warrant from the Kirk, but only in
the vulgar speech, from the titles they had to benefices, in which respect
civil persons beneficed were called Bishops in former times.

6. The PASTOR and men of God seeking neither profit nor preferment to
themselves, The way of the Pastors reformation and the prelates defection very
contrary.
expelled the Prelate and all his Ceremonies out of the Kirk of Christ by no
other means, but such as became the faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ, as
preaching, praying, penning, advising with the best reformed Kirks, reasoning
in assemblies, and after liberty granted to all to oppone, the consent, oath
and subscription of the Adversaries.

The PRELATE seeking nothing but his own prosit and preferment, is restored
again by such means, as better beseem his Ministers, who has been a
murderer and liar from the beginning, then the sincere Ministers of Jesus
Christ: For craft and cruelty has been their ways, Their craft was to
remove their strongest opponents out of the Country, that they might not be
present in assemblies, to espy their proceedings, and to reason against them,
to abolish the true liberty and authority of assemblies, to protest that they
were seeking no prelacie, neither of the Popish nor English kind, and that
they had no purpose to subverte the Discipline received, but to deliver the
Kirk from disgrace, and to be the more mighty to oppose her enemies, Jesuits
and Papists,, to falsify the acts of the Kirk, to promise to keep all the
cautions and conditions, made to hold them in order, which now they profess,
they never minded to do, etc. Their cruelty has been to boast, to banish,
imprison, deprive, confine, silence, etc.

7. The PASTOR and men of God all this time of defection gave testimony to the
truth, The past. bears witness against the several degrees of defection, and
fears a change in the worship of God, which the prel. enters upon so soon
as the government is altered, and he come to his power.
opposed against the several steps of the prelates ambition, by all the
means that became him to use, as public preaching, supplicating, reasoning,
protesting, and suffering, and when the prelate was triumphing in the height of
his dignity, they could not, comparing the first temple with the second, but
declare the grief of their hearts for the change, and their great fear of
alteration to be made in the worship of God, when now the hedge of the Kirk was
broken down, and an open way made for all corruption.

The PRELATE is of the Clergy, that seldom is seen penitent, and therefore
as against all the means used by the Pastor, he had altered the government of
the Kirk, so he enters next upon the worship and Service of God. Aberdein 1616.
Sanctandr. anno 1617.
and will have a new confession of Faith, new Catechism, new forms of prayer,
new observation of days, new Forms of ministration of the Sacraments, which
he first practiced himself, against the acts and order of the Kirk. Perth 1618.
And since convened an assembly of his own making to draw on the practice of
others. Edinburgh anno 1621.
And thirdly he has involved the honorable estates of the Kingdom into his
great guiltiness by their ratification in parliament, which has brought an
inundation of evils into this Kirk and country.

8. The PASTOR and men of God considering, what the Kirk was before, The past.
resolves to be constant to the end, against al heresy and corruption, which
is entering every day by the prelates misgovernment.
what the reformation was, and what conformity is, what the proceedings of the
one and of the other have been, sees Religion wearing away, pityeth the young
ones, that never have seen better times, laments ever the multitude, that can
not see the evils of the present, and resolves for himself to hold constant
to the end against Papists, prelates, Arminians, and whatsoever can arise, to
wait with patience, what the Lord will do for his people, and when he is gone
to leave a testimony behind him of the twofold misery of impiety and
iniquity, that he has seen in this land.

The PRELATE has forgotten what himself and the kirk was once, he has
wrought a greater defection in this kirk in the short time of his Episcopacie,
then was in the primitive kirk for some hundreths of years, and is so far
yet blinded with the love of his place in the world, that he makes his worldly
credit the Canon, and his prelacie the touchstone of the trial of all
Religion. The Pope shall no more be Antichrist, Papistrie may be borne with,
Arminianisme may be brought in, because they can keep company with Prelacie.
The Reformation is Puritanisme, preciseness, Separation and intolerable,
because it can not cohabitate with prelacie. The Gods of the Nations were
sociall, and could live together, but the God of Israel is a jealous God.

The Prelates objection.
THE PRELATE will objest, Obj. The Superintendents in the beginning were
prelates.
that albeit he can neither justify all his own proceedings of late, nor
yours of old, as all men have their own infirmities, yet that ye do him
wrong by your deduction, in confounding times that would be distinguished:
Because from the Reformation to the coming of some Scollars from Geneva with
presbyterall discipline, this kirk was ruled by prelates, and the
Superintendents in the beginning were the same in substance, that the prelates
are now.

The Pastors answer.
ALL men have their own infirmities, but good men are not presumpteously bold
for the love of the world, to hold on in a course of defection against so many
obligations from themselves, and so many warnings from good men. Infirmity one
thing and presumption another. The pastors of the Kirk of Scotland had begun
to root out bishoprie, and to condemn it in their assemblies, before these
Scollers came from Geneve: but never condemned but allowed the charge of
Superintendents, appointed for a time in the beginnings of the Kirk, the one
and the other being different in substance: Answ. Showing particularly, that
the Superintendents were not prelates.
For



The Prelate is chosen for fashion by Deane and Chapter, without any Canon of
the Kirk, and with solemn consecration of the Metropolitan and their bishops.



The Prelate has taken to himself the power, to ordeyne and depose Ministers,
and to decree excommunication.



The Prelates have set up a Hierarchy of all these.



The Prelate is subject to no censure, hut may do what, and may go whither he
will, and no man ask him, why he has done so.



The Prelate is more in ruling then in preaching, and more in the world then in
the Kirk.



The Prel. thinks his office to be perpetual, by reason and virtue of his
consecration.



The prel. neither has received commission from the Kirk, nor means to
render a reckoning to them, nor account of himself, as of a commissioner, but
thinks his office essentially diverse from the office of the pastor, as the
pastors office is from the deacons. The pope may as well say that the
Evangelists were popes, as the prelate, that the Superintendents were prelates.

THE FIFTH PART.
The Pastor and Prelate compared by the weal of the Kirk. and the peoples
souls.
THE saeftie and good of the State was the maine end of Roman policy, The
good estate of the Kirk the end of Kirk policy.
and the fundamental law, by which that people squared all their other
laws, according to their own Maxim: Salus populi suprema lex. eversa domo,
interdum rei publicae status manner potest: urbis ruina, penates omnes secum
traha^ necesse est. Valet. max. l. 5. c. 6.
Let the safety of the people be the souveraigne lauv. The Kirk of Jesus Christ
has better reason to think, that the safety of the Kirk should be the rule and
end of all Ecclesiastical policy, although the form of external Worship and
of the government of the house of God were not prescribed by the Lord himself
in his Word, but left arbitrarie to men to be framed by their Canons and
Constitutions, yet this must be holden as infallible. That it is the best form
of government which by reason and experience is found to be best for the
weal and safety of the Kirk. Unto this general both Prelate and Pastor will
without question condescend: but they differ in the particular, what this is,
wherein the good and weal of the Kirk does consist: For the Prelate places
the weal of the Kirk in her outvvard peace and prosperity, and thinks the
Kirk well constituted, and in good case, when she florisheth in wealth and
vvorldly dignities. But herein he abuses the christian World three ways, The
prelate abuses the people three ways in determining what is the good estate
of the Kirk.
First, that he measures and determines the good estate of the Kirk by her
outvvard face, and not by her inward grace, by the health of her body rather
then of her soul, by that which is accidental to the Kirk, and which she may
either have or want, and yet continue a true Kirk, and not by that whi his
essential and proper to the very nature and being of a Kirk. Secondly, that he
judges that to be the weal of the Kirk, which has many times proved her
vvrack, being abused, as commonly it has happened: He takes poison for a
preservatiue, and surfett of peace and prosperity, excess of wealth and
vvorldly honors, which are her deadly disease, to be her health and best
constitution. Too large bestovving of riches and preferments upon the ministers
of the Kirk, bred that contagion within her bowels which turned almost to
her death in the end: for thereby defection grevv by degrees, till ar^ st
under the Man of (...) it came to the height. Thirdly, that he measures the
good estate of the Kirk by himself, and the rest of the members of that
Hierarchicall body, as though it went well with the whole Kirk, when
Bishops stand and reign, like the Kings of the nations, and as though the
ministry vve^e sufficiently vindicated from poverty and contempt,
vvher^tvvelue or thirteen of the number are clymed up like (...) the highest
places, that with their evil favored mingeot^^^ they may move laughter to
all that behold them from below, or like fowls flovven up to the highest
roofes, shooting down their filthy excrements upon the rest, that sit in the
lovver rooms. But the Pastor esteems the good an weal of the Kirk by her
spiritual estate, that is, by a sound faith, a pure worship, and a holy
conversation, as she stands or decays in these, so is she eyrher in a good
constitution or languishing, and as she is furnished with all the means that
may preserve and increase these, so she either prospers or decays. This
judgment of the Pastor is grounded upon very good reasons. For upon this
estate of the Kirk necessarily depends the glory of God, and salvation of
souls, which are the two things that make the difference betwixt the Kirk of
God, and all other so^ieties of men in the world, and therefore the Pastor
has reason to think, that all the riches of the earth, and all the glory of
all the kingdoms of the world are not to be put in balance with the glory
of God, and the salvation of souls, that which God with his own blood has
purchased and redeemed. Now whether the good of the Kirk in these things be
better procured and preserved by the Prelate or by the Pastor, let them be
typed by comparing them in the particulars follovving.

I. THE PASTOR his principal care is to preserve the purity of doctrine in
the Kirk, The pastor careful to preserve the purity of doctrine, for the good
of the Kirk: the prelate cares more for his own things.
that Christ's flock may be fed with the wholesome word of life, and to oppose
all contrary and unprofitable doctrine, as poysonable and pernicious to the
peoples souls, and for that purpose interteyneth in weekly meetings the
exercise of the word, where the doctrine delivered by one, is judged by all the
rest, whether it be sound and profitable, and takes such order with the
Papists, the great corrupters of doctrine, and enemies to the peoples souls,
that either he converteth them, or cutteth them off from the communion of the
Kirk with the spiritual sword, and exhorts the Magistrate, to execute the
laws made against them: whereby it came to pass that contrary doctrine, and
vayn and curious teaching either entered not into our Kirk, or was suddenly
repressed and put to the door, and Papistrie that had place before, was well
nigh put out of the land.

The PRELATE has neither leisure nor liking to look to such exercise, and
accounts no heresy so worthy his animadversion, as the alleged heresy of
Aerius and his followers. It is manifest in history from the beginning, that
the heresies that have most endangered the Kirk, have either been forged by
the ingines, k As Christ's real descent into hell, many Lutherane, Arminian and
popish errors.
or favored and borne out by the authority and credit of Prelates: b and this
day, diverse false and dangerous doctrines are partly vented, and partly
wincked at by them: neither thinks he papists great enemies to the Kirk: but
as the Jewish priests entertained the Sadduces, albeit enemies to true
religion, and hated Christians as their deadly foes, and as the Papist can
agree with the formal Protestant, but thinks the unconformable Calvenist his
irreconcilable enemy, so the Prelate could agree with the common Papist for
all his blaspheamous doctrine and profession, because he is a friend to his
Hierarchy. But the Reformed Christian, whom he calls the Calvinist, and
Puritan he can by no means bear, because he is professed unfriend to his
Hierarchy. A Prelate as a Prelate is not opposite to the Papist, but to the
Protestant.

2. The pastor in the matter of ceremonies looks to the edification of the
Kirk, which the prelate misregardeth.
The PASTOR knowing that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, thinks it
dangerous for the peoples souls to borrowe either substance or ceremony of
religion from Antichristian corruption, and therefore warns the people to
beware of the least beginnings and appearances of evil, and while he
deliberates about ceremonies, fittest for ordor and decency, he intends
nothing of his own, but the edification of the kirk, and in the practice of
ceremonies and circumstances orderly appointed, he looks to the peace of the
Kirk that it be not broken, and to the consciences of the weak, that they be
not offended.

The PRELATE likes to simbolize with Antichrist his Ceremonies, putting the
Papists in hope, that the body and substance of the^ superstition may be
resumed by time, where the shadows and ceremonie^ are so highly regarded. He
intends nothing in appointing them, but the maintenance of his own estate and
dignity, because he sees and says, N^ Ceremony no Bishop, and in practice
is more earnest in urging of Ceremonies, then of obedience to the greatest
things of the Law, and by the Canons about matters, which they themselves call
indifferent, does viole^^ either to the bodies or consciences of the people,
that think otherwise, and makes them to serve as rods to scourge and
whippe out of the Kirk, and ministry, whom and when they think good.

3. The PASTOR considering, The past. in the whole course of his ministry
intends the feeding of the flock: the prel. to feed him self.
that he is called to feed the f^ock of Christ, and to care for the peoples
souls, in his entry to the ministry, will be loath to undertake a greater
charg^ then he can in some measure overtake, and the less his charg^ is the
greater is his contentment, not that he desires to be (...) but to be
faithful, when he is entered he has the work of the ministry in singular
regard, as the most honorable and laborious work that he can be employed
about, whereof the best man is not worthy, and unto which the wole man is not
sufficient, and therefore is resident among the people, serves not by deputies
and Suffraganes, but in his own person, and is altogether taken up with the
Pastors duties, of preaching, praying, catechizing, visiting, exhorting,
rebuking, comforting, etc. but labors most diligently in the word and
doctrine, because faith comes by the Word preached.

The PRELATE intending nothing, but to feed himself, at his entry to his
prelacie, he regards not so much the number of souls he should feed, as the
number of chalders, the large revenues, and the great dignities he is to feed
upon, and the larger his Diocie, the better for him: Hence is it, that he
ascends from a Diocesan to an Archbishop, and a Primate. After he is entered he
disdayneth the work of the Ministry, as base, and unworthy of bis grace and
great Lordship, he serves by his deputies and Suffraganes, and thinks it a
more honorable and necessary employment to attend and reside at Court, or at
the places of civil judgment, as Council, Session, Exchequor, and howsoever
he appropriates to himself the reward of double honor due to them who labor
in the word and doctrine, yet he thinks, that he is not bound to take the
pains of that work, unto which the double honor is annexed. So the Pastor
must labor in the work, and the Prelate must reap the reward, and which is
more prejudicial to the peoples souls, he maintayneth that learned and
qualified preachers are not so necessary in congregations, as Curats and
Readers, that there is too much preaching, and too little reading and praying,
meaning nothing else but their confused Leitourgie.

4. The PASTOR dare not do harm to the peoples souls, The past. subject to
the sdiscipline of the Kirk himself, and (...) it for the good of the (...)
the prelate neither subject to the discipline him self nor exercises it for
the good of others, nor suffers the pastors to exercise it.
because he is subject both in calling and conversation to the discipline of
the Kirk, which stryketh upon the Pastor, as well as upon the people, and to
bring the transgressers to repentance, he sits with his brethren in session,
presbytery and assembly, administering the holy discipline holily, that is, in
sincerity and faythfulnesse, without prejudice or partiality, and never
ceasing, till the scandal be removed, the Kirk be purged, and the offender (if
it be possible) be won unto God, and all this, as being Christ's own work,
he does with Christ's own weapons, that is with the spiritual sword of the
word, which is mighty through God to subdue every thing exalting it self
against God, and to bring sinners to repentance.

The PRELATE may do what harm he will for his own tyrannical custom and
prastise, but not by any law either of Kirk or state, he exempteth himself in
respect of his Episcopal administration, and as he is a Prelate from all
censure, and scorneth to submit himself to any Ecclesiastical judicature,
albeit the chief Apostles submitted themselves unto the Kirk, and albeit there
be no subject in a Kingdom of whatsoever quality or condition, but in every
respect he is under the controulement of some judicature in the Land where he
lives. And as he is thus singularly lawless of himself, so pretending the
sole power of proceeding to belong to him by virtue of his place and office, he
sweyeth the course of discipline, as best pleases his Lordship, processes
begu^ne for trying of slanders, if the party never so wicked have Argument of
weight for my Lord or his Receaver, are incontinently by the Word of his
Monarchical authority stricken dead. Hereby it comes to pass, that where
prelates rule, sin reigns, and the nearer the Bishops wings, the greater
liberty for sin, as is seen in their own houses and traynes. And for this
reason is it, that both Atheists and Papists like the Episcopal discipline,
better then the pastoral, which they call straytelaced, because it troubles
their corruption, whereas the other lays the reins upon their neck. And if
the Prelate happen to proceed against offenders, his discipline consists not
so much in spiritual censure, as in worldly power and civil punishment, as
fining, confining, imprisoning etc. which have no power to work upon the
consciences of sinners to bring them to repentance, which is most proper for
the preachers of the Gospel, and the chief end of Kirk discipline.

5. The PASTOR for the good of the Kirk, The pastor would have all things be
done for the good of the Kirk, by the free assemblies of the Kirk: the prel.
will rule all by him self, whether in assembly, or out of assembly.
is desirous, that the assemblies of the Kirk, provincial and national, be
often holden and well kept, knowing how necessary they are for redressing
things amiss, for fulfilling things omitted, and for preventing evils that are
like to ensue: and when the assembly is convened he carries himself toward
his brethren, as toward the servants of Christ, and colleagues of equal
authority, none presuming to any place or pre-eminence, though of order only,
and not of power, without the calling and consent of his fellow brethren. There
every one has liberty to utter his mind, and every one is ready with the
gift that God has given him, as the diverse members of one body, for the good
of the whole Kirk: meek Moses and burning Elias, Esaias with his trumpet, and
Aaron with his belles, Bonaerges and Barionah, the son of thunder, and the
son of the dove, all moved by one spirit, with mutual respect, reverence,
and brotherly love, join together in one conclusion, and if at any time they
be of different judgments, they are not sudden and summar in concluding
things of importance, that concern the whole, but that all may be done with
uniforme consent, after the example of the Apostles Acts 15, the conclusion is
delayed, till all objections be satisfied, and God give greater light to such
as are otherwise minded, and so to the great good of the Kirk, both peace and
truth are preserved.

The PRELATE is as averse from a free assembly, as the Pope is from a free
General councall, and therefore will either have none at all, or will have
them so slavish, as if they were but his ecclesiastical courts convened under
him, and in his name. When this Assembly is convened, at his own hand,
without calling or election, he takes upon him to preside and moderate. There
no man has liberty to utter his mind before him, who has power to raise up
and cast down, to enlarge and restreyne, to prefer and postpone, or put in
and put out at his pleasure, and therefore no man's gift in such meetings does
good to the Kirk. And if it happen that his courses be crossed, and the best
sort oppose, then he rages, and by his proud boastings, and unreasonable
raylings, he plays the Prelate indeed, using Christ's ministers and the Kirks
Commisioners no better, then if they were his slaves or lackeys, convened to
say Amen to all his intentions, and to wait upon Oracles falling from his
mouth. In end the plurality of voices of the weaker sort, and for the most
part either emendicate or extorted, carries away the sentence which must
oblige all, and therefore besides the tyrannies and unjust proceedings, proves
afterward to the great hurt of the Kirk, to be the cause of many evils and
great divisions.

6. The PASTOR in planting of Kirks, The Pastor planteth the Kirk with the best
men, with consent of the people, and without hurting the conscience of the
intrant: the prelate with such as please him, without consent of the people or
presbytery, and with hurting of the conscience of the intrant.
and placing of ministers without respect to any man's private judgment or
affection with common consent, makes choice of the best qualified for graces
and manners, and most fit for the people he is to be set over, and that with
their own special advise and desire, so that he gives not the Kirk to the
Minister, but the Minister to the Kirk, and in the act of ordination at the
place where he shall serve, and in presence of the whole Congregation, he
requires of the Intrant neither oath nor promise, but what is appointed by the
assemblies of the whole Kirk, as constancy in the faith, obedience to the
King, and fidelity in his calling, and after he is admitted, he respects him
as the conjunct Ambassador of Christ, equal in power and authority with
himself, with no difference but of age and gifts.

The PRELATE excluding both the flock, whom the Pastor is to feed, and the
fellow-ministers with whom he is to labor in the work, except it be
superficially and for the fashion, when now the Prelate and his domestics (who
have greater hand in the planting of Kirks then both presbytery and people)
have brought the matter to the point of ordination, Dignitatibus viros dandos,
non dignitates hominibus dicere solitus Aeneas Syl. Platina. Magistratus alios
mereri, and non habere: alios habere, and non mereri. ib.
he gives the Kirk to the Minister, rather the^ the Minister to the Kirk,
whereof there flow so innumerable evils, that the Kirk has as just cause to
complain now of the placing of Ministers by bishops, as the Kirk had of old of
the planting of bishops through the corruption of Archbishops and
Metropolitaneo. Praesidentia non ex virtute sed malitia astimatur, no^ dignorum
sed pote^tiorum sunt throni, cathedra sine ullo acquiritur labor, and prelati
sunt qui nihil ad grad^ praeterquam velle, adferunt. Nazianz* Si percu^ctari
velles quis eos praefecerit, Sacerdotes respondent m^x, and dicunt, ab
Archiepiscopo nuper sum Episcopus ordinatus, centumque (...) solidos dedi, ut
Episcopalem gradum assequi meruissem, quoi si minime dedissem, hodie episcopus
non essem. Ambros. citante Bulling. decad. 5. sermon 4. Curritur ad curas
ecclesiasticas, a doctis pariter and indoctis, quasi quisque sine curis
victurus sit, cum ad curas pervenerit. Bern. epist. 42.
The ordination must be at the place of the Prelates residencie, and not at the
Kirk, where he shall serve nor in presence of the congregation; then is the
intrant forced without any pretext of warrant from the kirk, to give his oath
and Subscription to Articles of the Prelates devising, for maintenance of his
Episcopal authority, even as the Pope does in consecrating Bishops and
Archbishops, for establishing of his universal Supremacy. When he is
admitted, albeit for gifts and all other rsspects he be worthy of double honor
far above the Prelate himself, yet the prelate contemns him and his
brethren, as poor presbyters, with double contempt. Whereupon we see that the
Prelates and others by their example and doing esteem not of Ministers for
their worth and their works sake, but as they are in places of preferment, and
as they are clothed with offices and titles of dignity above their fellows:
and this again makes worldly minded Ministers to seek estimation by
greatness rather then by goodness.

7. The PASTOR procures the peace of the Kirk, The pastor by all means seeks
the peace of the Kirk. the prelate seeks his own peace and prosperity.
by following after things which make for peace, Romans 14. for by the discipline
and assemblies of the Kirk he preserves verity, without which there is either
no unity, or such unity, as is but a conspiracy, and resists heresy the
mother of the greatest divisions: so long as our assemblies had their liberty,
there could arise no heresy among us, if it had broken up in a parish, a
consistory or presbytery would have borne it down: or if it had proceeded
further, the^ the Synodall, or if it had not been able, the national assembly
would have suppressed it: for the same reason the Kirk of France, which was
nearest to ours, has been free of heresy: In the Low Countreysif the Kirks had
enjoyed the liberty of their assemblies, which they wanted for a long time,
Arminianisme had neither troubled them, nor their neighbors. He never can find
in his heart to urge or enforce unprofitable and untimely Ceremonies upon the
Kirk, if it were for no other cause, but that they have been the apples of
contention, and the cause of many Schisms, and will choose rather with Jonah
to redeem the quietness and safety of the Kirk with the loss of himself, then
for his own particular to raise the smallest tempest, that may peril her
peace. He carries himself no otherwise in his ministry, then becomes the
humble servant of the Kirk, and fears to be affected with Diotrephes his
ambitious humor, of aspyring above his brethren, which is a special
preservatiue of peace. He studieth to preserve holiness, without which there can
be no sound nor wholesome peace, he is ever at war with that which is
contrary to holiness, and sends away all scandalous livers with the workers
of iniquity, that peace may be upon the Israel of God Psalm. 25.

The PRELATE is accounted a peaceeble man, and pretends always the peace of
the Kirk, but indeed seeks his own peace and prosperity, and opposes the
things that make for peace: for if it serve for his own particular, he can
oversee Papists and Heretics, and suffer heresy to rise and spread it self,
that the Kirk may have some other thing to think upon, then his Episcopacie,
and may have himself to run unto in stead of assemblies, he cares not to
make Schism, and will fight with tooth and nail for unlawful and
unprofitable ceremonies, which have ever proved the cause of Schism, and ere
he redeem the Kirks peace, by casting out these cumbersome wares, he will
rather cast over boorde many worthy ministers, suffer numbers of souls, for
whom Christ has dyed, to perish, and the Kirk of Christ tossed with troubles,
by occasion of that noisome baggage, to sink at last under the burden.
Contention also comes by his pride and ambition: for first, great places make
great emulation, and hoate competition, as may be seen in Christ's own
Apostles, Sicut olim pestiferam illam vestia^, quae per Ari^s^ primo de
infernis extulerat caput, cupiditus episcopatus induxit: sic hodiernam haeresin
(nimirum pontificis Romani primatum) pracipue nutriunt, quos jam men^^care
suppudet, Aeneas Syl.
and history makes known in many others, what debate and contention, what
war and bloodshed prelacie has brought forth in the Christian world, between
Kirk and Kirk contending for primacie, prelate and prelate for presidencie,
Pope and Pope for papacy between Kings and Bishops for Souveraignitie: as
between the Roman Emperors, and Roman Bishops: the Kings of England and the
Primates of England.

8. The PASTOR contents himself with such a competent stipend, The Pastor
contents himself with his competent stipend, the prelate is a master of the
Kirks patrimonio.
as is assigned to him for his service, whereby he has neither means to swell
in pride and wealth, nor matter of excess and superfluity. And he has but
one body, so he undertaketh but one Cure, where he must be resident, and one
Kirk living, which for fear of the censures of the Kirk, albeit he would, he
dares not delapidate, but must leave the Kirk patrimony in as good or better
case, then he found it at his entry.

The PRELATE has a Lords rent out of the revenewes of the Kirk, which at the
first was destinate, and should be employed for better uses, and this he has
not for the service of the Kirk, but partly for his unlawful attending civil
affairs, and partly, for bearing out a Lordly port in himself, his Lady,
their children and followers. He uniteth Kirks far distant, to maki the
morsel the greater for his wide gorge: he allows and defends pluralities,
and Nonresidencies, by setting long taks without knowledge or consent of the
Kirk, and by setting of few forms and taxwardes he raketh up all, and
stinteth the Minister to a poor stipendiarie portion of five hundredth marks.
So that the most Sacrilegious persons in the Land are the Bishops themselves,
eating the meat out of the mouths of many worthy pastors, that labor
painfully in the Lords work.

The Prelates objection.
THE PRELATE will object, that there shall never be any form of Kirk
government or discipline, Object. Paritie is Anarchie and confusion.
which brings not with it some dangers and discommodities, and that must be
the best, which has the fewest. It cannot be denied, but the Episcopal
gouvernment has also the own inconvenients, whether we consider the Salvation
of Souls, or the outward constitution of the Kirk, and worship of God, or the
patrimony of the Kirk.

But the Anarchie and confusion, which ever attends the paritie maynteyned by
the Pastor is an inconvenience greater then all, and shows plainly, that the
paritie of Pastors is neither of God, nor can serve for the good of the Kirk:
for God is not the God of confusion but of peace, and most of all in the Kirks
of the Saints.

The Pastors answer.
THE gouvernment and order appointed by Christ can have no danger,
discommoditie nor inconvenience, but such as men bring upon it, and which
through the neglect or contempt thereof they bring upon themselves. That
therefore must be the best, which is best warranted by Christ, and approaches
nearest to the simplicity of the Apostles and the discipline of their times.
Malignant wits have ever been ready to lay imputations upon Gods ordinances,
as that his inward worship according to the Gospel of Christ has no wisdom,
that the outward has no majesty, that his order of the Kirk is but Anarchie,
because it is not a monarchy: but as the natural philosopher says, the order
of nature to be full of beauty, and the wise Statesman sees the beauty of
the order of a wise policy: so the Christian, when he sees the order of the
house of God, shall with the Apostle Col. 2. rejoice to see it, and will
prefer the beauty thereof to the wise government of the house and Court of
Solomon, as being appointed by a wiser then he: even Balaam, albeit disposed
to curse, when his eyes are opened to behold this wise order and marvelous
beauty, shall be forced to open his lips, and to say, How goodly are thy tents
o Jacob, and thy tabernacles to Israel: for a house full of silver and gold I
would not curse, for how shall I curse whom the Lord has not cursed? or how
shall I defye, Ans. Showing by many particulars, that the order of the
ministry appointed by Christ is far from confusion.
whom the Lord has not defied? Numb. 23. and 24. And that there is no
confusion in the paritie mainteyned by the Pastor, it is manifest to him that
desires to see, for: 1. Confusion has no subordination for disposing of
things, and setting every thing in it own place. The paritie mainteyned by the
Pastor has a lawful subordination of Elders to Pastors, of Deacons to Elders,
of a Kirk Session to a presbytery, of a presbytery to a Synod, and of a
Synod to a National Assembly.

2. Confusion has no prioritie of respect of precedencie nor of order. Paritie
of pastors so shunneth ambition, that it mainteyneth a prioritie of precedencie
Distinguendum inter autoritatem meriti, and potestatis.
and respect, for age, for zeal, for gifts etc. and a prioritie of order,
whereby one is moderator of others in all their Synods, and meetings, such as
was amongst the Apostles themselves, but without prioritie of power or
jurisdiction above the rest.

3. Confusion admits no commandment nor subjection: Paritie of Pastor,
admits both: for every Pastor conducteth his own flock, and every pastor is
subject to a joint fellowship of pastors in Presbyteries and Synods.

4. Confusion is abhorred, both by nature and all Societies, as their greatest
enemy, which overturneth all, where it has place. Paritie of Pastors has the
like paritie both in nature, and all sorts of society: for in nature one eye
has not power over another, nor one hand over another, nor one foot over
another, only the head has power over all. In the commonwealth and kingdom
there is a paritie without a prioritie of power of jurisdiction betwixt one
Baron and another, and betwixt one Nobleman and another, and in all the
Collegiall jurisdictions in the Land under the King himself. In the world
paritie betwixt one King and another, In the Roman Kirk equality betwixt one
Lord Bishop and another, and betwixt two Archbishops, Patriarks etc. and in the
Kirk of Christ betwixt Apostle and Apostle, etc. why then shall the divine
paritie of Pastors be accounted a confusion.




THE SIXTH PART.
The Pastor and Prelate compared by the good of the Common wealth, and of our
outward estate.
ALbeit that sometimes the power Ecclesiastical be without the secular, It is
best both for Kirk and State when civil and ecclesiastical authority join
together.
and the members of the Kirk make not any civil corporation, as in the
Apostles times, and long after. And some times the secular power be without
the ecclesiastical, and the members of kingdoms and corporations make not a
Kirk, as amongst the Heathen of old, and many nations and societies this day;
yet is it far best, both for Religion and Justice, both for truth and peace,
both for Kirk and Commonwealth, when both are joined in one: when the
Magistrate has both svvords, the use of the temporal svvord, and the benefit
of the spiritual svvord, and when the Kirk has both svvords, the use of the
spiritual sword, and the benefit of the temporal: When the two
administrations civil and ecclesiastical, like Moses and Aaron, help one
another mutually, and neither Aaron and Miriam murmur against Moses, nor
Jeroboam stretches out his hand against the man of God. Upon the one part,
Civil authority does good to religion.
civil authority mainteyneth and defends religion, where it is reformed,
and reformeth religion where it is corrupted. Kings shall be thy
foster-fathers, and Queens thy nurse mothers Esa. 49. 23.
, Kings serve the Lord in fear Psalm. 2. 11.
: And then serve they the Lord (says Augustine) when they serve him not only
faithfully as men, Quomodo ergo reges Domino serviunt in timore, nisi ea qua
co^tra jussa Domini fiunt, religiosa severitate prohibendo, a^que plectendo?
aliter enim servit quiahomo est, aliter quia etia^ rex est: quia homo est ei
servit fideliter vivendo, quia vero etia^ rex est, servit leges justa
praecipientes, and co^traria prohibentes, convenienti rigore sanciendo sicut
servivit Ezechias lucos, and templa idoloru^, and illa excelsa quae contra
praecepta Dei fuerant constructa, destruendo. Sicut servivit Josias, talia and
ipse faciendo. Sicut servivit rex Ninivitaru, universam civitatem ad placandu^
Dominis co^pellendo. Sicut servivit Darius, idolum frang^ndu^ in potestatem
Danieli dado. and inimicos ejus leonibus ingerendo. Sicut servivit Nebuchad
omnes in regno suo positos, a blasphemando, Dei lege terribili prohibendo. In
hoc ergo serviunt Domino reges, in quantu^sunt reges, cum (...) faciunt ad
serviendu^ (...) quae non p^ssunt facere (...) reges, August. epist. ser (...)
ad Bonifacium,
but as Kings, and do such things in serving him, as none can do but kings,
that is, while they rest not till Religion be established, and God served in
their dominions, according to his own Word. It has ever been the greatest
commendation of Princes, that they have begun their government with the
Reformation of Religion, as many worthy Princes have done both before, and
after the coming of Christ, for God prefers Kings unto all others, and
therefore Kings should haste to honor GOD above all others: Or that they have
exceeded all who went before them in this religious and Royal Chair. AZA
took away Idolatry: but JEHOSHAPHAT removed the high places also. EZEKIAH
went further, and brake the Brazen Serpent, albeit a monument of Gods mercy:
But this was the sin of his Reformation, that he razed not the Idol
Temples, which was kept to good JOSIAH, who therefore has this testimony
to the end of the World, that like unto him there was no King before him,
that turned to the LORD with all his heart, with all his soul, and with all
his might. Upon the other part, true Religion, although it propone for the
principal ends, the Glory of GOD, and the Safety of the KIRK, Religion does
good to (...) the whole commonweal.
yet it serves many vvayes for the Civil good, and vvorldly benefit of Kings
and Kingdoms. Because the true Religion, and no other, makes Kings and
Kingdoms to serve that GOD that gives both Heavenly and Earthly Kingdoms.
Hostis Herodes impie, Christum venire quid times? non cripit mortalia, qui
regna dot coelesti^. Sedulius Hymn.
Who loses the Bands of Kings, and girdeth their loins with a girdle: Who
is the only Judge, that puts down one, and sets up an other. And
therefore godliness has the promise, and true Religion has many blessings
attending. It is a blessed thing, when a King, or a Kingdom serves that GOD,
by whom kings reign, and who gives and takes away kingdoms at his
pleaure: Next because it qualifieth and disposes every man for his own
place. It makes rulers to know, that every Kingdom is under a greater
Kingdom, Omne sub regno gravioriregnum est Sonec. Traged.
and as they are advanced above all others, that they have so much the greater
account to make. It makes the subjects to obey for conscience sake, and
subdueth the people under their Prince: which made Theodosius to acknowledge,
that his empire consisted more by Christian religion, then by all other means.
It keeps true peace, both public and private, and when peace can be no
longer kept, it follows after it to find it again. It makes men just and
temperate in time of peace, not by restraint, which positive laws do, but
by mortification. With Christians to think that wickedness is sin, Whether of
the two commands more fully (says Tertullian) he who says, Thou shall not
kill, or he who says, thou shall not be angry: which of the two is more
perfect to forbid adultery, or to restrain the eyes from concupiscencs etc.
It makes every man to practice Christianity in the particular duties of his
calling. In the time of war it makes men courageous, and to fear none but him
that can kill the soul. In persecution it makes invincible patience* Without
confusion it gives at all times unto God, that which is Gods, and unto Caesar
that which is Caesar's, and without usurpation or injury to any, it gives
unto Noblemen, Statesmen, Barons, Burgesses, and all from the highest to the
lowest in the Kingdom, their own places, preferments and privileges,
according to the sovereign law of justice. All estates have need of this
divine influence, The best religion is best for the state
and of all these comfortable effects, and every religion promises them all,
but only Christian Religion is able to perform them, and the more Christian
it is, that is, the more near that it comes to the purity and simplicity of
Christ and his Apostles both in doctrine and discipline, and the more
christianly, that is, the more povverfully it be urged upon the consciences of
men, the more effectually it proves for these happy ones. Let us then upon
this ground proceed to our trial, whether the Pastor or Prelate be more
profitable for the Country and Common wealth.

THE PASTOR preserves the prosperous estate of the Kingdom and commonwealth,
The Pastor preserves the Commonwealth, which the prelate ruinateth.
by laboring to preserve piety, righteousness, and temperance in the Land,
and by oppusing with all his might against Idolatry and all sorts of impiety,
against unrighteousness and all sorts of injury, whether by craft or
violence, and against intemperancie, incontinencie unlawful marriages,
divorces, and whatsoever kind of impurities: Non tam numerorum simulacra
inania, aut Solis and syderum immutabilu^ ratio urbes and regna perdunt: quam
impietas primum, deinde injustitia, and virtutum expu^trix luxuria, Dom. de la
None. discurs. polit. 1.
for these three where they reign he knows to be more near and certain
causes, first of the many calamities and judgments of God, and then of the
alterations and periodes of states and Kingdoms, then either the intricate
numbers of Plato, or the unchanged course of the heavens, Causas eversionis
reipublicae quaerunt in ipsa reipublica. Arist. polit. 5. Bodian. de reipub.
libr. 4. Daneus politi. cap. 5. (...) Xenoph. paed. Cyr. 8. Fulix respublica
esse non potest, stantibus moenibus, ruentibus moribus. Chokier Haec nisi urbe
ab^rant, centuplex murus rebus servandis parum est. Plaut.
or what other cause is pretended by philosophers or politics, because these
where they reign, they threatten a ruin from the true fatalitie of Gods
providence and justice, and do shake the pillars of all humane society, as
Idolatry the pillars of the Kirk, unrighteousnes of the Commonwealth, and
intemperance of the family, and one of the three falling, the other two cannot
long endure.

The PRELATE upon the contrary, by taking in his own hands the power of the
general assembly, which was a great terror to sin, by depriving some worthy
pastors of their places, and others of their authority in censuring of sin,
by destroying the discipline of the Kirk, and by his own many unlawful
practices and permissions, has given way to Idolatry, blaspbemie, and the
profanation of the Sabbath, to all sorts of Scandalous and notorious Sins of
unrighteousness, uncleannes, and of the abuse of Gods creatures, for which the
wrath of God comes upon the world. But most of all by bringing a great part
of the kingdom under the guiltines of the violation of the covenant of God,
and of doing against their oath and Subscription has drawn on many
visitations from the hand of God, does daily provoke the Lord to further
wrath, stryketh at the pillars of all Societies, and posteth on the periods of
State and Kingdom.

2. The PASTOR accounts virtue, The pastor loves Christian simplicity, and
not Machivels policy: the prelate likes policy more then that simplicity.
truth, righteousness, Christian simplicity, and prudence to be the best
policy, not only for his own practice, but for all that are in authority,
and for all societies: and therefore pronounces anathema upon the chiefest
axioms of Machiavels art, Ante omnia optandum principi ut pius videatur, non
tamen ut sit. Oportet principem semper adversari^ in se alere, ut eo oppresso
potentior videatur. Religio animos hominum, primit, servitia subditos (...)
officio continet. Tuta est civitas quae dissidia and f^ctiones nutrit. Machiv.
de princ. and comment. in Livium.
whom he judges to be as pernicious a master of policy, as Antichrist is for
matters of Religion: and these two to be the principal supposts of Satan, the
direct enemy of Christian faith and obedience, and the crafty subverters of
Kirks and Commonwealths, unfitte for all, but most unfitte for us, whom grace
has favored with the light of the truth, and nature has fashioned to be
open and plain.

The PRELATES practices do proclaim what policy pleases him best.
Simulation, dissimulation, falsehoode and Flattery are known to be the ways
of his promotion. He stands in his grandeur and possesses his peace, by
promising good service in parliament to the King, against the Nobility, and
blowing the bellows of dissension betwixt them: he warmeth himself at the
fire he has raised betwixt the King and Kirk. He bears with men of every
religion, providing they be not Antiepiscopall. He urges Ceremonies, which he
himself otherwise cares nothing for, that they may be a band of obedience to
the slavish, and a buckler of Episcopacie against the opposites, he suffers
papistrie to prevail, and new heresies to arise, and gives connivence to the
Teachers of them, that there may be some other matter of disputation amongst
learned men, then about his myter. If all would follow his art and example,
Antichrist and Machiavel would be our chiefest Masters, and every Scottish man
of spirit would prove another Caesar Borgia, or Ludovieus Sfortia Alter
urbinatem, alter Mediolanensem Ducatum artibus Machiavellicis invasit, and ad
tempus tenuit, uterque Machiavellicae politiae exemplar perfectissimum misero
periit. Dane. polit. praef^t.
.

3. The PASTOR according to the nature of things distinguishes betwixt the
things of God and the things of Caesar, The Pastor distinguishes betwixt
things civil and ecclesiastical, and holds him at his own calling: the
prelate confounds all, and will rule all.
betwixt the soveraigntie of Christ, and the souveraigntie of man, betwixt the
dignity of the Statesman and honor of the Elder, that labors in the word and
doctrine, betwixt the palace of the Prince, and the Ministers manse, the
revenues of the Nobleman, and the Ministers stipend; and according to the
grounds of policy (...). Aristot, polit. 4.
holds, that many offices should be conferred upon one man, except rarely, by
the special favor of Princes, upon some that are eminent, as miracles for
engine, for wisdom, and dexterity, by reason of man's infirmity, the weight
of authority, the order of the policy, and the peace of the people: that as
every thing in nature does the own part, the ^^nne shyneth, and the wind
blows, the water moysteneth, so every man should be set to his own task,
Nemo sequens existimat se posse simul Aeneam and Hectorem, Catonem and
Scipionem in thea^ro ci^itatis agere. Cas. polit^ libr. 2.
that one man cannot both be Aeneas and Hector, Cato and Scipio, far less
can one and the same person be sufficient for the greatest affairs, both of
Kirk and policy. And therefore the Pastor keeps himself within the bounds
of his own place and calling, and neither medleth with civil causes, nor
takes upon him civil offices, nor seeks after civil honor.

The PRELATE makes no distinction, but confounds all, as compatible enough,
if he be the agent. And albeit for any good parts to be no miracle, but
neighborlike, Romani, Macedones, Lacedamonij legem tulerunt, ut nemo duobus
simul fungatur officis. Metiothus exercitu^ ducit. Metiothus vias ^urat,
Metiothus furina^ tractat, Metiothus cu^ctis aliis praest, Metiothus itaque
plorabit. Plutarch. The Pastor assisteth the civil Magistrate, the prelat
hinders him.
yet he finds himself sufficient for everything in Kirk and Commonwealth,
and tells all for fish that comes in his net, whether Civil offices,
Civil Honors, civil causes, or civil punishments: Like a Prince he has his
castle, his Lordship, his Regalitie, Vassalry, etc. He has power to confyne,
imprison etc. and takes it hardly, when he is not preferred to Offices of
estate, as to be Chancellor, President etc. which his predecessors had of old.
And thus against all ground of good policy he stands in pomp, as a mighty
Giant, with one Foot in the Kirk upon the necks of the Ministers, and with
another in the state, upon the heads of the Nobility and Gentry.

4. The PASTOR assisteth the Civil Magistrate in planting of virtue, and
rooting out of vice, partly by powerful preaching home to the Consciences of
sinners, H^c coertio ad Christ norman dirigitur, latenter primum and amice,
deinde paulo acerbius, tunc nisi paret sequitur interdictio sacrorum gravis and
efficax, interdictionem animadversio magistratus. Ita sit ut quae legibus
nusquavindicantur, illie sine vi and tumul tu coerceantur, igitur nulla
meretricia, nullae ebrietates, nullae saltationes, nulli mendici, nulli otiosi
in ea civitate reperiuntur. Bodin. de rep. Ge^nevens. meth. (...) cap. 6.
partly by censuring lesser offenses, which the Magistrate punishes not, as
lying, uncomelie jesting, rash and common swearing, rotten talking, brauling,
drunckennesse etc. Wherethrough the passages to murder, adultery, and other
great offenses are stopped, the people prevented in many mischiefs, and great
enormities, and the Magistrate many ways eased, and partly in censuring of
greater sins, and purging the Kingdom of foul offenses: for he joyneth the
Censures and the spiritual sword of the Kirk with the sword of the Magistrate,
so unpartially, that none are spared, with such expedition and diligence, that
sin is censured, and not forgotten, with such authority, that the most
ob^tin^^e have confessed, that the Kirk had power to bind and loose, with such
sharpness and severitie that Malefactors have been affraide, and so
universally, that, as there is no crime censurable by the Kirk, but the same is
punishable by temporal Jurisdiction, so he holds no sin punishable by
Civil Authority, but the same is allo censurable by Spiritual power, the one
punishing the offender in his body or goods, the other drawing him unto
repentance, and to remove the scandal.

The PRELATE is unprofitable to the Civil Magistrate in planting of virtue,
and rooting out of vice: for where his government has place, preaching has
more demonstration of Art for the praise of the speaker, then of the Spirit
for the censuring of sin, and conversion of the sinner: He passes small
offenses without any censure, and thereby opens the way to the greatest sins
of murder, adultery etc. and gives the Magistrate his hands full. He
vendicates to his court and jurisdiction some crimes, as proper for his
censure, which yet he passes lightly. The censures of the Kirk and sword of
excommunication in his hand serve for small use against greater sins. For
either they are not used at all, or so partially, that the greatest sinners
escape uncensured, or so superficially, that they are rather a matter of
mocking and boldness in sin, then of repentance to the sinner, or of
removing the offense.

5. The PASTOR is chargeable to no man beside his sober and necessary
maintenance allotted unto him for his necessary service, The pastor profitable
to the commonwealth, but not chargeable: the prelate chargeable but not
profitable.
which the people can no more want, then they may want religion it self, or
their own temporal and eternal happiness.

The PRELATE contrary to the rules of policy Non est studendum ut plurimi
sint in repub. magistratus, sed ut quam co^modissime and optime gerant remp, ij
qui erunt necessarij.
against the multiplying and mainteyning of idle officebearers, has for one
office, serving for no good use neither to King, nor Kirk, nor Country,
allowance of a large rent, is a great burden, and is many ways chargeable to
the Commonwealth, and to particular persons; by his great lands and Lordship,
by actions of improbation, reductions of feiffes, declarator of esheits,
entresses nonentresses etc. by selling of commissariats etc. by raising and
rigorously exacting the Quots of Testaments, by sommes of money given unto
them, their sons or their servants, for presentations, collations,
testimonials of ordination, or admission, sometimes by people who would be at a
good Minister, and ordinarily by the cannie friends of the intrant, who can
find no entry but by a golden port.

6. The PASTOR would have learning to grow, The pastor a ma^^^ner of Schools
and learning, the Prelate of neither.
and considering that Quales schola exhibet h^mines, tales habitura est
respublica. Dan. pol. Hinc major pars salutis vel corruptionis reip. pendet,
and ex scholarum fontibus, divini and humani ^ur^ praesidium vel expugnatio
oritur; ibi enim discuntur prima literarum monumenta, arts ingenuae mores,
jura divina and humana, quae omnia permaxi me interest incontaminata servari
etc. Greg. Tholos. lib. 13. cap. 3. Plebeiis argenti, nobilibus auri,
principibus gemmarum loco literas esse debere. Aeneas Syl. Platina, Indoctus
Episcopus asino comparandus. idem.
Schools and Colleges are both the seminary of the Commonwealth, and the
Lebanon of God for building the Temple, desires earnestly, that there might be
a School in every congregation, that the people might be more civil, and
might more easily learn the grounds of Religion, he would have the best
ingynes chosen and provided to the students places in universities, the
worthyest and best men to the places of Teachers, who might faithfully keep
the Arts and Sciences from corruption, and especially the truth of Religion,
as the holy fire that came down from heaven was kept by the Levites. He
desires the rewards of learning to be given to the worthyest, and after they
have received them, that they be faithful in their places, least by loytering
and laziness, they become both unprofitable and unlearned.

The PRELATE is not so desirous of learning in himself, as of ignorance in
others, that be only may be eminent both in Kirk and Commonwealth, and all
others may render him blind obedience and respect. He devoureth that himself
which should entertain particular schools: he fills the places of students
without trial of their ingines to pleasure his friends and suyters, contrary
to the will of the masters and the Acts of the foundations; he fills the
places of learning not with the learned, but the welthiest sort, who for any
vigilancie of his might both corrupt the humane sciences and bring strange fire
into the house of God. If a learned man happen to attain to one of their
highest places; which they call the rewards of learning, incontinent their
learning begins to decay, and their former gifts to wither away. So that
their great places and prelacies either find them or make them unlearned.

7. The PASTOR by the gouvernment of the Kirk prescribed in the word, The
Pastors government by assemblies meeter for a Monarchy the^ the episcopal
gouvernment.
Possunt judicare, non possunt praejudicare, habent vim charitatis, non habent
vim authoritatis. Hugo de S. victore de sacram. part. 2.
is strong to resist or repress Schisms, heresies, corruptions, and all the
spiritual power of sin and Satan, but has no strength to withstand the
temporal power and authority of Princes. The same gouvernment sorts with
monarchy no less, then with Aristocrasie through the wisdom of the Son of
God, who fitteth the same for all nations, and diverse forms of civil
policy. The Pastor acknowledges his Prince to be his only Bishop, and
overseer superintendent over the whole Kirk in his dominions, as being the
preserver of the liberties of the Kirk and keeper of both tables, To whom also
the general assembly of the Kirk, of some few commissioners chosen by them and
convened, when it is thought expedient by the Kings Commissioner, may give his
Majesty better and more speedy satisfaction in Kirk affairs, and with greater
love and contentment of the whole Kirk, and of all his Majesty's loving
subjects, then can be given by the thirteen Prelates. All which may be done
upon a small part of the prelates rent, for bearing the charges of his
Majesty's Commissioner, who also may be changed at his Majesty's pleasure.

The PRELATE and his gouvernment it weak to withstand the spiritual forces of
sin and Satan, but is strong to oppose the temporal power of princes, and
has been of all enemies the most dangerous to monarchy; for howsoever now,
while opposition is made, he flatter and fawn upon the Prince for his own
standing, yet if all Ministers and the whole Kingdom did acknowledge his
Superiority of bind the conscience, the Primate of the Kirk would be
powerful then any Subject in the kingdom, Quod si Christiani olim non
deposuerunt Neronem and Dioclesianum, and Iulianum apostatam ac Valentem
Arianum and similes, id fuit quia deerant vires temporales Christianis.
Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 7. pessime sed ut Hierarchicum decebat.
and might prove as terrible to Kings, whatsoever their Religion were, as Popes
have been to Emperors, and Prelates have been to Kings in former times. He
has no power for all his credit and Lordly authority to get any thing done to
his Majesty's satisfaction, and with contentment of the Kirk, for all the craft
and violence, that has been so long bended, never one whole famous
congregation within the Kingdom is either conquested, or like to be subdued to
his Conformity, but either the better or greater part, or both have resisted.
And yet for his Lordly maintenance he has impaired the rent of the crown, in
so far as it was aided by the collectorie, he pulls from the King the rents
of great benefices, the homage of Vassales with their commodities, Regalities,
and other privileges more proper for the Scepter then the Shepherds staff.

8. The PASTOR desires no other title, The Pastor takes no man's title, nor
dignity nor place: the Prelate takes all these from the Nobles and Peers of
the Land.
but to be called the minister of the town or parish, he stryveth with no man
for precedencie, he seekth no place in the Common wealth, neither in Counsel,
Session, nor Exchequor, but stirs up, and sounds the Trumpet in the ear
of the generous spirits of the Kingdom, to show themselves worthy of their
own places, and whether he be Minister in brough or land, he is a Common
servant to all, from the highest to the lowest, to parents and children, to
Masters and fervants in all pastoral duties: while he lives he harmeth none,
but helping all, procuring honor to the greater, and maintenance to the poorer
sort, and when his life is brought to a comfortable end, every soul blesses
him, and all mourn for him, as for a common parent,

The PRELATE according to the political axiom Virtute decrescente crescit
vanitas, and titulorum arrogantia proverbium de repub. Veneta cu^ usurparetur
titulus, Domine, sim pliciter, tunc ^acta est resp. cum Domine stabilita est:
Magnifice Domine tunc eversa est. Plebeios ex humili. genere natos, si ad
dignitates and honores pervenerint, immemires suae sortis, plerumque ambitione
insolenter se efficere aliosque deptimere conari co^stat. ijde^ multo
insolentiores and propemodum intollerabiliores magna cu^ actura reip. esse
solent. qua^ qui nobili celebri and vetere stirpe geniti sunt, ita ut veteru^
ille recte dixerit. Baiuli impera^t and mali sunt superiores bonis, ^etuo ne
nave^ fluctus opprimat. Camer. cent. 2. (...). Epig. grac. The Pastor makes
the minds, the bodies and estates of the people sit for war: the prel.
disableth all.
When virtue waineth, Vanity waxes, and many titles much vanity, disdayning
to he called any more the Minister of Christ, has taken upon him the Titles of
the Nobility, My Lord of Orknay, My Lord or Cathnes, My Lord of Murray, My
Lord of Argyl, etc. with the title he takes the place before them, and fills
their places in Council and Session, and when risen up from his dunghill, he
is set on high places, and is drunken with his new honors, he lefteth his
ears like Isis Ass, and as handmaides, when they become mistresses, he waxes
so insolent, that he can not be borne. In his own city he will have momage of
all, overtruleth the election of their Magistrates, harmeth both parents and
children through the Country, by giving warrant far sudden and secret
marriages without proclamation, which the very Counsel of Trent cannot but
allow, he takes the honor of the greater to himself, and spends that upon
his pride, which should serve for the poorer sort. And when after many wishes,
his life at last is brought to an end, the whole Diocie is filled with joy,
and his own family and friends are filled with centempt, and disgrace.

9. The PASTOR makes the Kingdom fit for war, against the time that
necessities give alarm: for, by laboring to make the people truly religious,
he makes them resolute for both parts of Christian fortitude, active and
passive, for doing valiantly, and suffering constantly. In the time of peace,
Fortiter ille facit qui mi^ser esse potest
he stirs them up against softness and intemperancie, to diligence and
labor, whereby their bodies are the more able and durable: He strengthens
also the nerves of war, by contenting himself with a mean estate, and by
his doctrine and example teaching people to spare in peace, for the time of
war.

The PRELATE makes the Kingdom unfitte for war: for by his government the
people loose true fortitude, with the love of Religion, that if they have any
kind of Courage for battle, it is not so much the invincible courage of
Christian Religion, as the carnal and bastard Fortitude of Paganism, which in
comparison of the former has ever been but pusillanimitie. By his oversight of
ryoting and idleness, their bodies become weak and effeminate, and by his own
large rents, and his example of prodigality, which to them is a law, he
enervates the estate, and cutts asunder the sinews of war.

The Prelates objection.
THE Prelate will object, Object. The estates of parliament cannot bear the
severitie of Pastors, nor want the prelates to be the third estate.
that if you that are Pastors understoode either the manners of the people, or
the grounds of policy, ye would see that neither can Noblemen, and others
given to their pleasure bear your simple and censorious form of preaching,
nor your austeere, and precise form of discipline, and life, nor yet can the
High Court of Parliament want the Prelates, which make up one of the three
estates: that ye are but shallowe, and considers not what depth this draws.

The Pastors answer.
WE know, Ans. Showing that the faithful pastor will at some time be found
comfortable to all estates, and that the parliament may be perfect without the
Prelates.
that of all rancks, there be some who love their pleasures more then God, and
these, according to the first flattering part of the objection, will say with
the old verse: Non mihi sit Servus, Medicus, Propheta, Sacerdos.
He is no servant fit for me,
Who Physician, Prophet, Priest will be.
For such may neither abide to be cured of their spiritual evils by the
Counsel of God, nor to hear of the evils that will come, if they refuse to be
cured, nor to exhorted to repentance, when the calamities are turned upon them,
that they may be turned away: but all are not such, and from which, while they
are in their pleasures, we make appellation to themselves, while they are in
the pains or terrors of death, and to be presented before the judge, whether
the^ the pastor or prelate pleases the^ better? The other part of the
objection, the wisdom of the King and of the honorable Estates of Parliament
can answer, who know how a Parliament may be perfect without either Pastor or
Prelate. If, by the name of a parliament, we understand a general and
national meeting of the whole Kingdom and Kirk by their Commissioners, with
their supreme Magistrate, and King, every one to give his advise and judgment
respective, according to the nature of the society civil, or ecclesiastical,
which he presents: commissioners of the Kirk, to give resolution from the word
of God, if need be, concerning matters civil, but not to meddle with civil
causes civilly, and to propone petitions to the King and estates for the good
of the Kirk, to require their civil sanction, and to see that nothing be
concluded in things civil, that may be a hinderance to the worship of God. The
Nobility with Commisioners of Barons, and Burrowes for civil matters, and to
add the civil sanction in the matters of Gods worship, Kirkmen chosen and
instructed by the Kirk, may sit in Parliament after this sense, and are bound
to co^tribute their best help for the honor of the King and good both of Kirk
and Country. But if by a Parliament we understand the highest Court and
supreme judicature civil, meddling only with civil matters, or with matters
of religion civilly, as to add the civil sanction, and to ratify by civil
authority, what has been put in Cannon by the Kirk before, the^ the assembly
of the Kirk or their Commissioners may, or should attend the High Court of
parliament, as the Convocation house does in our neighbor Kingdom, but can
have no place nor vote in parliament, neither in making laws about things
civil, nor in the civil authorizing in matters of Religion: for Ministers
should not judge of the right of inheritance, nor pronounce sentence about
forfeyture, nor make laws about weights, and measures etc. but should exhort
the people to obey the civil powers. Without bishops or ministers laws have
been made by Parliament, and may be made now no less then without Abbots,
Priors etc. who had once vote in Parliament no less then they. Their benefices
are Baronies, in respect whereof they claim vote in parliament; but they are
not Barons or proprietars, and heretable possessors thereof to transmit them to
their heirs, or to alienate them, but only are usufructuaries to have the use
of the fruits of them for their time. Neither does it suite with the ministers
calling, to have such Baronies, nor are they to be reckoned for ecclesiastical
persons, but for civil, when they have place in parliament in respect of these
Baronies, and therefore cannot vote there in name of the Kirk.

TO conclude then, Conclusion.
whether we look to the word of God, or to the more pure and primitive times
of the Kirk, or to the nature and use of things indifferent, or to the
Reformation and proceeding of our own Kirk, or the good of the Kirk, and of
the peoples souls, or to the happiness of the Commonwealth, and the good of
every one, from the King that sits upon the Throne, to him that heweth the
wood, and draws the water, we may see, whether the Pastor, or the Prelate,
whether Reformation or Conformity is to be followed by the true Christian and
Countreyman. And that there is as great difference betwixt the Bishops of our
times, and the faithful Pastors of the Reformed Kirks, as is from the light
that comes from the stars of heaven, and the thick darkness that arises
from the bottomless pit. And it may be made manifest, that since Bishops
were cast in the moulde of the man of sin, wheresoever they have ruled,
whether amongst the Papisticall and the Reformed (some few excepted, who when
they ventured upon these places, went out of their own element) they have
been the greatest plagues both to Kirks, and Kingdoms, that ever had
authority in the Christian world. Neither needs any man to object, A
general objection answered.
that the Comparison that we have made, runs all the way betwixt the good
Pastor, and the evil Prelate, and therefore may be answered by the like
unequal comparison, betwixt the good Prelate and the evil Pastor, as if the
most part of the episcopal evils above mentioned were only the personal
faults of the men, and not the corruptions necessarily acco^panying the estate
and order of Prelates, and that if good men fill these places, there is no
danger but the Kirk may be as well, or better governed by prelates, then by
Pastors: for the comparison is not so much betwixt the Pastor and Prelate, as
betwixt the office of a Pastor and the office of a Prelate or Bishop. Aliud est
injusta potestate just velle uti, and aliud est justa potestate injuste velle
uti. August. de bono conjug. cap. 14.
It is one thing (as Augustine says) to use an unlawful power lawfully, and
an other thing to use a lawful power unrighteously and unjustly. Pastors may
have their own personal infirmities, and never so many as under the Prelates
gouvernment: and Prelates may have their own good parts, and never so many as
by the occasion of the Pastors opposition: but neither the one nor the other
are to be ascribed to their offices, nor is the lawfulness and unlawfulness
of their offices to be judged by their persons. It is true, when an unlawful
power and a lawless man meet together the case of those that are under his
authority must be the worse, as we may see in the Papacy, which being always
evil for the Kirk, yet have proved worse, when monsters in stead of men have
sit in that seat. But it is evident, that the evils which Prelates and their
Lordly government bring upon the Kirk, do flow from their sole jurisdiction,
exorbitant power, meddling in civil government, and the curse of God upon that
unlawful estate, all which are common to the whole order, and not peculiar to
some persons. And the corruptions which are common to all in these places,
although greater in some then in others, of necessity must flow from the
unlawfulness of the state and office it self. It is so far, that good men
put in the places of Prelacie, can make the government good, that the places of
prelacie have ever corrupted the men, and made them worse. So it was with
Aeneas Sylvius, who before his Popedom seemed sound and honest, mainteyning
many points against the tyranny of the seat, but being made Pope Pius the II,
retreated all, and proved as impious and Antichristian as the rest: So many
that have been of good account in the Ministry, and given hope of great good
by them to the Kirk, when they entered to be Bishops, yet wholly degenerated
from their first works, and learned betime ululare cum lupis, to houle with the
wolves: the experience whereof made Queen Elizabeth to say, When she made a
Bishop, that she marred a good Minister.

FINIS.
GEntle Reader be entreated favourablie to pass by some slips in printing: as
when one letter is put for another, as n for r Scacarium page 28. lin. a fine
6. or one letter is wanting as page 20. in margin Aerianum: or a letter
abounds, as page 63. in margin Bodin. repi. or when a siliable is wanting page
26. lin. ult. became. page 41. in marg. Scoticana. or altered page 64. in marg.
savitia. or a word is misplaced, page 25. med. and the daughter had devouted
the mother. and some other the like.


