The eight books of Caius Julius Caesar containing his martial exploytes in
the Realm of Gallia and the Countries bordering upon the same translated out
of latin into English by Arthur Goldinge G.

Imprinted at London by Willyam Seres Anno. 1565

TO THE RIGHT honorable Sir William Cecill knight, principal Secretorye to
the Queens majesty, and master of her highness Courts of wards and
liueries. Arthur Golding wishes health and increase of honor.
ALBEIT (RIGHT HOnorable) that the difficultnes of this praesent work,
considering mine own want of experience not only in matters of war, but also
in diverse other things whereof this history entreats, did dissuade and in
manner discourage me from enterprising the tra^slatio^ thereof yet
notwithstanding forasmuch as I perceived it to be a work, for the pleasure
and profitablenes thereof much desired of many, and that such of my simple
travels, as I have heretofore bestowed in like matters, have been well accepted
at your hand, as well boldened by your favorable encouragement: as also
remembering that earnest endeavor ouercometh al things: I Went in hand
therewith. Not entering at the first beginning of the History, but about the
mids of the fifth book where master Brend (whose Copy from your honor came
to my hands) prevented by death did leave. The which latter part at such time
as I had finished, and was come to perusing it over and correcting it with my
friends, there were of them that counseled me to begin the work new again
from the first beginning, and to put it out wholly in mine own name whereunto
although I could not willingly be persuaded at the first: yet afterward when I
had somewhat more depelye weyed the reasons that they alleged: considering with
my self how I had sufficient leisure, and that I had overcome a piece of no
less difficultye already, than the former part was: least I might have seemed
to seek excuse of slouthfulnes, or to refuse pains of wilfulnes, r^ther than
^o defend my self by unableness: I agreed to their advice, And thereupon
laying aside master Brendes copy, to use it rather as a counselor when the
thing was done, than as a praesident in doing* I have begone the whole work
new again, and according to the first Authors meaning (as nere as I could)
translated it throughout. wherein how mi doings may be liked of others I know
not. This I most humbly desire your honor, that you will take my pains and
travel in that behalf in good worth. For I have not done it, because I thought
my self of more skill and experience than master Brend (which I confess
miyeres give me not) neither because I would in defacing his glory, (which were
a point of lewdness) go about (as the latin proverb says) to prick out the
crows eyes. But I have done it, partly moved by the persuasions aforesaid, and
partly because I was defirous to have the body of the whole Storye compacted
vnyforme and of one style throughout. For so I thought it should be both more
allowable among such as are of knowledge, and also more acceptable to the
reader, when neither part of the work might be an eye sore to the other.
Furthermore forasmuch as it is known unto many, that the said Copy was
committed unto me, I have forborne to build upon that foundation, least I
might have ministered occasion to such as love cauilling, to say I had either
hatched other birds eggs, or else praesumed to finyshe the pycture of Venus
that Appelles left imperfect. The which my doings I submit under your
favorable protection: not doubting but that your Honor of your accustomed
goodness and gentelnesse to wards me, will patiently bear with mine errors
where any happen, and so regard my paynfull travel, as that my boldness may
no whit offend you. At Powles Belchamp the.xxi. of October. Anno. 1565.

Your Honors alwais most humbly to command Arthur Golding.

TO THE READER.
WHEREAS CAESAR in his descryption of Gallia made in the beginning of this
work, may seem dysagreable with other Authors, I thought it expedient for the
better understanding of this History, as well to set out a more ample
description of Gallia, as also to declare what sundry Nations have since Cesars
time possessed the same. Nevertheless gentell reader, thou shall not look for a
particular declaration of the shifting removing and expulsing of every several
kind of people, nor of the alteration of the state of every several country
in that Region: for that would rise to an infinite volume, more tedious than
profitable, and it is more than I were able to perform. But I purpose to set
before thine eyes (as briefly and plainly as my sle^der knowledge will give me
leave) the bounds of that noble country, with thalteration of such states as
have borne chief pre-eminence and souereintye in the same. First and formest
therefore it is to be considered, that in the 693. year after the building of
Rome (as affirms Eutropius) which was the.3905 year since the creation of the
world, and the eight and fifteth year before the birth of our savior Christ,
Julius Caesar the author of this work, (who afterward brought the state of Rome
to a monarchy) being created Consul, was sent by the Senate as Lieuetenant
General with an army against the Galls inhabiting on the hither side of the
Alps: whom with in ten years space he utterly subdued and brought in peaceable
subjection to ye Roman empier. the whole process whereof, he sets forth so
plainly, sincerely, and purely in these Commentaries, without either
affectatio^ of vainglorye to himself, or suppressinge the deserved
commendation of others: yt it is to be doubted whether he atcheued his affairs
with more felicity and valiantness, or reported them with more indifferency
and faithfulness. And forasmuch as his intent in this work, was only to
entreat of the matters of that country which he had in commission to conquer,
he suppresseth in his description of Gallia, not only that part which the
Romans call Cisalpina because it lies on the same side of the Alps that Italy
and Rome does, but also ye Province of Narbon, as Countries which by coming in
subjection to the Roman Empier, were now rather to be counted part of Italy
tha^ of Gallia. For the ancient Gallia contained not only* whatsoever is
included within the mountain Pirenes, the Ocean, the Rhine and the Alps: but
also extended over the Alps to the river Rubicon. And therefore by a general
division it was wont to be divided into Gallia Cisalpina and Gallia
Tra^salpina. Cisalpina was also called Togata because thi^habiters thereof after
the manner of ye Romans went in gowns. It is now called Lombardye of the
Lombardes a people of Germany dwelling sometime about the mids of the river
Albis on the westside thereof, where as be now the territories of the
Byshoprickes of Magdeburg and Halberstade, who in the time of the Emperor
Iustine the second, in the year of our Lord 569. being called into Italye by
Narses themperors Lieuetenant there, took possessions of that country and
reigned therein by the space of two hundred and four years unto the year of
our lord 773. at which time Charles king of France surnamed the great, took
Desiderius last king of Lombardes prisoner and annexed his seniory to the
dominion of France. Gallia Tra^salpina whereof this Historye entreats, has
(according to Ptolomies description) on the west ye Mountains Pirenes now
called Ronnceuall which deuyde it from Spayn, and the west Ocean. On the East
it has partly the Alps which divide it from Italy, and the River Rhyne which
parts it from Germany. On the north it has the Britysh Ocean and on the
South it has a part of the midland Sea called Ligusticu^. This is now called
France, and it is divided into four parts, Province, Aquitaine, Celticke,
and Belgycke. All that lies from the river Rhone and the mountains Cemenii
(now called the mountains of Auuerne) unto the midland Sea between the river
Uarus which runs out of the Alps by the city Nicea, Of some called the
Leua^t sea
and the River Illyberis in the mountains Pirenes, bears ye name of the
Roman Province, and was also called Braccata of a kind of short cote which
the people of that country did commonly go in. It conteyneth Sauoy, Delphiuoys,
Languedocke, and Province. Aquitai^e lies between the mountains Pirenes and
the river Loyre, which risinge out of the Mountains of Auuerne falls into
the west Ocean: and is bounded on thoneside with the said mountains of
Auverne, which divide it from the Province, and on thotherside with the west
Ocean. It conteyneth Poyters, Xanton, Lymosin, Berrey, Auuerne, and Angolesme,
with the duchies of Guien and Gascon sometime the inheritance of the kings of
England. Celtick, (which was also called Lugdunensis of Lugdunum the chief City
of that country now called Lions standing upon Soan not far from the place
where it falls into Rhone,) runs through the mids of France from the
west Ocean and the Britysh sea, unto the upper part of the Rhine: and is
bounded on thoneside with the river of Loyre, the Mou^tain of Auverne and the
river Rhone which separate it from Aquitain and Province, and on thotherside
with the rivers of Seen and Marne which growyng into one chanel a littell above
Paris do fall into the Brityshe Ocean and divide it from Belgic. It conteyneth
littel Britain, Normandy, Burgu^dy, Swicerland with others. Belgicke has on
the South the foresaid rivers of Seen and Marne, on the East the neither part
of the Rhyne, and on the west and north sides the British or english Ocean. It
conteyneth Picardy, Arthoys, Flanders, Braband, Holland, Gelderla^d, Lorreine.
etc. with all the low country bordering upon the Rhine, and also the I Will of
France whose head city of Paris stands upon the River Seen, whereof all the
whole country of Gallia took the name. This country has alwais been renowned,
not only for the fertility of ye soil, the te^peratenesse of the air, and the
abundance of all things for men's necessities and pleasure: but also (and that
chieflye for the valiantness in arms and practice in Cheualry of thin
habiters, whereby they both enlarged the bounds of their territorye, and also
darkened the glory and drowned the name of other Realms that were neybours
unto them: In so much that the Greeks the chief Registerers of worthy acts,
called all thinhabiters from the river of Danow northward by the name of Celtes
or Galls. Of this country were those Galls that under the first Brenne (who
is reported to have been a Briton) burned Rome ye.365. year after the buildyng
thereof in the time of the elder De^nis king of Sicil. Of this country were
those Galls that under the second Brenne a hundred and nine years after the
foresaid burning of Rome slew Ptolomie king of Macedonie, and in thassault of
Delphos were oppressed with thunder lightning and tempests. Out of this
country issewed those Galls which being called to the aid of the king of
Bithinia (as Trogus reports) after they had vanquished his enemies, parted
his kingdom with him calling the country Gallogrece or Galatia, and
themselves Gallogrekes or Galatians. Of who^ the prowess was so redowted, that
the kings of the East made not any wars wherein they hired not the Galls
to serve them: and if they were put from their kingdoms, they resorted not to
any other than the Galls for succor. And as that marciall offspring held the
kings of Asia occupied there: so their mother country in Europe not only
troubled their neighbors, but also vexed and disquietted even the victorious
Romans, until such time as Julius Caesar through his great prowess and good
fortune, brought them in subjection to the Roman Empyer. From the which time
it received both the laws and language of the Romans and bare their yoke
obediently, until the.viii. year of themperor Honorius which was the.406. year
after thincarnation of Christ, at the which time the Frenchmen who as then
dwelt upon the Rhine on the further side, being sent for against one Lucius a
Roman president for rauishing a Senators wife in the City of Triers, took the
city, and within a while after subdued al Belgicke under the^. This was the
beginning of ye French dominion in Gallia, which as it afterward by little and
little came in subjection to the^ took ye name of France of the^. For although
that mention be made of them in the lives of diverse Emperors before, and that
from the reign of Galien, themperours from time to time had much a do with
them: yet notwithstanding they aspyred not to any souereinty before the said
reign of Honorius. Of the Original of the^ are diverse opinions. Some think
they inhabited the country by the river Sala toward the rivers Mean and Rhyne,
and that in hope of conquest and desire of spoil, at such time as thempier
began to decline and wax weak, they joined unto them the Almanes and troubled
Themperours of the west, by whom they were always repressed, to their great
slaughter and damage. Strabo places their countrrye between the Norikes and
Uindelicians. Othersome affirm the^ to have been a multitude of al sorts of
people of Germanye united in leage together, defending their liberty against
the Empier, whereof they took their name, as frank and free people that would
not be bond or subject to any man. But whatsoever they were, or wheresoever
their dwelling was before they came over ye Rhine, sure it is that since they
passed into Gallia, they have with great good fortune increased, and
pollitiquelye maintained their state unto this day. For after they had laid the
foundation of their kingdom at Triers under Pharamund, first ouermatchyng the
Almanes their late fellows and confederates, and anon after subduing the
Burgonions who somewhat before them entering into Gallia had seized into their
possession the countries of the Heduans and Sequans with a part of the ancient
Roman Province, which keeps their name and progeny unto this day, they made
them selves Lords of all Gallia. In process of time also their kings became
lords of al Germany and Pannonie, and were invested with ye sword of the
Empier, which they held certain discents from Charles the great, who received
the title and diadem imperial at Rome upon Christmas day in the year of our
Lord God. 800 But worldly things never continue at one stay. Partly by civil
dissentio^, and partlye by outward war, and partly by composicio^ and gift
of kings, not only the name and title of Thempier, but also all the Provinces
beyond the Rhine, yea and many on this side ye Rhine to, were sequestered from
the crown of France. For in the time of Char^es the simple about the year of
our Lord.886. the Normannes (who are supposed to have been people either of
Denmark or of Norwey) inuadinge France under their Duke Rollo, (who
afterward being christened was named Robert) partly by force and partly by
composition seized into their possession that part of the Realm which unto
this day bears of them the name of Normandy: In the which country the
posteritye of the said Rollo reigned as Dukes a long descent, until Duke
Willyam surnamed the Ballard conqueryng this Realm in the year of Christ's
incarnation.1967. brought his right with him into England, with the Princes
whereof it continued until such time as the Frenchmen recovered it again in
ye reign of king Henry the sixth. The Uandales also invaded a part of
Belgicke, to the which at their departing thence into Spain they left the
name of Flaunders. Many other nations likewise have settled themselves in
France, who being ouermatched by the Frenchmen are grown into the same name
with them. But no one Nation since their first coming thither, has so often
and so sore afflicted them as our English Nation has done: whose kings
diverse times before, but specially from the time of king Edward the third, have
contended with them, not so much for any one part or Province of the
country, as for the substance of the crown and possession of the whole Realm,
descended to our kings by right of inheritance. And they have both gained and
hild it many years, until fortune changing her copye, has transferred the
possession again to the Frenchmen, the right remaynyng still to the Crown of
England. In these our days we see how not only Flaunders which has of long
time continewed so, but also all the countries bordering upon the Rhine and
many cities nere unto the Alps are alienated from the Crown of France.
Whereof some are under the jurisdiction of the Spanysh king, some are
imperial, and other some are free. Thus as fortune of war disposes, the
bounds of this kingedome have sometime been enlarged and sometime straightened:
the which who so desires to know more particulerly, I remit him to the reading
of such Chronacles and Antiquities as entreat thereof. I trust this shall
suffice for an introduction to this historye: my pains in translatyng whereof,
I desire thee to accept in good part, and to use them to thy behoof. And as
for the old names of ye cities, Towns, Countries, Hills and Ryuers, how they
be called at this day, together with a dyscription of certain Roman Engynes
hereafter mentioned in this book, I refer thee partlye to the Notes in the
Margent, and partlye to the table in the end of this work, where thou shall
find them or at the least the most of them in order of the Alphabete.

Farewell.
Errors escaped in the printing.
Fol. 14. b 5. for supersticions read suspicions

Fol. 16. a. 21: for emca^ped read encamped.

Fol. 16. b. 15. for sarued read served.

Fol 18. b. 12. for being read were.

Fol. 24. b. 1. for man's read men's.

Fol. 25. a. 18. for holding their heads, read holding down their. etc

Fol. 43. a. 20. for making read leaving.

Fol. 44. b. 26. for whereof read thereof.

Fol. 51. a. 21. read, he led his army. etc.

Fol. 64. a. 19. for accomt read account.

Fol. 64. b. 18. for Carunes read Carnutes, and in all places after for Caruntes
read Carnutes.

Fol. 65. a 14. for to read and.

Fol. 69. a. 19. for Uuel^es read U^elles, and so in all places after.

Fol. 69. b. 9. for to broyle read the broyle.

Fol. 70. b. 12. for conueying read coming.

Fol. 71. a. 15. for Naunets read Nannets.

Fol. 73. a. 17. put out, the, before lynnen.

Fol. 82. b. 10. for Biggerones read Bigerrones.

Fol. 84. a. 11. for Teucthers read Tencthers and so in all places after.

Fol. 97. a. 16. for the to read to thee.

Fol. 105. a. 11. put out, that,.

Fol, 120. a. 27. for Aucalits read Ancalits.

Fol. 121. a. 16. read he sent. etc.

Fol. 133. b. 23. for drive read driven.

Fol. 135. b. 13. for redlly read redily.

Fol. 144. b. the last line, for psent read spent.

Fol. 147. a. 1. for the, read them.

Fol. 153. b. 21. for parter read parts.

Fol. 160. a. 8. read, one of the greatest.

Fol. 164. a. 9. for Minuitius read Minutius

Fol. 177. b. 4. for Lemoni^es read L^monikes

Fol. 189. b. 14. and. 25. for Gebenua read Gebenna.

Fol. 189. b. 26. read, inasmuch as.

Fol. 195. a. 1. for manes read means.

Fol. 196. b. 19. read, and both of them. etc.

Fol. 200. b. 13. for lur^d read allured.

Fol. 207. b. 1. read, of our soldiers. etc.

Fol. 217. b. in the. 6. 7. and 8. lines whereas the sentence is thus, all such
forasmuch as there were neither woods nor Mountains to hyde them, they were
as s^ain, read thus: they were all s^aine by cure horsemen, saving such as h^d
themselves in the woods and mountains.

Fol. 219. a. 10. put out, the people of,.

Fol. 221. b. 24. for Aleria ^ead Alexia.

Fol. 226. b. 6 for Uella^nia^s read Uellaunia^s

Fol. 234. a. 13. for copasie read compass.

Fol. 253. a. 16. put out, by,.

Fol. 256. a. 23. for perisisted read persisted.

Fol. 260. a. 4. put out, he,.

Fol. 263. a. 21. read, it was astonished. etc.

Fol. 268. a. 8. read, did cut of. etc.

FINIS.
THE FIRST BOOK of Caius Julius Caesar's Commentaries of the wars in Gallia.
ALL The whole country of France
GALLIA IS divided into three parts: Of the which, one is inhabited by ye
Belgies. An other by the Aquitanes, and the.iii. by them who in their tongue are
called Celtes, and in our Galls. All these dyffer each from other in
Language, Customs, and Laws. The river of Geronde deuideth the Celtes from
the Aquitanes: and the rivers of Seane and Marne do divide them from the
Belgies. Of all these, the Belgies be most puissante, as they which are
furthest distant from the delycatenes and civility of the Province, and unto
whom is little or no resort of merchants, to bring in things that might
effeminate their minds. Besides that, they border upon the Germans,
inhabitinge beyond the River of Rhyne, with whom they be at continual war.
The same thing also is a cause why the Now called Swiszers.
Heluetians having daily conflict with the Germans either in their own
defense, or by the way of invasion, do in prowess excel the rest of the
Galls. That part which is said to be possessed of the Celtes a cou^tri of
France lying between Gascognie and the countries of Germany.
Celtes, takes his beginning at the River of Rhone, and is enclosed with ye
water of Gerownd, with the Ocean Sea, and with the bowndes of the Belgies:
bordering also upon the Rhyne in the cou^tryes of the Sequanes and Heluetians,
and it bends toward the North. The Belgia the low countries of Germany,
from Treuorse and Men's to Flanders and those parts. Aquitane the countries of
Gascognie and Guien.
Belgies begin at the uttermost bowndes of Gallia, and extend to the
neathermost part of the Rhyne, and they lie North and East. Aquitane
stretches from the river Gerownde to the mountains Pyrenes and the Spanishe
sea, between the north and the west. There was among the Heluetians one
Orgetorixa man of the greattest nobility and wealth in all the country. He
in the time that Two chief honors of the state yearly changed.
Marcus Messala and Marcus Piso were Consuls of Rome, blinded with desire of
souerayntie, conspired with the nobility, and persuaded the City whereof he
was, to remove out of their country with all the power they could make:
Alleging that it was an easy matter for the^ to conquer all Gallia, in
as much as they excelled al ye rest in prowess. It was the easyer for him to
bring them hereunto, because the Swiszers.
Heluetians dwell in such a country as on all sides is by nature fortyfied.
For on the one side they are enclosed with the river of the Rhyne a very broad
and deep water, which deuideth the^ from the Germans: on an other side with
the high mountain Mount saint Claude or mount Iou. Bourgomo^s
Iura, which is between them and the Mount saint Claude or mount Iou.
Bourgomo^s
Sequanes, and on the third side with the lake Leman and the River Rhone,
which deuydeth them from our prouynce. By means hereof it came to pass, that
they cowlde not raunge very far abroad, nor with their ease make rodes
against their neighbors: which was a great grief unto them, being a
people desirous of war. For in respect of their multitude, and of the
renown of their puissaunce and force in arms, they thought them seluis
enclosed in a straight, as whose Country passed not. CCxl. miles in length,
and an hundred and four score miles in breadth. Persuaded with these reasons,
and moved with the Authority of Orgetorix, they determined to make prouysion
of all things meet for their voyage: As namely in byinge of all the carts
and caryage beasts they could come by, in employing al their growndes to
tyllage, to the intent to furnyshe them selves abundantely with corn in their
iourneye: and in confirmyng peace and aliaunce with the cities adioynyng. For
the performance of these things they thought two years to be sufficyent:
decreeinge by law to set forward the third year. To bring these matters
to effect was Orgetorix chosen: And he took upon him to go in ambassade to
the Cities. He in that journey persuaded Casticus a A Bourgonion.
Sequane, the son of Catamantalis, (whose father had reigned many years among
the Sequanes, and was accounted a friend to the Senate and people of Rome) to
take upon him the soueraintie in his own country, the which his father had
held before him. Also be persuaded Dumnorix the Heduan the brother of
Diuitiacus (who at that time bare chief authority in his country, and was in
greatest favor with the commonaltie,) to attempt the like, and thereupon gave
him his dawghter in marriage. He proved that it was an easy matter for them to
bring their enterprises to pass, for as much as he should obtain the
government of his own City, and it was not to be dowted but that ye Swiszers
were able to do more than all France beside, wherefore he should be able with
his power and with his army to warrant them kyngedomes. Persuaded with this
Oration, they gave their faith one to an other, and confirmed it with an oath:
Hoping assuredly that saying three of the strongest and puissanteste nations
of all France had bent their force together, it could none otherwise come to
pass, but that they must needs be Lords of all the whole country. When this
matter was bewrayed to the rest of the Heluetians, according to their custom
they committed Orgetorix to prison to answer to his complaynt. If he were
cast, the law condemned him to be burned with fire. At the day appointed
for the pleadinge of his case, Orgetorix called to the Sessions all his kynred
and alyance, to the number of ten thousand men, together with all his
reteynours and dettours, of whom he had a great company. By them he so wrought,
that he came not to answer his enditement. When the City being stirred
herewithall, sowghte to maynteyne thexecution of their laws by the sword, and
that the magistrates were raysinge a power of men out of the country for the
same purpose, Orgetorix dyed: not without suspicion (as the Heluetians think)
of killing him self. After his death, the Heluetians nevertheless proceeded
with their fore determined purpose of departinge out of their country. And
when they thought them selves in a sufficient readiness for the matter, they
set on fire all their Cities, to the number of twelve, and all their
villages, which were about iiii. hundred, together with the rest of their
private buyldinges. Likewise they burned all their corn, sauinge that which
they meant to carry with them, to the intent that al hope of returning home being
taken away, they should more willingly adventure them selves to abide all
perilles. Commandment was given that every man should carry with him so much
meal as would serve him for three months. Moreover they persuaded the People
about Basil.
Rawracians, People about Basil.
Tulingians and People about Basil.
Latobrigians their next neighbors, to follow the same trade in burning
their towns and villages, and to accompany them in this their voyage,
receiuynge also into league and confederacy the People of Toule in Loraine.
People of Losanne. People of Burbone, Bauier or Boeme in Almaine.
Boyans, who not long ago had inhabyted on the further side of the Rhyne, and
were now lately come over into the coast of Noricum, and had there beseeged
the City Norinberg.
Noreia. There were but only two ways for them to pass at out of their
country, the one by the Burgonio^s.
Sequanes narrow and uneasy between the mountain Iura and the river of
Rhone, scarce so broad as that a cart might well be driven through it, so
ouerhanged with the high mountain that a very few had been able to stop
them of their passage: The Other through our province, far more easy and
readier, because that the river of Rhone which runs between the borders of
the Heluetians and the Now the people of Sauoye and Delphinoyes.
Allobrogians (who were lately come under the Roman Empire) has diverse
foordes and shallowe places to pass at. The uttermost town of thAllobrogians
and next to the borders of Heluetia is Geneua, out of the which town is a
bridge into Swiszerlande. They thought verily they should either entreat the
Allobrogians because they seemed not as yet to love the people of Rome from the
heart, or else they would compel them by force to give them passage through
their country. When all things were in a full readiness for their journey, they
appoyneted a day when their whole number should meet all together at the
River of Rhone, the which day was about the.xxviii. of March, Lucius Piso, and
Aulus Gabinius, being then Consuls of Rome: When tydinges hereof was brought
unto Caesar, that they went about to pass through our Province, he made haste
to depart from the City, and with all speed possible went into the The
country of France at the foot of the Alps.
further gallia to Geneua, where he gave order for the musteryng and leuying of
as many souldyers as could be made through all the Province, (for there was
but one legio^ at that time in the further Gallia) and commanded the bridge at
Geneua to be hewe^ down. Alegion.
As Soon as the Heluetians were advertised of his coming, they sent of the
greateste princes of their country in ambassade to him, among whom the chief
were Numeius and Ueredoctius, who had in commission to say unto him that the
Heluetians were minded to pass through the province without any harm doing,
because they had none other way to go: desyringe him to give them leave to
pass with his favor. Caesar remembryng how Lucius Cassius the Consul had
heretofore by the Heluetians been slain, and his army vanquished and
compelled dishonorably to crepe under a yoke, thought it not convenient to
grant their request For it could not sink in his head that men bearinge a
rooted enmity in their hearts against ye people of Rome, would after liberty
ones given them to pass through the province, absteyne from injury and evil
doing: Notwithstanding to thintente to have respite to assemble his soldiers
that he had appointed to be levied, he answered the Ambasssadours that he would
take a further time to brethe upon the matter: and that if they were minded to
common any further with him, they should return to him agein at the vi. day
of April next following. In the mean while, with that legion that he had
about him and with such souldyers as were assembled out of Province, he drew
a diche and made a wall of xvi. foot hie, ninetene miles long from the lake
Leman, which falls into ye river of Rhone, unto the mou^ntaine Iura, which
deuideth the borders of the Borgonio^s from the Swiszers. As Soon as this work
was fully fynished, he raised towers upon the wall and put men of war in
them, to the intent the better to resist the Heluetia^s, if they attempted to
pass against his will. When the day appointed to the Ambassadoures was come,
and thambassadours returned, He made them answer that without breaking the
custom and exaumple of the people of Rome, he could not give any man leave to
pass thorough the Province: which thing if they attempted by force, he told
them he would withstand them. The Heluetians disapointed of this their hope,
assaied to get over the River, some in barges joined together, and some in
boats, whereof they had made great store before hand, and othersome at the
foordes where the water was shallowest: and this did they often times by
day, but oftener by night. Howbeit being repulsed by the strength of our
fortification, and the continual resort of our soldiers which held them
ever at the swords poi^t, they left of their enterprise. There was yet one
way left by the Bourgonio^s
Sequanes, the which nathelesse they could not pass against the Sequanes
wills by reason of the streightes. Whom when they could not of the^ selves
entreat, they sent messengers to Dumnorix the Hedui people of Burgu^die about
Autum
Heduane that by his intercession they might prevail in their suite. Du^norix
was very well beloved, and for his liberality was able to do much with the
Sequanes, and he bare good will to the Heluetians, because he had married the
daughter of Orgetorix out of that country. Moreover being led with desire of
soueraintie, he sought innovation of things, endeuoringe by his benefytes to
make many Cities beholden unto him. And therefore he took the matter upon
him, and obtained leave of the Sequanes for the Heluetians to pass through
their country, causynge hostages to be given on both sides, the Sequanes that
they should not trouble the Heluetians in their passage, and the Heluetians
that they should go quietly without offringe injury or evil doing. Anon
word was brought unto Caesar that the Heluetia^s were minded to pass through
the countries of the They are now both namid Burgonious.
Sequanes and They are now both namid Burgonious.
Heduanes into the borders of Santow which is not far from Toulouse a City
in Province. If that were suffered, he knew well it would be greatly to the
noyaunce of the Province, to have such warrelike people ancient ennemies of
the Romans, so near neighbors unto it in Cha^pion and corn countries. For
these considerations, he left his lieuetenaunt Titus Labienus behind him to
the defense of the fortification already made, and he him self with all
speed returned into Italy, where he levied two Legions a new and drew out of
the garrysons about Aquileia three other that wyntered there, and with those
five legyons took his neereste way over the Alps toward the further Gallia.
There the People of Tarantaise in Sauoie.
Centrones, the People of Tarantaise in Sauoie.
Caroceles, and the People of Tarantaise in Sauoie.
Caturiges having taken the higher places before, went about to stop him from
passinge with his army. But in many of these battelles they went by the
worst, and so Caesar in seven days marched from Ocelum which is the furthest
town of the hithermost prouynce, unto the borders of the * Uocontians which
are in the further Prouynce. From thens he conducted his army among the A
people borderinge upon Tarantaise Delphine and Sauoye.
Allobrogians, and from the Allobrogians to the Secusianes, which are the
first people out of Province beyond the river Rhone. By that time had the
Heluetians with all their host passed the streyghtes and the country of the
People of Sauoye and Daulphine. Bourgonio^s
Sequanes, and being entered the borders of ye People of Sauoye and Daulphine.
Bourgonio^s
Heduanes wasted their fields. The Heduanes feeling the^ selves to weak to
make defense against them, sent messengers to Caesar to desire succor:
alledgyngs that their deserts toward the people of Rome had always ben
such, that it stood not with their honor to suffer their Lands to be
destroyed, their children led into captivity, and their towns to be sacked,
in manner within the sight of their army. The same time that the Heduanes made
this complainte, the People about Neuers.
Ambarries being near friends and alies of the Heduanes, advertised Caesar that
their fi^ides were already wasted, and that they had much a do to keep their
ennemies out of their walled Towns. Furthermore the Allobrogians which had
lands and possessions on the other side of Rhone, People of Sauoye and Dausph^ne.
came flyinge unto Caesar and told him that nothing was left them save the bare
ground. Caesar moved with these matters, thought it not good to forslowe the
time until the Heluetians having spoiled his friends, were come among the
Sa^tones. People of Gascognie and nere Tolouse
There is a river now called Saone, which through the bounds of the Heduanes
and Sequanes enters into Rhone, so mildely and gently, that it is not possible
to be discerned by sight which way the stream runs. The Heluetians with
boats and shallops joined together had passed the same, whereof when Caesar was
advertised by his espialles, at such time as three parts of their army were
already ferryed over the River, and the fourth part was yet behind, About
the third watch of the night, he set out of his camp with three Legio^s, and
came upon that part that had not yet passed the River: and setting upon
them unawares and out of order, slew a great number of them, the rest took
them to flyghte and hyd them selves in the next woods. The Canton where this
was done was called Now called Zurich,
Tigurine. For all the whole country of Heluetia is divided into iiii. Cantons
or shyres. This same one Canton remouynge out of their Country in the time of
our fathers, slew Lucius Cassius the Consul, and sent his army under a yoke.
So, whether it were by chance or by the providence of the gods immortal, the
self same part of Heluetia which had brought so dishonorable a reproach
upon the Romans, was the first that suffered punishment for it. Wherein
Caesar revenged not only the displesure done to the whole state of his
Country, but also the displeasure done to him self in private, for as much as
ye Tigurines in the same battle that Cassius was slain, slew also his
Lieuetenaunt Lucius Piso, the grau^dfather of Lucius Piso, Cesars father in
law. After this disco^fiture, to the intent he might overtake the rest of the
Heluetian host, he caused a bridge to be made upon Arar, and so passed over
his army. The Heluetians abashed at his sodeyne approach, when they perceived
he had done as much in one day as they were scarce able to do in twenty, that is
to say, passed the river, sent ambassadoures unto him, whereof the chief was
Diuico, whoo in the battle agienste Cassius was captain of the Heluetians.
The effect of his treaty was, that if ye people of Rome would be contented to
make peace with the Heluetians, they would depart into what quarter so ever
Caesar would appointe them, and there remain at his pleasure. But if he were
purposed to pursewe the^ with battle, they willed him to call to remembrance as
well the damage that the Romans had received by their nation in time past, as
also the ancient prowess of the Heluetians. And where as he had assailed one
Canto^ vnbewares at such time as the rest being passed the River could not
reskewe their fellows, it was no matter why he should greatly glory in his
own prowess, or despise the Heluetians, who had been in such sort trained up
by their fathers and ancestors before time, as to contend rather by manhod
than by deceyte, or to covet conquest by suttletie. Wherefore it was good for
him to be well advised that through his ouersyghte the place of their present
being took not his name and were made famous by the destruction of the people
of Rome and thvtter slaughter of his army. To these things Caesar made answer
in this wise. That he had so much the less need to dowt what he should do,
in that he perfectely remembered the things which the Heluetian ambassadors
had made mention of: the which grieved him so much the more, as the people of
Rome had less deserved them. For if their conscience had accused the^ of any
wrong done, it had been no hard matter to have shonned thinconuenience. But
herin they were deceived, that neither they knew them selves to have committed
any thing why they should be afraid, nor thought it meet to be afraid
without cause. But admit he could be contented to forget the former reproach
done unto the Romans, was it reason he should also wink at their
wrongefull dealing again of new, in attemptynge to make them selves passage
through the Province by the sword whether he would or no? in that they had
molested the Heduanes, the Ambarrians, and the Allobrogians? their glorying so
presumptuously in their former victory, and their vauntinge of escapinge so
long vnponnyshed for their wrongefull dealings, had brought them to the
point they were at. For the gods immortal are wont sometime to grant greater
prosperytie and longer respite from ponnyshement unto such as they are minded
to chastyse for their offenses, to thente^t that when the change came the
grief thereof might touch them more nearer the heart. Now albeit things were
as they were, yet notwithstanding if they would give him pledges, that he might
perceive they were willing to perform the things they promised, and moreover
make satisfaction as well of the injuries and displeasures done to the Heduanes
and their adherentes, as also to the Allobrogians, he was contented to make
peace with them. Diuico replyinge said that the Heluetians had been taught
of their ancestors, to take and not to give pledges: whereof the people of Rome
could bear witness them selves. When he had given this answer, he
departed. The next day they removed their Camp from the place where they were,
and so did Caesar likewise, who sent out all his horsemen to the number of.iiii.
thousand (which he had assembled out of all the Province and among the
Heduanes and their adherentes) to discover toward what part his ennemies were
drawn. They pursuinge over greedely the rerewarde of their enemies, encountered
with the Heluetian horsemen in a place of disadvantage, and lost certain of
their company. The Heluetians being puffed up with the success of this
skirmish, because that with five hundred horsemen they had given repulse to
so many of our horsemen, began to stay more boldly then they were wont, and
sundry times out of their rereward, to provoke our men to the encounter.
Howbeit Caesar restrained his Soldiers, and thought it inoughe at that present
to prohibit his enemies from wasting and spoylinge of the Country. So they
continued on their journey by the space of.xv days together, in such sort that
there was not paste a five or six miles distaunce between the rerewarde of our
enemies, and our foreward. In the mean while Caesar called daily upon the
Heduans, for the grain that they had promised him by their common consent. For
by reason of the cold (for as much as Gallia as is said before is situate
under the north clime) not only the corn was not ripe in the fields, but
also there was not sufficient forage to be gotten. As for that corn which he
had brought with him by the River Arar, could not handsomely serve his turn,
because the Heluetia^s had withdrawn them selves another way, from whom he
was not minded to depart. The Heduans made delays from day to day, saying it
was a gatheringe, it was a bringinge, it would be there out of hand. When
Caesar perceived him self to be dalyed withal to long, and that the day was at
hand that it should be measured and divided unto his soldiers, calling
unto him their chief noblemen and Princes, of whom he had a great company in
his Camp, and among other, Diuitiacus and Liscus who at that time held the
principal office, which they call Uergobret, which is an office that lasts
but from year to year, and for the time has absolute power of life and death,
he sharply blamed them that whereas there was not any corn to be bought, nor
to be gotten in the fields, in such a time of necessity, his enemies being
so near at hand, he was not succored nor relieved by them, specially
considering that for the most part at their entretance he had taken this war in
hand. Wherefore so much the iuster cause he had to complain, in that he was
disappointed by them. Then at the length Liscus provoked thereto by Cesars
words, disclosed that which hitherto he had concealed: How there were
certain persons of great authority among the common people, that could do
more than the magistrates. Who with their lewd and sedicious talk did put the
people in such fear, that they delivered no^ the corn, as they ought to have
done by promis. Alledgynge that if they could not now atteine the souerein^tie
of Gallia them selves, it were more reason to prefer thereunto the Galls
rather than the Romans. For out of all doubt, might the Romans ones get the
maystrye of the Heluetians, they would bring the Heduanes under coram as well
as all the rest of the Galls. By these persons our counselles and all that was
done in our camp were bewrayed to the ennemy. Whose doings it lay not in
their hand to bridell: for albeit that utter necessitye compelled him to
declare thus much unto Caesar, yet was he not ignorante what peril he procured
him self in doing thereof, which was the only cause why he had concealed
the matter as long as he could. Caesar perceived by these words of Liscus,
that Dumnorix the brother of Diuitiacus was noted. But because he would not
have those matters debated in ye presence of many, he soon dismissed the
counsel, keeping Liscus still with him. When he had him alone, he required those
things of him that he had towched in the counsel: and he vttred them more
at large and more boldly. Caesar made pryuie inquiry for the same things at
other men's hands, and found them to be true in deed: as that Dumnorix him
self was a man of singular audacitie, and in great favor with the
co^monaltie for his liberality, desirous of alteration, and that he had taken
to ferm for many years to come at a small price as well the customs for all
things that were conveyed in and out of the Realm, as all other taxes and
impositions of the Heduanes, because that when he had ones beaten the price no
man durst set in his foot against him. By means whereof he had not only his
own pryuate substance, but also gotten abundantely wherewith to show him
self lyberall abroad, in so much that he found a great number of horsemenne
always at his own charges and kept them about him, and that he was able to
deal lyberally not only with his own country, but also among the Cities
that were his neighbors. By means of which authority he had bestowed his
mother in marriage to a man of the greatest lineage and power in all Berrey,
taken a wife from among the Heluetians, and had married his suster by the
mother side and diverse other of his kynneswomen into other Cities, the which
affinity was an occasion that he favored and wysshed well to the Heluetians,
and bare ill will to the Romans, whom naturally he hated in his heart, because
that by their coming his power was abated, and his brother Diuitiacus restored
to as much favor and estimation as ever he had before. For might the
Romans have il success, he was in good hope through help of the Heluetians
to be made king: where as if the Romans obtained the superiority, he was
out of all hope, not only of being king, but also of that estimation ye he
then had.

Moreover Caesar learned by inquiry, that in the battle of horsemen which he
lost a few days before, Dumnorix and his horsemen began first to fly: (for
he was capteyne of the men of Arms that the Heduans had sent to thayde of
Caesar) and that by their running away the rest of the men of arms were
discomfited. The which things being known, when as beside these
superstitions, he had other matters of certeintie to charge him withal, as
that he had led the Heluetians through the country of Burgundy, that he
had caused hostages to be given between the^, and that he had done all the said
things not only without commandment of him and of the City, but also
without their knowledge, for as much as he was accused to him by the chief
magistrate of the Heduanes, he thought it sufficient cause either to
ponnissh him himself, or to command the city to se him ponnished. But there
was one thing that withstode all these matters: namely that Caesar knew his
brother Diuitia^us to bear earnest good will to the people of Rome, and that he
heartily loved him, and that he was a man of syngular faithefulnesse, justice,
and modesty. Wherefore he was verrye loathe to offend his mind with the
ponnishemente of his brother. And therefore he called Diuitiacus unto him, and
remouinge his accustomed interpreters, commoned with him by Caius Ualerius
Troacillus chief governor of the Roman Province in Gallia, his familiar
friend whom he chiefly trusted unto in all things. First he put him in
rememberaunce what had been spoken before his face in the counsel of the
Galls concerning his broother Dumnorix, and showed him what every man
severally had reported of him, to him in secret. Desiryng and persuading him,
that without his displesure, he might upon sufficient trial of the matter,
either proceed against him him self, or else cause his City to proceed
against him according to his deserts. Diuitiacus embracinge Caesar with many
tears, began to entreat him that he would not deal over straightly with his
brother. He said he knew those things to be true, and no man was more sorry for
it than he, because that where as he was of great estimation him self both
in his own country and in all Gallia beside, and his brother could do little
or nothing by reason of his youth, his broother had been advanced by his
means only: the which his wealth and authority although he had abused, not
only to the decay of his estimation, but also well near to his own
destruction, yet not with standinge he was sore troubled inwardely, both for
the love he bare to his brother, and for thopinion of the common people. For if
Caesar should chance to deal any thing roughely with him, (he standing so
highely in his favor as he did,) every man would think it were done by his
consent and procurement, whereby it would come to pass that he should loose the
hearts of all the Galls. As he was making this request unto Caesar with many
words weeping, Caesar took him by the right hand, and comforting him desired
him to make no more intreatance, assuringe him that he set so much by him,
that at his request he was content to pardon both the injury done to the
common weal, and also his own grief, to order all as he thought good.
Herevppon he called Dumnorix aside: and taking his broother to him, declared
what matters he had to charge him with, laying before him what informatio^s
were put up against him, and what complaynt y^ city had made of him: he
warned him to avoid all causes of suspicion hereafter, upon trust whereof he
told him he would (for his brother Diuitiacus sake) remit all that was past.
This done he set good watch about Dumnorix, to thinte^t to know what he did
and with whom he had any conference. The same day being certified by his
skowtes that his ennemies were emca^ped under the side of a hyl about.viii.
miles from his camp, he sent to view the nature of the hill, and what coming
there was to it on every side round about. Word was brought him agein that
it was very easy. About the end of the third watch he commanded Titus
Labienus his liuetenant to take the same men for his guides that had viewed
the ground before and knew the way, and with two Legions in all haste possible
to take the top of the hill, declarynge unto him what his purpose was to do.
In the end of the fourth watch, he him self by the same way that his ennemies
had gone, went toward them, and sent all his men of arms before him.
Publius Considius who was counted most expert in feats of chivalry (as he
that had sarued first in the army of Lucius Sylla and afterward under Marcus
Crassus) was sent before with the skowtes. At the dawning of the day, when T.
Labienus had gotten the top of the hill, and that he was not paste a mile and
a half from the camp of his enemies, who (as he learned afterward by his
prisoners) knew neither of his coming, nor of Labienus being there, Considius
came ronning to him upon the spur, and made report unto him, that the hill
which he would that Labienus should have taken, was possessed by his ennemies:
the which he perceived by the arms and antesignes of the Galls. Hereupon
Caesar withdrue his army into the next hill, and set his men in order of
battle. Labienus (for as much as Caesar had expresselye commanded him that he
should not join battle with his enemies before such time as he saw his army
nere unto their Camp, to thinte^t that assault might have been made upon them on
all sides at ones,) when he had taken the hill, stood still waiting for us,
and absteined from feighting. At length when the day was well forth, Caesar
understood by his espialles, that they were his own men that had taken the
mountain, and that the Heluetians had dislodged from thens, and that Considius
of a childish fear had reported for a certainty the thing he had not seen. All
that day he followed after his enemies with like distaunce as he had done
before, and encamped within three miles of their Camp. The next day because that
within two days after it behooved him to distribute corn to his soldiers,
and forasmuch as he was not above eightene miles from Beawbrai which is the
greatest and welthiest City in all the country of the Heduanes, he thought
good to make provision for corn, and thereupon turning from the Switzers, he
took his way toward Beawvray. This his doing was by certain fugitives of the
hand of Lucius Aemilius Captain of a troop of Gallian horsemen, bewrayed to
the enemy. The Switzers, (whether it were that they thought the Romans
departed from them for fear of them, (which seemed to them so much the more
lykely to be true, because ye day before having taken the higher grounds, they
had not given them battle,) or that they were in hope to cut them of from
their provision of corn,) altered their purpose, and turning back again,
began to pursewe us and to assail^ our reregard, when Caesar perceived that, he
withdrew his host into the next hill, and sent out his men of arms to
withstand the brunt of his enemies. In the mean while he ordered his men upon
the mids of the hill in three battles of four legions of old expert soldiers:
so that above him on the top of the hill he placed the two legions, which he
had lately levied in the hither Gallia, together with all the strangers that
were come to his aid, and furnished all the hill with men of war. In this time
also he caused all the baggage to be brought together into one place, and the
same to be fortified by them that stood in the higher battle. The Heluetra^s
following after with all their chariots, conveyed all their stuff into one
place, and they them selves on a thick throng, having put our horsemen aside,
cast themselves in a square battle, and preased under our vauntgarde. Caesar
sending first his own, and then all other men's horses out of sight, (to
thentent that putting them al in like peril he might cut of al hope of flight)
encouraged his men, and joined battle. His soldiers by throwinge darts from
the higher ground, did easily break the battle of their enemies. The which
being ones disordered, they charged upon them with their naked swords. It was
a great trouble to the Galls when they should feight, that many of their
targets being stricken through with one blow of a dart, and fastened together
in such sort that after the yro^ was bowed, they could neither pull the Darte
out, nor yet handsomlye seight by reason their left hands were troubled. So
that in conclusion many having a long time wearied their arms, chose rather to
cast their targets out of their hands, and to seight with their bodies naked.
At length waxing faint with wou^des, they began to lose ground, and because
there was a hill nere at hand about a mile of from the place, they began to draw
them selves thither. When they had gotten this hill, and that our men pursued
still after them, the Boyans and Tulingians (to the number of a fiftene
thousand men) who closed up the battle of our enemies, and were a rescow to
their reregarde, assailing us on the open side as we passed by them, enclosed
us about. That seeing the Heluetia^s which had recovered the hill, preased
forward again, and began the battle a fresh. The Romans tourninge their
Standards, were feign to encounter them both ways at ones. The forewarde and
middelwarde to resist them that even now were as good as vanquyshed and put to
flight, and the rerewarde to withstand them that came new upon them. So the
battle was fore fought a long while ere fortune inclined to either party. At
the last not able to withstand our force any longer, the one part of them
retired to the Mountain as they had begone, and the other part drew them selves
to their Chariots and their stuff. For during all the time of this battle,
which was fought from seven of the clock in the morning until the evening,
there was not any of us could say he saw his enemy turn his face from him. Yea
and about their stuff the battle was prolonged, until it was far on the
night, because they had set against us their Chariots in manner of a Rampire,
and threw darts from aloft at us as we came toward them. And many of them from
under the Chariots and from among the wheles, did thrust at our men with
Pikes and Iauelins and wounded them. After long feight, we wan their cariages
and their tents also, in the which the daughter of Orgetorix and one of his
sons were taken prisoners. From this battle escaped about an hundred and
thirty thousand men: which iourneying all that night long continually without
ceasing, came the fowrth day after into the borders of the Now called Langres.
Lingones. Our men being feign to rest themselves there three days for
dressing of their wounds, and buriyng of such as were slain, were not in case
to pursue them. Howbeit Caesar sent letters and messangers to the Lingones, that
they should not succor them with victuals or any other thing: if they did, he
sent them word he would repute them for his ennemies no less than the
Heluetians. After three days, himself followed them with all his power. The
Heluetians constreyned with penury of al things, sent Ambassadors unto him
to offer submission. Who meting him by the way, when they had cast them selves
at his feet, and with humble words and sorrowful tears besought him of
peace, and that he had commanded them to abide his coming in the same place
where they then were, they obeyed. As soon as Caesar was come thither, he
demanded hostages, their armor, and the slaves that had fled unto the^. While
these things were a serching out and bringing together, (for doing whereof
they had one nights respite,) about six thousand men of that Canton which is
called Strawsbrough.
Uerbigenus, (whether it were for fear least after surrendringe of their
armor they should be ponnished, or that they were induced with hope of
escaping scotfree, because they supposed that in so great a number as were
there to be yielded, their flight would either be hidden or not perceived at
all) stale out of the Heluetian Camp the same first night, and took their way
toward the Rhine and the borders of Germanye. Which thing when Caesar had
knowledge of, he commanded them by whose country they had passed, that if they
would he should hold them excused, they should seek them out and bring them back
again. When they were brought back ageine, he took them for his ennemies,
and as for all the rest, when they had delivered hostages, armor, and
runnagates, he took them to mercy. He commanded the Heluetians, Tulingians,
and Latobrigians to return into their own country from whens they came. And
for as much as having wasted all their Corn and fruits, at home in their
Country was nothing remaining wherwt to sustain hungar, he gave in
commandment to the Allobrogians to furnish them with corn, and willed
the other to repair their cities and towns that they had burned. This thing he
did chieflye for this intent, because he would not have ye place from whence ye
Heluetians came, to lie uninhabited, least the Germans that dwell beyond the
Rhine, should for the goodness of the soil, remove out of their own Country
into Switzerland, and plant them selves by the Province and the Allobrogians.
At the request of ye Heduanes, he granted that the Boyans (because they were
known to be men of singular prowess) should be placed in their country, and
the Heduanes not only gave them ground to occupy, but also afterward admitted
them into like estate of fredome and liberty as they themselves had. In the
camp of ye Heluetians were found tables written with Greek letters, and brought
unto Caesar, wherein was expresslye contained a register of all the names and
what was the number of al those that came out of their country, of such as
were able to bear armor by them selves, of the children by them selves, of the
old men and women severally by them selves. Of al y^ which the gross sum
was, of Heluetians reckned by the poll two hundred threescore and three
thousand: of the Tulingians six and thyrtye thousand: of the Latobrigians
fourtene thousand: of the Rauracyans three and twenty thousand: of Boyans two
and thirtye thousand. Among these there were about four score and twelve
thousand that were able to bear armor. The whole sum of them al one with
another, was three hundred threescore and eight thousand, or therabouts. The
number of them that returned home again (upon muster taken as Caesar
commanded) was found to be an hundred and ten thousand.

When the war of the Heluetians was brought to an end, the Princes almost of
all the Cities of Gallia came ambassadors unto Caesar, to rejoice with him in
his good fortune. Declaryng that albeit the people of Rome had for wrongs done
unto them of old time by the Heluetians, justly now punished them by battle,
yet the thing had fallen out no less to the behofe of the Realm of Gallia,
than of the Romans, inasmuch as the Heluetia^s being in the flower of their
prosperitye, had abandoned their natyue country, of purpose to make war in
all Gallia, to the intent that having gotten ye souereinty, they might take their
choice of all the whole country, to plant and set themselves in that place that
should seem most fruitful and commodious for them to dwell in, and to make all the rest of the Cities tributary unto them. They made request that it might be
lawful for the^ to sommon a Parliament of Gallia at a certain day, and that it
would please Caesar to ratify it with his consent: for they said they had
certain matters, which they would sew unto him for by a common assent. When
their request was granted, they appointed a day for their meting, and bound
them selves with an oath, that they should not any of them disclose the
matter, saving unto such as ought to be so^moned thereunto. After that this
counsel was broken up, the same Princes of the Cities that had been with him
before, returned unto Caesar, and desired they might have leave to common with
him privily and in secret, of matters concerning the welfare and well doing
both of him and of them al. Having obtained their peticion, they cast them
selves at Cesars feet, and weepyng told him that they sought and endeavored no
less to have the things kept secret which they should speak, then to
obtain the things they sewed for, because that if it should happen to be
disclosed, they saw they should run in danger of their lives for it.
Diuitiacus the Heduan was speaker for them. He declared how all Gallia was
divided into two factions, of one of the which, the chief ringleaders were
the Heduanes, and the men of Auuern of the other: Who had contended many years
with tooth and nail for the souereintye, and that at length the men of Auuerne
and the Sequanes had waged the Germans on their side, of whom at the first
there came but fiftene thousand over the Rhyne. But afterward when those savage
and barbarous people had found a savor in ye fertile soil, good fare, and
plentiful wealth of the Galls, they had tolled over mo of their countrymen,
in so much as at that time, there were of them to the number of an hundred and
twentye thousand: To whom the Heduanes and their confederates had diverse
times given battle: wherein going by the wors, they had received great damage,
for they had lost all their nobility, all their counsel, and all their men of
arms. Through the calamities of which overthrows, they which heretofore both
by their own prowess, and by their aliance and frendshyppe with the people of
Rome, had been able to do most in all Gallia, were now brought to such an after
deele, that they were constreyned to give the noblest men of their country in
hostage to the Sequanes, and to bynd their City by oath, that they should
neither require their hostages again, nor desire aid of the Romans, nor yet
refuse to be their subjects and vassales for ever. He himself only of all
the City of the Heduanes, was the man that could not by any means be
brought, either to be sworn, or to give his children for pledges. And therefore
he had been feign to fly his Country, and to resort to Rome to desire help of
the Senate, because he only was not restrained either by oath, or gyuing of
hostages. How be it the Sequanes yt were co^querours, were in worse case the^
the Heduanes that were overcome, in that Arionistus king of the Germans had
settled him self in their country, and had seyzed to his own behoof the
third part of the lands of Sequanie (which is the best of all Gallia) and had
now latelye commanded them to surre^der one ^ther third part, to the intent to
provide a place of habitacio^ and continuance for the The people of Co^stance.
Harudes, of whom four and twenty thousand men were come to him a few months
before. And within few years it would come to pass, that all the Galls should
be dispossessed of their country, and all the Germans come over the Rhyne. For as
the soil of Gallia was not to be compared with the soil of Germanye, so the
usual fare of Germanye was not to be compared with the fare of Gallia. Now
Ariouistus as soon as he had vanquished the power of the Galls, (which was
done at the battle of Amagetobria,) began to show himself a proud and cruel
conqueror. For he demanded all noble man's sons for hostages: against
whom he extended to monstrous villainy and crueltye, if every thing were not
done at his beck and pleasure. He was a man altogether barbarous, wrathful,
and harebraind, so that it was not possible to endure or suffer his government
any lengar. Unless there were any help in Caesar and the people of Rome, all the Galls should be driven to do as the Heluetians had done, that is to say,
fleet out of their own country to seek some other dwelling place and some
other habitacion further of from the Germans, and to take in good worth what
fortune so ever should betyde them. If this geere should come to Ariouistus
hearing, he was well assured he would take most grievous punishment of all the
hostages that were in his hands. Thonelye hope that remained, was that Caesar
might either by his own aucthority and thaucthoritye of his army, or by the
fame of his late victory, or by the name of the people of Rome, set a stay
that no mo of the Germans should be brought over the Rhine, and defend all
Gallia from thoppression and tirany of Ariouistus.

After that Diuitiacus had made this oracion, all that were present began with
abundance of tears to desire succor of Caesar. Caesar marked that of all other,
only the Sequanes did none of those things that the residue did: but looked
sadlye upon the ground with their heads hanging down. Wonderyng what should
be the cause thereof, he demanded it of them. The Sequanes gave him not a word
to answer, but continued still in the same sadness holdyng their peaces. When
he had oftentimes enquired of them and could by no means cause them to
speak, the foresaid Diuitiacus the Heduan answered, that so much the more
miserable and grievous was ye state of the Sequanes tha^ of all the rest, in
that they alonly durst not even in secret co^playn of their misfortune, nor
seek for succor, but trembled at the cruelty of Ariouistus being absent,
as much as if he were there present: because (and if the worst should happen)
yet might all others save them selves by flight, but the Sequanes who had
received Ariouistus into their country, and put al their walled towns in his
hand, must abide all the smart and vexation to thuttermost. When Caesar
understood this, he comforted the hearts of the Galls with fair words,
promysing them that he would see a redress in the matter. And he was in good
hope, that (what by his benefits and what by his aucthoritye) he should bring
Ariouistus to make an end of his extorcion. This oration ended he dysmyssed the
counsel. Besides the premysses, many other things persuaded him to think
upon the matter, and to take upon him to redress it. First and formest
because he saw the Heduanes (whom the Senate of Rome had oftentimes called
their brothers and kynsfolk,) to be held in subjection and bondage of the
Germans, and understood that their hostages were with Ariouistus among the
Sequanes: yt which thing (consyderyng how greatly the Romayne Empire was then
advanced) he thought would redou^d to the great dishonor of himself and of the
whole state. Moreover he saw that if the Germans should take it up of
custom to pass the Rhyne, and to come in great numbers into Gallia, it would
turn to the prejudice of ye people of Rome: for he thought that such savage and
barbarous me^ as they were, would not so bridle them selves, but that when
they had subdued al Gallia, they would after the example of the Cimbrians an^
Duchmen, pass into the Province* and so take their way into Italy specially
saying there was nothing between the Secusianes and our Province, but the river
of Rhone. The which things he thought meet to be prevented with all speed.
Now was Ariouistus grown to such a haultines and such a pride, that he seemed
intolerable. Wherefore he demed it best to send Ambassadors unto him, to
demand of him that he should chose some place mydway betwixt them where they
might meet to have communication. For he sent him word that he had to talk
with him concerning the commonwealth, and other weighty matters touching them
both. Ariouistus answered to this ambassade, that if he himself had had any
thing to do with Caesar, he would have come unto him: and that if Caesar had any
thing to do with him, he should come unto him. Besides that, neither durst he
come into those parts of Gallia that Caesar ^yd possess, without an army,
ney^her could he assemble an army into ^ne place without great provision and
charges. Moreover he marueyled what either Caesar or the people of Rome had to
do to meddle in his part of Gallia which he had conquered by the sword. Upon
the report of this answer unto Caesar, he sent Ambassadors to him again with
these instructions. For as much as being benefited so greatly by him and the
people of Rome, as that in the time of his Consulshyp the senate had proclaimed
him king and their friend, he requited him and the people of Rome with this
gentylnes, that being requested he disdayned to come to communication,
presuming that it was not for him to talk or be made privy to matters of the
common weal: these were ye things that he demanded of him. First that he
should not convey any number of men hereafter over the Rhine into Gallia,
secondly that he should render such hostages as he had of the Heduanes: and
that he should permit the Sequanes to render such as they had, with his favor.
And thirdly that he should not offer any wrong to the Heduanes, nor make any war
against them or their adherentes. If he so did, both be and the people of Rome
would continue his friends and well wyllers for ever. Otherwise, (for as much as
ye Senate in the time that Marcus Messala and Marcus Piso were consuls, had
decreed that whosoever had Gallia committed to him for his charge, should
defend the Heduanes and other fryendes of the people of Rome, so far forth as
he might do it to the furtherance of the common weal,) he would not wink at
the injuries of ye Heduanes.

Ariouistus replied hereunto, that it was the law of arms, that such as were
Conquerours should in such sort as they thought good reign over them that were
subdued, which might be perceived by the people of Rome them selves, who were
accustomed to reign over such as they had conquered, not at thappointme^t of
others, but as they listed themselves. Now like as he took not upon him to
prescrybe unto the Romans how they should demean themselves in their right,
even so no more ought the people of Rome to trouble him in his right. The
Heduanes forasmuch as they had tried the fortune of battle, and were over come
by him in a pitched field, were become tributaries unto him. Wherefore he
thought that Caesar did him great wrong, to dimynish his revenues by his
coming. As for the Hostages of the Heduanes, he said plainly he would not
deliver them: Neither would he on the other side make any war upon them or
their complyces to do them harm, so they kept touch with him in those things
that they had couenaunted, and paid their tribute from year to year. If they
did otherwise, the Romans (their brothers as they termed the^) should be to
far of to rescow them. And whereas Caesar sent him word he would not wynke at
the injuries of the Heduanes, he said ageine that never man yet encountered with
him but to his own undoing, and therefore come when he would he should be
welcome. He would make him understand what force and puissance was in the
vyctoryous Germans, men altogether nouzeled in feats of arms, who in.xiiii.
years together had never put their heads under house roof.

The same time that this countermessage was brought unto Caesar, came also
Ambassadors to him from the Heduanes and Treuires: The Heduanes complayninge
that the Harudes which were latelye brought over into Gallia, did forray their
country, and that they could not purchase peace at Ariouistus hand, no not
upon sufficient pledges: The Treuires that an hundred town shyps of the
Sweuians were come to the further side of the Rhyne, and went about to pass
the River, of whom the Captains were Nasua and Cimberius, brothers. With ye
which news Caesar being sore moved, thought it stood him in hand to speed his
matters betymes, lest if the new power of the Sweuians should join with the
host that Ariouistus had before, he should have more a do to resyst them.
And therefore furnishing himself of victell with as much have as he could, he
made toward Ariouistus by long iourneyes. When he was three days journey
onward of his way, word was brought him that Ariouistus with all the power he
could make was going to take Besancon, which is the greateste town belonging
to the Sequanes, and that he was now marched three days journey from his own
borders. Caesar thought it stood him upon to beware, that that happened not.
For of all things mete for war, there was in that town great scarcity, and the
situacion thereof was so strong, that whosoever had it, might prolong the war at
his pleasure, by reason that the River Alduasdubis environed in manner ye whole
town like a pair of co^passes. That room that the river enclosed not, (which
was the space of not above six hundred foot) was fortified with a hill of a
great heyghth, so that the foot of it on both sides touched the very brym of
the river. This hill was compassed with a wall in manner of a tower, and joined
to the Town. Hither came Caesar iorneying night and day with as much speed
as might be, and taking the town placed a garryson in it.

While he rested a few days at Besaucon to furnyshe him self of grain and
victual, through the enquirye of our men, and the talk of the Galls and of
the Merchauntmen, which reported the Germans to be men of huge stature and
bygnes, of incredible force and courage, and of great practyse and experience
in feats of arms, whereof they had oftentimes had trial by encounteryng with
them, and that they were not able to abide the grymnesse of their countenaunces
and the fierceness of their looks: sodeinlye there came such a fear over all
the army, that it wonderfully troubled the minds and appalled the courages of
all men. This fear began first among the Tribunes, and chief officers of the
Camp, and such other as had accompanied Caesar in this voyage for frendshippes
sake, and had small skyll or none in matters of war: who feyninge, some one
excuse and some another, of very earnest busynes that they had to do, desired
leave to depart with his favor. Othersome for shame least they should be
thought to have gone away for fear tarried still. Howbeit these could neither set
a good countenance on the matter, nor sometime keep themselves from weeping: but
hyding them selves in their tents, either they bewailed their destiny secretly
to them selves, or else with their acquaintance lamented the danger that they
were all like to fall into. And commonly through the whole camp was nothing but
making and signing of testaments. Through the talk and fearfulness of these
men, by littell and littell even they that were of great skill and experience
in the camp, namely the old beaten soldiors, and the peticapteynes, and those
that had the charge of the men of arms, were sore troubled. Such of them as
would seem to be less fearful, said they feared not the enemy, but the
narrownes of the wais, and the greatness of the woods that lay between them and
Ariouistus: or else they cast doubts how their grain should be commodiously
conveyed after them. Many also told Caesar plainly, that whenever he
should give commandment to dyslodge the Camp or to auaunce the Standards,
the Soldiers would not be obedient to his word, nor displaye their banners
for fear. When Caesar understood these things, he called a counsel, and
assembling thither the Capteines of all the bands, rebuked them very
sharplye. First in that they took upon them to be inquisitiue or careful,
whether or for what purpose they should be led. As for Ariouistus, he had (in
the time that he was Consul) sewed most earnestly for ye friendship of the
people of Rome: and why than should any man misedeme, that he would so rashly go
back from his duty? He believed verily, that if he ones knew his demaundes,
and understood perfectly how reasonable offers he would make him, he would
not reject, either his good will, or the good will of the people of Rome. But
if he would be so mad and so far ouersene, as to make war, why should they be
afraid of him? or why should they despair either of their own prowess or of
his circumspectnes? The enemy that they had to do with, was no such, but that
they had tried what he was able to do twice before: First in our fathers days,
when the Cimbrians and Duchmen were vanquished by Marius in such sort that the
whole army deserved no less praise then the Graundcapteyne himself: And now
of late again in Italy at the hurlyburly of the bondmen, who were not a littel
furthered through the practice and discipline which they had received at our
hands. Whereby it might be judged, how good a thing it is to be constant: in
as much as who^ for a time being naked they feared without cause, even the same
afterward being both armed and victours, they nobly overcame. And to be short
these were none other Germans than those, whom the Heluetians had vanquyshed
in diverse conflictes, not only where the Heluetians dwelt theymselues, but also
often times even at home at their own doors, and yet the same Heluetians were
not able to make their part good against our army. But if the late discomfiture
and flyghte of the Galls were ye matter that troubled any man's conscience, if
they looked well upon the matter, they should find that Ariouistus after he had
many months together kept him self within his Camp, and in marisgrounds, and
never come abroad into the field to offer battle, when the Galls were now
weary with long protracting of the war, and thought of nothing less then that
they should have had battle, set sodeinlye upon them being disordred, and
overcame them more by cautele and pollicye than by force. The which policy,
though it had taken place against savage and unskillful people, yet was not
Ariouistus so folysh to look that it should prevail against our army too. As
for those that laid the cause of their fear to the heard conueying of their
victuals and the narownes of the ways, they took more upon them then became
them, that they durst presume to teach their graundcapteine what he had to
do, as if he had not known what pertayned to his duty. And therefore he bade
the^ cast the care thereof on him. The Sequanes, Lewks, and People about Langres.
Lingones should serve their turn of grain, and besides that corn was now
ripe in the fields. Concerning their journey, they themselves should in short
time be able to judge. Whereas it was reported to him that they would not be
obedyent to his commandment, nor auaunce their sta^dards, he said he passed
not of that matter. For he was well assured that if any army refused to be
obedient to their Captein, it was either because of his ill success and
misfortune, or else because that by some manifest and notorious deed he was
convicted of avarice. That he had clear hands, his whole life, and that he had
good success, the war against the Heluetia^s did declare. And therefore that
which he was minded to have driven of a longer time, he would now put in
execution out of hand. For the next night following, at ye fowrth watch he would
dislodge from thens, to the intent that without further delay he might
understand whether shame and duty were able to do more with them, or fear. And
though he wist that noman else would follow him, yet notwythstanding he would
go with the tenth Legion alone, of which he doubted not, and would accept it
for his chief band to guard his person. This Legion had Caesar showed special
favor unto, and for the valiantness of it he trusted most unto it.

Upon the making of this oration, the minds of them all were wonderfullye
changed, and there grew in them a great cheerfulness and desire to feight.
First of all, the tenth Legion by their Trybunes gave him thanks for the good
opinion he had of them. affirmyng that they were most ready to set forward to
the war. Then the rest of the legions by their Tribunes and the Capteines of
their chief bands, entreated that they might make their purgation unto Caesar:
saying they never doubted, nor feared, no nor thought that it perteined unto
them to determine of the orderyng of the war, but that it belonged altogether
to their graundcapteine. Caesar accepting their purgation, and having learned
the way perfectly by Diuitiacus (because that of all the Galls he trusted him
best) to the intent he might lead his army more then fifty miles compass in
open fields, set forward immediately after ye iiii. watch as he had said he
would do. The.vii. day, as he continued on his journey still, his espyals brought
him word, that we were within fowr^ and twenty miles of Ariouistus host. When
Ariouistus knew that Caesar was coming toward him, he sent Ambassadors to him,
declaring that whereas heretofore he had demanded to come to communication, he
was contented so to do seeing he was come somewhat nerer, and that he trusted he
might now do it without danger. Caesar refused not the profer. For thinkyng he
would now come to amendment, considering he offered of his own voluntary will,
the thing he had before denied when it was requested, he was in great hope
that for the great benifites which he and the people of Rome had bestowed upon
him, he would upon knowledge of his demaundes desyst from his stoubernnes. And
therefore the.v. day after was appointed for communication. In the mean while
as Ambassadors were sent to and fro between them, Ariouistus demanded that
Caesar should bring no foteman with him to communication, for he said he was
afraid to be surprised of him by treason: wherefore both parties to come with
their horsemen, otherwise he would not come there. Caesar because he neither was
willing that the communication should be broken for any bymatter, nor yet durst
put the French horsemen in trust with his life, thought it most for his behofe
to take all the Frenchmens horses from them, and to set upon them the Legionary
souldi^rs of the tenth Legion which he trusted most unto, that if he stood at
any need, he might have a faithful band of his friends about him to guard him.
The which thing when he had done, one of the soldiers of the tenth Legion
being somewhat merely disposed said, that Caesar did more than he had promised.
For whereas he had promised but to accept the tenth Legion in plare of the
pretorian Cohort, he had promoted them to be men of arms.

There was a great plain, and in the same a ba^ke of earth of a good pretye
bigness. This place was almost midway between both the camps, and thither
they came to communication as is aforesaid. The legion that Caesar had brought
thither on horseback, he placed about a two hundred paces from the said bank.
And likewise the horsemen of Ariouistus stood a like distance of. Ariouistus
requested that they might commune on horseback, and bring each of them ten
persons with them to the parley. At suc^e time as they were come thither, Caesar
in the beginning of his oration, rehearsed the good turns that Ariouistus had
received by him and by the people of Rome: as that the Senate had vouchsaued to
give him the name and title of king, and to account him as their friend, and
also had sent most honorable and rich presents unto him, the which things he
told him had happened unto few others, and were not wont to be bestowed upon
any, but such as ye Romans thought had highly deserved them for some great
good turn that they had done. But he, when as he had neither access unto
them, nor any just cause why he should desire any such thing at their hands,
had atteyned those rewards only of the mere curtesye and liberalitye of him
and the Senate. Moreover he did him to understand how ancient and how just
causes of aliance and friendship there were between them and the Heduanes: what
decrees had been made for them by the Senate, how oftentimes and how honorable:
How the Heduanes had ever held the Souereintie of al Gallia, even before such
time as they desired our frendshyp: It was the custom of the people of Rome,
that their friends and alyes, should not only not lose any thing of their own
by them, but also be increased in favor, dignity, and honor. Now to have that
thing wrung from the^ by force which they had brought with them, when they
first entered in frendshyppe with the Romans, who could suffer it? Afterward
he made the like demand as he had done by his Ambassadors: that he should
not make war against the Heduanes or their Alyes, that he should surrender
their hostages, that if he could not send home again any part of the
Germans, at leastwhyse yet he should suffer no mo to pass the Rhyne.

Ariouistus answered littel to the demands of Caesar: but vaunted much of his
own prowess. He said he had passed the Rhyne, not of his own head, but at the
request and intreatance of the Galls themselves: at whose pleasure he had
left his own country and kindred, not with out great hope and promise of
reward for his labor: And now he had settled himself in Gallia by their
consent: they had given him hostages of their own freewyll, and he took such
tribute of them as conquerors are wont to ses^e their subjects at by the law
of Arms. He had not made war against the Frenchmen, but the Frenchmen against
him. For all the Cities of Gallia were assembled to besege him, and had
encamped themselves against him: all the which power he had in one battle
overthrown and vanquyshed. If they would try the matter by the sword again,
he was ready to cope with them. But if they had rather have peace, they did
wrong to wythholde their tribute which they had paid unto that time with
their good wills. As for the friendship of the people of Rome, be thought it
ought to be an ornament and stay unto him, and not an hinderance, and that he
had requested it in hope to have found it so. But if the people of Rome should
seek to release his tribute, and to pull away his vassals that had submitted
the^ selves to him, he was even as wyllyng to forsake their frendshyp as ever
he was to request it. Whereas he brought over great numbers of Germans into
France, he did it for to strengthen himself and not to anoy the country.
Whereof there needs none other wytnes, than this, that he came not but at their
own request, and that he had made no war upon other but only defended
himself. He was come into France before the people of Rome, who until that
time never led their host out of the borders of their own Province. And what
should they mean to come within his jurisdiction? For as well was this part
of France his province, as the other part was ours. And therefore as he were
not to be borne wythall if he should have invaded our marches, so did we him
wrong to intermedle within his jurisdiction. And whereas Caesar had said that
the Heduanes were proclaimed friends by the Senate, he made him answer he was
not so barbarous, nor so unskillful of things, but he knew well enough, that
neither the Heduanes aided the Romans in their late war against the people of
Sauoy and Daulphine, nor the Romans them in their quarrels that they had with
him and the Sequanes. Wherefore he had good cause to mystruste that Caesar under
the color of feyned frendshyppe, kept that army which he had in France for
none other purpose, but to oppress him. But if he gate him not away, and
withdrew his power out of those countries, he would take him no lengar for his
friend but for his enemy. And if he could kill him, he was sure he should do a
great pleasure to many of the noble men and Princes of Rome. The which thing
he had perfect knowledge of by their messengers, of all whom he could
purchase the good will and friendship by his death. But if he would depart, and
leave unto him the free possession of France, he would reward him hyghly for
his labor, and look what wars soever he would have made, he would dispatch
them without puttyng him to any travel and danger.

Caesar replied many things to this purpose, why he might not desyst from his
enterprise: alledgyng that it stood not with his custom nor with the custom
of the people of Rome, to abandon their Alies that had well deserved of them.
Neither could he see, why Ariouistus should have more right to challenge
France than the Romans. For Q. Fabius Maximus had hertofore vanquished the
men of Auuerne and the People about Rhodes.
Rutenes, and yet ye people of Rome pitiyng them did neither make their country
a province, nor put them to any tribute. But if so be that respect ought to be
had to time of most antiquity, then had the Romans most just cause to reygne
over France. Or if the judgment of the Senate ought to be observed, then
ought France to be free, for as much as it was decreed that being conquered
by battle, it should still enjoy their own laws and customs. While these
things were a debating in the treatye, it was told Caesar that Ariouistus
horsemen were coming toward the bank, and that riding against our horsemen,
they began to throw darts and stones at them. Wheruppon Caesar made an end of
talking, and wythdrew him self to his men: commanding them that they should
not cast any thing at all again at their enemies. For albeit that without any
peril of his chosen Legion, he saw he might have encountered with the horsemen
of his ennemies: yet notwythstanding he would not give occasion by puttyng his
enemies to flight, to have it said that breakyng promis with them he had
entrapped them under pretense of communication.

When it was reported to the common soldiers, how arrogantly Ariouistus had
behaved himself in the treaty, forbidding the Romans all France, and that
his men of arms had made assault upon ours, insomuch that by means thereof the
communication was broken of, our army began to be far more cheerful and far
more desirous to feight. Two days after, Ariouistus sent Ambassadors to
Caesar, certifying him that he was desirous to entreat with him concerning those
things that had been begone to be talked of and not brought to conclusion.
Wherefore he would he should either appoint a day to confer again: or if he would
not so do, that he should send some men of his with commission to commune
with him. Caesar thought it not good to common personally with him any more,
the rather because the Germans the day before had no stay of them selves, but
that they threw darts at our men. Again he thought that whomsoever of his men
he sent commissioner unto him, should go in great danger, and should be cast
into the hands of most savage persons. It seemed most expedient to send unto him
M. Ualerius Procillus, (the son of C. Ualerius Caburus, a young gentilman of
singular virtue and humanity, whose father had been made free of the City by C.
Ualerius Flaccus) both because he was trusty, and could speak the French tung
perfectly (the which Ariouistus used much by reason of long conversation among
the Frenchmen,) and also because there was no cause why the Germans should
work any evil against him. And with him he sent also M. Titius who used to
resort as a guest to Ariouistus. To these men he gave in charge that they
should diligently mark and justly report unto him what Ariouistus said. As Soon
as Ariouistus saw the^ in his Camp, he cried out to them in the presence of
his army, asking them what they had to do there, and whyther they came as
spies. When they went about to make their au^swer, he would not suffer them, but
by and by committed them to ward. The same day he removed and encamped under a
hills side about a six miles from Cesars Camp. The next day after, he marched
with all his power even in the face of Cesars camp, and pitched his tents a
two miles beyond him, of purpose to cut of his grain and victuals that was
to be brought to him out of Burgundye. From that day forward by the space of
five days together, Caesar brought out his men before his camp and had them
in order of battle, to the intent ye if Ariouistus lifted to give battle he might
have liberty when he would. But Ariouistus all this while kept his foteme^ within
the Camp, and sent out his horsemen dailye to skirmysh. This was the kind of
feight wherein the Germans were well practiced. They were of them six thousand
men of arms and as many footmen very swift of foot and strong, whom the
horsemen had chosen out of all the whole host, every man one for his
faufgard. These they had always at hand with them in battle, and unto these
they resorted for succor. If the horsemen were any thing ouercharged these stepped
ever in. If any of the^ were sore wounded or unhorsed, these guarded him about.
If the matter required either to adventure far forward or to retire quickly
back, their swiftnes was such through continual exercise, that hanging upon the
horsemanes by the one hand, they would run as fast as the horses. When Caesar
perceived that Ariouistus kept him self within his Camp, to the intent he would
not any lengar be stopped from his victuals, beyond the same place where the
Germans abode, about syxhundred paces from their Camp he chose a ground mete
to encamp in, and came thither in three battles. Two of these battles he caused
to stand still ready in array, and the third he willed to fortify the Camp.
This place was (as I said before) sixhundred paces from the ennemy. Thither
sent Ariouistus about syxtene thousand footmen light harnessed, with all his
horsemen, to put our men in fear, and to prohybit them from fortifiyng their
camp. Nevertheless, Caesar (as he had before determined) commanded two
battelles to wythstand the enemy, and the third to go through with ye work.
When he had fortifyed the Camp, he left two legions there, and part of his
hired Soldiers that were there for his aid: and led his other four legions
back again into his greater camp. The next day, Caesar (as he had pourposed
before) brought his whole power out of both his camps, and marching somewhat
from his greater camp, set his men in order and proffered to give his enemies
battle if they would. When he perceived that they would not then come forth
neither, about Noone he conveyed his army into their Camps again. Then at the
length Ariouistus sent part of his power to assault ye lesser Camp. The
encounter continued very sharp on both sides until the euentyde. At the
sun setting, after many wounds given and taken, Ariouistus conveyed his army
again into his Camp. As Caesar made enquirye of his prisoners what should be the
cause that Ariouistus would not encounter with him in a pitched field, he found
that the occasion thereof was this: because it was a custom among the Germans,
that their ancient women should by castyng of lots and soothsaying declare
whether it were for their behoof to feight or no: and that they said, the
Germans might not by any means possible get ye victory, if they fought
before the new moan. The next day Caesar left a sufficient power in each of his
Camps to defend them, and set all his light armed soldiers in the face of his
enemies before his lesser Camp, because he had a small number of Legionary
souldyors in respect of the multitude of his enemies, to the intent to use the
light armed soldiers for a show. He him self with his men ordered in three
battles marched to the Camp of his enemies. Then were the Germans constreined
of necessity to bring their power out of their camp. And so they set severally
with like distaunce between the^, the The people of Consta^ce.
Harudes, the People about Strausbrou^^.
Marcomannes, the People about Worms
Triboks, the People about Spire.
Uangions the People about Sion in Ualoys.
Nemets, the * Sedusianes, and the * Sweuians every one by them selves: and
because there should be no hope left in running away, they environed all their
whole battle with their carts and chariots. In them they placed their women,
and they at such time as the soldiers should go forth to battle, holding up
their hands and weping besought them that they would not yield them in
bondage to the Romans. Caesar assygned to every Legion severally a Lieuetenant
and a Threasoror, to thentent they should be as witnesses of every man's valiant
behauior. And he himself gave charge upon his enemies out of the right wing,
because he perceived his enemies to be weakest on that side. So as soon as sign
of battle was given, our men set courageously upon their enemies. And on
the other side our enemies on the sodein came forth against us with such
celeritie, that we had no leisure to discharge our darts at them: In so much
that castinge aside Darts the matter came to hand strokes with naked swords.
But the Germans quickly knitting themselves close together, brake the force of
our swords. Nevertheless there were very many of our men to be found, that flew
stoutlye upon them, and pulling their tergats out of their hands wounded them
aloft. Now while the battle of our enemies was on the left wyng driven back
and put to flight, in their right wing by reason of their multitude they did
sore ouercharge us. Which thing when P. Crassus a noble young gentilman
Lieuetenant of the men of arms perceived, (because he was somewhat more at
liberty than they that were in the battle,) he sent the rereward to the res^ow
of our men that were in peril. By means whereof the feight was renewed, and
all our enemies too^e the^ to flight. And they never ceased flying, before they
came to ye Rhine which was about five miles from the place where ye field was
fought. There also few of them either trusting to their strength assaied to
swim over, or else fyndinge Botes saved themselves by rowing: among the which
number Ariou^stus was one, who fynding a lighter tied to the bank, fled away
in it. Our horsemen ouertooke all the rest and slew them down right. Ariouistus
had two wives, the one a Sweuian borne whom he had brought from home with him,
the other of Norimberge the suster of king Uoccio, whom he had married in France,
sent thither by her brother: both the which perished in that chase. The two
daughters of them also was one of them slain, and the other taken prisoner.
Marcus Ualerius Procillus as he was led away by his kepers bound with three
cheines, chaunsed to light into Cesars hand as he pursued the horsemen of his
enemies. The which thing was no less joy to Caesar than the victory it self:
that one of ye honorablest men of al ye Province of Gallia his familar fre^d,
in whose house he had soiourned, was delivered out of his enemies hands and
recovered again by him, and that misfortune had not laid any such calamitye
upon him as might have abridged any part of Cesars great gladness and
reioycement. He told Caesar that three times lots were cast upon him before his
eyes, whether he should be burned out of hand, or reserved until an other time:
and that it was his good luck to be saved by lotte. Marcus Titius also was
found and brought unto him again. When the brute of this disco^fiture was blown
over the Rhine, the Sweuians that were come to the river side began to return
home again: whom amazed for fear, the Ubians which are inhabiters on the Rhyne
pursewing slew a great number of them. Caesar having in one Summer dispatched
two great wars, conveyed his army into garrisons among the Sequanes somewhat
sooner than the time of the year required, and making Labienus for general in
his absens, he him self went into Lumbardye to hold a parliament there.

FINIS.
THE SECOND BOOK of C. Julius Caesar's Commentaries of his wars in Gallia.
DVRING THE TIME that Caesar wyntred in Lumbardy as we have showed before, it
was oftentimes reported to him by here say, and he was also certified by
letters from Labienus* that al ye Belgies (which we have declared to be the
third part of Gallia) did co^federate themselves against the people of Rome and
give hostages among themselves. The causes of their confederacye were these.
First they feared least after that all the rest of Gallia were subdued our
army should come against them. Secondly because they were moved thereunto by
diverse of the Galls, who partly like as they were loathe that the Germans should
have tarried any lengar in their country, so likewise it grieved them that the
Roman army should winter and continue in France: and partlye were such as
through inconstancy and lightness of mind, desired thalteration of the state:
Of diverse also, who (whereas now it was a common trade through all France,
that whosoever was of most power and most ability to hire men, made himself a
king) thought they should not so easly come by their purpose if we gate the
souereinty. Caesar being moved with these tidings and letters, levied two new
Legions in Lumbardy, and in the beginning of Summer sent his Lieuetenant Q.
Pedius with them to conducte them into France. And as soon as there began to be
any store of forage in the fields, he him self came unto his army. He gave
in charge to the Seuones and the rest of the Galls that were borderers upon
the Belgies, to learn what was done amongst them, and to certify him thereof.
They all agreed in one report, that there was nothing but musteryng of
soldiers and assembling of their powers into one place Then thought he verily
it was not for him to make any more staying in ye matter but even to march
against them. So when he had made his provision of corn, he dislodged his camp,
and within fiftene days or thereabouts, came into the borders of the Belgies.
As Soon as he was come thither, which was upon the sodein and sooner than he was
looked for, the men of Rhemes who are the vttermoste of the Belgies next unto
the Celtes, sent Iccius and Antebrogius two of the chief of their City
ambassadors unto him, to declare unto him that they submitted themselves and
all that ever they had to the curtesy of the people of Rome to do with them
what they would: affirming that they had neither been of counsel with the rest
of the Belgies, nor conspired with them against the Romans, and in token
whereof they were ready both to give them hostages, and to do whatsoever they
would command them, whether it were to receive them into their towns, or to
furnish them with corn and other things. They told him that the rest of the
Belgies were all in armor, and that the Germans which inhabit the further
side of the Rhine, did take their part, and that the madness of them all was
so great, that they were not able to withdraw so much as the People of Soyssons.
Swessions being their brothers and nere kinsmen of their own blood, who used
the same laws and customs that they did, and had all one state of government
and one magistrate with them, but that they would needs support the same quarrel
that the rest of the Belgies did. When he enquired of them what and how
great cities were in armor, and what they were able to do in war, he found the
matter to stand in this case. That the Belgies for the most part were disceded
of the Germans, who passing the Rhine time out of mind, and settling themselves
there because of the fertilitye of the soil, drove out ye Galls that dwelt
ther^ before, and that they only had been they, which (when al Gallia was
troubled in the days of our fathers) kept the Duchmen and Cimbrians from
entering within their borders. Whereupon it came to pass, that for the
remembrance of those things they had challenged great aucthority and took a
pride in their own doings for feats of cheualry and knighthood. As touching
their number, the men of Rhemes said they knew all things for a certeintye:
because that being alyed to them by blood and marriage, they understood by
their kinsfolk what number every one of them had promised to find to ye war, in
the parlame^t of the Belgies. The The people of Beawvoyse.
Bellouocanes were they that excelled among them both in prowess, aucthority,
and number of men. For they were able to send a hundred thousand well armed to
the field: of the which number they had promised threescore thousand of the
best: and therefore they required to have the ordering of the whole war
committed unto them. The The men of Soysons.
Swessions were next neybors unto them, and possessed most large and
fruitful grounds. Amongst whom had reigned (even syns we might remember) a
king called Diuitiacus, the puissantest prince of al Gallia, who held the
dominion not only of a great part of these Countries, but also of Britain:
and now reigned among them one Galba, unto whom for his justice and wisdom
the whole charge and administration of the war was by the consent of al men
committed. They had walled towns to the number of twelve, and promised to set
out fiftye thousand armed men: the The people about Tour^^^ People of Arras.
Neruians as many, who are to be counted the sauagest people of them all, and
are furthest of: the People of Amyens.
Atrebatians fiftene thousand: the People of Turwin.
Ambianes ten thousand: the People of Gelderland and Cleueland.
Morines five and twenty thousand: the Menapians seven thousand: the People of
Caui^.
Caletanes ten thousand: the Uelocassians and People of verman^oys
Ueromanduanes as many: the People of Doway.
Catuakes ninetene thousand: ye Co^drusians, Eburones, Ceresians, and Pemanes,
which may be called all by thonly name of Germans, they supposed to be about
forty thousand.

Caesar encouraging the men of Rhemes and making them liberal promis of
recompense, commanded al their senate to come before him, and al their noble
men's sons to be delivered to him for hostages: al yt which things were of them
diligently performed by a day appointed: Then he greatly commended Diuitiacus
the Heduane, and declared unto him how much it was for the profyt of the common
weal, for the armies of their enemies to be kept a sunder, that he were not
constreyned to encounter with so great a power all at ones. The which thing
might be brought to pass, if the Heduanes would with their host enter into the
marches of the Bellouacanes and waste their country. With these instructions he
sent him away: and when he understood by such skoults as he had sent abroad,
and by the information of the men of Rhemes, that al ye power of the Belgies
being assembled into one place, was coming toward him, and was not now far from
him, he made all the have he could to pass his army over the river The river of
Aesne.
Axona, which is in thuttermost bounds of the men or Rhemes, and there pytched
his Camp. In doing whereof he brought to pass, that the banks of the river
fortified the one side of his Camp, and that no enemy could come upon the back
of him to do any hurt behynd, and that victualles might be conveyed to him from
Rhemes and other Cities without danger. Upon the same River was a bridge.
There he set a garrison of men, and left his Lieuetenant Q. Titurius Sabinus
with six cohorts on the other side of the river: commanding him to fortify his
camp with a Rampire of twelve foot in height, and a trench of eyghtene foot
in breadth. Eight miles from this Camp was a City belongyng to the men of
Rhemes called Called Brai in the county of Rhetell.
Bibrar, the which the Belgies in their way began to assault with great
violence. The townsmen had much a do to hold out that day. The manner of
assault among the Celts, is al one with the manner of the Belgies. They, as soon
as they have beset the walls about with their multitude, and that they have
slung stones on al sides, in such sort that the wall is left naked of
defendants, do cast their shieldes over their heads, and approaching to the
gates undermine ye walls. The which thing was easy to do at that time. For
there was such a multitude of them that threw stones and Darts, that no man was
able to stand upon the wall. As Soon as night had made an end of thassaulte,
Iccius of Rhemes a man of great birth and favor in his Country, who at that
time was Captain of the Town, one of them that came of ambassade unto Caesar
to entreat for peace, sent unto him by messengers, that if he did not reskew
him, he was not able to hold out any lengar. The same day about midnyght,
Caesar using for guydes the same persons that came of message from Iccius,
sent certain Numidians and archers of Now called Candye.
Creta, and slingars of the Isles Now called maiorica and minorica.
Baleares to succor the Townsmen. By means of whose coming, on the one side the
men of Rhemes in hope to make their part good became more earnest to abide the
pushe, and on the other side the enemies for the same cause were out of all hope
of winning the Town. Wherefore tarying there but a while, when they had wasted
the fields of the men of Rhemes, and set on fire all their villages and
buildings that they could come by, they marched with all their whole power
toward Cesars Camp, and within less than two miles of him pitched their
tents: the which as might be perceived by the smoke and fyres, occupied more
than eight miles in breadth. Caesar at the first both for the multitude of his
enemies and for the singular opinion that was bruted of their manhood,
determined, not to be to hasty in giving them battle. Notwythstanding, he
daily put in proof by skirmishing with his horsemen, both what his enemies by
their manhood could do, and what his own men durst do. When he perceived our
men to be nothing inferior to their enemies, then in a certain place before
his camp of nature mere and convenient to set a battle in, because the same
hill where his tents were pitched rising very littell above the plain, was no
brother before than would suffice to set the forefront of a battle in, and was
steep on both sides, and rising a slope in the front, by lyttel and littel
came again to a plain, he drew from the one side of the hill to the other a dyche
overthwart, of a four hundred paces or therabouts, and at the ends of the
diches rered up bulwarks and furnished them with ordinance to the intent that
when he had ordered his battles, his enemies abounding in multitude, should
not on the sides enclose his men as they were feighting. This done, he left in
his Camp the two Legions that he had last levied, that wheresoever should be
any need of succor they might be led thither, and set his other six Legions
in battle ray before his Camp. His enemies likewise bringing forth their
power, set them in order also. Now there was between our army and the army of
our enemies a good pretty marisse. This our enemies looked ever when we should
have passed over. And our man were ready with their weapons to assail them
being troubled, if they had adventured first over it. In the mean while the
horsemen of both sides encountered between the two battles. After much
streining of curtesy which part should pass over first, and none aduenturing
to pass, Caesar having gotten thupper hand of his enemies horsemen, conveyed al
his men again into their Camp. From that place, his enemies immediatlye took
their way to the river Now called Disne in Guien.
Arona, the which was showed before to be behind our Camp. There finding
foordes, they attempted to pass over part of their host: of purpose if they
could, either to win the bulwark that Q. Titurius Cesars Lieuetenant kept,
and to cut down the bridge: Or at leastwyse if they could not so do, to
spoil the fields of the men of Rhemes which greatly furthered us in our
wars, and to keep our men from their vyctuals. Caesar being advertised hereof
by Titurius, led over the bridge all his men of arms, and Numidia^s light
harnessed, his slingars and archers, and marched to them himself. There was a
sharp encounter in that place. Our men setting upon their enemies troubled in
the river slew a great number of them. The residew endeavoring like desperate
persons to pass over upon their carkesses, they repulsed with force of
weapons, and the horsemen enclosyng such as had first passed, slew them
euerichone. When our enemies perceived that their hope deceived them both in
wynning the Town, and of passing the river, and saw our men would not
adventure into a place of dysaduauntage to feight with them, and that their
own vyctuals began to fail them, they called a counsel by which they
determined that it was best for every man to return home to his own house,
and into whose borders so ever the Romans should enter first, with their army,
to resort thither out of all parts to defend them: to thyntent they might
rather try the matter in their own country than abroad, and have their own
household provision and store of victuals always at hand to maintain them
with. To consent upon this point, together with the other causes this reason
also moved them: because they understood Diuitiacus and the Heduanes approached
near the borders of the People of Beawvoys^
Belloua^anes, who would not by any means be persuaded to tarry any lengar, but
that they would go and succor their own. When this thing was fully agreed
upon, about the second watch, with great tramplyng and noise departing out of
their Camp, without any certain order or government, every man preasing to be
formest on his journey, and making have to be at home, they demeaned them selves
in such wise as that their departure might seem like a running away. Caesar
having forthwyth knowledge hereof by his spies, and mystrustynge some treason,
because he perceived not as yet what should be thoccasion why they departed,
kept his army and his horsemen still within his Camp. By the dawning of the
day, when he was better assured of the matter by his skoults, he sent all his
horsemen before to stay their rereward and made Q. Pedius, and L. Aurunculeius
Cotta Lieuetenants over them: commanding his Lieuetenant T. Labienus to follow
immediatlye after them. These ouertakynge the hyndermost and chasing them
many miles, slew a great number of them as they fled. While the rerewarde
(whereunto we were by that time come) stayed and valeantly with stood the force
of our Soldiers, the formest, because they seemed out of danger and were not
restreined by awe or commandment of any man, as soon as they heard the noise,
brake their array, and took them every man to his heles to save himself. So
without any danger, our men slew a great multitude of them, and mo had slain
if the day had been lengar. About the sun setting they retired from the chase
and returned in to their Camp, as was commanded. The next day following, before
his enemies could recover them selves from their fear and flight, led his
army into the country of the People o^ Soyssons.
Swessions who were borderers upon the men of Rhemes, and after a long journey
came to Noyon.
Nouiodnue. Whereas he attempted to have won this town by assault in his way,
because he hard say it was unfurnished of men of war to defend it, the dich
was so broad and the wall so high, that although there were but few to defend
it, yet was he dysapoynted of his purpose. Wherefore fortifying his camp he made
An instrument of war made of timber and hurdles for men to go under safelye to
the walls of a town.
Uines, and began to make provision of things meet for the siege. In the
mean while all the multitude of the Swessions that escaped from ye chase came
the next night into the Town. How beit when the Uines were with good expedition
brought to the town, and the Rampyer cast up, and Turrets reered, the Galls
being abashed at the hugeness of the works such as they had neither seen nor
heard of before, and the celeritye of the Romans, sent Ambassadors to Caesar
offering to yield up the town, who at the intreatance of the men of Rhemes
obtained their suit. Caesar taking for pledges the chief of the City, and two of
king Galbas sons, upon delivery of al ye armor out of the town, People of
Soyssons.
received the Swessions to mercy, and led his host against the People of
Beawvoys.
Bellouacanes: who having conveyed them selves and all that they had into the
town of Beawvays.
Bratuspantium, at such time as Caesar was come within five miles with his
army, all the elder sort of them coming out of the town held up their hands
unto Caesar and with pitious voice made token to him that they submitted the^
selves to his pleasure do with them what he would, and that they would not
stand in contension with the people of Rome. Also when he came nere the town,
and pytched his tents there, the children and women holding abroad their
hands from the wall, after their manner desired peace of the Romans.
Diuitiacus (for after the departure of the Belgies he had dysmissed the host of
the Heduanes and was returned unto Caesar) spoke for them in this wise. That
the Bellouacanes had at all times continued faithful and friendlye to the
whole state of the Heduanes: and that but for the persuasion of their noble men
(who made them believe that the Heduanes were brought in bondage by ye Romans
and suffered all kind of villainy and despite at their hands) they had
never withdrawn themselves from the Heduanes, nor made war against the
Romans. The authors of this counsel because they perceived how great
calamity they had thereby brought upon their country, were fled into
Britain. Wherefore not only the Bellouacanes but also the Heduanes in their
behalf, besought him to use his clemency and gentilnes toward them. The which
thing if he would vouchesafe to do, he should bring the Heduanes in further
credit and authority among all the Belgies than ever they were, as by whose
aid and furtherance they were wo^t to maintain their wars if any happened.

Caesar for the honor he bare to Diuitiacus and the Heduanes, promised to
receive them to mercy and to save them harmless. And because it was a great
City, excelling among the rest of the Belgies as well in authority as in
multitude of people, he demanded six hundred pledges. The which being
delivered and all the armor brought out of the town, he marched from thence
into the coasts of the Ambianes: who without delay yielded themselves and all
that they had unto him. Upon their Country bordered the The people about
Tournei
Neruians of whose nature and conditions Caesar found thus much by enquirye.
That there was no recourse of merchants unto them: That they suffered no wine
nor other such things as tend to riot, to be brought in unto them, because
they were of opinion that by such things the courage was apalled, and the
stoutnesse thereof weakened. That they were savage people and of great
valeantnes: often rebuking and finding much fault with the residew of the
Belgies, for yielding theymselues to the people of Rome, and casting away their
ancient prowess: and stoutly affirming that they would neither send
ambassadors, nor take peace upon any condition. When he had iorneyed a three
dais through their country, he understood by his prisoners that the river
Sambre.
Sabis was not past ten miles of from his Camp. Beyond the which river all the
Neruians were gathered together and there abode the coming of the Romans,
together with the People of Arras.
Atrebatians and People of vermandoys
Ueromanduanes their next neighbors. For both those people they had persuaded
to abide the like fortune of war with them. Moreover they looked for a power of
the People about Bosleduke.
Aduaticks, who were coming toward them. The women and such as by reason of
their years were unmeet for the fyelde, they had bestowed in such a place as
there was no access unto with an army by reason of ye fennes. When he knew
these things* he sent his skoults and peticapteyns before, to chose a ground
mete to encampe in. Now whereas very many of the Belgies that had yielded
themselves and many of the other Galls that waited upon Caesar, iorneyed
together with him, certain of them (as it was after known by the prisoners)
markyng the order and custom of the marchyng of our army those days, came by
night to the Neruians, and showed unto them that between every legion went a
great sort of cariages: and that it were no matter at all as soon as the first
Legion were come into their camp, and the rest of the Legions were yet a great
way of, to set upon it under their burdens, the which being put to flight and
their stuff taken from them, it would come to pass that the rest should be
out of heart to stand against them. It was a furtherance to the counsel of them
that made this report, that the Neruians of ancient time being able to make no
power of horsemen, (for even at this day they pass not for it, but all their
strength consysteth in the force of footmen) to thentent they might the easlyer
trouble the horsemen of their borderers whenever they came for any bootye
within their marches, cutting young trees half a sunder and bowyng down their
tops to the ground, and plasshing the boughs that grow thick out of the
sides with bushes and thorns between the^, they brought to pass that these
hedges were as good a defense to them as a w^l: for they were so thick that it
was impossyble not only to enter, but also even to see through them. When
by this means the passage of our army was stopped, the Neruians thought the
foresaid counsel not to be ouerslipped. This was the nature of the place that
we had chosen to encamp in. A hill a like level from the top down to the bottom
stretched to the River * Sabis that we spoke of before. From the same river
with like leuelnesse upward rose another hill directlye against this about two
hundred foot: the bottom whereof was open, and thupper part so thycke with wood
that it could not easlye be seen inward. Within those woods our enemies kept
them selves close, and in the open ground were to be s^ne a few stales of
horsemen by the ryuers side: and the river was about three foot deep. Caesar
sending his horsemen before, followed after with all his power. But the manner
and order of their array was otherwise than the Belgies had reported it to the
Neruians. For inasmuch as the enemy was at hand, Caesar (as his rustome was to
do) led six legions always in a readiness vncombred with the carriage of any
thing: after them he placed the stuff of all the host: and lastly the two
legions that were last levied were a rereward to the whole army and guarded the
stuff. Our horsemen with the slingars and bowmen passing the river encountered
with the horsemen of our ennemies. While they receyled back to their company
in the woods, and from thence again issued out upon our men, who durst not
pursew them any further then the plain and open ground extended, in the mean
time, the six Legions that went before, having their work measured out unto
them began to fortifiye their Camp. As soon as they that lay lurking in the
woods espied the formest cariages of our army, which was the time agreed upon
among them selves to give the onset upon us, for the performance whereof they
had set themselves in order of battle within the woods and encouraged one
another before hand, sodeinlye they came flying out with all their power and
charged upon our horsemen. Having easly put them back and disordred them, with
incredible swiftnes they came running down to the river: insomuch that well
nere all at one instant our enemies were in ye woods, in the River, and in hand
with us. With like swyftnesse also they rose against the hill to our Camp
against them that were occupied about their work. Now was Caesar driven to do al
things at ones. The banner was to be displayed: which was the toke^ when weapon
was to be taken in hand: warninge was to be given by the sounding of a
trumpet: the soldiers were to be called back from the work: such as were
gone abroad to fetch turfe were to be sent for: the battle was to be set in
array: the soldiers were to be encoraged: and sign of battle was to be given.
Of the which things a great part was interrupted by shortness of the time and
the hasty assault of our enemies. Against these distresses two things were a
help. First the knowledge and experience of the soldiers, because that
through their practice in former battles, they could as good skyll to teach
them selves, as be taught of others what was to be done: and secondlye
because Caesar had given commandment to every Lieuetenant severally that none
of them should be so hardye to depart from the work and from their several
legions, until such time as the camp were fortified. These men by reason of ye
hasty approach of their enemies, looked for no commandment from Caesar, but
ordered al things by them selves as seemed best by their own discretions. Caesar
having commanded such things as were nedeful, ran encoraging his soldiers
what way soever chance led him, and came to the tenth Legion. He made no
lengar protestacion to his soldiers but that they should have in remembrance
their ancient prowess: and that they should not be discouraged in their
hearts, but valeantly wythsta^d the brunt of their enemies. And because his
ennemies were no further of than a man might throw a Dart, he gave the^ a sign
of encountryng: ye which done, as he was going to another part to encourage
them like wise, he found them feightyng already. For the time was so short, and
the enemy so earnest to feight and so nere at hand, that there wanted leisure
not only to place them under their antesignes, but also to put on their skuls,
and to pull their tergats out of their cases. Look what part every man by
chance lighted into from his work, and what antesigne he saw first, there he
stayed, least in seking for his own company he should lose the time which was
to be spent in feighting. When he had set his men in array, rather according as
the nature of the place, and the fall of the hyl, and the necessity of the time
would suffer, than as the reason and order of battle required, so that his
legions in diverse places at ones were feign to encounter their ennemies one in
one part and another in another, the perfect sight and view being also hindered
by reason of thick hedges that were betwyxt the^, there could not any certain
rescow be placed any where, neither could it be seen what was nedeful to be
done in every part, nether could any one man see the order and execution of all
things. And therefore in so great uncertainty of things ensewed also diverse
haps of fortune. The Soldiers of the ninth and tenth legions as they stood in
the right side of the battle, after the darts were thrown, did quickly drive
down from the higher ground into the river, the * Atrebatians (for they by
chance were matched with them) then out of breath with running and
fortrauelled and sore wounded: and preasyng after them slew a great part of
them with their swords, as they were troubled in passing the water. Moreover
they sticked not to pass the river with them: but boldly aduenturing into a
place of disaduauntage, they renewed the battle again against their enemies
that returned upon them and made resistance, whom finally they put to flight.
Also in another part, two other legions the eleventh and the eyghth having
driven back the * Ueromanduanes (with whom they encountered) from the higher
ground fought hard upon the banks of the river. And al our whole Camp well nigh
being left naked on ye forefront and on the left side, seeing that in the right
wing stood the.xii. legion, and within a little way of it the.vii. legion:
All the Neruians in a very thycke battle by the conduct of Boduognatus who
was general of the field, made toward the same place. Of whom some began to
assault our Legions on the open side, and some to get to the highest place of
our Camp. The same time our horsemen and our light harnessed footmen and
such as were with them, (who (as I told you) were put to flight at the first
shocke of our enemies,) as they were retyring into their Camp met their
enemies full in the face, and fled again from them another way. And the
varlets and pages who from the high gate of our Camp and the top of the hill
had seen our men pass the River with conquest, going out to gather the
spoil, when they looked back and saw the enemies in our Camp, took them to
their beles as fast as they could. Therewithal was also heard a noise and a
rose of them that came with the cariages, and every man scattred away for
fear some one way and some another. All the which things struck such a fear
into the hearts of the horsemen of Triers, who are reputed for men of singular
prowess among the Galls, and were sent from their City to aid Caesar, when
they had seen that our Camp was replenished with a multitude of our enemies,
our Legions sore laid at and in manner beset round about, and that our pages,
our horsemen, our slingars of Numidie, fled scattring here and there every way,
thinking there was no hope of recovery with us, took their way home, and
reported to their City that the Romans were put to flight and vanquyshed, and
that their enemies had won their Camp and all their cariages. Caesar as he
went from encouraging the tenth Legion to the right wyng, when he perceived his
men to be sore pressed, and the Antesignes gathered together into one place:
the souldyers of the.xii. Legion to be pestered so thycke together that one
could not feight for another: all the Centurions of the iiii. Cohort slain, the
antesigne bearer killed, and the antesigne lost: the capteynes almost of all
the other Cohorts either wounded or slain, among the which number P. Sextus
Baculus a very valiant Gentilman chief captein of a band was hurt with so many
and so sore wounds that he was now not able to stand on his legs: the residue
to wax somewhat faint, and diverse forsaken of the hindermost to wythdrawe out
the battle and eschew feightyng: his enemies giving no entrance to such as
came up against the hill on the forefronte from the lower ground, and laying
sore to them on both sides, so that the matter was brought to a narrow issue,
and no help that could be mynistred to releue them: took a tergat from one of
the hyndermost souldyors (for he was come thither without a tergat) and
aduauncing him self into the forefront of the battle, called upon the
Centurions by name, and encouraging ye rest of the soldiers, he commanded the
antesigne to be advanced and the bands to set them selves more at large, to
thinte^t they might ye easlyer wyeld their swords. By his coming the soldiers
being well chered and gathering courage again, when every man for his part in
the sight of his graund captain even at thuttermost extremity, endeavored to
employ his travel, the brunt of the enemy was a littell stayed. Caesar
perceiving that the seventh Legion which stood by him was likewise sore
ouerlaide by the enemy, admonyshed ye Tribunes that the Legions should by lyttel
and littel knit them selves together and turnyng their antesignes advance them
toward the enemy. By means whereof when as one helped another, and that they
were out of fear of being enclosed of the ennemy behynd, they began to stand
more boldly at defens and to lay their hands better about them. In the mean
season, the soldiers of the two Legions which in the rereward were a defense
to the cariages, hearing of the battle ran thither a pace and were spyed by
our enemies in the top of the hill. And Titus Labienus having won the tents
of our enemies, and beholding from the higher ground what was done in our camp,
sent the tenth legion to the reskew of our men. Who learning by the flight of
our horsemen and pages in what case the matter stood, and in how great danger
both the Camp, and the Legions, and the Captain him self was, made as much
have as was possible. Upon the coming of them there ensewed such an alteration
of things, that even such of our men as for grief of their wounds were fallen
down, leaning upon their shieldes began to feight again a fresh: the pages
perceiving their enemies amassed ran upon the^ armed being unarmed themselves:
and the horsemen to thentent with valea^tnes to wipe away the reproach of their
former flight, did in all places put them selves into the battle before ye
Legionary souldyors. How beit the enemies even in thuttermost peril of their
lives showed such manhood, that as fast as the formest of them were
overthrown, the next unto them bestrid them and fought upon their bodies: the
which being likewise cast down, and the dead carkesses heaped one upon
another, those that remained standing upon the^ as it had been a hyl threw
darts at our men and latchyng our Darts sent them again at us: so that there
was good cause to deem them men of so hault courage, who durst pass so broad
a river, clymb up the high banks, and march up into a place of most
disaduauntage for themselves: all the which things the nobleness of their
courage of most hard, had made very easy. This battle being dispatched, and
the nation and name of the Neruians being brought almost to utter destruction,
the elder sort who (as we told you) with the women and children were gathered
together into out Islands and fennes, when they heard of this battle, thinkyng
that nothing was able to stay the conquerors, nor nothing able to save such as
were vanquished, by the consent of all that were left alive sent ambassadors
unto Caesar, and yielded them selves to his mercy, alleging in declaration of
the great calamity of their country, that of syx hundred Senators they were
brought to three, and of threescore thousand men there were scarce five hundred
left that were able to bear armor. Whom Caesar to thentent it might appear he
had showed pity to wretches and such as submitted themselves unto him,
preserved very carefully, granting them to enjoy still their country and
towns, and streightlye commanding the borderers to restrein themselves and
theyrs from doing them any wrong or harm.

The Aduaticks (of whom we have written before) coming with all their power to
aid the Neruians, when news was brought them of this discomfiture, brake of
their journey and returned home: and abandoning up all their Towns and Castles
conveyed all their goods into one town of nature excellently well fortified:
the which on al parts round about having most high rocks and steep fallings,
had left on one side an ascent gentlye rising by littel and littel, not passing
two hundred foot broad. This place they had fortified with a double wall of a
very great height, and thereupon had laid in a redines stones of a great mass
and logs of timber sharpened at both ends. Them selves were the ofspryng of
the Cimbria^s and duchmen, who at such time as they took their voyage through
our Province into Italye, bestowed such stuff and cattle of theyrs as they
could not carye and drive with them on this side the river Rhyne, and left syx
thousand of their company behind for the saufe keeping and defense of the same.
These after the death of their companions, being many years together
dysquietted by their neybors while they sometime invaded and sometime defended,
concluding peace by general consent, chose this place to inhabit and settle
themselves in. And at the first coming thither of our army, they made often
salyes out of the town, and skyrmished with our men. Afterward being environed
with a Rampyre of twelve foot, of fiftene miles compass about, and beset with
castles as thycke as one could stand by another, they held themselves within
the town. When they saw the Uines framed, the mount raised and a turret a
buylding a far of, at the first they began to laugh at it and to make a
continual seoffyng at it from the wall, that so huge an engine should be rered
so great a distaunce of, demanding in manner of scorn, with what hands or
with what strength, specially men of so small a stature (for in respect of
their own ta^nes and goodly personages all the Galls for the most part account
us but dwarfs) hoped to place a tower of such workmanshyp upon the wall of the
town. But when they saw it removed and approchyng nere the walls, abashed at
the strange and unaccustomed sight thereof, they sent ambassadors to Caesar for
peace: who spoke to this effect. That they believed, the Romans did not make
way without the assistens of the Gods, which could with such expedicion set
forward engines of so great a height and bring them to encounter at hand.
Wherefore they said they submytted them selves and all that they had unto
their curtesy: desyring and humbly beseching that if of his mere clemency and
gentilnes which by report he had extended toward other, he could vouchesafe to
save the Aduaticks, he would not bereue them of their armor. For almost al
their neybors were enemies unto them, and had spite at their valiant doings,
from whom they were not able to defend themselves if they should deliver up
their armor. So that it were better for them (if they should be put to that
extremity) to suffer any displeasure whatsoever, at the hands of the people of
Rome, than to be butcherlye murdered by them among whom they had been wont to
reign like lords.

Caesar made answer herunto, that he would save their City rather of his own
accustomed gentilnesse then for any desert of theirs, so that they yielded
before the battle Ram touched the wall: but no condition of yelding should be
accepted without delivery of their armor. For he would do by the^ as he had done
by the Neruians, and give commandment to their neighbors that they should
not offer any kind of wrong to such as had submitted them selves to the people
of Rome. When word hereof was brought to the City, they said they were
contented to do whatsoever should be commanded them. Herupon casting a great
quantity of armor over the wall into the diche that was before the town,
insomuch that the heaps of armor did rise welnere to the top of the wall and
the rampire, and yet (as afterward was found) concealing and keeping still
within the town, about the third part, they set open their gates, and for
that day used them selves peaceably. Toward night Caesar commanded the gates
to be shet, and his soldiers to get the^ out of the town, that the townsmen
should not receive any displeasure by them in the night time. But they having
laid their heads together before (as afterward was understood) forasmuch as
they believed that our me^ upon their submission would either set no watch nor
ward at all, or at leastwyse keep it more slightly, partlye with such armor as
they had retained and concealed and partly with tergats made of bark or wrought
of wicker, which upon the sodeine they had covered over with leather as the
shortness of the time required, in ye third watch, whereas the ground was least
steep to come up the hill to our fortifications, issued sodeinly out of the
town with al their power. But sygnification was soon made hereof by fyres (as
Caesar had commanded before) and spedye resort was made thither from the
bulwarks. Nevertheless our enemies stood stoutly to their tacklyng as became
valiant men to do in the last hope of their welfare, feightyng in a place of
disaduauntage, against such as threw darts at them from the towers and mounts,
considering there was none other shyft to save the^ selves then by their
manhood. In conclusion with the slaughter of a four thousand men, the rest
were driven back into the town. The next day after, when Caesar came to break
open the gates and no man stood at defense, he sent in our soldiers, and sold
all the spoil of the town. Such as had bought it, made an accomt to him of the
number of three and fifty thousand folk by ye pol.

The same time, P. Crassus who^ he had sent with one legion to ye Uenets,
People of Uannes.
Uuels People of Perch.
Osisines People of Landriguer.
Curiosolits, People of Cornwall.
Sesuvians, People of Roane.
Aulerks, People about Renes. Al peoeple of Britain and Normandye.
and Rhedones (which are haven towns and stand upon the Ocean sea,) advertised
him that all those Cities had yielded and were brought in subjection to the
people of Rome. After that these things were dispatched and al Gallia brought
in peaceable obedience there went such a report and estimation of this war
among other barbarous people, that from such nations as inhabited beyond the
Rhine were sent Ambassadors unto Caesar, profering to give him hostages and do
what so ever he should command them. The which ambassades Caesar (for as much as
he had then have into Italy and A part of a country now called Sclauony.
Illyricum,) commanded to repair to him again in the beginning of the next
summer. And so when he had distributed his legions into garrisons for the
winter season among ye The country about Charters.
Carunes, The country of Aniow.
Andia^s, and The cou^tri about towers beneth the river of Loyre
Turones which were cities nere to those places where he had made war, be took
his way in to Italy. And for these things upon ye sight of Cesars letters,
general supplycation was proclaimed in Rome for fiftene days, which thing
before that time had happened to no man.

FINIS.
THE THIRD BOOK of C. Julius Caesar's Commentaries of his wars in Gallia.
AT SVCH TIME AS Caesar took his journey into Italy, he sent Seruius Galba with
the twelueth Legion and part of his horsemen against the People between Geneua
and S. Mawryce.
Antuats, The country about S. Mawrice.
Ueragrines, The country about Sion in Ualoys. Being al people in and about the
Alps.
and Sedunes which inhabit all the countries from the borders of the
Allobrogians to the lake Leman, and the river Rhone, unto the top of the Alps.
The cause of his sending thither was that he would have ye ways over the Alps
which Merchaunts could not pass without great danger and great (...) paying,
hereafter set open. By gave him leave to place one Legion there in garrison if
he thought good so. Galba having fought certain prosperous battles and won
diverse of their fortresses by force, after that ambassadors had been sent to
him from all sides, and that hostages were delivered and peace stablyshed,
determined to leave two Cohortes in garryson among the Antuats, and he himself
to winter with the rest of the Cohorts of that legion in a town of the
Ueragrynes called Now called Martanach and of some Sion in Ualoys.
Octodure, the which being situate in a valley and not much plain ground about
it, is environed on all sides with very high mountains. Now whereas this
village was divided in two parts with a river, he appointed the one part of it
to the Galls to winter in, and the other part left void by them he assigned to
his Cohorts, the which place he fortified with a trenche and Rampyre. When a
good part of the Winter was now past, and that he had commanded corn to be
brought thither, sodeinlye he was advertised by his espials, that all the
Galls were in the night time departed out of that part of the village which he
had limited unto them, and that the hills that ouerloked the town, were held
by an innumerable multitude of the Sedunes and Ueragrines. There were some
causes that moved the Galls, to renew the war thus upon the sodeyne, and to
conspyre the destruction of this legion. First perceyuyng the Legion to want of
the full number, because two Cohorts were taken out of it, and many severally
were abse^t that were sent abroad to fetch in victuals, they disdeined our small
number. Secondlye by reason of the disadvantage of the place, in that they
should run down upon us from the hyl unto the valley and cast their darts
at us, they thought it was not possible for us to abide the first brunt of
them. Moreover it grieved them that their children were taken from them in
the name of the hostages, and persuaded themselves that the Romans went about
to ceaze into their hands the tops of the Alps not so much for passage, as for
a perpetual possession, and so to lay those places unto their province, which
bordered up on them. Galba upon the receipt of these tidings, when as his winter
work and fortifications were not yet fullye fynished, nor sufficient of corn
and other victuals provided, by reason that after submission made and pledges
delivered he thought there had been no war to be feared, called a counsel
with all speed and demanded every man's opinion what was to be done. In the
which counsel, because so much sode in danger had happened unlooked for, and
that they might see almost all the higher grounds keuered with armed men,
against whom there could come no succor unto the^, no nor any victuals be
conveyed in for their relief, the wais being foreclosed by the enemy, in
manner dispairing of life, some were of this opinion that it was best to abondon
al their stuff and caryages, and so yssuing out to endeavor to escape with their
lives by the same way that they came thither. Howheit it seemed good to the
greater part, to reserve this counsel til there were none other shyft, and in
the mean while to try how the matter would fall out, and to defend their Camp.
By and by after, so that there was scarce so much respit as to order and
dispose the things they had determined, the enemies at a watch word given,
came running down on al sides, and threw stones and darts into the trenche.
Our men at the first while their strength was fresh, stood stoutlye at
defense, insomuche that they sent not any dart from the Ra^pyer, but it was
bestowed to some purpose: and what part of the Camp soever seemed to be
dysfurnyshed of defenders or ouercharged with enemies, thither they ran and
reskowed. But herin they had the dysaduauntage, that our ennemies when they
were wearyed with continuance of feyghting, would wythdrawe them out of the
prease, and other succeeded fresh and lustye in their steades. Of the which
things our me^ could none do by reason they were so few. In so much that not
only he that had been weary had no respyt to convey him self out of the
battle, but even he that was wounded had no liberty to draw himself somewhat
aside out of ye place where he stood, to refresh or ease himself. When they had
fought by the space of syx h^^^^es and more without ceassyng, and that not only
strength but also weapons began to fail our men, and that our enemies preased
more earnestly upon us, insomuche that our men waxing faint, they began to
break down the Rampire and fill up the trenche, and that the matter was
brought to utter extremity, P. Sextius Baculus capteyne of the chyef band, who
as we told you before was nere spent with wou^des in the battle against the
Neruians, and likewise C. Uolusenus Trybune of the souldyors, a man of great
wisdom and prowess, came runnyng unto Galba, and told him that there was no
way to save them selves but one, which was to issue out and to seek succor at
their uttermost refuge. Galba therefore calling together the Centuryons, gave
the soldiers quickly to understand, that they should by littel and littel
cease from feighting, and only receive the darts that were thrown at them,
and refresh themselves of their labor and travel: the which done he
commanded that as soon as warning was given them, they should issue out of
their Camp, and think to save themselves by their manhood. They did as they
were bidden. And issuing sodeinly out at all the gates, assailed their enemies
with such force, that they could neither tell what to do, nor gather them
selves together. Thus fortune changed her copy in such wise, that they fetched
in on every side and slew those that stood in good hope and possibility of
wynning their Camp: and having of thirty thousand men and above, (the which
number is certainly known to have come to thassaulte of our camp,) slain more
than the third part, they put the rest to flight and made them so amazed, that
they suffered them not to stay, no not in the higher grounds. So having
overthrown all the power of their enemies, and turned them out of their
harness, they retired into their Camp and fortifications. After this
encounter, because Galba would not to often put him self to the curtesye of
fortune, remembryng he came to winter there for another purpose, and perceiving
he had met with other adventures than he looked for, but chiefly moved
thereunto with scarcety of corn and other vyctuals, the next day he set all
the houses of that village on fire, and taking his way into the Province,
without any enemy to trouble him or stay him by the way, brought his Legyon
saufe among the Antuats, and from thence to the Allobrogia^s, and there wintred.

Aft^r that these things were dyspatched, when Caesar thought there had been no
cause of tumult and rebellion left in Gallia, considering how the Belgies were
vanquished, the Germans driven out, and the Sedunes overcome in ye Alps, and
so in the beginning of winter was gone into Illyricum, for that he had a desire
to vsit those Nations also, and to know those countries, there arose a sodein
war throughout Gallia. The cause of that war was this. A young gentilma^ called
P. Crassus, lay in garryson with the seventh legion nere unto the Ocean sea
among the Andians. The people of Aniow.
He, because in those quarters was small store of grain sent out diverse of his
chyef officers and Tribunes into the Cities therabouts to fetch corn and
vyctuals: of the which number were T. Terrasidius sent to the Uuelles, M.
Trebius Gallus sent to the Curiosolits, Q. Uelanius and T. Silius sent to the
Uenets. This City bears great authority over all these countries on the Sea
coast, both because the Uenets have many ships where with they are wont to
sail into Britain: and also because they excel all the residewe in
knoweledge and experyence of Sea matters: and moreover because those few
hauous (as many as be of them) in that ragyng and main sea be all in their
possessyon, which is a cause that all they that are accustomed to sail those
seas, do pay custom to them. These Uenets began to broile in deteyning of
Silius and Uelanius, because they thought that by their means they should
recover the hostages that they had given to Crassus. Their next neibors moved
with thautority of their example, (as the Galies will in deed attempt things
sodeinlye and upon a head) for the same cause deteyned Trebonius and
Terasidius: and out of hand dyspatchyng. Ambassadors confedered them selves
together by their noblemen, to do nothing but by common aduyre, and to abide
thuttermost, what fortune so ever should follow: persuading with the rest of
the Cities to chose rather to continue in the lyberty which they had received
from their auncetors, than to continue in bondage under the Romans. When they
had quicklye allured all the Seacoast to be of their mind, they sent a
general ambassade to P. Crassus, theffect whereof was, that if he would have
his men again he should render unto them their hostages. Caesar being certifyed
of these procedings by Crassus, because he was at that time somewhat far of,
commanded Galleyes to be builded in the mean season upon the River of Loyre
which falls into the Ocean Sea, and rowers to be fetched out of Province, and
maryners and ship masters to be taken up. These things being spedelye brought
to pass, he him self as soon as the time of the year would suffer him, came
to his army. The Uenets and the rest of the co^federate cities having knowledge
of Cesars coming, and therwithal weiyng what an heinous offense they had
committed against him in deteining and castyng in prison his ambassadors,
(which name had alwais heretofore ben accounted hollye and inviolable among al
nations) according to the greatness of the danger, determined to lay for the
war before hand, and specially to provide things necessary for shyps: the
which they did with so much ye better hope, because they had great trust in
the strentgh of the place, from whence they knew all access with an army by
land was cut of by salt marshes, and conueying thither by water would be very
combersome, because the Romans were unacquainted with those countries, and
there were few hauons to harbrough in by the way: and also they believed
verelye, that our army should not be able to tarry any long time among them
because there was so small store of grain. Yea and though all these things
should fall out contrary to their expectation, yet notwythstanding they were able
to do much with their shyps, whereas the Romans had not any power of ships,
nor yet knowledge of the shallowes, hauons, and Islands that were in those
places where they went about to make war: And they knew right well it was
another manner of matter to sail in the narrow seas then in the main and open
Oc^an. When they had thus taken aduyce, they fortifyed their towns: they
conveyed their corn out of the country into the towns: they gathered together
as many ships as they could unto Uannes where it was known that Caesar would
first begin ye wars: they alyed unto them for their more assistence in that
war, the People of Landriguer.
Osisines the The country about Liseaux
Lexobians, the The country about Nau^ts
Naunets, the The country about Auranches
Ambiliats, the The country about Torowan.
Morines, the Diablinters, and the The country of Leondul^. The Gu^^ders and
Cleues.
Menapians: and they sent for succor out of Britain which is situate over
against those countries. These things above me^cioned were such as might
greatly trouble and set back the war. How beit there were many things that
enforced Caesar unto this war. As namely the wrongful deteyning of the Roman
knights: the rebellion after submission: the going back from promys after
pledges delivered: the confederacy of so many cities: and in especially least
through his negligence in this behalf, the rest of the country might take
courage to do the like. Therefore forasmuch as he perceived how all the Galls
in a manner were given to newfanglenes, and stirred up to make war upon every
light occasion, and that al men of nature are desirous of liberty, and hate
the state of bondage: he thought it convenient to divide his host and send them
farther abroad, before any mo cities were confederate together. And thereupon
he sent his Lieuetenant T. Labienns with a band of horsemen against the Treuires
which are next ye river Rhine: giving him in charge to go to the men of Rhemes
and the rest of the Belgies, and to keep them in their duty, and to prohibit
the Germans (who were reported to be sent for to aid the Belgies) from
passing the river if they attempted to ferry over by force. P. Crassus with
twelve Legionary Cohorts and a great company of horsemen, he commanded to take
his journey into Aquitaine, to thentent there should not out of those countries
be sent any aid to the Celts, and so puissant Nations be joined together.
He sent his Lieuetenant Q. Titurius Sabinus with three Legions against the *
Uuels, *Curiosolyts, and Lexobians, to keep that power from joining with the
rest. He made Decius Brutus a noble young gentilman admyrall of his Navy and of
the French fleet which he had assembled from among the The people of Poyters.
Pictones and The people of Xanton.
Santones, and the rest of the Nations under the Roman jurisdiction:
co^maundyng him to set forward against the Uenets as soon as might be: and he
himself marched thitherward with his army by land. The situacio^ of the towns
for the most part was such, that being set in thuttermost nookes and mountains
reaching into the sea, there was no coming to them on foot, by reason of the
rysyng of the tides, which ever happened twice in twelve hours space: nor yet
with ships because that at the falling of the tide, the shyps were beaten
upon the shallowes: so that both ways thassault of the towns was hyndered.
And if at any time overcome perchance with the greatness of our works, when we
had shet out the sea with Ietties and mounts raised as high as the town walls,
they began to have distrust in their estate, by and by arrived a great number
of ships, whereof they had plenty at pleasure, and carried away all that they
had, and conveyed them selves into the next towns, where they defended them
again with the same advantages and commodities of the places. This they did so
much the more easlye for the most part of the summer, because our ships were
kept away with tempests and much a do we had to sail in the main and open sea
against so great tides, whereas were havens few or none at all. For their shyps
were builded and decked in this wise. The keles of them were somewhat flatter
than the keles of our shyps, to thentent they might the easlier abide ye
shallowes and the falling of the tide. Their foredecks were very straight
upright, and so were also their sternes, made so for the nones for the better
abydyng of the greatness of the waves, and of the tempests. All the whole ship
was made of heart of Oak, able to endure any force or displeasure were it never
so great. Their seats were of planks a foot deep, fastened with nails an ynch
thyck. In stead of Cables ye anchors were tied with cheines of iron. In stead
of the linne^ cloth their sails were of leather, or else of raw hides dressed
thin: which happened for want of hemp and fla^ and because they knew not the
use of them, or else (which has a more likelyhode of truth,) because they
thought that in so great tempests of the Ocean and in so great rage of ye
winds, ships of so great burden could not well and handsomlye be guided
with sails of linen. Thencounter between these ships and our navy was such,
that only in swiftnes and rowyng with ores we were to good for them. But al
other things according to the nature of the place and the violence of the
tempests, were more handsome and agreeable for them than for us. For neither
could ours hurt them with their stemmes, they were so strong made, neither
could a weapon easlye be thrown up into them by reason of their height: and
for the same cause they might not well be kept among rocks. Moreover it came to
pass, that when the wind began to be boisterous, and that they had put
themselves to the wether, they were both able the better to endure the tempest,
and staid more saufly in shallow places, and when the tide failed them they
feared nothing at all the stones and rocks: of all the which things the
mischaunce was to be feared of our fleet.

When Caesar had won many towns, perceiving that he spent all that great
travel in waste, for as much as though he took their towns yet they ever
escaped his hands, so that he could not hurt them, he determined to tarry the
coming of his navy. The which as soon as it was assembled and came within
kennyng of our enemies, about a two hundred and twentye of their shyps in very
good readynesse, and thoroughly furnyshed with all kind of artillery launching
out of the haven, set them selves against ours. Now wist not Brutus that was
admiral of the fleet nor any of the Tribunes or peticapteynes whereof every
one had his ship appointed to him severally, what was to be don, or by what
means they might maintein the battle. For well they knew y^ with the stemmes of
their ships they could not anoy their enemies: and albe it they had raised up
turrets, yet were the foredecks of the French ships far above them: so that
neither any dart could be cast any thing handsomlye from bylow, and such as
were thrown down by the Galls fell with greater force. One thing which our
men had prepared before did us good service: which were sharp hooks fastened
unto long steals, not unlike in fashion to Country Sithes. With these they
took hold upon the cords that held ye saleyards to the mastes, and drawing
them unto them, cut them a sunder as the Galleyes were driven forward with
force of ores, so that of necessitye the sail yardes must needs fall down: to
thintente that the French ships disappointed of their sails and tackling
wherein co^systed their chief hope, they might at one time be marred for doing
any more seruys. Then remained thencounter consysting only in manhod, wherein
our soldiers easly surmounted. And that so much the more because the thing was
done in ye sight of Caesar and all his army, insomuch that no deed, were it done
any thing valeantly, could escape unnoted. For the army stood upon all the
hills and all the high grounds, from whence there was any perfect vewe into the
sea. The sails being (as we said) cut down, when as two or three of our
galleies were alwais about one ship of our enemies, our soldiers endeavored
most earnestly to board the^. The which thing when the Frenchmen perceived,
after that many of their ships were won from them, and that they could find no
remedy against that mischief, they endeavored to save themselves by flight. But
when their shyps were now turned to take the wind, suddenly the sea became so
still and calm, that they could not stir out of the place. The which thing
happened for our purpose as well as we could wish. For our men ouertaking them
one by one did in such wise board them, that very few of all the whole number
escaped to land, and that was by reason the night came so fast on, the battle
being continewed almost from four of the clock to the sun going down. In
the which battle was dispatched the war of the People of Uannes in Britain.
Uenets and of all the sea coast. For not only al ye youth, yea and all that were
of further years in who^ was any wisdom and estimation, were assembled
thither: but also they had brought thither all the ships that were to be
gotten any where: the which being lost, the rest had neither whither to resort
for saufgarde, nor wist how to defend their towns. And therefore they yielded
themselves and all that they had unto Caesar. Upon whom he determined to take
the greater punishment, to the intent the barbarous people should hereafter take
better head how they demeaned themselves otherwise than well toward
ambassadors. wherefore putting al their Senate to death, he sold the rest under
a garlond for bondme^.

While these things were a doing about Uannes, Q. Titurius Sabinus with that
power which he had received of Caesar, was come among the People of Perch.
Uuels. The Governor of them was one Uiridouix, and he had ye chyef charge of
all those Cities that had rebelled, out of the which he had gathered a puissant
army. And in these few days the People of Roane.
Aulerks, People of Eureux. People of Liseaux.
Eburouiks, and Lexobians having killed their Senotors because they would not
be the authors of this war, had shet their gates and joined themselves with
Uiridouix. Besides these, a great multitude of unthrifts and cut throtes were
flocked thither out of all Gallia, of those sort of rascals whom hope of
spoil and desire of war had wythdrawen from husbandrye and daily labor.
Sabinus therefore held him self within his Camp in a place mete for all
purposes: When Uiridouix being encamped against him a two miles of, did daily
bring forth his army and offer him battle: insomuch that now, Sabinus began
not only to be despised of his enemies, but also to be cried out upon and
taunted of his own soldiers. And he gave his enemies so much cause to think
that he stood in fear of them, that now they durst approach even to the
trenche of his Camp. The which he did because he thought it was more then a
Lieuetenant ought to do, to encounter with so great a multitude of enemies
specially in thabsence of his general, unless it were in an indifferent place
or upon some occasion of advantage given. When he had thus confirmed the^ in
this opinion of his fearfulness, he chose out a mete person for the purpose, a
subtle fellow, one of the Galls that he had in his retinew for his aid, and
persuaded him with great rewards and large promises, to steal over to his
ennemies, giving him instructions what he should do. This fellow coming
thither like a runnagate, reported what fear the Romans stood in: and
declared how sore the Uenets had distressed Caesar him self, assuring them
that the next night after at the furthest, Sabinus would steal priuelye with
his army out of his camp and take his way toward Caesar to succor him. When
this was heard, they cried out all with one voice, that so fair an occasion
of good success ought not to be let slip, and that the Camp was to be
assaulted out of hand. Many things pricked forward the Galls in this device:
as the pawsyng of Sabinus the days before: the warranting of the runagate: the
want of victualles for the which they had made very slender provision: the
hop^ of the good success of the wars about Ua^nes: and because men commonly
are willing to believe such things as they would have come to pass. Moved with
these persuasions, they would not suffer Uiridouix and the rest of the
Capteynes to depart out of counsel, before they had granted them that they
should arm them selves and march to our Camp. The which thing being agreed
unto, they came meryly toward us with their shreds and fagots that they had
gathered to fill up the dyches, as if the vyctory had been their own out of al
cry. The place where our tents were pitched, was somewhat high, and rising by
littel and littel from the bottom about a thousand paces. Hither they came
runnyng a great pace, to the intent they would give the Romans as littel leisure
as they could to gather together and arm themselves: insomuche that by that
time they came there, they were clean out of breath. Sabinus after he had
encouraged his men, gave them token of encounter which they sore desired. And
perceyuyng his enemies to be troubled with the burthe^s that they bare,
commanded issue to be made out upon them suddenly at two gates. It came to
pass by means of thaduauntage that we had of the ground, through
thunskylfulnes of our enemies that had ouerweried themselves before, and
through the prowess of our own soldiers practysed in former conflicts, that
they were not able to abide one pushe of us, but by and by turned their backs.
Whom combered in that sort our men fresh and lusty encounteryng with, slew a
great number of them: and our horsemen ouertaking the rest left but few of
them, that saved them selves by flight. So all at one time Sabinus was
certified of the battle on the sea and Caesar of Sabines victory: and
immediately thereupon all the Cities yielded to Titurius. For as the hearts of the
Balls are cherefull and forward to take wars in hand: so are their courages
faynte and nothing stout to bear out adversities.

At the same time almost, P. Crassus coming into Aquitaine, the which (as is
said before) both for the largeness of the Countries and multitude of people,
is to be counted a third part of Gallia, when he perceived that he must make
war in such a place, where a few years before Lucius Ualerius Preconius a
Lieuetenant was put to flight and his army slain: and from whence L. Manlius
the Uiceconsull was glad to escape by flight with the loss of all his stuff
and cariages: he saw it stood him in hand to look well about him and to take
good heed. Wherefore having made provision of grain, gotten aid as well of
horsemen as footmen, and moreover called unto him by name many valiant
personages out of Tolowse, Caracassone, and Narbone which are Cities bordering
upon the Province of Gallia, he led his army into the country of the People
about Tolouse
Sontiats. The Sontiats having knowledge of his coming before, assembled a
great power both of footmen and also of horsemen wherein consisted their chief
strength, and encountryng our army by the way, first began the battle with
their horsemen. The which being put to flight, as our men of arms chaced them,
suddenly they showed their footmen whom they had laid in a valley for a stale.
They setting on our men disordered, began the battle again. The feight was
long and cruel: the Sontiats for the trust they had in them selves by reason
of their former vyctoryes, thynking that the welfare of Aquitaine consisted in
their manhod and prowess: and our men desyring to show what they could do
without their General, and without the rest of their Legions, having but a
young man to their Captain. At length our enemies overcome with wounds took
them to flight. Of whom after that a great number had been slain. Crassus in
his way began to assault the head City of the Sontiats: and when he saw them
stand stoutly at defense, he builded Uines and Towers. They on the other side
sometime issuing out, and sometime drawyng Mines to the Mount and Uines (in
which feat the Aquitaines are very cunning, because that among the^ in many
places are iron mines) when they perceived our men to take so good head of them
that they could nothing at all by those means avail, sent Ambassadors to
Crassus and desired that he would take them to mercy. The which request
obtained, they delivered their armor as was commanded them. While the minds
of all our men were busyed herabout, out of another part of the town
Adcantuan chief governor of the City with syxhundred sworn brethren whom
they call Soldures (whose state and condition is such that they participate
and enjoy alike all commodities of this life, with them to who^ they have vowed
their friendship, and that if any thing happen unto them otherwise then well,
that they come to any mysfortune, either they take part with them in their
aduersitye, or else kill them selves: In somuche that within the compass of
man's remembrance there has not any of the^ been found, that when his friend (to
who^ he had sworn himself) was slain would refuse to dye,) intended to make a
saly upon us. But our soldiers warned by the great shout that was raised by
such of our company as warded on that side, resorted to their weapons, and
after a sharp encounter drove him back into the town: and yet nevertheless he
obtained of Crassus the like benefyt of submission as other of the Townsmen
had done. After that Crassus had received their armor and hostages, he took his
way into the Marches of the * Uocatians and * Tarusatians.

Then the savage people agreued that within so few days after our coming
thither we had won a town both by situacion and man's hand so well fortified,
sent out ambassades on all sides: confedered themselves together: gave hostages
one to another: and prepared men of war. Furthermore ambassadors were sent to
the Cities of the hythermost part of Spain next unto Aquitaine, and aid of
Souldyors and Capteines were waged from thence. At whose coming they began to
set forward the war with great authority and great multitude of people. Those
were chosen to be Capteines that had served all their time with Q. Sertorius,
and therefore were demed to be men of singular knowledge in feats of arms.
These according to the custom of the people of Rome, practysed to take places
of advantage, to fortify their Camp, and to cut our victuals of from us. The
which thing when Crassus perceived, considering that his own army by reason
of the slender number thereof could not conuenientlye be sent diverse ways
abroad, and that his enemy might both raunge abroad at pleasure and also
forlay the ways, and yet leave sufficient defense in his camp besides, which
was a cause that grain and victual could not well be conveyed unto him, and
moreover that the number of his enemies daily increased, he thought it best to
try ye matter by battle without any further lingering. Having propounded this
matter in counsel, when he perceived al of them to be of ye same opinion, he
appointed the next day to give battle in. As soon as the day began to break,
he brought forth his army and orderyng them in two battles placed his aids in
the middle ward, waiting what his enemies intended to do. They albeit that in
consideration of their multitude, and their ancient renown in cheualry, and
the small number of our men, thought they might have given us battle sauflye,
yet notwithstanding they thought it a surer way, by forlaying the ways and
cuttyng of our victuals to get the vyctory with out bloodshed. And if the
Romans for penury of corn and vyctuals began to retire, they determined to
assail them cowardly as they were troubled in marchyng with their burdens on
their necks. The Capteines lyked this counsel so well, that as often as ye
Romans brought their men into the field, they kept them selves within their
Camp. Crassus perceyuyng that, when he by his prolonging of time and his
enemies by pretending such fear, had made our Soldiers more courageous to
feyght, insomuche that it was hard at every man's mouth that they would to their
ennemies camp without any further delay, after he had given encouragement unto
the^, led them thither with willing hearts There while some filled up ye diches,
some by throwyng darts thick drove the defendantes down from their Rampyres
and fortifications, and that the strange soldiers whom Crassus trusted not
greatly unto to feyght, in mynystrynge stones and weapons unto others, and in
brynging turfe to make the mount, made a show as though they had fought in
deed, and while on the contrary part our enemies fought sloutly and
vnfearfullye, and that the weapons which came ^^om above lighted not any where
in vain, our horsemen raunging about the Camp of our enemies, brought Crassus
word that their camp was not so strongly guarded at the chief gate, and that it
was easy to enter at it. Crassus exhortyng the capteines of the men of arms
to encourage their men with promis of great rewards, declared unto them what
he would have done. They according to their commission taking forth four
Cohorts which being left to defend the Camp had not ben wearyed with labor,
and leadyng them a great way about because their enemies should not spy them
from their Camp, while all their mynds and eyes were occupied earnestly in
feighting, came quickly to that side of the fortificatio^ that we spoke of
before: And breaking it down were entered all within the camp of their
ennemies, before they could be perfectly discerned by them, or that it could be
known what they were a doing. Then was heard a great noise from that part:
wherewith our men recoueryng strength, which commonly happens in hope of
victory, began to assault them more fiercely. Our enemies being besette on all
sides, and past hope of all recovery, cast themselves down from their
fortificatio^s, intending to save themselves by flight. Whom our horsemen
ouertakyng in the champio^ fields made such a slaughter of the^, that of fiftye
thousand which were known to be assembled thither out of Aquitaine and from
among the The peoples of Byscay.
Cantabres scarce the fowrth part was le^te alive: and so when it was far in
the night, he returned into his Camp.

When this discomfiture was heard of, the most part of Aquitaine yielded unto
Crassus, and of their own accord sent him pledges: in the which number were
the People of Tarbes.
Tarbelles, ye People of Tarbes.
Bigerrons, the People of Bierne.
Precianes, the People of Bierne.
Uocats, the People about Tur^e.
Tarusats, the People about Turfe.
Flustats, the People of Agenoys.
Garits, the People of Agenoys.
Auscians, the People of Aux.
Garumnes, the People of Aux.
Sibuzats, and the People of Aux.
Cocosats. A few of the Cities that were furthest of upon confidence in the
time of the year because winter was at hand, drove of from dooyng so.

The same time almost, Caesar albeit that ye so^mer was nygh spent, nevertheless
forasmuch as when all Gallia was brought to peaceable obedience, the People of
Tyrwyn.
Morines and Guelders and Cleues.
Menapians only remained that bare armor against him, and had never sent
ambassadors to him for peace: thynkyng that war might soon be dyspatched,
led his host thither. But they determined to make war with him far after
another sort than the rest of the Galls had done. For in as much as they
understood how the greatest nations that had given him battle in the field,
had been vanquished and put to flight, and perceived the^ selves to have main
woods and marisgrounds, they conveyed themselves and all that they had into the
same. To ye entrance of which woods when Caesar was come, and had begone to
fortify his camp, and that no enemy in the while appeared, as our men were
dispersed about their work, suddenly they came flying out of all parts of the
wood, and gave charge upon our men. Our men taking weapon quicklye drove them
back into the woods, and after they had slain a great number of them, they
followed them so far in somewhat unhandsome places, that they lost a few of
their company. The rest of the days ensuyng, Caesar began to fell the woods:
and to thentent no assault should suddenly be made upon our men unawares from
either side as they were worki^g unarmed, all the wood that was cut down he
caused to be laid with the ^ops turned to the ennemy, and stacked it up on both
sides like a rampire. When with wonderful speed we had in few days ryd a great
deal of ground, so that we had now gained their cattle and hyndermost
cariages, and yet they withdrewe them still into thicker woods, such tempests
ensued that of necessity we were constreyned to leave of our work, and the
rain continued so long that our men were not able to lie any lengar in the
fields. And therefore when Caesar had wasted all their country, and burnt up
their towns and buildings, he led back his army again and placed them in
garrison among the * Aulerks and * Lexobians and the other cities that had made
this last war.

FINIS.
THE FOVVRTH BOOK of C. Julius Caesar's Commentaries of his wars in Gallia.
THE WINTER THAT followed, which was the same year that Cneus Pompeius and M.
Crassus were Co^sulles, the * Usipits Germans and likewise the * Teuetheres,
with a great multitude of men passed the River of Rhine not far from the
place where it falls into the sea. The cause of their fleetyng was for that
they had many years together been vexed and oppressed with war by the
Sweuians, and could not be suffered to till their land in quiet. The Nation of
the Sweuians is of all the Germans greatest and most warlike. They are
reported to have a hundred shyres, from each of the which they yearlye take a
thousand armed men and send them out of their country a warfare: they that tarry
at home do find both them and themselves. These again ordinarily the next
year after go to the wars, and the other remain at home. So neither the
tillage of their land, nor the discipline and practice of war is decayed.
Howbeit among them there is not any piece of private or several ground. Neither
is it lawful for the^ to abide above one year in a place to dwell: neither do
they live much by corn, but for the most part by milk and cattle, and they
use hu^ting very much. The which thing for the kind of meat, and daily
exercise, and lyberty of life, (inasmuche as from their childhod being
acquainted with no duty nor nurture, they are not in any thing broken of their
wills,) does both nouryshe their strength, and makes them men of
unmeasurable big bodies. And now they have brought the^ selves to such a
custom, that even in most cold places they have none other raiment than
leather Ierkins, which are so short that a great part of their bodies are left
bare: and that they wash them selves in the runnyng waters. They suffer
merchants to resort unto them, but that is rather because they would have
chapmen to utter such things unto as they have gotten in the wars, than for
any need they have of ought to be brought in unto them. Moreover the beasts
which the Galls do most delight in and which they pay for excessiuely, the
Germans occupy not if they be brought to the^ out of any other country: but
such as are bred among them though they be littel tittes and ill shapen, they
make by dailye exercise to be very good of labor. In encountres of horsemen,
oftentimes they light from their horses and feight a foot: accustoming their
horses to keep a standinge, unto whom they retire quickly again when need
requires. Neither in their manner is any thing counted more shameful or
cowardly, than to use saddels. And therefore a very few of them dare adventure
against saddled horses be there never so great a number of them. In any wise
they suffer no Wine to be brought in unto them, because they think that
thereby men are weakened and disabled to endure pains. As touching their
publyke estate, they count it the greatest praise that can be, for the fields
to lie waste a great way of from the marches of their country. For that is as
much to say, that a great number of cities were not able to withstand their
puyssance. And therefore from one side of Sweueland it is reported that the
fields lie wast sixhundred miles of together. On another side dwell just by
them the People of the country about Colon on the other (...) of Rhyne
Ubians whose City was sometime both large and flourishing according to the
manner of the Germans, and they be somewhat more civil than other people of the
same nation and sort, because they border upon the Rhyne, and merchants resort
much unto them, and they them selves by reason of their nerenesse unto Gallia,
are inured with their manners. Albeit that the Swenians many times and in many
battles put them to their shyftes and could not drive them out of their
country by reason of the largenes and puissance of their City: yet
notwythstandyng they made them tributaries, and brought them lower, and made
them weaker.

In the same case were the Usipits and Teucthers whom we spoke of before, who
when they had many years withstood the force of ye Sweuians, were for all that,
at the last put out of their possessions, and after three years wandering in
many places of Germany, came to the Rhine whereas the Menapians did inhabit.
These Menapians had lands, houses, and towns on both sides the River. Howbeit
being stricken with fear at the coming of so great a multitude, they removed
out of their ^ouses that they had beyond the river, and dysposing garrisons on
this side the Rhine, prohibited the Germans to pass over. They having tried
al means, when as they durst neither attempt to pass by force for want of
ships, nor could get over by stelth for the Menapians which watched the^, made
as though they would have returned home into their own country: and going back
three days journey, returned again, and coming all that way on horseback in
one night, surprised the Menapians nothing at al knowing or mystrusting any
such matter, who being advertised by their skoults of ye departure of the
Germans, had without fear returned into their dwellings on thothersyde of
the Rhine. These being slain, they took their ships, and passing the
stream before that part of the Menapians which were quietlye at home in their
houses on this side the Rhine could be certified of their doings, took all
their houses and kept them selves the rest of the winter with their provision.

Caesar being advertised hereof, and mistrusting the infirmity of the Galls,
because in taking of counsel they be variable, and for the most part are
desirous of alteration, thought it not expedient to put them in trust with any
thing. This is a common custom among the Galls, to compel even wayfairyng
men to stay whether they will or no, and to enquire what every of them has
hard or knows of every matter. And for the common people to come flocking
about merchantmen in Cities, and to constreine them to tell out of what
countries they come, and what things they know of there. And being moved with
these light reports and here says, they fall to counsel oftentimes even of most
weighty matters: where of they must needs repent them by and by after, seeing
they are so fondly led by uncertain rumors, and that diverse persons tell the^
forged news to feed their fancyes wythall. The which custom when Caesar
understood, to the intent he might not mete with some worse match than he had
made already, he went sooner to his army than he was wont: When he came thither,
those things that he mystrusted would come to pass, he found done in deed.
That is, how ambassades were sent from many Cities to the Germans, and that
they were entreated with to depart from the Rhine, the which don they should
have at their hands whatsoever they would demand. With hope whereof the
Germans being moved, raunged now further abroad, and were come into the
borders of the People of Liege or Lukeland.
Eburones and People about Aix between Utreight and Iuliers.
Condrusians, which are reteiners to the Treuires. Caesar calling before him
the Princes of Gallia, thought it convenient to dissemble those things that he
knew: and thereupon appeasyng their courages with fair language and quickening
their spirits with comfortable words, he commanded them to find him a
number of men of arms, in purpose to make war with the Germans. When he had
made provision of corn, and taken muster of his horsemen, he marched toward
those places in the which he heard that the Germans were. As Soon as he came
within a few days journey of them, there came ambassadors from them, theffect
of whose oration was: That the Germans would neither begin to quarrel first
with the people of Rome, nor yet refuse to cope with them if they were
assailed: It was the custom of the Germans delivered from their auncesors,
that who soever made war upon them, to make resistance by force and not by
entretance: Nevertheless they had thus much to say for the^ selves, that they
were come against their wills as me^ cast out of house and home: If the Romans
would take them in^o favor, they might be profitable friends unto them,
wherefore they required either to assign them lands, or else to suffer them to
enjoy such as they had already gotten by conquest: to the Sweuians only they
gave place, whom not even the Gods immortal were able to match: For in all
the earth beside there was not any man whom they could not overcome.

Caesar replied hereunto as he thought good. But the conclusion of his oration
was: That there could be no frendshippe between him and them as long as they
abode in Gallia: And that it could not be true that they which were not able
to defend their own country, should keep possession of an other man's: and
though they could, yet were there not in Gallia any lands that could be
given, (specially to such a multitude) without doing wrong unto others: But it
should be lawful for them (if they would) to settle them selves in the
borders of the Ubians whose ambassadors were then with him to complain of the
injuries done by the Sweuians and to desire help of him: the which thing he
promised to obtain of the Ubians for them.

Thambassadors said they would make report hereof to their company, and upon good
aduyce taken in the matter, return again to him after the third day: desiring
that he would not in the mean time approach any nerer to them with his camp.
Caesar answered that they might not obtain so much as that at his hand. For
he knew that they had sent a great part of their horsemen certain days before
over ye Maze to the Brabander^
Ambiuarits to fetch in prays and forage. The return of which horsemen they
looked for, and therefore (as he thought) sought to have delays in the matter.
The river Maze spryngeth out of the mount^ine People of Langres.
Uosegus which is in the borders of the People of Langres.
Lingones, and receiving an arine of the Rhine to it which is called walin.
Uacalos, makes the Island of the Hollanders.
Batauians, and not passing lxxx. miles fro thence runs into the Ocean. Now
the Rhyne ryseth among the People of Granpunter
Lepontians who inhabit the Alps and from thence runs swift a long race by
the borders of the People of Uawd.
Nantuats, Helnetia^s, Sequanes, People of Me^z.
Mediomatrik^, People of Strawsoorg
Triboks, and Treuires: and when it comes nere the Ocean, it deuydeth it self
into many streams, making many great Islands: whereof a great sort are
inhabited by wyld and savage peoples: of ye which some are thought to live by
fyshe and birds eggs: and lastly falls with many heads into the Ocean.

At such time as Caesar was come within twelve miles of his enemies,
thambassadors according to appointment returned unto him. Who meting him in his
journey entreated him very earnestlye that he should proceed no further. When
they could not get grant thereof, they requested him to send out of hand to
his horsemen that were the foreryders of his host, to command them that they
should not seight, and that he would give them leave to send ambassadors to the
Ubians: whose Noblemen and cou^sellers if they made them assurance by oath,
upon such condition as Caesar should prescribe, they were contented to stand to
it. To bring these things to pass, they desired three days respit. All these
things Caesar thought tended to this one end, that by dryuing of of those three
days, their horsemen that were then absent might return. Notwithstanding he
promised to go no further forward but four miles that day, to have fresh water
for his Camp: willing them to repair to him the next Morning betymes, to
know further of his pleasure touching their demands. In the mean time he sent
to the Capteines of his horsemen that were rydden before, to warn them that
they should not make any assault upon their enemies: and that if any assault
were made upon them, that they should forbear them until he might come nerer
to them with his whole power. But our enemies, as soon as our horsemen came
within their sight, of whom there was the number of five thousand, whereas they
had not above eight hundred horsemen in all, because those that were gone over
the Maze for forage were not yet returned, while our men feared nothing
because their ambassadors were but newly before departed from Caesar, and that
they had entreated him for a truce, gave a quycke charge upon our men and put
them out of array. And when our men returned again to their defense, they
according to their custom lyghted a foot, and goring our horses and
dismou^ting many of their masters, put the rest to flight: and in such wise
chaced them in their fear, that they never ceased flying until they came in
the sight of our army. In that encounter were slain of our horsemen threescore
and fowertene, among whom was one Piso of Aquitaine a very valiant Gentilman
borne of a noble house, whose Graundfather had obtained the Souereinty of his
own City, and was proclaimed friend of our Senate. This Piso reskowing his
brother beset with enemies, delivered him out of danger: and he himself being
cast from his horse that was wounded, resisted valeantly as long as he could.
But at length being enclosed after he had received many wounds, he fell down.
The which his brother (who now was gotten out of the battle perceiving a
far of, put spurs to his horse and dasshyng in among his enemies was slain
also. After that this battle was fought, Caesar determined neither to hear
thambassadors, nor to accept any of the profers, of such as deceitfully and
traitorously desiring peace, had wilfully moved war: Again, to tarry until the
power of his enemies were increased and their horsemen returned, he thought it
the point of extreme madness: and considering the infirmity of the Galls
(among whom he perceived how much authority his enemies had gotten by that one
skyrmish) he thought it not good to give them respit, to practice new devises.
When he had determined upon these matters and made his Lieuetenants and
Threasoror privy to his purpose, to the intent he should not have any mo days
of delay in encou^tring with his enemies, there happened the best opportunity yt
could be devised for his purpose: which was this: the next day following,
earlye in the morning, ye Germans using the like dyssemblyng and falshod yt
they had done before, came to our Camp in great number accompanied with all
their nobles and ancient men: both (as they said) to purge themselves, of that
contrary to the former treaty and contrary to their own suit, there had been
a battle fought, the day before, and also to have wroght some new fetch, to
have gotten a truce if they could have compassed it by wile. Caesar being glad
that they were fallen into his hands, commanded them to be put in sauf keeping.
And thervppon he led all his power out of his camp, commanding his horsemen to
follow after his host, because he thought them discoraged with their late
conflict. Thus with his men in three battles he marched the space of eight miles
with such speed, that he came to the camp of the Germans before they could
understand what was done. Who being dismayed in all things upon ye sodein,
both for our hasty approach, and for the departure of their own men, having
leisure neither to take counsel nor yet to arm themselves, were so troubled
that they wist not whether it were best for them to go forth with their power
against the enemy, or to tarry and defend their Camp, or else to save themselves
by flight. Our men understanding their fear by the rore and shuffling that was
among them, and provoked with their traitorous dealing the day before, dashed
into their Camp. In the which place, such as could quicklye arm them selves
resisted our men a while and mayntayned the battle among their stuff and
cariages. But the rest of the multitude of women and children (for they came
from home and passed the Rhine tag and rag) began to fly here and there
every way, after whom Caesar sent his horsemen to overtake them. The Germans
hearing the cry behind them, when they saw their company murdered, threw
away their harness and forsaking their standerds fled out of their camp: and
when they came to the metyng of the Maze and Rhine, being past hope of fliyng
any further, after that a great number of them were slain, the rest cast
themselves into the stream, and there being oppressed with fear, wearynes,
and the force of the water, perished. Our company without the loss of any one
man, saving that a few were wounded, whereas there was to the number of four
hundred and thirty thousand of our enemies one and other, returned out of this
dread full battle into their Camp. And there Caesar gave license to depart to
such as he had detained. But they fearing that the Galls whose fields they had
wasted would punish them and deal cruelly with them, said they would tarry
still with him: and Caesar being content therewith granted them their liberty.

After that this battle against the Germans was dispatched, Caesar thought it
expedient to pass the Rhyne for many causes, whereof this was the iustest, that
forasmuch as he saw the Germans so easly persuaded to come into Gallia, he
would have them stand in some fear of their own things at home also, when
they should perceive that the people of Rome both could and durst pass the
Rhine with an army. And to further this matter withal, that company of horsemen
of the Usipits and Teucthers, which I said before, were gone a forragyng and to
fetch booties on the other side of the Maze, and were not at the battle, after
the dyscomfyture of their company, had retired over the Rhyne into the borders
of the The people about Nassaw and Hessen in Germany.
Sicambers, and joined themselves with them. Unto whom when Caesar sent
ambassadors, desyryng them to deliver into his hands such as had moved war
against him and the realm of Gallia, they made answer that the people of Rome
had nothing to do beyond ye Rhine. For if he thought the Germans did him wrong
to come into Gallia with out his leave, why should he challenge any souereinty
or authority at all on the other side of the Rhyne. Moreover the People about
Colon on the further side of the Rhyne.
Ubians who alonly of the people beyond the Rhyne sending Ambassadors unto
Caesar had entered in Leage with him and given him hostages, made earnest suit to
him that he would succor the^ against the Sweuians who sore oppressed them. Or
if he could not so do, being occupied about other weighty affairs of the
people of Rome, they desired that he would do no more but only bring his army
over the Rhine: for in so doing he should pleasure them as much as if he had
succored them, and also put them in good hope for ever after. For they said
that the name and estimation of the Roman army was so great, since Ariouistus
was chaced, and now of late this other overthrow given, that the fame and
frendshyp of the people of Rome, might be a protection to them even among the
furthest Nations of Germanye. wherefore if he would come, they proffered a great
number of Boats to ferrye over his army in. Caesar for these causes which I
have showed, determined to pass the Rhyne. Howbeit to pass in Boats he
thought it not without peril, and besides that he thought it stood not with
his honor nor with the honor of the people of Rome so to do. And therefore
albeit it was a very hard matter to make a bridge, by reason of ye brodenesse,
swiftness, and depenesse of the stream, yet notwythstanding be thought either
to go that way to work, or else it was not for him to pass at all with his
army. Whervppon he framed a Bridge in this wise.

He fastened together a two foot space one from another two pieces of timber of
a foot and an half square somewhat sharpened at ye lower end, measured
according to the depth of the water. These being let down into the river with
pulleyes, he made to be beaten fast in with Commanders not plo^me vpryght like
a post, but shoryng like the side of a roof of a house, so as they might lean
with the ronning of the stream. Likewise directlye against them, he set other
two fastened together in like sort, a forty foot distance of beneth, with
their heads into the stream. Between both these according to the distance
that was between ye iointes of the two pieces of timber, were let in beams of
ii. foot square to streine them out fastened on both sides at thends with two
braces, the which being ones closed and fastened on the wrong side, the strength
of the work was so great, and the things were so framed, that the greater
violence of water that bare against it, so much the closer did the joints shet
and hold the faster together. Upon these were fastened Ieests of straight
timber, which were covered over with rafters and hurdles. And yet besides this,
both on the nether part of the stream there were pyles driven one overthwart
another the which being set under in stead of a Iettye, and joined to the
whole work, might break the force of the stream, and other likewise somewhat
above the bridge: to thentente that if the Germans should cast in any bodies
of trees into the water, or send any ships down the stream to break
down the work, these should be a defense to abate the violence of those
things, that they hurted not the bridge. Within ten days after that the stuff
was begone to be brought together, the work was fully finished and the host
conveyed over.

Caesar leaving a strong garrison at each end of the bridge, marched into the
borders of the Sicambres. By the way there came Ambassadors to him from many
Cities, to whom desiring peace and frendshyp he made very courteous answer, and
wylled them to bring him hostages. The Sycambres from that time that the bridge
was begone to be builded, preparing them selves to flight, had (by the counsel
of such of the Usipits and Teucthers as they had with them) fleeted out of
their country, and carrying all their goods with them, had hyd themselves in
woods and wildernesses. Caesar tarying but a few days in their borders, after
he had burned up all their towns and buildings, and cut down their corn,
retired into the country of the Ubians. Where promisyng them his help if they
were troubled by the Sweuians, Now called Swoabes.
he learned thus much at their hands. How that the Sweuians after they knew by
their skoults that the bridge was a making, called a council after their manner,
and sent messangers every way to give warning that they should depart out of
their towns, and carry their wives and children and all that ever they had into
the woods, and that as many as were able to bear armor should come together
into one place, the which was appointed almost in the heart of those countries
which the Sweuians possess, where they determined to abide the coming of ye
Romans and to give them battle. The which thing when Caesar understood,
forasmuch as he had accomplished al those things for the which he had passed
his army over the Rhine, namely in putting the Germans in fear, in revenging
himself upon the Sicambres, and in resk^wing the Ubians, after he had spent
but eightene days beyond ye Rhine, thinking he had done sufficientlye both
for his honor and for his profit, he retired into Gallia and hewed down the
bridge.

Although there were but a littel of the Summer remaining, and that in those
countries (because al Gallia lies somewhat northward,) winter begins
betimes: yet notwithstanding he determined to make a voyage into Britain,
because he understood that in all the wars that he had had in France, our
enemies had always been aided from thens. Albeit that the season of the year
meet for warrefare failed, yet he thought it might be greatly for his behoof,
to go unto the Island and see what manner of men they were, and to view the
places, hauons, and ryuages, all the which things were almost unknown to the
Galls. For lightly there comes not any man to them except merchantmen,
neither is any thing known to the merchant men themselves saving the sea coast
and those countries that lie against Gallia. And therefore when he had called
the merchants of al quarters before him, he could not learn, neither how byg
the Island should be, neither what and how puissant nations inhabited it, nor
what order they kept in their wars, nor what laws and customs they used,
nor what hauo^s there were able to receive any great number of ships. To know
these things, he thought good to send Caius Uolusenus before with a galley,
ere he hazarded himself thither: to whom he gave commandment that having
serched out all things, he should with all speed return unto him. And he him
self took his journey to the The people of Torowan and the country about Ca^yce.
Morines, because that from thence is the shortest cut into Britain. Hither he
commanded that shyps from all places of the sea coast nere therabouts, and
that his fleet which he had builded the last summer against the Uenets should
assemble. In the mean time his purpose being known and carried into Britayne
by the Merchants, there came ambssadors from many cites of the I Will unto him,
proferyng to give him hostages, and to submit themselves the to Empire of the
people of Rome. Whose message being heard, he made them very liberal
promyses, and encouraging them to continue in the same mind still, sent them
home again, and with them one Comius, whom having vanquished the *
Atrebatians he had made king there, whose counsel and valeantnes he liked well
of, both because he took him to be faithful to him, and also because he was
thought to be a man that was able to do much in those countries. He gave him in
commission to go to as many Cities as he could, and to persuade them to alie
them selves with the Romans, and to tell them it should not be long ere he came
thither. Uolusenus having viewed the coast, as far as he had liberty to do
(which durst not stir out of his ship and commit himself to the barbarous
people,) returned the fyfth day unto Caesar, and made report unto him what he
had seen. While Caesar tarried there for the furnishing of his navy, there came
ambassadors from a great part of the * Morines to excuse them of their folly
hertofore used, in that they being rude people and unskillful of our custom
had moved war against the people of Rome, promising to do whatsoever he would
command the^. Caesar thinking that these things fell luckelye on his side,
because he would neither leave an enemy behind his back, nor could well make
war because the time of the year was so far spent, nor demed theys tryflyng
busynesses worthy to be preferred before yt weighty affairs of Britain,
charged them with a great number of hostages. The which being brought, he
received their submissio^. Having assembled together about fowerscore hulkes,
and as many as he thought suffycient to convey over two Legions, he
distributed all the Bailyes that he had to the Threasoror and his Lieuetenants,
and the chief officers of his Camp. There were also besides these, eightene mo
hulks, which were held by the wynd an eight miles from that place that they
could not come al into one have. These he assigned to his me^ of arms. The
rest of his army he committed to his Lieueteuants Q. Titurius Sabinus and L.
Aurunculeius Cotta to lead against the Menapians, and such towns of the
Morines from whence there had come no ambassadors unto him. And he commanded
P. Sulpitius Rufus another Lieuetenant of his, to keep the hauon with such a
crew as he thought sufficient for the purpose.

When he had thus set things in order, having gotten a seasonable wether to
sail in, he loosed from the shore almost about the third watch: commanding
his horsemen to go to the further hauon and there to take shippyng and follow
after him. Which charge being by them executed somewhat slowly, he himself
about four of the clock arrived with his formest shyps in Br^taine, and there
he saw all the hills covered with armed men. The nature of the which place
was such, and the Sea was so enclosed with narrow hyls, that a Dart might be
thrown from the higher grounds unto the ryuage. Thinking this to be no mete
place to take land at, he rode at anchor until it was nine of the clock,
awayting the coming of the rest of his shyps. In the mean season calling his
Lieuetenants and Tribunes together, he declared to them what he had understood
by Uolusenus, and what he would have done: warning them (as the order of war,
and specially sea matters required) that forasmuch as they should have a
sodeine and uncertain removing, all things should be done by them at a beck,
as the time would serve. When he had dismissed them, having gotten both wind
and tide with him at ones, he gave them sign to way up their anchors, and
going forward about an eight miles from thence, arrived at an open and plain
shore. But ye Britons having knowledge of Cesars meaning, sent their horsemen
and wagoners before, (the which kind of furniture they commonly use in
battle) and following after with all the rest of their power, prohibited our
men to take land. By means hereof we were in great perplexity, for as much as
our shyps by reason of their greatness could not come nere ye shore for want
of water: so that it behooved our soldiers in unknown places, with troubled
hands, ouerladen with the great and weightye burden of their harness, both to
leap out of their ships, and to stand in the waves, and to feight with their
enemies: whereas they on the contrary part standing upon the dry ground, or
wading but a littel way into the water, having al their limbs at liberty, in
places thoroughly known to them, might boldlye cast Darts at us, and overcome
us with their horses which were inured to the purpose. Our men somewhat abashed
at these things, as they that were altogether unacquainted with this kind of
feight, showed not the like courage and chierfulnes that they were wont to use
in pytched fyelds. The which thing when Caesar perceived, he commanded that the
Galleyes whereof the facion was more strange to the savage Britons, and the
moving more ready and wieldsome, should be removed a little from the shyps of
Burden, and rowed forth, and set against the open side of his ennemies, and
there with slyngs, shot of arrows, and other artillery to disorder them and
send them further of which thing did greatly advantage our men. For the rude
people abashed at the facion of the Galleyes, the rowing of them with ores, and
the strange kind of artillery that was in them, stood still on a heap, and a
littell gave back. But when our men stayed and seemed to make curtsy, chiefly
for the depenes of the water, the chief standerd-bearer of the.x. Legion making
earnest protestacion to the Gods, that the thing which he purposed to do
might happen luckely to the legion, said, leap down my fellows onles you will
betray our standerd to the enemy: surely I will do my duty to thuttermost for
my common wealth and for my graundcapteine. When he had spoken this with a loud
voice, he threw himself out of the ship and began to carrye the standerd
against the ennemies. Then our men encouragynge one another, not to suffer such
a foil, leaped euerichone of them out of the vessel. Those that were in
the other formest ships seeing them do so, followed after them and approached to
their enemies. Thencounter was sharp on both sides. Howbeit our men for as
much as they were able neither to keep array, nor to take sure foting, nor to
follow their standerds, inasmuche as some coming out of one shypp and some out
of another, they were feign to cluster themselves under that standerd that came
next to hand, were much troubled. But our ennemies being perfect in all the
flete and shallow places, as soon as they espied from the shore any of our
company coming out of their shyps one by one alone, put spurs to their
horses, and ran upon them being troubled in the water, and where they saw
few, there would they come by companies and enclose them: and other some from
the open side threw darts at the whole rout of us. The which when Caesar
perceived, he commanded the Cockbotes and Brigantines to be furnished with
soldiers and sent them to succor such as he saw in danger. As Soon as our
men were gotten to dry land, the rest of their company followed hard after
them, and charging fiercely upon the enemies put them to flight: but they
could not chase them far, because our horsemen could not keep their course, and
attain to the Island, the which one only thing Caesar myssed of his accustomed
good fortune. Our enemies overcome in this battle, as soon as they had
recovered themselves from the chase, sent Ambassadors by and by unto Caesar for
peace, proferyng to give him hostages, and to do whatsoever he would commau^d
them. With these ambassadors came also Comius of Arras, whom we showed you
before to have been sent by Caesar into Britain. For at such time as he came of
message from Caesar, they laid hand on him as soon as he came out of his ship,
and cast him in prison. But after the foresaid overthrow, they set him at
liberty, and when they came to sew for peace, they laid the fault thereof upon
the common people defiryng pardon of their unskillfulness and folly. Caesar
blaming the^ in that having of their own accord sent Ambassadors to him into
Gallia to sew for peace, they had without cause moved war against him, said
he was contented to bear with their folly, commanding them to give him
pledges: of ye which they delivered one half out of hand, and the other half
which was to be fetched out of the further parts of the country, they said
they would deliver within few days after. In ye mean season they bade that
every man should return home to his own dwelling: and the noble men resorting
to Caesar from all sides, submitted themselves and their Cities unto him.

Peace being by this means stablyshed, after the.iiii. day of our arryuall in
Britayne, the eightene shyps that we spoke of before, which had the horsemen
to convey over, loosened from the further haven with a soft wynd. The which
when they approached so nere Britayne that we might see them out of our camp,
sodeinly there arose so great a tempest that none of them was able to keep his
course, but some were driven back again to the place they came fro, and
othersome were cast with great danger down to the lower part of the Island
which is toward the son setting: the which nevertheless after they had cast
Anchor, being filled with waves, were of necessity in the dead of the night
constreined to take the maine sea agein, and so made toward the maine land. It
chanced that the same night the moon was at the full, which is wont to cause
spryng tides in the Ocean, and that was unknown to our me^. So at one instant
the tide filled both those galleyes wherein Caesar had conveyed over his army,
and also those which he had drawn into harborough: and besides that, the
tempest shaked the ships of Burden that rode at Anchor. Neither could our
men either rule or help the matter by any means possible, when ye most of our
shyps were thus broosed and weather beaten and the residew unmeet to sail in
having lost their cables, anchors, and all the rest of their tackling, the
whole army (as it must needs come to pass in such a case) was greatly
disquietted. For there were none other ships to co^uey them over in again, and
al things wanted wherwyth to repair those, and forasmuch as every man looked
assuredly to winter in Gallia, there was no provision of grain made in those
quarters against the winter. The which things being known, the princes of
Britain which after the discomfiture had assembled to execute Cesars
commandments, conferryng upon the matter among themselves, when they
understood that the Romans wa^ted both horsemen, ships, and victuals, and
perceived by the smalnes of our camp, that there was but a thin company of us,
which were in deed conveyed in so much the less room, because Caesar had
suffered his Legions to bring over no stuste nor baggage with the^: They thought
it best to rebel, and stopping us from victuals to prolong the matter until
winter, believing verily that if they might ge^te the maistry of these, or shet
them up from returning, no man would hereafter be so bold to pass into
Britain to make war upon them. Wherefore co^spiring together again, they
began to steal themselves by littel and littel out of ye Camp, and to assemble
their men privily out of the country. But Caesar although as yet he knew not
what they were about to do, yet not wythstanding both upon the myschaunce of
his ships and in that they made delay in deliueryng their hostages, he misdemed
that which after came to pass in deed: and therefore he laid before hand to
have a remedy against all mischyeues. For he both gathered corn daily out of
the country into his camp, and also with the timber and iron of such ships as
were forest battred, he mended the rest, and such other things as were
necessary for the same purpose, he wylled to be brought from the main land. In
accomplishinge whereof, his soldiers wrought so earnestly, that with ye loss
of twelve ships, the rest were so well mended that they might well be sailed in.

While these things were a dooyng, as one of the Legions which is called the
seventh and was ordinarilye sent out for forage, was one day abroad, no
suspicion of war unto that time rising, when some of the men were yet in the
fields and some coming homeward to ye camp, those that warded at the gates of
the camp, brought Caesar word that they saw a greater dust than customably was
wo^t to be raised, the same way that ye Legion was gone Caesar misdoubting the
truth of the matter, that the disloyal Britons were practicing of some new
deuyse, commanded those Cohorts that warded, to go with him on the way, and
two other to supplye their roumes, and the rest to arm themselves and follow
quickly after him. When he had gone a good pretty way he might perceive that his
men were ouercharged with enemies, and had much a do to hold out, and that
there was throwing of darts on all sides at ye Legion which had cast themselves
close together. For in asmuchas in all other quarters ye corn was reaped down,
and none standing any where save in this one place, our enemies mistrusting yt
our men would come hither, had lain lurking in the woods all the night before,
and when they saw our men had laid down their weapons and disseuered
themselves busy in mowyng and reapyng down corn, they brake out upon them
suddenly, and after they had slain a few of them, they chased the rest being
out of array, and also enclosed them with their horsemen and wagons. This is
their order of feight in wagons. First they ride round about on all parts
casting of darts: and often times with the terriblenes of their horses and ye
ratlyng noise of their wheles, they break the array. And when they have wound
themselves in among the troops of horsemen, they leap out of their wagons
and feighte afoote. In the meanewhile the wagoners withdraw themselves
somewhat out of the battle, and set their wagons in such order, that if they
be ouercharged by the enemy, they may have spedye and handesome recours unto
them. By means whereof they are both as ready to remove as the horsemen, and
as steadfast to stand in the battle as the fotemen and supply both duties in
one. And they are come to such a perfectnes by daily practice and exercise,
that even in steep and fallinge places they will stop their horses ronnynge
a full galloppe, and guide them and turn them in a short room, and run upon
the Uergies, and stand steadfastly upon the beams, and quicklye recover them
selves back again into the wagons. With the which things while our men
were troubled for the straungenesses of the feight, Caesar came in very good
season to the rescow: For at his coming the enemies stood still, and our men
took heart to them. Notwithstanding forasmuch as he thought the time served not
then for his purpose to meddel with his enemies or to give them battle, he kept
himself in his place, and anon after conveyed his Leg^ons into his Camp
again. As these things were a doing, and that al our men were occupied, the
rest that were in the fields went their way. For many days after there followed
such continual storms, that we were fain to keep our Camp, and our enemies
could not come forth to battle.

In the mean time ye Britons sent messengers abroad into al quarters,
publyshing every where what small number was of us, and what oportunitye both
of winning (...), and setting themselves at liberty for ever was offered, if
they could turn the Romans out of their camp. H^ruppon assebled a great power
of ^orsemen and fotemen, and came to our Camp. Albeit that Caesar perceived
that the same thing was like to happen which had come to pass a few days
ago, that if his enemies were put to flight, yet should they by their quicknes
escape danger, yet notwythstanding forasmuch as he had gotten a thirty horsemen
which Comius of Arras whom we have spoken of before had brought over with him,
he set his Legions in battle ray before his Camp. When the matter came to be
tried by the sword, our enemies were not able to stand any while against the
force of our Souldyers, but turned their backs. Whom we purse winge as far
as our strength would give us leave to run, slew very many of them, and after we
had burned up all the howses a great way about, we retired into our Camp.
The same day came ambassadors from our enemies to Caesar to entreat for
peace: whom he charged with double number of Hostages, and commanded them to
bring them to him into Gallia. And forasmuch as the It is ye time when the
day and night are all of one length which is twyce in the year in March and
September.
Equinoctial drew nere, he thought the winter season was not for him to sail
in, his ships being so weak as they were, wherefore having gotten a mete
weather, somewhat after midnight he loosened from the shore with his ships:
the which came eueryecheone of them safe to land. But that two of the ships
of burden could not attain to the same hauon that the rest did, and were
driven somewhat lower. Out of the which when as a threhundred soldiers being
set a land were going toward their Camp, the Morines whom Caesar at his
setting forth into Britain had left in quiet, allured with hope of spoil,
came about them, not with so great a number to speak of at the first, and bad
them put of their harness if they loved their lives. When they on the other side
casting theimselues in a ringe stood at defense, suddenly at the cry that was
made, there came together about six thousand men. The which thing Caesar
hearing of, sent all his horsemen out of his Camp to their rescowe. In the
mean while our men withstode the force of their enemies feightyng very
valeantlye by the space of more then four hours: in ye which time few of
them being wounded, they slew very many of them. But as soon as our horsemen
came within sight, our enemies casting away their weapons turned their backs
and a great number of them were killed. The next day, Caesar sent his
lieuetenant T. Labienus with those Legions that he had brought over again out
of Britain, against the Morynes that had made insurrection. Who having not
any place to fly unto for succor by reason their fennes were dried, which kind
of refuge they had used the year before, came almost all in subjection to
Labienus. But Q. Titurius, and. L. Cotta two other of Cesars Lieuetenantes
which had led certain Legions against the Menapians, having wasted al their
fields, cut down all their corn, and burnt up al their buildings, because
the Menapians had al hid theymselues in the thick woods, returned unto Caesar.
Caesar appointed that al his Legions should winter among the Belgies. Only
two cities of Britain sent hostages thither, the rest refused to do it. After
these things were done upon the sight of Cesars letters, the Senate
proclaimed a general supplication for twentye days.

FINIS.
THE FYFTH BOOK of C. Julius Caesar's Commentaries of his wars in Gallia.
THe same year that Lucius Domitius and Appyus Claudyus were Consulls, Caesar
departinge from his winter garrisons into Italye, as he was yearly wont to do,
commanded his Lieuetenantes in whose charge he had left his Legions, that
they should in the winter season cause as many news ships to be builded as
they could, and the old to be mended, declaring of what receite and fasshyon
he would have them made. For the more spedye loading and unloading of them, he
made them somewhat lower than those that we are wont to occupye in our Seas:
and that so much the rather, because that through the often change of the
tides, he had perceived that the Seas went rougher there. For the better
carrying over of things of great weight and numbers of horses, he made them
somewhat broader then those that we use in other seas. All these he commanded
to be made in such wise that they might be spedelye driven with ores: whereunto
their lowenesse did greatly further. Such things as were necessary for the
arming out of the ships, he caused to be brought out of Spain. And after
that he had held a parliament of the hither Galia, he took his journey into
Illyricum, Now called Lumbardy.
because he hard say that the marches of the Province were wasted by rodes
made by the Pirustes. Certain people of Illiricu^ now called Scla^ony.
When he came thither, he commanded the Cities to find him men of war, and
appointed them a place to mete all at together. The which thing being blown
abroad, the Pyrustes sent ambassadors to him, declaryng that none of those
things had been done by the common consent of their maiestrates, and that
nevertheless they were content to make him amends for the wrongs that were
done, at his pleasure. Caesar accepting their profer, charged them with
hostages, and wylled them to bring them in by a certain day: declaring unto
them, that unless they did so, he would persecute their City with the sword.
When the hostages were brought in by the day limited, he appointed dayesmen
between the Cities to consider of the matter in variance, and to ^esse the
penalty. Having dispatched these matters, and held a counsel there, he
returned again into the hither Gallia, and from thence went to his army. When
he came thither, as he went about all his winter garrysons, he found that
through the singular diligence of his soldiers wanting in manner al things
that should have furthered the^, about syx hundred ships of the facion before
declared and eight and twenty other galieyes were finished, and as good as at
the point to be set a flote within few days after. Wherefore commending his
souldyers and such as had been the ouersears of the works he told them what he
would have done, and wylled them all to assemble at the haven of Ca^ice: from
whence he understood to be the handsomest passage into Britain, as the which
was not distant past a thirtye miles from that place. For yt doing hereof, he
left such a number of soldiers as seemed suffycient, and him self with four
well appointed Legions and eight hundred horsemen, went into the country of the
Treuires, because they neither came to the Parliamentes, nor did him homage,
and were reported to raise ye Germans on thotherside of the Rhine. This City
is able to make mo horsemen than all Gallia besides, and has also a great
power of footmen, and (as we showed hertofore) bordreth upon the Rhine. In
that City two were at strife for the souereintye, Induciomarus and Cingetorix.
Of who^ the one as soon as it was known that Caesar would come thither with his
army, repaired unto him, making faithful promise that he and all his should
become his liegemen, and continue faithful friends to ye people of Rome for
ever: aduertising him what was done among the men of Triers But Induciomarus
leuyed both horsemen and footeme^, and bestowing saufly such as for their
years were not able to bear armor, in the forest of Ardeine which from the
River of Rhine keeps on still of great wydenesse through the middle of the
country of the Treuires, unto the entrance of the borders of Rhemes:
determined to lay for war. Notwithstanding, after that diverse of the noble
men of that country partly moved with thauthority of Cingetorix, and partly
afraid at the coming of our army, had repaired unto Caesar and made suit to
him for their own peculier cases, because they could not provide for their
whole Country: Induciomarus fearyng least he should be abandoned of all men,
sent Ambassadors to Caesar: certifying him that ye cause why he would not
depart from his men and come unto him, was to thentent he might the eas^yer
keep his country in obedience, least by the departure of all the noblemen, the
common people might for lack of good counsel do amiss. Wherefore the City was
at his pleasure, and if Caesar would give him leave, he would come to him into
his Camp, and there put into his hands both himself and his City. Albeit that
Caesar knew welinough the very truth of the matter, what things feared him
from his determined purpose, yet notwitstandyng because he would not be
compelled to spend the Summer about the Treuires, seeing he had all things in a
readiness for his wars in Britayne, he commanded Induciomarus to come to him
with two hundred hostages: the which being brought, and amongst them his son
and al his kinsfolk, whom he had called out by name: he comforted Induciomarus
and exhorted him to continue in his allegiance. And yet neuertherles he called
the noble men of Tryers unto him and reconciled them one by one unto
Cingetorix. The which thing partly he thought he was bound to do of dew
deserte, and specially he thought it should be much for his own behofe, to
set such a one in authority and estymacion in his country, whose syngul^r good
will toward him he had had trial of before, Induciomarus took this matter
to heart, that his own estimacion should be diminished among his countrymen,
and therefore whereas he hated us in his heart before, the grief hereof made
him to hate us much more deadly.

Caesar having set these matters at a stay, came with his army to Calyce. There
he understood how forty of his ships which were made about Meawlr, could not
keep their course by reason of a re^pest, but were driven back again to the
place from whence they set forth. All the rest he found redye to sail and
throughlye furnyshed of all things. Thither came the horsemen of all Gallia, to
ye number of iiii. thousand, and the noblemen of all the Cities: of whom a very
few, of whose trustynes toward him, he had had proof before, he determined
to leave in Gallia, and to carye the rest with him for pledges, because be
feared least in his absence they should make any broile in Gallia. There was
together with others, Dumnorix the Heduan of whom we have spoken before. Him in
especially Caesar determined to have with him, because he knew him to be a man
desirous of alteration, and desirous of souereinty, of great courage and of
great authority among the Galls. Besides this, the said Dumnorix in an open
assemblye of the Heduanes had said that Caesar had put the government of the
City into his hands: the which words the Heduans took in great displeasure,
and yet they durst not send Ambassadors to Caesar either to refuse it or to
entreat him to the contrary. This fact Caesar learned by such in whose houses
he had lodged when he was in that country. At the first he made very earnest
suit and entreatance that he might be left behind in Gallia, partlye because
(as he alleged) being unaccustomed to sail he feared the saltwater, and
partly because he said he was let by vow. Afterward, when he saw that Caesar
stood stifflye in denial of his request, al hope of preuayling being utterly
taken away, he fell to persuading with the princes of Gallia, calling them
back one by one, and exhorting the^ to tarry still in the maine land, and
putting them in fear it was done for some further fetch that Gallia was thus
robbed of all her nobilitye at ones: for it was Cesars dryft to this end, that
whom he was ashamed to put to death in the open sight of Gallia, he might carry
them over into Britain and there choppe of al their heads. Wherefore he
plighted his faith unto them, and demanded them to be sworn to him, that
what so ever they should perceive to before the profyt of their country, they
should do it by common advice. These things were reported to Caesar by diverse
persons. Whereupon Caesar, for as much as he made so great account of the
Heduans, determined by some means or other to bridle Dumnorix and to fear him
from his pretensed purpose: and because he saw there was no end of his madness,
he thought it stood him in hand to foresee that he hurted not the common weal
and him. And therefore abiding there about a.xxv. days, because his sailing was
hindered by the Northwest wind, which customablye in those coasts, blows
at all times, he did his good will to have kept Dumnorix in obedience, and yet
nevertheless laid to know all his devises and practices. At length obteining a
mete season, he commanded all his power both of horsemen and fotemen to go a
board. While all men's minds were busyed heraboutes, Dumnorix with the Heduan
horsemen began to depart homewarde out of the camp without Cesars leave. When
Caesar heard tidinges thereof, staying his vyage and setting al other things
aside, he sent a great part of his horsemen after him to pursew him,
commanding to fet him back again: and if he made any resistance, and would not
be ruled, he bade kill him: for he thought he would not deal like an aduysed
person in his absence, that durst disobey him in his presence. Dumnorix being
called back made resistance and began to defend himself with his sword,
calling upon his men for help, and crying oftentimes out, that he was a free
man and of a free City. Notwythstandinge, they (as was commanded them) beset
him about and slew him: and so all the Heduan men of arms returned unto Caesar.

After that this matter was dispatched, leaving Labienus in the maine land
with three Legions, and two thousand horsemen, to keep the haue^s and provide
grain, and to learn what was done in Gallia, and to deal advisedly as time
and occasion should require: Caesar himself with five Legions and like number
of horsemen as he left in the main land, at the sun going down loosened
from the shore, and being driven with a soft Southwest wind, the which also
about midnight fell, could not keep his course, but being carried further with
the tide, about the dawning of the day beheld Britain left a little on the
left hand. Then following again the change of the tide, he endeavored by force
of Ores to attain to that part of the Island, where he had found to be best
landing the last summer before. Wherein the courage of our souldyers was much to
be commended, in that with their shyps of burden being heavy laden, through
continual rowyng without ceasing, they made away as fast as the Galleyes. So
we arrived in Britayne with all our ships even about high noone, neither was
there any enemy seen in that place. Howbeit (as Caesar understood afterward by
his prisoners,) there was a great power assembled thither: the which being
abashed at the number of our shyps, whereof together with the victailers
ships and such as every man had made for his own occupying, were above
eight hundred in sight all at one time, withdrew them selves from the riuage
and hid them in the higher grounds. Caesar after he had set his army a land,
and taken a place mete to encamp in, when he had learned of his prisoners in
what place the power of his enemies abode, left ten Cohortes and three hundred
horsemen at the seas side to keep his ships, and immediately after the third
watch, marched to ward his enemies, so much the less fearing his shyps,
because he had left them ryding at anchor in an woosye and open shore: and he
appointed Q. Atrius to see to the sauf keeping of his ships. Himself after he
had gone about a twelve miles in the night time, discovered the host of his
enemies. They coming with their horsemen and chariots to a ryuers side, began to
beat us back from the higher ground and to encounter with us. But in the end
being put to repulse by our horsemen, they hyd the^ selves in the woods, where
they had gotten a plot excellently well fortified both by nature and man's hand,
the which place (as it should appear) they had prepared before hand as a hold
for their own civil wars. For by cutting down the trees every where, they
had foreclosed all the entrances in: and they themselves issuing out of the
woods here some and there some a few in a company, made defense, and would not
suffer our men to come within their fortifications. Nevertheless the soldiers
of the vii. legion making a shed and casting up a bank to their
fortifications, won the place, and drove them out of the woods, with the
receyte of a few wounds. Howbeit, Caesar forbade his men to pursue them over
far, both because he knew not the nature of the place, and also because the
greater part of the day being now spent, he would have some time left for ye
fortifying of his camp. The next day following early in the morning, he sent his
horsemen and fotemen forth in three battles, to pursue them yt were fled. They
had not gone but a littel way insomuch y^ the hindermost were yet in fight,
when certain horsemen came from Q. Atrius to Caesar, bringing him word that the
last night there arose a marvelous tempest, which had shaken almost all his
ships and cast them a land, so that neither anchor nor Cable could hold, nor
the shipmen and governors endure against the violence of the storm: by means
of the which beating together of his shyps, much hurt was done. When Caesar
heard these news, he whylled his Legions and horsemen to be called back, and to
cease of their journey: and he himself returned to his ships: where he saw as
much in manner with his eyes, as was reported to him by messages and letters:
so that with the loss of a forty ships, the rest might with much a do be
mended. And therefore he chose such as were Shypwryghtes, out of his Legions,
and commanded others to be sent for out of the main land. Also he wrate
unto Labienus, that he should make as many ships as he could, with the help
of those Legio^s that he had. Moreover although it were a work of great toil
and labor, yet notwithstanding he thought it most for his behoof, to have all
his ships drawn a land, and joined in one fortification with his Camp. In
doing hereof he spent ten days, not respityng his soldiers from their labor,
so much as the night time. When he had drawn his ships a land, and
thoroughly fortified his camp, he left the same power to guard his ships, that
was there before, and returned himself to the place he came fro. At his
coming thither, a greater power of the Britons was assembled out of all
coasts into the same place. The chief government of the Realm and ordering
of the wars was by common aduyce committed to Cassibelan, whose Seniorie is
severed from the Cities toward the sea coast by a river which is called Tems
about fowerscore miles of from the Sea. This Cassibelan in times past had
contynuall war with the Cities adioyninge: but the Britons being moved with
our coming, had chosen him to be their souereine, and made him General of the
wars.

The inner part of Britain is inhabited of such as by witness of their
ancient records were borne and bred in the I Will: and the sea coast by such as
have passed thither out of Belgicke to fetch bootyes and to make war: All the
which well nere, are called by the same names that the Cities are where they
were borne and from whence they first came, remaining there still when the war
was done, and tillinge the ground. The country is maruelously well replenished
with people, and there be very many buildings almost like in facion to the
buildings of Gallia. There is great store of cattle. The coin that they use,
is either of brass, or else ringes of iron sysed at a certain weight in stead
of money. In the inner parts of the Realm grows tynne: and in the sea coast
grows iron: but hereof is small store. The brass that they occupye is
brought in from beyond the sea. There is timber of all kinds as is in Gallia
saving Beech and Fyrre. They think it a heinous matter to taste of a hare, and a
hen, and a goose. Nevertheless they cherish them for their minds sake and for
their pleasure. The air is more te^perate in those places than in France, and
the cold lesser. The Island is in facio^ threecornerd, whereof one side is toward
France. The One corner of this side which is in Kent where for the most part
ships ariue out of France, is toward the East: and the other nethermore is
toward the South. This side conteyneth about five hundred miles. Another side
lies toward Spain and the sun going down: on the which side is Irland
less then Britain (as is supposed) by the one half. But the cut between them is
a like dystance as is the cut between France and Britain. In the mids of
this course is an Island called Man. Also there are reported to be many mo less
Isles about Britain: of the which Isles, some have written that in the winter
season when the days are shortest, ye nights are a full mooneth long
together. We could learn nothing thereof by enquiry: but we saw it tried by
how reglasses of water, that the nyghtes were shorter there, then in the firm
land. The length of this side is (according to thopinion of the inhabiters)
seven hundred miles. The third side is northward: and against it lies no land:
but the point of that side butteth most toward Germany. This they esteem to be
eight hundred miles long. And so the circuit of the whole Island is two thousand
miles. Of all the inhabitants of this I Will the ciuilest are the Kentysh folk,
the which country marches altogether upon the sea, and differs not greatly
from the manner of France. Those that dwell more into the heart of the Realm,
for the most part sow no corn: but live by milk and flesh, and clothe
themselves in leather. All the Britons do dye themselves with woade, which
sets a bluish color upon them: and it makes the^ more terryble to behold
in battle. They wear their hear long, and shave al parts of their bodies
saving ye head and the upper lip. They have ten or twelve wives a piece, common
among themselves, specially brothers with brothers, and Parents with their
children. But the issue that comes of them, is accounted his that first married
the mother when she was a maid.

The horsemen and wagoners of our enemies gave a whote skirmish to our men by
the way: but yet in such wise, that our men were every way to good for them,
and drove the^ into the woods and hills: howbeit by following them
euergredilye we lost diverse of our company. But they after taking breath a
while, when our men thought of no such thing, as they were busy in fortifiing
their Camp, sodeinlye burst out of the woods, and giving a charge upon them
that were set to ward before our camp, fought egrely with them: insomuche that
Caesar was feign to send two Cohortes, and those the chief of two Legions, to
the rescow: the which being placed but a little way one from another. When our
men began to be discouraged at the strange kind of feight, brake through ye
mids of our enemies by fine force, and recovered from thence sauf. The same
day was Quintus Laberius Durus the Tribune slain: and yet by sending many
Cohorts to the rescowe: our enemies were put to the worse. In all this kind of
conflict forasmuch as it was fought in the syghte of all men and in the open
face of our ca^p, it was perceived that our men by reason of the weight of
their armor, for that they could neither pursew them when they gave back, nor
durst depart from their antesignes, were not mete enough to encounter with such
a kind of enemy: and that the men of arms could not feight, but in great
peril, because our enemies would many a time and often lose ground for the
nonce, and when they had egged our men a littel from the maine battle, would
leap out of their chariots and feight a foot, which was an unequal match.
And they kept such an order in their feighting on horsback, that whither our
men fled or chaced, they were always in like danger. For they never fought in
great companyes together, but scatterynge a great way of one from another, and
had stales lying in diverse places one to serve another turn, and fresh and
lusty men came always in ye roumes of such as were weary.

The next day the enemies stood aloof in the hills far from our camp: and
showed themselves here a few and there a few, and began to assail our horsemen
more faintly than they had done the day before. But about midday, when Caesar
had sent forth a Lieutenant of his called Caius Trebonius with three Legions,
and all his men of arms for forage, suddenly they came flying upon the
forragers on all sides, in such sort that they would not from our Legions and
our Antesignes. Howbeit our men laid so sore to their charge that they put
them to the foil, and never left pursewyng them, until such time as our
horsemen taking courage upon the aid when they saw the fotemen at hand
behind them, drove their enemies headlong, and slew a great number of them,
giving them no respit either to gather themselves together, or to stay any
where, or to leap out of their Chariots. Immediatlye upon this discomfiture,
such as were assembled from al quarters to aid in this war, departed: neither
did our enemies at any time after that, encounter with us with their whole
power. Caesar having knowledge of their intent, marched with his army to the
Tems, into the Seniory of Cassibelan. This river can be passed but only in one
place a foot and that very hardly. When he came thither, he saw a great power
of his enemies in battle raye on the other side of the river. Now was the bank
sticked full of stakes sharpened at the fore end, and likewise other stakes of
the same making were driven in the channel and hidden with the water. Caesar
having understanding hereof by his prisoners and runawayes, sent in his horsemen
before, and commanded his footmen to follow immediately after them. But our
soldiers went with such speed and force having no more than only their heads
above ye water, that the enemy being not able to withstand the violence of our
fotemen and men of arms, forsook the banks and took them to flight.
Cassibelan (as is above mentioned) dispairyng of his good success by feighting
in plain battle, sent away all his greater powers, and kepinge still a four
thousand wagoners, watched which way we went, and drew somewhat aside out of
the way, hiding him self in combersome and woodye places: and where so ever he
knew our men should march, he drove both cattle and people from thence in to
the woods. And when our horsemen raunged any thing freely abroad into the fields
for forage or to harry the country, he sent his wagoners by all ways and
paths out of the woods upon our men of arms and encountered with them to
their great prejudice: through the fear whereof he kept them short from
raunging at their pleasure. So the matter was brought to this pass, that Caesar
would not suffer his horsemen to stray any farnesse from his maine battle of
fotemen, and adventured no further to anoy his enemies in wasting their
fields, and burning their houses, than he was able to compass by the travel
of his footmen as they were able to journey.

In the mean while, the Trinobantes, which is ye strongest City well nere of
all those countries, (out of the which City a young gentilman called Mandubrace
upon confidence of Cesars help coming unto him into the maine land of Gallia,
had escaped death by flight which he should have suffered at Cassibelans hand, as
his father Imanuence had done, who had reigned in that City) sent Ambassadors
to Caesar, promysing to yield unto him and to do as he should command them: and
they desired him to defend Mandubrace from the tyranny of Cassibelan, and to
send him into the City, to take the government and souereinty thereof upon him.
Caesar sessed them at forty hostages, and besides that, to find grain for his
army: and he sent Mandubrace unto them. They executed his commandment out of
hand, and sent him both his full number of hostages, and also grayn for his
army. When Caesar had defended the Trinobantes, and saved them harmless from
his soldiers, the * Cenimagues, * Segontians, * Aucalits, * Bibrokes, and *
Cassians sending Ambassadors to Caesar yielded them selves unto him. By them he
learned that not far from ye same place was Cassibelans town fortified with
woods and marisgroundes: into the which was gathered a great number of men
and cattle. Now the Britons call it a Town, when they have fortified a
co^bersome wood with a dich and a Rampyre: and thither they resort to eschew
the invasions of their enemies. To this place marched Caesar with his Legions,
he found it excelle^tly well fortified both of nature and by man's devise.
Nevertheless he ente^ded to give assault unto it in two places at ones. Our
enemies after they had tarried a while, being not able to endure the force of
our men, fled out at another part of the town. A great number of cartell was
found there, and many being taken in the chase, were slain.

While these things were a doing in these quarters, Cassibelan sent messengers
into Kent, (which we showed before to lie upon the sea, in the which country
were four kings, Cingetorix, Caruill, Taximagull, and Segonax) commanding
them to raise al ye power they could make, and suddenly to set upon and
assault our camp by the seas side. As Soon as they came to our camp our men
breakyng out upon them slew a great sort of them, and taking Cingetorix their
noble Captain, prisoner, conveyed themselves back again in saufty. When
Cassibelan heard of this battle, for as much as he had taken so many losses,
and had had his country wasted, but chieflye moved with the rebellion of the
Cities, sent Ambassadors by Comius of Arras to Caesar to entreat with him of
submission. Caesar in as much as he had determined to pass the winter in the
firm land because of ye sodein commotions in Gallia, and for that there
remained not much of the so^mer, the whithe he perceived, might easly be
trifled out by his enemies: commanded to send him hostages, and sessed the
Realm of Britain, at a yearly trybute to be paid to ye people of Rome: giving
straight charge and commandment to Cassibelan, that he did no displeasure to
Mandubrace nor to ye Trinovants. As Soon as he had received the hostages, he
conveyed his army again to the sea, where he found his ships repaired. When he
had set them a flote again, for as much as he had a great number of prisoners
and many of his ships were perished by tempest, he determined to ferry over his
army at two conueyes. And so it chanced that of so great a fleet, at so many
viages, neither this year nor the year before there was not any one ship
missing that carried over our soldiers: but of those that should have been sent
back again empty from the maine land when they had set the soldiers of the
first convey a shore, and of those that Labienus raused afterward to be made,
which were to the number of threescore, very few could attain to the place,
and all the rest were cast back. The which when Caesar had a while tarried for
in vayn, least through the season of the year he might be disapointed of
sailing, because the Equinoctial was at hand, he was feign to pack up his
soldiers in less room closer together. And so taking thoportunity of a very
calm weather that ensewed, he launched forth in the beginning of the second
watch, and by the break of the day came saufe to land with al his whole
fleet.

When he had drawn his ships into harbrough and held a counsel of the Galls
at Amiens o^ Saint Quintins.
Samarobrina, forasmuch as that year there was some dearth of corn in Gallia
by reason of the drowght, he was compelled to place his army in garrison
otherwise than he had done the years before: and to disperse his Legions into
mo Cities. Of the which he committed one Legion to his Lieuetenaunt Caius
Fabius to be led among the Morines: another to Q. Cicero to be conveyed to the
Neruians: the third to L. Roscius, to be conducted to ye Essuans: ye fowrth he
bade should winter among the men of Rhemes with T. Labienus in the marches of
Triers. Three he placed in Belgicke, and appointed Lieuetenants of them his
Threasorer. M. Crassus, and Lu. Munatius Plaucus, and C. Trebonius: he sent one
legion which he had last of al leuyed beyond the River Po, and five Cohorts
among the Eburones, the greatest part of whose country is between the Maze and
the Rhine, and were under the dominion of Ambiorix and Cativulcus: ye charge of
these soldiers he committed to his Lieuetenants Q. Titurius Sabinus, and L.
Auru^culei^s Cotta. By distributing his Legions in this wise, he thought he
might make best shift with the scarsenes of corn. And yet the garrisons of al
these legio^s, saving of that which he gave unto L. Roscius to be led in to the
most quiet and peaceable part of al, were contained within ye space of one
hundred miles. In the mean season until he knew that his Legions were settled
and their garrisons fortified, he determined to abide in Gallia.

There was among the Carunts a man of great birth called Tasgetius, whose
ancestors had reigned in that City. Unto this man for his singular prowess
and good will toward him, forasmuch as he had done him very good service in all his wars, had Caesar restored ye room of his ancestors. Now at this time
in the third year of his reign his enemies aided by many of the City slew him
openly: the which thing was complained of to Caesar. He fearyng in as much as
the matter touching many men, least the City by their compulsion should rebel,
commanded Lucius Plaucus to depart with all speed with one Legion out of
Belgicke to the Caruntes, and to lie in garrison there all the winter time: and
to apprehende such as he knew were accessory to the murder of Tasgetius and
to send them to him. In the mean time he was certyfied from all his
Lieuetenants and Threasorours to whom he had committed the charge of his
Legions, that they were settled in garrison and their garrisons fortified.

About a fiftene days after they were settled in garrison, there was begone a
sodein uproar and rebellion by the means of Ambiorix and Cativulcus: who at
such time as they had been pressed to entertain Sabinus and Cotta at the marches
of their kingdom, and had brought the^ corn to the place where they lay in
garrison: moved thereunto by the messengers of Induciomarus of Triers, raised
their people, and suddenly surprising those that were sent abroad for wood,
came with a great power to assault our Camp. But when our men had taken them
quickly to their weapons, and gotten up upon the Rampire, and had by se^ding
out the Spanish horsemen on the one side, over matched the^ in skirmishing on
horsbacke, our ennemies dispayring in their success, wythdrew their men from
thassault. Then after their manner they cried out unto us, that some of our
company should come and speak with them for they said they had to commune with
us in matters concerning the state, whereby they hoped al controversy might be
decided. Hereupon were sent unto them to talk with them Caius Carpineius a
knight of Rome one of Titurius familier friends, and one Q. Iunius a Spaniard
who diverse times before was wont at Cesars commandment to resort to Ambiorix:
before whom Ambiorix spoke in this wise.

That he confessed himself greatly in det to Caesar for his benefits toward
him, in that by his means he was discharged of the pensio^ that he paid to
the Aduatickes his next neyghbors, and for that his own son and his brothers
son whom the Aduatickes under the name of hostages had held in bondage and
cast into prison, were by Caesar released and sent home again: And that touching
thassault of their camp, he had done nothing of his own head or voluntary
will, but by compulsion of his City: among whom his state was such, that the
people had as much authority over him, as he had over the people: who were
enforced to this war upon this occasion, by reason they were not able to
wythstand the sudden insurrection of the Galls: whereof his humbleness might
be a suffycyent proof. For he was not so foolyshe to think that he with his
power were able to overcome ye people of Rome: but it was the purpose of all
the Galls to do that which was done, and this was the day appointed to
assault all Cesars garrisons at ones, to thentent one legion should not
succor another: Galls could not lightly deny the request of Galls, specially
seeing the device seemed to tend to the recoueryng of the liberty of all Gallia:
who^ forasmuch as he had satisfied for the natural affection he was bound to
owe to his country, he now had also consideration of his dewty, and for the
benefits of Caesar, admonished them, and prayed Titurius for the mutual
enterteinment that had been betwixt them, that he would look to the saufgard of
himself and of his soldiers. A great number of hired Soldiers of the Germans
were passed the Rhyne already, and would be there within two days after:
wherefore advise themselves whether they thought it good or no to depart with
their soldiers out of their wintring places either to Cicero or to Labienus,
of whom thene was not past a fiftye miles of and the other a littell further,
before the next borderers perceived it: he promised them thus much, and assured
them thereof by oath, that he would give them fre passage through his country:
in doing whereof he should both do a pleasure to his country in disburdening it
of garrisons, and requite Caesar for his deserts.

As Soon as this Oration was ended, Ambiorix departed: And Carpeneius and
Iunius reported to the Lieuetenants what they had heard: who being very sore
moved at the sodeynnesse of the matter, although those things were spoken by
the enemy: yet they thought the^ not mete to be passed over lightly. But
specially it moved the^, for that it was not in manner to be believed that the
city of ye Eburones being base and of no reputacio^, durst wilfully without
assistence make war against the people of Rome. And therefore they propounded
the matter in counsel, where was much debating of it to and fro. L.
Aurunculeius and most of the Tribunes and Capteines of the chyef bands,
thought it was not mete to attempt any thing rashlye, nor to depart out of
their garrisons without express commandment from Caesar: declaring that they
were able to withstand never so great a power, yea even of the Germans, having
their winteryng places fortified: an evident proof whereof was, that they had
valeantly wythstode the first push of their enemies, putting them to many
foyles, and they wanted no victuals: In the mean while succor would come out
of the next garrisons and from Caesar: and in conclusion what greater point of
lyghtnesse or what greater shame could there be, than in such wise to bring
their chief matters in question, upon the motion of the enemy.

Titurius earnestly replied hereunto, that it should be to late for the^ to do
so, when a greater power of enemies accompanied with the Germans were
assembled against the^, or when any displeasure was taken in the next
garrysons. The time of consultacion was short, and he thought that Caesar was
gone into Italy: for otherwise he thought that neither ye Caruntes would have
conspyred the death of Tasgetius, nor yet that the Eburones (if he were in the
country) would have come so proudlye to our Camp: As for his own part he had
not eye to his enemies saying, but to ye thing it self: for the Rhine was at
hand and he knew well that the Germans were greatly grieved with the death of
Ariouistus and our former victories: besides that ye Galls freted inwardly to
be brought in subjection of the Roman Empire with so many reproaches and
displeasures as they had received, and to have the renowm of their former
chiualry defaced: finally who could think ye Ambiorix would have enterprised
such a matter without assured hope? But howsoever the world should fall out, he
was sure his opinion could bring no harm. For if there were no evil meant
toward the^, they might with out peril go to the next legion: or if all Gallia
conspired with the Germans, then was there no way to save themselves but only
in making away with speed. As for the counsel of Cotta and such as were of
contrary opinion, to what purpose was it? through the which, if not present
peril, yet assuredlye famine was to be feared by long siege.

When this disputacion was had on both parts, and that Cotta and the capteines
of the chief bands resisted earnestlye, do as ye list if you needs will (quod
Sabinus): and that was said with a loud voice, that a great sort of the
soldiers might well hear him: for I am not he that most fears the peril of
death among you. These shall be wise: and if any thing chance amysse, they shall
ask account at thy hand, in as much as if thou would let them, joining them
selves with the next garrisons with in a day or two at the furthest, they
might jointly together with them sustain what soever the fortune of battle
should lay upon them: and not peryshe by famine and swoorde like people cast of
and banished from the rest of their company. After these words there was
rising on all hands: and hold was laid upon them both, entreata^ce was made
that they would not through their wilful dyssention, cast all into utter
danger. It made no matter whether they went forth, or whether they tarried
still, so they were al of one mind and opinion: but on the contrary part in
disagreeing was no likelyhod of well doing. The matter through disputacion was
prolonged until midnight: at the length Cotta being persuaded, yielded to
Sabinus, and thereupon the sentence of Sabinus taking place, it was proclaimed
that they should set forth by the break of day. The rest of ye night was
consumed in watching, every Souldyer loking about what he had to carry with
him, and what he should be constreyned to leave behind him of such furniture as
he had prepared for winter. Al things were devised in such sort as that they
could not tarry without peril, and that the danger might be augmented by
werying of the soldiers with watching. As Soon as daylight appeared, they set
forth of their camp like men fully persuaded that the counsel had been given
them, not by Ambiorix their enemy, but by some special friend of theyrs, in as
slight array as could be, and with as much baggage as they were able to carry.
Our enemies understanding of their journey by their noise in the night and their
watching, laid a bushment in two several places of advantage secretly in the
woods about a two miles of, and there awayted the coming of ye Romans.
As Soon as part of our army was entered into a great valley, suddenly they showed
themselves on both sides the valley, and began to assail the hindermost of us,
and to keep the foremost from rising up the hyl again, and to encounter with
us in a place of the most disaduauntage that could be for us. Then Liturius, as
he that had laid for nothing before, trembled and ran up and down to set his
men in order: but it was so fearfully and after such a facion, as if he ^ad
been at his wits end: the which thing is commonly wont to happen unto such,
as are compelled to take counsel when ye thing should be presently executed.

But Cotta, who seemed to have forsene that these things might come to pass by
the way, and for the same cause would not be author of the journey, was not to
seek in any thing that was for the saufrye of them all. For both in calling
upon the soldiers and in encouraging them he executed the office of a
Graundcaptein: and in feightinge he performed the dewty of a soldier. And
forasmuch as by reason of the length of their array, he was not able in his own
person to see al things done, and to forecast what was to be performed every
where, he caused it to be proclaimed that they should forsake their baggage,
and cast them selves in a ring. The which counsel although in such a case it
be not worthy to be reproved: yet it fell out ilfauoredly. For it both abated
the courage of our me^. and made our enemies more chierfull to feight, by
reason it might seem that that thing was not done but upon great fear and
utter despair. Moreover it happened (as it must needs come to pass,) that the
soldiers commonly went from their antesignes, and ran to catch and snatch from
among the cariages, such things as every of them did set most store by, so that
there was nothing but crying and weeping. But the barbarous Galls were not to
learn how to demean themselves. For their capteines caused it to be
proclaimed through all the field, that no man should stir out of his place:
the pray was theirs, and all that the Romans had, was reserved for them, and
therefore get the victory and al was their own. Our men were equal to them both
in number and prowess: and albeit they were destitute both of good captein and
of good fortune, yet they reposed all hope of welfare in their manhod: and as
often as any Cohort issued out, a great slaughter of enemies was made on that
side. The which thing when Ambiorix perceived, he caused it to be cried, that
his men should throw Darts a far of, and not encounter at hand: and what way
so ever the Romans preased upon the^, to give way, for that by means of ye
lightness of their harnes and their daily exercise, the Romans could do them
no harm: and to pursew the^ when they retired again to their sta^derdes. The
which precept was so diligently observed by them, that as often as any Cohort
of ours brake out of the ryng, and charged upon the^, our enemies flew back
as fast as they could. In the mean while there was no shyfte but that part must
be made naked and open to receive the Darts that were sent. Again as soon as
they began to retire to the place they came fro, they were enclosed both by
them that had given place unto them, and by them that waited at hand upon
them. And if they went about to keep their ground, neither could their manhood
avail them, neither could they standing so thyck together, avoid the Darts
that such a multitude did cast at them. And yet being afflicted with so many
incommodities at ones, and being sore wounded, they stood still at defense: and
when a great part of the day was spent, whereas they fought from the break of
day unto eight of the clock, they committed not any thing that might seem
vncomlye for them to do. Then T. Balbuentius who the year before had had the
leding of one of the chyef bands, a valeaunt personage and of great
authority, was thrust through both the thyghes with a Iaueling. Q. Lucanius
of the same degree, feighiing manfullye, as he was rescowing his son that was
beset with enemies, was likewise slain Lucius Cotta one of the Lieuetenantes,
as he was encoraging all the Cohorts rank by rank, was wounded full in the mouth
with a slyng. O. Titurius being moved with these things, when he had espied
Ambiorix a far of encoraging his men, sent his interpreter C. Pompeius unto
him, to desire him that he would spare him and his soldiers. Ambiorix being
spoken unto, made answer, that if he were desirous to common with him, he
should have good leave: for he hoped he should be able to wey so much with his
people, as to save his soldiers, and as for himself, should have no harm at
all: for thassurance whereof he gave him his faith. Titurius communicated the
matter with Cotta, who was wounded, that if he thought it good they might
depart out of the battle, and jointly go talk with Ambiorix: for he was in hope
to entreat him for the saufgard of the^ selves and of their soldiers. Cotta
said plainly he would not go to his armed enemy, and stood styfflye upon that
point. Sabinus commanded such of ye Tribunes as he had about him at that
present, and the peticapteines of the chyef bands, to wait upon him. And
when he came nere to Ambiorix, being willed to put of his armor he did so, and
commanded his men to do in likewise. In the mean time, while they debated
among the^ selves, as concerning the co^dicions, and that Ambiorix for the
nones made a long protestacion, he was by littel and littell enclosed about and
slain. Than according to their custom, they cried victory, and made a great
shout, and therwyth giving a fresh charge upon our men, brake our array. There
Lucius Cotta feighting valiantly was slain, and the most part of his
soldiers with him. The remnant retired into their camp from whence they came.
Of whom L. Petrosidius, the chief standerdbearer, when he saw himself
ouercharged with the multitude of his enemies, threw the standerde into the
trench, and feighting right valiantly without the Camp, there was slain. The
others with much a do endured thassault until night: and in the night time
being in despair of all succor, they slew themselves euerychone. A few that
escaped fro the battle, came by unknown ways through the woods, to Tit.
Labienus where he wintred, and certified him how all things had fallen out.
Ambiorix being puffed up with this victory, immediately with his horsemen set
forth toward the Aduatickes, who were borderers upon his kingdom, and never
rested iorneying day nor night, commanding his fotemen to follow after as fast
as they could. When he had opened the matter, and styrred the Aduatikes, ye
next day after he came among the Neruians, and exhorted them that they should
not let slip this occasion of setting themselves at lyberty for ever, and of
revenging the^ upon the Romans for the wrongs they had taken at their hands.
He told them that two of their Lieuetenants were slain, and a great part of
their army brought to naught, affirminge that it were no matter at al to come
suddenly upon the Legion that wintred with Cicero, and to put them all to the
sword, for the performance whereof he proffered himself to be their helper. With
this oracion, he easlye persuaded the Neruians. Whereupon immediately dispatching
messengers to the Centrones, Grudies, Leuakes, Plewmosians and Gordunes, (all
ye which were under their dominion) they raised as great a power as they
could, and upon the sodein came spedely to the place where Cicero wintred,
before that any inklinge of the death of Titurius was brought unto him. It
happened unto him also (as it cannot otherwise be) that many of his soldiers
which were gone abroad into the woods to fetch fuel and timber, were cut short
by the sodeyne approach of the enemies horsemen. These being entrapped, the
Eburones, Neruians, and Aduatikes, with the co^federates and clients of them
all, began to assault the Legio^ with a great power. Our men took them quickly
to their weapons, and gate them upon the Rampire. With much a do they held out
that day, because their ennemies put all their hope in speed, and if they
might get this victory, they believed they should be superiors ever after: By
and by Cicero dispatched letters to Caesar, promising great rewards if any would
co^uey them to him. But all the ways were so forlaid, that the messengers were
taken. Ye will not think what speed and diligence was used in ye camp: for of
that stuff y^ had been conveyed thither for ye fortifiing of it, were raised in
ye night time about.cxx Towers, and whatsoever wa^ted else of the work was
finished. Our enemies the next day assembling a far greater power, assaulted
our camp agein, and filled up the dich: and our men made resistance in like
sort as they had done ye day before. The like was done diverse days after: no
part of the night season was discontynued from labor: not the sick, no nor
the wounded had any time to rest. Whatsoever was needful to ye next days
assault, was ever laid for and provided in a redines the night before. A great
sort of stakes hardened in ye fire, a great number of Pikes for defense of ye
wall, were new made: towers were plauncherd, and battlements and portcolyses of
timber set up. Cicero himself being a man very sickly, took not so much
leisure to rest himself as the night time: insomuch that his soldiers of
their own accord, were feign in manner to compel him by entreatance to spare
himself. The^ the Captains and noble men of the Neruians, which had any
entrance of communycation and cause of acquaintance with Cicero, bare him in
hand that they were desirous to speak with him* Having leave to do so, they
declared the same things, that Ambiorix had talked of with Tyturius. That is
to say: how all Gallia was in arms, how the Germans were passed the Rhine,
and how Caesar and the rest of the Romans were beseged in their wintering
places: making report moreover of ye death of Sabinus. And for the more credit,
they showed them Ambiorix. They said they were in a wrong box, if they looked
for any help at the hands of them, which were in hazard and not able to help
themselves. Nevertheless that they were so well minded toward Cicero and the
people of Rome, that they would refuse nothing save only their wintring among
them, the which custom they would be loath should be continued. It should be
lawful for them without any let on their behalf to depart in sauftye out of
their wyntering places, and to go into what quarters they would without fear.
Cicero made none other answer hereunto but this only, that it was not the
custom of the people of Rome, to take any articles at their armed enemies
hand: but if they would lay down their weapons, and use his help in the matter,
and send commisioners unto Caesar, there was good hope (considering his
vprightnes) that they should obtain their requests at his hand. The Neruians
disapointed of this their hope, enclosed the place where ye Romans wyntred,
with a Rampire of.xi. foot and a dich of xv. foot. These things they had
learned of us: partly by being conversant among us certain years before, and
partly by the instructions of certain of our army, who^ they had taken
prisoners. Nevertheless forasmuch as they had not sufficient Iron toles
necessary for the co^passing of ye matter, they were drive to cut up turfes
with their swords, and to scrape up the earth with their hands, and to carry it
away in their clokes. Whereby is given to understand, what a multitude of men
were of them. For in less than three hours, they finished a fortificatio^ of
xv. foot ten miles compass. The rest of the days folowinge, they began to
prepare and make Towers of ye height of the Rampire, and hokes and vaultes of
boordes as their said prisoners had taught them: The seventh day of this
siege being a very windy day* They began to cast balls of wyldfier out of
slings, and burning darts upon our cabanes, which were covered with thatche
after the facion of Gallia. These cabanes took fire lightly, the which by
violence of the wind was carried over all the camp. Our enemies ensuing with a
great noise, as if ye victory had been theirs out of all cry, began to drive
their Towers and engines forward, and to scale the Rampire with ladders. But
the valiantness and courage of our soldiers was such, that when the fire
round about them scorched them, and that the multitude of artillery
overwhelmed them, and that they saw all their baggage yea and all their
substance burned before their faces, yet there was not any man that sloonke
away to save himself, no nor scarce any that looked back: but every man most
valiantlye and courageously intended to their feighting. This was the sorest
day that our men endured, howbeit this was the end thereof, that ye same day
were the greatest number of our enemies wounded and slain, as they had
clustred and thronged themselves under the Rampire, in such sort that the
formest could not retire for the^ that were behind. Now when the flame began a
little to fall, and that in a certain place, a tower of our enemies was brought
so nigh ye it touched the Uamure, the Capteines of the third Cohort, drew back
out of the place where they stood, and removing their soldiers, began with
signs and voice to call the enemy in, if he would adventure: but there was none
of the^ that durst approach. Then were they on all sides dystroubled with
casting of stones, and the Tower was set on fire. There were in that Legion two
Centurions valiant Gentelmen, which at that time approached to the forefront of
the battle, whose names were Titus Pulfio, and L. Varenus, These twain were at
continual debate among them selves, which of them should be preferred before
other, and at all times striued with great contencion and hartburning which of
them should be placed highest. Now at such time as thencounter was sharpest
about their fort, Pulfio said to Uarenus: Uarenus what stickest thou? or what
other place do thou look for, for the trial of thy manhod? this day shall
decide our controversies. When he had spoken these words, he proceeded out of
the fortifications, and where he saw his enemy thickest, he ran fiersly upon
them. Then could not Uarenus hold himself within the trenche, for fear least
all men should speak shame of him, and so he followed him. Pulfio leaving a
mean space between him and his enemies, threw a dart among them, and struck
one of them through as he was coming out of the battle against him. His
companions seeing him dead of the stripe, did cover him with their shieldes, and
threw darts on al sides at Pulfio, giving him no respit to retire back.
Pulfios target was stricken through, and the Dart stacke fast in his sword
gyrdel. This chance turned aside his scabberde, and so troubled his right hand
that he could not redily draw his sword, and his enemies beset him about as he
was thus entangled. That seeing his enemy Uarenus, succored him and relieved
him in danger of his life. Immediately all the preace turned themselves from
Pulfio to him, because they thought that Pulfio had been stricken through with
the Dart. Uarenus drew his sword and came to hand strokes, where, having slain
one, he put the rest somewhat back. As he followed over gredely upon them, he
slyded into a low plot and fell down. Then Pulfio rescowed him again being
enclosed: and so both of them in saufgard, having slain many of their
enemies, retired with great praise into their camp. Thus fortune tossed them
both, as well in contention as also in encounter, that either of them being
enemies should nevertheless help to save the others life, in such sort that it
was not to be judged, which of them was to be preferred before the other. The
greuouser and sharper that the assault daily was, (inespecially forasmuch as
a great number of his Souldyers being either dead or maimed with wounds,
the matter was driven to so hard a point, that few remained able to make
defense,) so much the oftener were letters and messengers dispatched toward
Caesar: of whom some being taken by the enemy, were put to death with torments
even in the sight of our soldiers There was within a Neruian called Uertico,
borne of a worshippeful stock, who at the first beginning of the siege had
fled to Cicero, and had served him very faithfully. This man persuaded a slave
of his with hope of liberty and great rewards, to convey letters to Caesar. The
fellow having them closed in a Iaueling, went his way with them, and because he
was a Galle, he was conversant among the Galls without suspicio^, and so
escaped unto Caesar. By his means understanding was given of the peril that
Cicero and his Legion were in. Caesar upon the receipt of the letters, which was
about.xi. of the clock in the morning, dyspatched out of hand a Pursiuant to
his Threasoror Marcus Crassus, who wintered among the Bellouacanes, about. xxv.
miles of from him. He commanded him to set forth with his Legion at midnight,
and to come unto him in all have. Crassus came forth with the messenger. He
sent another to his Lieuetenant C. Fabius, wyllyng him to bring his Legion
into the borders of ye Atrebatia^s, through which country he knew that his way
did lie. Also he wrate to Labienus, that (if he might do it without damage to
the common wealth,) he should come with his Legion into the coast of the
Neruians. The rest of his army, forasmuch as it was somewhat further of from
him, he thought not meet to tarry for. He gathered unto him about four
hundred horsemen out of the next garriso^s. About three of the clock, being
certified of the coming of Crassus, he marched that day.xx. miles. He gave
Crassus the charge of Samarobrina, and left one Legion with him, because he had
left there, the cariages and baggage of his army, thostages of the cities, the
public wrightings, and al ye grain that he had provided to sustain the
winter wythal. Fabius as was commanded, making no long tarience in his journey,
met him with his Legion. Labienus having understanding of the death of Sabinus,
and the slaughter of the Cohorts, forasmuch as all the power of ye Treuires
were assembled against him, fearing least if he should in such sort have
departed out of garryson, as that he might seem to be fled, he should not
have been able to sustain the force of his enemies, specially whom he knew to
be puffed up with their late victory, wrate again unto Caesar, how dangerous
a matter it was to lead his Legion out of the place where he wintered:
Certifiyng him moreover what was done among ye Eburones and declaring that all
the whole power of the Treuires, as well horsemen as fotemen, had enca^ped
themselves not passing three miles of from him. Caesar allowing his counsel,
although he had no mo but two Legio^s where he looked for three, yet
notwythstandyng perceiving there was none other hope to save al, but only by
making speed, came by great iorneyes into the borders of the Neruians. There
he learned by his prisoners how the world went with Cicero, and in how great
peril the matter stood. Then he persuaded one of the Gallian horsemen with
great rewards, to convey a letter unto Cicero, the which he wrate in greek
letters, to the intent that if it should happen to be taken by the way, our
purposes should not be disclosed to the enemy. And if he could not come at
Cicero, he advised him to tie the letter to the thong of a Iaueling, and so to
throw it into his camp. The contents of ye letter were, that he was come forth
with his Legions, and would be shortly with him: exhorting him to persevere in
his accustomed valiantnes. The Gall for fear of danger, threw in the letter
with a Dart as was commanded him: The which by chance sticked in a tower, and
for two days together was not perceived of our me^, until the third day y^ a
certain Soldier espied it, and taking it down carried it to Cicero. When he had
red it over, he rehearsed it again in the open asse^bly of his soldiers, to the
great comfort and reioycement of them all. Anon after they might se the smoke
of our fires a far of: the which thing put them clearly out of doubt of the
approach of our legions. The Galls having knowledge thereof by their scoultes,
forsook the siege, and with all their power went to mete Caesar. They were to the
number of threescore thousand armed men. Cicero after leave given, requested
of Uerti^o (whom we spoke of before) the foresaid Gall to carry letters again
unto Caesar, warning him to be very circumspect and diligent in making of his
journey. He wrate in his letters how their ennemies were departed from his
camp, and were bent wholly toward him. Caesar receyuinge these letters about
midnight, advertised his men thereof, and encouraged them to thencounter. The
next morning by the break of the day, he dislodged his camp, and proceeding the
mountenance of four miles or there abouts, espied a multitude of his enemies on
the further side of a great valley and a river. It was a matter of great peril,
to encounter with so great a power in a place of disaduauntage. The which
considered, in as much as he knew that Cicero was delivered from beseging, and
that he had therefore the less need to make have, he stayed and fortified his
camp in a place of as much aduau^tage for him as he could choose. The which
albeit it were of it self very slender, scarsly of seven thousand men,
specially having no baggage: yet he gathered them as close together as he
could in the narrow ways, of set purpose to bring him self in most
contempt of his enemies. In the mean time sending out his scoults into al
parts, he serched what way he might best take, to pass the valley. That day
after certain light skirmyshes between the horsemen at the waters side, each
part kept still their ground: The Galls because they looked for a greater power
which was not yet come, and Caesar, if perchance through the pretense of
fearfulnes, he might allure his enemies to adventure over to his side, to the
intent to encounter with them on the hither side of the valley before his camp:
Or if he could not bring that to pass, than that he might try out the ways
where he might with less peril, pass the Ualley and the River. By the break
of the next day the horsemen of our enemies came to our Camp, and encountered
with our horsemen. Caesar of set purpose commanded his horsemen to give back and
retire into their camp. Therewythall he bade that his Camp should be fortified
on al sides with a higher Rampire, and the gates to be da^med up, and in doing
thereof to make hasty thronging and heauing and shoouing with as much pretense
of fear as might be. Through all the which things the enemies being entyced,
conveyed over their army, and put them selves in battle ray in a place of
disadvantage. Also when they saw our men wythdrawen from the Ra^pyer, they
began to approach nerer, and threw Darts into our fortifications on all sides.
Moreover sending Heraultes about, they made proclamation, that if there were
any Gall, or any Roman, that would turn to them between that and three of
the clock, he should be taken to mercy: but if they tarried after that hour,
they should have no favor showed them. Finally they set so light by us, that
whereas our gates were da^med up but with single rows of Turfe for a show:
which they thought had been done so substancially, that it had not been
possible for them to break through them, some of them fell in hand with
pulling down the Rampire, and some with fillyng up of the diches. Then Caesar
issuing forth at all the gates, and sending out his horsemen, did quickly put
his enemies to flight, in such sort that none of them tarried to feight, of
whom he killed a great number, and made all the rest to throw away their
weapons. Notwithstanding he would not pursew them over far, for fear of the
woods and Marysses that were betwixt them, wisely foreseyng that it would be
greatly to his hinderaunce, to forsake that place: and so without any loss or
hurt of his men, he came the same day in saufty unto Cicero. He wondered to
behold the Turrets, vaults, and fortifications that his enemies had made. And
when the legion was brought forth, he found that the tenth soldier was not
left alive without a wound: by all the which things he might easly deem, with
how great peril, and with how great valiantnes things had been attempted and
propulsed. Wherefore he highly commended Cicero and his Legion according to
their desert, calling out such of the Centurions and Tribunes of the soldiers
severally by name, as he had learned by the report of Cicero, to have behaved
themselves most valiantlye. As concerning the myschaunce of Corta and Sabinus,
he learned the truth more exactlye by his prisoners. The next day in an open
assembly he declares the whole matter as it was done, and comforted and
encouraged his soldiers. He told them that the loss which was rece^ued
through the fault and rashness of the Lieuetenant, was so much the lesser to
be made account of, in as much as the displesure being by the favor of the
Gods immortal and through their prowess recovered, neither their enemies had
any long continuance of their joy, nor themselves long continuance of their
sorrow. In the mean while, the men of Rhemes with incredible swiftnes carried
tidings to Labienus of Cesars victory, insomuch that whereas he was about
threescore miles from the place where Cicero wintred, and that Caesar came
thither after the nyneth hour of the day, before the next midnyght, there
arose a noise before the gates of his camp, whereby the men of Rhemes gave
understanding to Labienus of ye victory, with great rejoicing for the same.
When news hereof was brought to the Treuires, Induciomarus (who was fully
minded to have assaulted Labienus in his camp the next day,) fled away in the
night, and conveyed home all his army again. Caesar sent back Fabius with his
Legion into his wintring place, and himself determined to winter about
Samarobrina with three legions in three several garrisons. And forasmuch as all
Gallia was in such an uproar, he determined to tarry with his army all the
winter. For after ye time that the displeasure which we had received by the
death of Sabinus was blown abroad, almost all the Cities of Gallia began to
consult of war, sending messsengers and ambassadors into all parts, laying
wait to know what others purposed, and deliberatinge where it were best to
begin the war. They held night counsels in places far from resort. Neither
passed there any part of all the whole winter almost, but that Caesar was
continually troubled with tidings of the metinges, conspyracies, and
insurrections of the Galls. Among other things he was advertised from L.
Roscius Thresorer of the host, whom he had made captain of the.xiii. Legion,
that a great power was assembled out of the Cities of littel Britayne to
assail him, and that they were not past an eight miles from the place where he
wyntred: but as soon as they heard news of Cesars victory, they departed in
such sort, as that their departure might seem to be a running away. But Caesar
sommonyng before him the noble men of every city, partly by putting them in
fear in declaryng that he knew of their doings, and partly by entreating them
gentlye, kept the greater part of Gallia in dew obedience and quietness.
Notwithstanding the Senones, which is a city very strong and of much
authority among the Galls, laid wayt by common consent to have slain Cauarine
whom Caesar had made king over the^, whose brother Moritasgus, held the kingdom
at ye coming of Caesar into Gallia, as many of his ancestors had done before.
The which thing when he foreseing had fled unto Caesar, they pursewed him to ye
uttermost borders of their territory, and utterly expulsed him both from his
kingdom and country, and therwythall sending Ambassadors unto Caesar to excuse
the matter, when as he commanded al their counsel to come before him, they
refused to obey him. So much it auayled among those barbarous people, that
there were some found, which durst give thaduenture to rebel. For hereupon
ensued such an alteration of minds through all Gallia, that (setting aside
the Heduanes and the men of Rhemes whom Caesar had ever in chief estimacio^,
the one for their continual faithfulness toward ye people of Rome from of old
time, the other for their late friendship in these wars of Gallia) there was in
manner no city, which we had not cause to suspect. And I do not think that
this their doing is a matter so much to be wondered at, partly for many other
causes, but inespecially, considering how great a corsye it was to their
hearts for them which bare away the renown of cheualry and feats of war
from all other nations, to have lost so much of that their estymacion, that
they should be brought in subjection and bondage to the people of Rome, the
Treuires and Induciomarus, let pass no part of all the whole winter, without
sending Ambassadors over the Rhine, styrring the Cities to war, and promosing
monye, affirming that a great part of our army was slain, and that the remnant
was very small. How beit they were not able to persuade any of the Germans
to pass the Rhine, who answered, that they had learned twyse already by
experyence, namelye in the war of Ariouistus, and the passing over of the
Teuctheres, that it was not for the^ to try the courtsye of fortune any more.
Albeit that Induciomarus were disappointed of this hope, yet notwtstanding he
nothing forslowed to muster soldiers, to train them before hand, to get horses
of his neighbors, and to allure to him with promis of great rewards the
outlawes and condemned persons of al Gallia. By means whereof he gate himself
such estimacion through all Gallia, that Ambassades resorted to him from al
places, sekyng his favor and frendshyp as well in publyque affairs as pryuate
matters. When he saw such voluntary resort unto him, and that on the one side
the Senones and Caruntes were prycked forward with remorce of conscience for
their heinous offens, and that on thotherside the Neruians and Aduatickes
prepared war against the Romans, so that he should have ynow that would be glad
to assyst him of their own accord whenever he began to set forward, he
sommoned a counsel in armor. This is the manner of the Galls when they begin
any wars, wherein by a common law, al ye young stryplinges are wont to come
together in armor: and he that comes last of them, is in the open sight of
the rest, with all kind of most cruel torments put to death. In this counsel
he condemned his son in law Cingetorix, a Prince of the contrary faction,
(whom we declared before to have forsaken him and yielded unto Caesar) for a
traitor, and did confiscate his goods. When this was done, he declared in the
counsel that he was sent for by the Senones and Caruntes and diverse other
cities of Gallia. He said he would go thither through the Country of the men
of Rhemes and wast their fields, and ere ever he so did, that he would assault
the Camp of Labienus: and therwythall he gave commandment what he would have
done. Labienus forasmuch as he had encamped himself in a place both by nature
and man's hand very strong and defenfible, feared not any danger that could
happen to him and to his Legion. Nevertheless he minded not to let slyp any
occasion, that might turn to his furtherance. And therefore being informed by
Cingetorix and his alies, of the oracion that Induciomarus had in the counsel,
he sent Messengers to the cities nere hand, and called the horsemen about him
from al parts, appoynting them a certain day to mete together. In ye mean
while Induciomarus with all his horsemen went up and down almost every day
before his camp, sometime to view the situacion of the Camp, and sometime to
commune with them or to put them in fear, and diverse times he would cause his
horsemen to throw their Darts all at ones into the Trench. Labienus held his
men still within the fortification, and by all means he could devise, gave his
enemies occasion to think that he stood in fear of them: Now when
Induciomarus every day more proudly and disdeinfully then other, came before
his Camp, Labienus one night taking in the horsemen of all the cities
therabout which he had sent for, laid so narrow watch for the keeping of all his
me^ wtihin the camp, that the matter could not by any means be horn abroad
or be bewrayed to the Treuires. In ye mean season Induciomarus according to
his daily custom, resorted to the Camp, and there persent a great part of the
day. His horsemen threw their darts, and with most spightful words provoked our
men to come forth to feyght with them. When they saw that our men gave them
none answer, at their pleasure about the Evening, they brake their array, and
departed without order. Then Labienus sending out suddenly al his horsemen at two
gates, gave them commandment and expressly charged them, that when their
enemies were dyscomfited and put to flight, (the which he foresaw would come to
pass as it did in deed) they should al set upon Induciomarus, and that they
should not hurt any other man, before they saw him dead, because he would not
that he should have leisure to escape while they were occupied about thothers.
He promised great rewards to them that slew him, and he sent his fotemen after,
to the aid and succor of his horsemen. Fortune favored the device of the man.
For inasmuch as all made assault upon him alone, Induciomarus was taken tardie
even in the foord of the river, and there slain, and his head car^ed into our
Camp. The horsemen in their retire, slew as many as they could come by. When
this thing was ones known, all the hosts of the Eburones and Neruians that
were assembled together, departed, and so by this means for a while after,
Caesar had all Gallia in better quyetnes.

FINIS.
THE SYXTH BOOK of C. Julius Caesar's Commentaries of his wars in Gallia.
CAESAR FOR MANY consideratio^s loking for a greater broile in Gallia,
determined to make musters by his Lieuetenantes M. Sillanus, C. Antistius of
Rhegiu^, and T. Sestius. Moreover he requested of Cn. Pompeius the Proconsull,
that for as much as he abode with authority about the City for defencs of the
common weal, he should command to repair to their standerdes, and to come
unto him, all such as being bound by oath to the Consul, he had leuyed in
Callia Cisalpina. For he thought it should be greatly auayleable herafter to
make al Gallia stand in awe, if it might appear to them that Italy was of
such power and abilitye, as that it could not only repair and amend in short
space any loss received by the wars, but also make it self stronger than it
was before. The which thing when Pompey both for the commonweals sake, and
for frendships sake, had granted unto, having spedelye made muster by his
Capteines, and not only raised but also conveyed thither as he was, three
Legions before winter was done, and also having dowbled the number of those
Cohortes that he had lost with Q. Titurius, through his celerity and power, he
gave to understand what the disciplyne and riches of the Romans were able to
do. After that Induciomarus was slain (as I told ye before), the Treuires
committed the souereinty to his next kinsmen, who ceased not to solicit their
neighbors the Germans, and to promis them monye. When they could not obtain
their purpose of their neighbors, they sought to them that were further of. At
the last having found some cities pliable to their desyer, they bound the one
to another by oath, and wrought sure with hostages and money. They entered
society and aliance with Ambiorix. The which things when Caesar understood, and
saw moreover that on all sides war was rered against him: that the Neruians,
Aduatickes and Menapians, with thassistance of all the Germans on this side
the Rhine were in arms: that the Senones came not at his commandment, but
took counsel with the Caruntes and other borderers against him: and that the
Treuires with often ambassades went about to raise the Germans: he thought it
stood him in hand to lay for the wars betymes. And therefore ere winter was
fully spent, he brought together four Legions that were nerest to him, and
suddenly invaded the borders of the Neruia^s, and there before they could
either assemble to resist him, or fly to save themselves* having taken a great
bootye of men and cattle, the which he gave to his souldyers for a pray, and
wasted their fields, he compelled them to submit themselves to him, and to
give him hostages. Having quicklye thus dyspatched this business, he conveyed
his Legions again into their winteryng places. In the beginning of the spring
sommoning a counsel of al Gallia, when as all the other came, saving the
Senones, Caruntes, and Treuires: co^iecturing this to be a beginning of war
and rebellion, to the intent he might seem to set al other things a part, he
adiourned the parliament to Lutetia of the Parisians: They were next neyghbors
to the Senones, and had priuileged each other in their cities within man's
remembrance: but it was thought they were no partakers of this counsel. This
matter being openly pronounced from the bench, he went the same day with his
Legions against the Senones, and by great iorneyes came thither. Acco Prince of
the contrary faction having knowledge of his coming, commanded the common
people to get them into the Towns. As they were about to do so, before they
could dyspatch, tidings came that the Romans were at hand, by means whereof
constreyned of necessitye to cease from their enterprise, they sent messengers
to Caesar to entreat with him. They made their access unto him by the Heduanes,
whose country had continued faithful from of old time. Caesar at the suit of
the Heduanes was the wyllynger to bear with them, and accepted their excuse,
for as much as he thought that the summer time was rather to be employed
about the war that was at hand, then about examination of matters. And so he
commanded them to give him a hundred hostages, the which he delivered to the
Heduanes to be kept. Thither also the Caruntes sent Ambassadors and hostages,
using for their intercessors the men of Rhemes, unto who^ they were as it were
reteyners, and they received like answer. Caesar holds out his parliament
still, and commands the cities to find him horsemen. Having thus pacified this
part of Gallia, he applied himself wholye with thought and mind to the wars
of the Treuires and of Ambiorix. He commanded Cauarine to accompany him with
the horsemen of the Senones, least there should rise any uproar in ye country,
either through his irefulnes, or for malice that they bare against him. When
he had set these matters at a stay, forasmuch as he knew certainly that
Ambiorix would not encounter with him in battle, he forecast in his mind how
he might come to the knowledge of all his other devises. There were the
Menapians bordering upon the Eburones fensed in with continual fennes and
woods round about them, who only of all the people of Gallia, had never sent
ambassadors to Caesar to entreat for peace, and he was sure that Ambiorix
soiorned amongst them. Also he had understanding, that by means of the
Treuires, he had entered in league with the Germans. He thought it mete to
disappoint him of these helps, ere he assailed him by battle: lest either
being brought to utter despair, he might hide himself among the Menapia^s, or
otherwise he himself be compelled to feight with thinhabiters on the further
side of the Rhine. When he had determined upon this devise, he sent all the
baggage of his army to Labienus among the Treuires, and bade two Legions go
thither to him. Himself with five Legions having nothing to comber the^, set
forward against the Menapia^s. There having not raised any power because they
trusted in the strength of the place, they fled into the woods and Marysses,
and conveyed al their goods thither. Caesar deuyding his army with C. Fabius
his Lieuetenaunt, and Ma. Crassus his Threasorer, and quicklye making bridges,
assailed them on three parts at ones, and setting their houses and villages a
fire, gate a great bootye of men and cattle. By means whereof the Menapians
were enforced to send Ambassadors unto him to entreat for peace. Receiving
their hostages, he threatened to take them for his enemies, if they received
either Ambiorix, or his Ambassadors within their borders. When he had set these
things at a stay, he left Comius of Arras with a troop of horsemen, as a Warden
among the Menapians, and him self went against the Treuires. While Caesar was
doing these things, the Treuires having assembled a great host of horsemen and
footmen, were about to set upon Labienus who with one Legio^ had wintred in
their borders. And now they were not past a two days journey from him, when
they understood that two Legions mo sent thither by Caesar, were come unto him.
Wherefore encamping the^ selves about xv. miles of, they determined to tarry for
the aid of the Germans. Labienus having knoweledge what his enemies purposed
to do, and hoping that through their rashness some occasion of battle would be
given, left five Cohorts to defend the stuff, and setting forth toward his
enemy with.xxv. Cohorts and a great power of horsemen, encamped himself within a
mile of him. There was between Labienus and his enemies a river with steep
banks, hard to be passed. This river he neither purposed to pass himself,
neither thought he that his ennemies would pass it. Every day they were in
greater hope than other of aid. Labienus said in an open assembly, that
forasmuch as it was reported that ye Germans were nere at hand, he would not
put both his own goods and the goods of his army in hazard, and therefore would
the next morning by break of the day dislodge his ca^p. These things were sone
reported to the enemy, as it is commonly seen that among so many Gallian
horsemen as he had, nature compels some of them to bear favor to their
country affairs. Labienus in the night time calling to him the Tribunes and
chief officers of his camp, declared unto them what he minded to do. And to
the intent the eas^yer to bleare his enemies eyes with suspicio^ of fearfulnes,
he bade that they should remove with more noise and hurlyburly, than the
custom of the Romans was to do. By this means, he made his removing seem
like a running away. These things also (as it happens where two armies
encampe so near together) were by spies before daylight carried to the enemy.
The rereward was scars out of the camp, but that the Galls encouragyng one
another, not to let their hoped pray slyppe out of their hands: In as much
as it would be to long to wait, lingaring for the aid of the Germans since the
Romans were in such a fear, and it stood not with their honor to be so
cowardly, that with so great a power as they had, they should be afraid to
assail so small a handful, specially being troubled and flying away: boldly
passed over the river, and in a place of disaduau^tage gave us battle. Labienus
mistrustyng as much before, to thentent to toll them all over the River, kept
on his way softly with like pretense of fear as he had used before. At length
sending the stuff and cariages somewhat before, and setting them upon a littel
hill, ye have (quod he) my Soldiers, the occasion that ye wyshed for. Ye hold
your enemy in a place unhandsome and of disaduau^tage. Now let us
peticapteines see like valiantnes in you, as you have oftentimes showed before
your Graundcapteine: think that he were now here, and presently beheld your
doyngs with his eyes. With these words he commanded the standerd to be turned
toward the enemy, and the battles to be advanced. And se^ding a few horsemen
away for the defense of the Cariages, he placed the rest on the sides of his
battles. Our men raising a great showt, quicklye discharged their darts at
their enemies. When contrary to their expectacion, our enemies saw us who^
they believed to have been fled, return upon them with force of arms, they were
not able to abide so much as ye onset, but at the first meting taking
themselves to their heles, fled to the next woods: whom Labienus pursewyng
with his horsemen, slew of them a great number, and took many mo, and within
few days after recovered the City. For the Germans that were coming to
their aid, hearing of the discomfiture of the Treuires, retired home again.
The kinsfolk also of Induciomarus who were thauthors of this rebellion,
departed out of the City, and accompanied the Germans. And so ye souereinty
and rule of the country, was betaken to Lingetorix, who (as we have declared)
continued alwais faythull from the beginning. After that Caesar was come from
the Menapians among the Treuires, he determined for two causes to pass the
Rhine: of the which one was because they had sent aid to the Treuires against
him* the other was to thentent that Amb^orix should not have any recourse unto
them. These matters being determined upon, he purposed to make a bridge a
littell above the same place, where he had passed his army before. When the
manner how he would have it done was ones known and the thing set in hand with,
his soldiers plied the work so earnestlye, that it was finished within few
dais after. Then leaving a strong garrison among the Treuires for the defense
of the bridge, least they should make any assault upon the sodeine, he passed
over the rest of his army both horsemen and fotemen. The Ubians who before had
given him hostages, and submitted themselves unto him, sent Ambassadors unto
him to make their purgacion, declaryng that they had neither sent any aid out
of their City to the Treuires, nor broken their allegiance in anys point:
requesting and beseching him to spare them, and that for the hatred of the
Germans in general he would not punish the^ being innocents, as if they had
been offenders: If it were his pleasure to demand any mo hostages, they were
ready to deliver them. When Caesar had examined the matter, he found that the
aid was sent by the Sweuians. Whervppon when he had received their
satisfaction, he enquired of the passages and ways into Sweuia. In the mean
time within few days after, the Ubians advertised him that all the Sweuians
had assembled their power together into one place, and that they had sent
commandment to all nations that were under their dominion, to send them aid
of horsemen and footmen. When he knew this, he provided for grain, and chose a
place mete to encamp in. He commanded the Ubians to wythdrawe their cattle out
of the fields, and to convey all that they had into the towns, hoping that
those barbarous and unskillful people, constreyned for want of vyctualles,
might be brought to feight to their own hynderaunce and undoing. Moreover he
wylled them to send often spies into Sweuia, and to learn what was done there
among them. They fulfilled his commandment, and within a few days after,
brought him word that all the Sweuians, after the time they had certain
understanding of thapproch of the Romain army, had withdrawn themselves with all the power which they had leuyed among their confederates, to the furthest
part of al their country: In the which place was a wood of excedyng greatness
called Now called Swartswald
Bacenis, the which ran a great way inward, and being cast of nature as a wall
between them, kept the Cherusciens from doing wrong or inuading the Sweuians,
and likewise the Sweuians from doing wrong or inuading the Cherusciens: at the
entrance of the which wood, the Sweuians determined to abide the coming of the
Romans. Now forasmuch as I am come to this place, I think it not amysse to
entreat of the facions of Gallia and Germany, and to show how those Nations
dyffer one from another. In Gallia, not only in all Cities, and in all
villages, and al quarters, but also almost in every house are factions. And
the heads of these factions are they, whom they esteem worthyest to have it:
at whose arbitrament and determination, their matters of greatest weight and
importance, as well in counsel as otherwise, are disposed. And this matter
seems to be so ordained of old time for this consyderatio^, that none of the
communalty should want help against his superior. For no man will suffer that
such as perteine to him, should be oppressed or deluded by falsehod, if he
should otherwise do, he were like to bear no sway among them. To be short this
is the manner of all Gallia. For all the Cities are divided into two parter.
When Caesar came first into Gallia, the Heduanes were ye ringleaders of the one
faction, and the Sequanes of the other. The Sequanes being but weak of
themselves, because that of old time ye chyef authority belo^ged to the
Heduanes, and many reteiners hung upon their sleeue, alied unto the^ Ariouistus
and the Germans, who^ to their great loss, with large promises they allured
unto them. Now when they had fought many battelles luckelye, and slain all the
Nobility of the Heduanes, they surmounted so much in power, that they wythdrew
to them many that were alyed to the Heduanes, and took their noble men's
sons in hostage, and compelled them to swear openly that they should take
no counsel against the Sequanes, and held in possession part of the marches
which they had taken wrongfully, and finally obteyued the souereinty of al
Gallia. Through which necessitye Diuitiacus being driven to seek help, and
coming to Rome to the Senate for the same intent, returned home without
speding of his purpose. But at the coming of Caesar when things were altered,
the Heduanes had their hostages redeliuered, their old alyes and confederates
restored, new brought in by Caesar, (because that they which had inclined to
their friendship, saw them selves to be in better case, and more vpryghtly
dealt wythall,) and their estate enlarged in all other things with favor and
dignitye, so that the Sequanes were feign to bisburden themselves altogether of
the Souereintye. In their place succeeded the men of Rhemes: whom forasmuch as
it was perceived to be as far in favor with Caesar as any other, they which by
reason of old grudge, could by no means agree with the Heduans, yielded themselves
into the tuicion of the men of Rhemes, and they very earnestly defended them,
thereby establishing their new and suddenly gotten souereinty. The case stood so
at that time, that ye Heduanes held the chief place, and the Rhemians held the
next place of dignity unto them. In all Gallia there be two sorts of men, that
are made any account of or had in any estimation. For the co^munalty is kept
under in manner like slaves, and of themselves they dare do nothing, neither
are they taken to counsel in any matter. Many of them when they be either
oppressed with Det, or with the unreasonableness of taxes and tallages, or
with wrongs done by those y^ are mightier than they, do yield themselves in
bondage to the Nobleme^. And they may lawfully deal with the^ in all points, as
with their slaves. But of the foresaid two sorts, the one are Druides, and
the other are Knights. The Druides are occupied about holy things: they have the
doing of public and private sacrifices, and do interpret and discuss
matters of Religion. Unto them do resort great numbers of young men to learn at
their hands, and they be had in great reverence. For they determine almost of
all controversies and matters in variance, as well publyque as pryuate. And if
there happen any thing to be done amysse, if there be any murder committed, if
there rise any controuer^y concerning inheritance or bounds of lands, they
take the matter into their hands, and awarde either recompense or penalties in
the case. And if there be any be he private person or be it corporation, that
will not stand to their judgment, they interdite him, which punishment among
them is counted most grievous. They that are so interdited, are accounted in
the number of wicked and ungracious folk: All men shonne them, al men eschew
their company and communication: least by communicating with them, they should
defyle them selves and receive any harm by the^: if they demand law, they
may not have it: neither may they enjoy any honor. Over all these Druides
there is one Primate, which has chyefe authority over them. When he is
dead, if there be any of the rest that excels in worthiness, he succedeth. Or
if there be many equal, he is chosen by voices of the rest of the Druides. And
diverse times they strive for the souereinty by force of arms. These men at a
certain time of the year, in the borders of the Caruntes (whose country is
counted the middel of all Gallia,) do sytte together in a place hallowed,
whereunto resort from all places, all such as have any controversies: and look
what is decreed and judged by them, that they stand to. This order of
disciplyne is thought to have had beginning in Britain, and from thens to have been brought into Gallia. And at this day, they that are desirous to know the
thing more exactly, do commonly repair thither to learn it. The Druides
customablye are exempted from the wars. Neither do they pay taxes and
tallages with other folk: for they are priuileged from the wars, and are free
from al other burdens. Allured with so great rewards, many even of their own
accord do register them selves in the order, and diverse are sent thither by
their parents and kinsfolk. There they are reported to learn a great number
of Uerses by heart. Wherefore it comes to pass, that diverse contynew.xx. years
in learning. Neither do they think it lawful to put them in wrighting,
whereas in all other things, for their accounts, as well public as private,
they use the Greek letters. This order they seem (in mine opinion) to have
taken for two considerations. Partly because they will not have their
discipline published among the common people, and partly because they will not
that they which shall learn, trusting to much to their books, should have the
less regard of remembrance: for as much as it happens welnere to most me^,
that upon trust of the help of their book, they are slacker in learning
things by heart, and less pass to bear them in mind. This is one of the
chiefest things that they labor most to beat into men's heads, that the
Souls dye not, but do after death pass from one to another: and here by
they think men should be most stirred unto virtue, when the fear of death
is not accounted upon. Also they dispute many other things: as of the
stars, and of their moving: of the bigness of the world and the earth: of
the nature of things: of the strength and power of the Gods immortal: and
do teach them to yowgeth. The other sort is of knighthod. These when need
is, and when any war chances, (which before the coming of Caesar chanced
almost every year, either upon occasion of wrong done by them unto other, or to
withstand other that would do them wrong) they give themselves all to feats of
arms, and among them as any man is of greatest birth and ability, so has he
about him most servants and reteyners. And this is thonly grace and power
that they know. All the whole Nation of the Galls is very sore addicted to
Religion: and therefore they that are dyseased with grievous maladies, and they
that are in peril or in battle, do either offer or vow to offer men in
sacrifice, and do use the Druides as ministers in such kind of sacryfyces:
because they think that unless one man's life be paid for the life of an
other, the wrath of the Gods immortal cannot be appeased. And of these kinds
of sacryfices, they have certain solemn rites to be used openly. Other some
make unmeasurable huge images: whose bodies being hollow and made of wycker,
they stuff with quick men, and setting the images on fire, do smoolder the men
within them with the flame which enuironeth them on al sides. They think that
the punishment of such as are taken in stealing or robbing, or in any other
fault, is more acceptable to the Gods immortal, howbeit when store of such
kind of people sayleth, they fall to the punishment of such as are giltles. Of
al Gods they worship chiefly Mercury: and of him there be many images. They
report him to be the fynder out of al arts: they report him to be the guide of
wayfairyng men: him they believe to have most power to the gayning of money and
in merchandise. Next him they honor Apollo, and Mars, and Jupiter, and Minerua.
Of these they have in manner the same opinion, that other Nations have: that is
to say: That Apollo drives away diseases: that Minerua trayneth folk in the
principles of works and handycraftes: that Jupiter holds the souereintye of
heaven: that Mars has the charge of wars. Unto Mars, at such time as they
are toward feighting a field, for the most part they vow such things as they
shall take in the battle: those things that they take alive, they offer in
sacryfice: all the rest of their things they bring together into one place. In
many Cities are to be seen great stackes of such things pyled up in hallowed
places: and it seldom or never chances, that any man is so irreligious that
he dares either hide any thing that is so taken, or pilfer any thing away that
is so pyled: and a most grievous punishment with extreme torments is appointed
for y^ offense. The Galls report themselves to be al issued from Dis the
father of hell, and they say that the Druides do so tell them. And for that
cause they determine ye space of all times, not by the number of days but of
nyghtes: and they observe their birth days and the beginnings of months and
years in such wise, that the day ever follows after the night. In their other
trades of living, they differ from others in this point, that they suffer not
their sons to come in their presence openly, until such time as being men
grown, they be able to supplye the roumes of soldiers: and they count it a
shame, that the son as long as he is a boy, should be seen abroad in his
fathers company. Look how much money the men do receive with their wives in name
of their dowrye, they make an estimate of their own goods and lay so much in
value thereunto: all the which is occupied together in one stock, and
thencrease thereof is reserved, and which of them soever ouerliueth other, the
stock with thencrease of the former years, falls to the Suruiuor. The men
have over their wives like as over their children, authority of life and death.
And when a householder of any noble lineage deceaseth, his kinsemen come
together, and as touching his death (if there be any suspicio^ of the matter)
have his wives in examinacion as if they were slaves. And if they find them
culpable, they put the^ to death with fire, and all kind of torments that can
be devised. Their burying after the manner of ye Galls is honorable and
sumptuous. All things that they think the party delighted in when he was
alive, they throw into the fire with him, even living things and all. And a
littell before the time of our remembrance, it was the custom that when the
funerals were fully accomplished, the slaves and reteyners whom they set most
by, were also burned with the^. Such Cities as are esteemed to govern their
commonweals best, have enacted by law, that if any man understand ought by
the borderers concerning the common weal by fame or uncertain report, he shall
declare it to the Magistrate, and in any wise not make any other body privy
unto it: because it is well known, that rash fellows and such as have no
skyll, are made afraid with false rumors, and stirred to mischief, and take
upon them to consult of the matters of greetest weight. The Magistrates keep
secret such things as they think good, and show unto the people such things
as they deem mete for the^ to know. It is not lawful to talk of the common
weal, but in the way of counsel. The Germans do much dyffer from this
custom. For they neither have Druides to bear authority in dyuyne matters,
nor yet pass upon sacryficing. They account them for Gods, whom they behold,
and by whose means they are manifestlye helped, that is to wete, the sun,
the fire and the moon: as for the rest, they never somuche as ones heard of
them. All their whole life consists in hunting, and in the practice of feats
of arms. From their childhod they give them selves to labor and hardness.
Those that continue longest without company of women, receive greatest
commendation among the^. For hereby they think that the stature and power is
nourished, and the sinews strengthened. They count it one of greatest shames
that may be, to have to do with a woman before thage of.xx. years. The which
can by no means be hidden, because they both wash themselves indifferently men
and women together in the running waters, and also do wear hides or littel
short garments scars able to cover any part of their bodies. They give not
themselves to tillage: but the chiefest part of their diet, consysteth in
whitmeate and flesh. There is not any man that has any certain quantity of
ground, or any bounds of his own. But the Magistrates and Princes from year
to year, assign to companyes and kinredes of folk which have kept together,
so much land as they shall think sufficient, in what place is pleases them,
and compel them the next year after, to remove some other where, and they
allege many reasons for their so doing. First, least allured with continual
custom of taryinge in one place, they should wythdraw their minds from war
and set them upon husbandry. Secondly, least they should covet to get much
land into their hands, and the welthyer sort drive the poorer out of their
possessions. Thirdly, that they should not be over curious in their buildinges,
for thauoidance of cold and heat. Fowrthly, that there should not grow any
covetousness of monye, from whence are wont to spring partakinges and debates.
And finally, to thinte^t to keep the common people from grudge and hartburning,
when every man sees that he may be as rich as the richest. It is the greatest
praise to a City, to have their borders a great way of wasted, in such sort
that it may seem like a wyldernes. This they think a point of prowess, to
compel their neighbors perforce to forsake their grounds, in such wise that no
man dare inhabit nere them. Besides that they deem themselves to be the more in
saufty, al fear of sodein invasion being taken away. When a City either
defends or inuadeth, there be officers chose^ for the war, who have
authority of life and death. In the time of peace there is no common
Magistrate: but the Lords of every shire and town, do minister law among
their tenantes, and determine controversies. It is counted no shame to rob, so
it be without the bounds of every City, for they hold opinion it is a good
exercise, to keep their youth from slouthfulnes. And at such time as any
noblema^ in open counsel profering himself to be a Captein, wills the^ to
show themselves that are willinge to follow him, by and by rise up such as
like the man and the quarrel, and promis him their help: and they are much
commended of the people for their labor. If any of them be not as good as
their word, they are esteemed ever after for cowardes and traitors, and they are
discredited in all respects as long as they live. They think it not lawful to
hurt a stranger. Whosoever resorteth unto them, for what occasion so ever it be,
they defend the^ from wrong, and esteem them as holy. For every ma^s house is
open to them, and they may take meat and drink at their pleasure. It was so in
time past, that the Galls surmou^ted the Germans in prowes, and made war upon
the^ at their pleasure: and for thabundaunce of their people, for whom there
was not la^d enough to maintain them at home, sent inhabiters on the further
side of the Rhine: Insomuch that the most plentiful places of all Germanye
about the wood Hartswald
Hercinia, (the which I see was known by fame to Eratosthenes and certain
Greeks, who call it Orcinia) the People of Languedock
Uolces Tegtosages took, and there planted themselves. The which Nation at
this present holds still the same habitacion, and is greatly renowned for
justice and chiualry: and eue^ now they continue in the self same pouertye,
scarcetye, and patience that the Germans do, and use the like fare and
apparel that they do. The nerenesse of our Province, and the experience of
traueiling in strange cou^tryes beyond the sea, has helped the Galls with
many things to their enriching and commodity. By littel and littel being
enured to yield, and being vanquyshed in many battles, they themselves will not
make comparison with the^ in prowess. This forest of Hercinia before
mentioned, is as much in breadth as a lightfooteman is able to journey in nine
days: for otherwise it cannot be bounded, because they know not how to measure
iorneyes. It begins at the borders of the Heluetians, Nemets, and Rauraces,
and so right by the coast of the river Danow, stretches to the border of the
Daces and Auartians. From thens it bends on the left hand quight another way
from the river, and by reason of his greatness touches the borders of many
Nations. Neither is there any man of this hither part of Germany, which is
able to say, that he has either seen or heard, where the end of this forest
is: and yet there is that has gone.lx. days journey out right, and could never
learn out of what place it should rise. It is certain that there bread in it
many kinds of wild beasts, which are not seen else where. Of the which these
are they that most dyffer from the rest, and seem most worthy to be put in
writing. There is a kind of Ox in shape like a Stag, in the mids of whose
forehead between his ears is one horn, much higher and streighter then any of
the horns that are known to us: at the top whereof do spread out tines and
branches a great way of. The nature of the male and female is all one, the
shape of body is all one, and the greatness of their horns is all one. There
be also beasts that are called Alces. The shape of them and the diversity of
the colors of their coats, is like unto Goats, but they be somewhat bigger,
and are without horns, and they have legs with out knots or joints, and
therefore they lie not down to rest them: and if they happen by any chance
to fall down, or to be overthrown, they cannot raise nor help themselves up
again. The trees are to them in stead of Couches: to them they lean
themselves, and so bowinge a very littell, do take their rest. By whose
footing when the Hunters perceive where their haunt is, they do either
undermine, or else cut within the ground, all the trees thereawayes, in such
sort that by thupper part they may seem to stand fast still: so that when they
lean against them as they were wont to do, they ouerlade the weak trees with
the weight of their bodies, and fall to the ground with them. The third kind
is of the^ that are named Ures. These are of bigness somewhat less than
Elephantes, in kind and color and shape like a Bull. They are of great
strength and swiftness. They spare neither man nor beast that comes in their
fight. The Germans are very peinfull in making pittes to take them, and so
kill them. Their young men do harden themselves with this travel, and exercise
themselves with this kind of hunting. And they that kill most of them,
bringing forth the horns for a witness, do receive great praise. But as for to
acquaint them with men, and to make them tame it is not possible, though they
take them never so young. The largeness of their horns, and the shape and
facion of them, does much differ from the horns of our Oxen. These they gather
most diligently, and binding them about ye brimmes with silver, do use them at
their greatest feasts for cups. Caesar when he understood by the Ubian
spies, that the Sweuians had wythdrawen them into the woods, fearyng scarcety
of grain, (because (as I said before) the Germans pass little or nothing
upon tillage,) determined to proceed no further. Nevertheless to thentent he
would not put the barbarous people altogether out of fear of his return, and
also stay them from aiding the Galls, when he had repassed his army, he cut of
the bridge the length of CC. foot toward that side of the river that was next
the Ubians, and at the hither end of the bridge, builded a tower of.iiii.
stories, wherein he left a garryson of.xii. Cohorts to defend the bridge, and
strengthened the place with great fortifications. Of this place and of the
garrison there, he made Captein a young Gentelma^ called C. Uolcatius Tullus:
And he himself as soon as corn began to wax ripe, setting forward to make
war against Ambiorix, sent before him L. Minuitius Basilius with all his
horsemen, through the forest of Ardeine (which is the greatest of all Gallia,
and from the banks of the Rhyne and the borders of the Treuires exte^deth to
the Neruians, and is more than five hundred miles in length:) to try if he
could get any advantage, by hasting his journey, and by thopportunitye of the
time. He gave him warning that he should not suffer any fires to be made in
his camp, least his coming should be perceived a far of, saying that he
would follow immediatlye after him himself. Basilius did as he was commanded:
and accomplishing his journey with more speed than all men thought it had been
possible for him to do, took many tardye in the fields, by whose information
he went straight toward Ambiorix in a place where he was said to soiorne with a
few horsemen. Fortune bears a great stroke in all things but specially in war
matters. For as it was a great chance that he should fall upon him unawares
and unprovided, and that they should se him present with their eyes, before
they heard any incling at all of his coming: so was it a great chance likewise
that he should lose all the furniture for the wars that he had about him, and
his horses and wagons be taken, and yet himself escape the death. But this
came to pass, because the house being environed with wood, (as the houses of
the Galls for ye most part be, who to eschew the heat of the weather
commonly do build nere the woods and rivers) his friends and household
servants in that narrow room endured for a while the brunt of our horsemen,
during ye which time, one of his friends set him on horseback, and the woods
hyd him that he could not be perceived as he fled. Thus both in fallinge into
danger and in auoydyng the same, fortune greatly auayled. It is to be doubted
whether Ambiorix of set purpose had not assembled his power about him, because
he looked not for any encounter, or whether the time disapointed him, and the
sodeine approach of our horsemen let him, because he feared least the rest of
our army had followed immediately after them. But surely he sent messengers
abroad into the Country, to bid every man shyft for himself: of whom some
fled into the forest of Ardeine, and some into the marisses nere hand. Such
as were next the Ocean, hid them selves in the Islands which the tide was wont
to make. Many forsaking their own country, committed them selves and all that
they had to strangers, whom they never saw nor herd of before, Cativulcus king
of the one half of the Eburones, who had associated himself with Ambiorix, being
now worn with years, and not able for age to endure the travel either of
warfare or of flight, cursinge and bannynge Ambiorix the author of that
enterprise, poisoned himself with Iuce of yewgh, whereof there is abundance in
Gallia and in Germanye. The Segnies and Condruses of the nation and number of
Germans, which are between the Eburones and Treuires, sent Ambassadors to
Caesar, besechyng him not to take them as his enemies, nor to esteem all the
Germans that were on thisside the Rhine, to be as in one case. For they
thought of nothing less than of war, neither had they sent any succor to
Ambiorix. Caesar having tried the matter by examynation of the prisoners,
commanded that if any of the Eburones were fled unto them, they should bring
the^ back again unto him. In so doing, he said he would work no dyspleasure to
their country. Then dividing his army into three parts, he bestowed the
stuff of all his Legions at Uaruta. It is the name of a castle almost in the
mids of the country of the Eburones, whereas Titurius and Aurunculeius had
wyntered before. Caesar lykyng well this place for other considerations, and
also in that the fortificatio^s made there the year before, remained yet whole
and undefaced, to thentent to ease his soldiers of their toil, left here al
their stuff, and appointed for defense thereof, the.xiiii. Legion, which was
one of the three that he had lastly levied and brought with him out of Italy.
Over this legion and camp he made Captein Quintus Tullius Cicero, and assigned
unto him CC. horsemen. Having thus parted his army, he commanded T. Labienus to
set forth with three Legions toward the Ocean, into those coasts that border
upon the Menapians. He sent C. Trebonius with like number of legions to wast
that country, that lies upon the Aduatickes. And he himself with the other three,
determined to go to the River Sambre.
Sabis which runs into Maze, and to the further parts of the forest of
Ardeine, whyther he heard that Ambiorix was fled with a few horsemen. At his
departure he promised to return again within seven days after, at ye which
time he knew that corn was to be delivered to the legion that was left in
garrison. He requested Labienus and Trebonius that (if they might do it to the
behofe of the common weal) they should also return at the same day, to
thentent that laying their heads again together, upon search made what their
enemies went about, they might take some other counsel how to proceed in the
wars. There was not (as we showed before) any host of men, nor any
garrison, nor any town that was able to defend it self by battle: But the
common people being dispersed, wheresoever was any blind valley, or any wild
wood, or any unhandsome maryshe where they hoped to find any defense or
saufgard, conveyed themselves thither. These places were known to the
borderers, and the matter required great circumspectnes, not so much for the
sauinge of the whole army, (for there could not happen any peril to the whole
power together by men amazed and dyspersed) as for preservation of every
soldier seuerallye. And yet this thing also in part made to the saufgard of
our army. For as the desyer of spoil egged forth many a great way from the
Camp, so the woods with their blind and uncertain paths was a let that they
could not come at them in any great companies. If they were desirous to have
the matter dyspatched out of hand, and to have the stock of such wicked
people utterly rooted up, it behooved them to send forth many armies, and to
let the soldiers divide themselves into many companyes. Again if (according
to the ordinances and custom of the Romain army,) the bands were to be kept
to their standerds: the place it self was a defense to the barbarous people,
who wanted no boldness at al to lay ambushes priuilye, and to entrappe them
being dyspersed. Wherefore in such distresses, as much as man's policy was able
to reach, was foresene, that (albeit their hearts burned with in them to be
reue^ged) yet somewhat should rather be omitted in doing displeasure to the
enemies, than so to displease them as should redound to the hurt of our
soldiers. Caesar sent messengers to all the cities nere abouts, to allure them
forth to the spoil of the Eburones, promisinge the^ that all that they could
get should be their own: to thentent that in the forests he might rather put ye
Galls themselves, than his own soldiers in hazard of their lives: and also to
thentent that being environed with a great number for thaccomplishing of such
an act, the offspring and name of ye country might utterly be destroyed. Hervpo^
a great number assembled quickly from al coasts. These things were a doing in
all quarters of the Eburones, and now approached the vii. day, at the which day
Caesar had promised to return to his cariages, and the legion that he left with
the^. Here it may be perceived, how great a stroke fortune may bear in the
wars, and how great casualties she may move. Our ennemies (as I have
showed) were scattered and amassed in such wise that there was not any host of
men, to put us in any fear at all. The report was spread over the Rhine among
the Germans that the Eburones were put to havoc, and that every man was
called to the spoil come who would. Hervpo^ the Sicambres which dwell upon the
Rhine, (who^ we have declared before to have received ye Teuchthers and
Usipites after their dyscomfiture) raised two thousand horsemen, and passed the
Rhine in Craers and Barges, a thirty miles beneath the place where ye
unfinished Bridge was, at the which Caesar had left his garrison. They invade
the uttermost bounds of the Eburones, where they recountred many as they fled
scattered here and there, and gate a great booty of cattle, whereof the
barbarous people are most gredye: wherewithal being more allured, they proceeded
further. Neither maris ground nor forest was able to stay these fellows, which
were trained up from their birthe in war and robbing. They enquired of their
prisoners in what place Caesar was: by whom they understood that he was gone far
of and that all the army was departed. And one of ye prisoners said: what mean
you to hunt after this miserable and slender bootye? which now if ye list may
be most fortunate. In three hours ye may come to Uaruta, where the Roman
army has bestowed al their goods. The garrison is so thynne, that they be
not able to single man the walls, neither dare any man put his head out of ye
tre^ch. Upon the hope of this offer, the Germans leaving the pray that they
had gotten, in a secret place, made toward Uaruta, vsinge him for their guide,
by whose declaration they were informed of the matter. Cicero who all the other
days before, had according to the commandment of Caesar, with great
aduisednesse kept his souldyers within his camp, and had not suffered so much as
a Uarlet or a Bage to pass out of the fortifycation, the.vii. day dystrusting
that Caesar would keep promis with him, because he hard he was gone further of,
and no tidinges came to him of his return, and moreover moved with the words
of such as termed his patience in manner a siege, if they might not have liberty
to pass out of their camp, loking for no such adventure after the dyspersinge
and almost utter destroying of his enemies, against who^ were gone forth nine
Legions, as to find any thing within three miles space that might anoye him,
sent out five Cohortes into the next cornfieldes to fetch in grain, between
the which and his camp there was no more but one littel hill only. There were in
the camp many that had been left behynd out of the other Legio^s, because they
were hurt and diseased. Of the which sort, such as within these few days were
recovered, being to the number of a CCC. were sent forth under the ba^ner with
the rest. Moreover a great multitude of Uarlettes and a great sort of beasts
for burden which had abiden in the Camp followed after. The very same time by
chance, came the Germane horsemen between them and home, and without
tariaunce with like pace as they had ridden all the way, endeavored to break
into the camp at the chief gate: and they were not espied by reason of the
woods that were on that side which let the view, before they were so nere
our Camp, that the Merchantmen which lay in hales under the Rampyer side, had
no leisure to recover themselves within saufgarde. Our men being taken
unprovided upon the sodein, were so troubled, that the Cohorte was scars able
to wythstand the first brunt. Our enemies spread them selves on all sides
about, to see if they could find any entryng place, in so much that our men
had much a do to defend ye gates: for the place was otherwise so strong of it
self and so well fortified, that it neded no defense. All the whole camp was in a
fear, and every one demanded of another ye cause of the tumult, in so much
that they wist not which way either to advance their banners, or whither they
should assemble themselves. One reports for a certeinty that the Camp was
already taken: another holds opinion that the Graundcapteine and his army
being utterly destroyed, ye barbarous were come thither as co^querors: many
devised new supersticio^s to them selves by reason of the place, setting before
their eyes, the mischaunce of Cotta and Titurius, who were slain in the same
Castle. Through this fear wherewyth all our men were strycken, the rude
Germans were confirmed in their opinion which they had conceived upon the
report of a prisoner, that there was no strength within. Whereupon endeavoring to
break in perforce, they encouraged one another, not to let so good fortune
escape out of their hands. There was left behind in the garrison sick, one P.
Sestius Baculus (who had had the leading of one of the chyef bands under
Caesar, of whom we have made mention in the former battles) and he had fasted
now five days. He being in despair both of his own life, and of the lives
of al his company, came out of his tent unarmed and perceiving his enemies to
preace sore upon them, and that the matter stood in utter peril, took weapon
from such as stood next him, and set him self in ye gate. After him followed the
Centurions of that Cohort which warded in the Camp, and for a while endured
the conflict with him. But at ye length Sestius was so sore wounded that his
courage failed him, and he sanke down, that much a do there was to draw him
out of the preace and to save his life. During the time of this leisure, the
rest took heart to them: in somuche that they durst set them selves upon the
Rampires, and make a show of defense. In ye mean while, our soldiers that
went out for forage, having dispatched that they went for, in their return
heard ye noise, whereupon the horsemen came a false gallop before, and perceived
in how great danger the matter stood. But now was there not any place of
defense, whereunto they might recover them selves in this their fear. Such as
were but newly retained, and therefore were not skillful in matters of war,
retired back to the Tribunes and Centurions, looking to receive commandment
at their hands what they should do. There was not any of them so stout of
stomach, that was not amassed at the sodeinnes of ye matter. The barbarous
people perceiving ye banners a far of, ceased from thassault. At ye first they
believed that our legio^s had been returned, which they had learned by their
prisoners to have been gone a great way further of. Afterward disdeining ye small
number of them, they set upon them on all sides. The varlets ran up to the next
hill, from whence being easly driven down, they thrust them selves among the
souldyers that were under their standerds, and thereby put them in greater fear
then they were before. Some thought it best to cast the^ selves in a wedge and
to break through their enemies quicklye: affirming that forasmuch as their
Camp was so nere at hand, although some of them were cut of by the way and
slain, yet the rest should save themselves. Other some thought it best to get
them to the top of the hill, and there to take what soever should betide the^
all together. This deuyse liked not the old soldiers that went out under the
standerd with them, as we told you before. Whereupon encouraging themselves,
and folowinge Captain C. Trebonius a knight of Rome who had the charge of
them, they brake through the mids of their enemies, and came al sauf into
the camp, without the loss of any one man. The Uarlets and horsemen following
after them with like force, were by the valiantnes of the souldyers likewise
preserved. But they which had gotten themselves to the top of the hyl, having
no understanding at al how to demean themselves, had neither the wit to
persevere in ye device which they first allowed in standing still to their
defense upon the higher ground, nor yet to use the like force and celerity
which they saw do good to their fellows: but for desire to recover to their
ca^p, they cast themselves into a place of disaduauntage. The Centurious (of
whom many for their prowess and manhod, had from lower roumes of the other
Legions, been promooted to the higher roumes of this legio^,) least they
should forgo the honor in arms which they had gotten before, feighting most
valiantly spent their lives together. The enemies bring by their force driven
aside, it came to pass that some contrary to all hope and expectation, came
saufe into the Camp, and some environed by the Germans, were utterly
destroyed. The Germans being now paste hope of winning our ca^p by assault,
forasmuch as they saw our men placed upon the Rampyres, with that pray which
they had bestowed in the woods, ga^e them selves over the Rhine again.
Howbeit when our enemies were ^^^ght gone, there remained such a fear among
our me^, that the same night when C. Uolusenus sent thither with the horsemen,
came to the camp: he could not make them believe that Caesar was at hand with the
army in saufgard. So sore were al their minds ravished with fear, that in
manner half beside them selves, they said plainlye, all the army was put to the
sword, and that the horsemen had saved themselves by flight: for it was not
like that while tharmy was in good case, the Germans durst adueture to assault
our camp. This fear the coming of Caesar took away. Upon his return, being
not ignorant how the world went, he found fault at the se^ding out of the
Cohorts out of their fort and garrison: affyrming that there ought no gap
(though never so small) to be opened unto fortune: forasmuch as fortune by the
sodein approach of ye enemy, had been able to have done much: yea and much
the more, in that they had repulsed the barbarous people well nere from the very
Rampire and from the gates of the camp. Of all the which things this was most
to be wondered al, that the Germans which had passed the Rhine of none other
purpose but to waste the country of Ambiorix, bendinge them selves against
the Roman camp, proffered thereby unto Ambiorix the greatest good turn that
could have been wished him. Caesar making another voyage to disquiet his enemies,
assembled a great power out of the Cities nere at hand, and sent the^ abroad
into al quarters. Al ye towns and all the buildinges that came in any man's
sight, were set on fire: botyes were driven out of all places: corn was not
only by such a multitude of men and cattle consumed, but also was through
thunseasonable time of the yers, and through continual rain beaten out, or
rotten upon the ground: Insomuch that if any had hyd them selves out of the
way for the time, yet were they like afterward (when tharmy was departed) to
perysh for want of food. And oftentimes it was come to ye point, (by reason of
so great a number of horsemen sent abroad into al quarters) that the prisoners
said expresselye, not only that none of them saw Ambiorix fly away, but also
constantly affyrmed that he was not gone out of sight. Insomuche that upon
hope of ouertakinge him, such as thought to have purchased greateste favor at
Cesars hand, endured infinite labor, yea more than nature could well have
borne, but for their earnest desire which surmounted all things, believing
always that they were at the very point to have obtained the happiness that
they sought for. And yet he wound himself from them continually into woods or
forestes, and hiding himself in ye night time, wythdrew him out of one coast
into another, guarded with no mo tha^ four horsemen, whom only of al me^ he
durst put in trust with his life. When Caesar had in this sort wasted the
countries, with the loss of two Cohorts he reduced the rest to Rhemes in
Champanie.
Durocort among the men of Rhemes: and sommoning thither a parlame^t of al
Gallia, he determined to make straight examinacion concerning the conspiracy of
the Senones and Carunts, and there giving sharp judgment upon Acco chyef
ryngleader of that enterprise, he punished him according to the ancient
custom of the country. Many fearing to stand to the trial of the matter in
judgment, fled away, whom when he had proclaimed traitors, he placed two
Legio^s in the borders of the Treuires, two among the Lingones, and the other
six in the borders of ye Senones at Agendicum to winter there: and having made
provision of grain for his army, he went into Italy to hold a Parliament, as
he was determined before.

FINIS.
THE SEVENTH BOOK of C. Julius Caesar's Commentaries of his wars in Gallia.
AFTER THAT GALlia was thus quieted, Caesar (as he was determined before) went
into Italy to hold a Parliament. There he hard news of the murder of Clodius:
and upon Certificat from the Senate how all the youth of Italye did conspyre
together, he purposed to take musters of all the whole Province. These things
were quickly reported into Gallia beyond the Alps. More over (as the matter
seemed to require) the Galls forged besides these rumors, that Caesar was
deteyned by means of the Mutinies in the city, and that the dissentio^s were
so great as that he could not come to his army. Taking occasion herupon, such
as before found themselves grieved to be in subjection to the Roman Empier,
began more freely and boldly to consult of war. The Princes of Gallia calling
secret counsels in forests and places far from resort, found fault with the
death of Acco: alleging that the like mischaunce might also light in their
necks. They bewailed the miserable state of al Gallia, promysing and profering
any reward that could be devised, to them that would adventure to begin ye war,
and with the hazard of their lives would assaye to set Gallia again in
liberty. And this matter (they said) ought to be put in practice, before their
secret deuyses were disclosed: to thentent that Caesar might be excluded from
his army. The which thing was easy to bring to pass, in that neither the
legions durst in the absence of their Graundcaptein styr out of their wintring
places, neither could the Graundcapteine without saufconduct come unto his
army. In conclusion they said it was better to be slain in the field, than not
to recover their ancient renown of cheualry, and the liberty which they had
received from their ancestors. When these matters had been sufficientlye
debated. The Caruntes proffered to refuse no peril for the common wealths sake,
promising to become the chyf Ringleaders in this war. And forasmuch as the
matter could not as than be assured by hostages, least it should be published,
they demanded assurance by oath and fidelitye: which was by layinge their
Antesignes and banners together, (for that is the solemnest ceremony that they
use in such cases) least when they should have begone the war, the rest
should forsake them. Than geuyng great praises to the Caruntes, and taking an
oath of as many as were present, after time prefixed for ye performance of the
matter, they brake up their counsel: when the day appointed was come, the
Caruntes under the conduct of Cotuat and Co^etodune desperate persons, at a
watch word given came together to Genabum, and there slew the citizens of Rome
that abode there in ye way of traffic and merchandise, (among whom was one
C. Fusius Cotta a worshipful knight of Rome, who by the commandment of Caesar
was master of the Storehouse) and riffled al their goods. The fame hereof was
sone blown through all the cities of Gallia. For when any great or notable
thing happens, they give knowledge of it by shouting through all the fields
and countries about. Others receiving the noise at their hand, send it in
likewise to their neighbors: and so it happened at that time. For those things
which were done at Genabum by the sun rising, before the first watch was
ended, were heard of in the country of Auverne, which is distant the space of
Clr. miles. By like means Uercingetorix the son of Celtillus a young Gentilman
of great authority among the people of Auverne (whose father had held the
souereinty of al Gallia, and was for that consideration slain of his countrymen
because he sought means to make himself king) calling together his reteiners,
did easly set them on fire. For as soon as they knew of his purpose, they ran
to weapon. Uercingetorix was wythstoode by his uncle Gobanition and the rest of
ye Princes, which thought it not good to try the courtesy of fortune in that
behalf, and was driven out of ye town of Cleremount in Auverne.
Gergobia. Nevertheless he ceased not from his enterprise, but in the country
took musters of beggars and naughty packes. When he had raised this power, he
met not any of the City, but he drew him to his opinion. He exhorted them to
put on armor for the liberty of their cou^trye, and so having gotten a great
power, he dryueth his adversaries out of the city, by whom he had been driven
out a littel before. Then they proclaimed him king: and he sending forth
Ambassadors every way, besought them to continue faithful in that they had
promised. It was not long ere he had alied unto him, the Senones, the
Parisians, ye Pictones, the Cadurkes, the Turones, the Aulerkes, the Lemonikes,
ye Andies and all the residewe that lie upon the Ocean. By general consent
the government was put into his hands: upon the offer of which authority, he
demanded hostages of all the said Cities, and commanded a certain number of
men of war to be leuyed and brought unto him out of hand. He appointed how
much armor every City should have in a readynes at home, and what they should
do before the time. Chieflye he made provision for horsemen. And as he was very
diligent in laying for things before hand, so did he with great severity
execute his authority, and with extremity of punishment compelled such as were
newters. For if there were any offense committed, he put them to death with
fire and all kinds of torments: and for light faults he sent them home
again with their ears cut of, or with one of their eyes put out: to
thentent they should be an example to the rest, and make them afraid with the
greatness of their punishment. Having by means of these punishments soon
gathered a great power, he sent one Lucterius of Cahors a man of synguler
audacitie with part of his army among the Ruthenes, and he him self went
against ye people of Bourges. At his coming, the me^ of Bourges sent messengers
to the Heduans (under whose tuicion they were) to desire succor, to the intent
they might be the better able to wythstande the power of their enemies. The
Heduanes by thaduice of the Liuetenants which Caesar had left with the army,
sent succor both of horsemen and fotemen to the men of Bourges: who when they
came to ye river of Loyre, which deuideth the Heduanes from them of Bourges,
tarried there a few dais, and because they durst not pass the river, returned
home again, declaring to their Lieuetenantes, that ye cause why they did so,
was by reason they feared that the me^ of Bourges would betraye them, whom they
knew to have fullye determined among themselves, that if they had passed the
River, they themselves should have beset them on the one side, and the men of
Auverne on the other. Whether they told our Lieuetenants this tale because it was
so in deed, or of treachery and falshod, for as much as the truth is not
known, I can not affirm it for a certeinty. Immediately after their departure,
the men of Bourges joined them selves with the men of Auverne. When these
things were reported to Caesar in Italye, after the time he understood that the
matters about the city were through ye wise and valiant demeanor of Cn.
Pompeius brought to a good point, he took his journey into Gallia beyond the
Alps. At such time as he was come thither, he was in great distress, by what
means he might come to his army. For if he should send for his Legions to
him into Province, he was assured that they should be encountered with by the
way, and he could not be thereto assyst them: And if he should adventure to go
to his army, he saw manifestly that it was not without peril for him to commyt
his life into the hands, no not even of such as seemed to be at that time most
in quiet. In the mean while, Lucterius of Cahors who was sent against the
Ruthenes, reconciled that City to the men of Auverne. From thens continuing
his voyage against the Nitiobriges and Gabales, he took hostages of them
both: and assembling a great power, purposed to make a rode into Province
toward Narbone. When Caesar heard tidinges thereof, all other devises set a
side, he thought it most expedient to prevent him in going to Narbone. When he
came thither, he chered such as were fearful, set garrisons among the
Ruthenes in Province, the Uolces, the Arecomikes, ye men of Tholous, and about
Narbone, which places bordered upon our enemies: and commanded part of his
power that was in Province, and the supplye which he had brought with him out
of Italy, to assemble in the country of the Heluians which borders upon the
country of Auverne. These things being thus set in order, and having repressed
Lucterius, yea and removed him, as who thought it to dangerous an enterprise
for him to enter among our garrisons, he took his journey against the
Heluians. Now albeit that upon the mountain The mountain of Geneua or of
Auverne.
Gebenua, which disseuereth the men of Auverne from the Heluians, ye snow lay
so deep in that dead time of the winter, that it was hard for him to pass,
yet notwythstanding casting a side the snow six foot deep, and so making
way, with great pain of his soldiers, he came to the borders of Auverne: and
oppressing them vnbewares, because they thought them selves as surely defended
with the mountain Gebenua as if it had been with a wall, in as much never erst,
any one man alone had found passage over it at that time of the year, he
commanded his horsemen that they should dispers themselves as far abroad as they
could, and put their enemies in as much fear as might be. Quyck^y were these
things by fame and messengers brought unto Uercingetorix about whom flocked all
the men of Auverne amazed, beseching him to provide some remedy against their
misfortune, and not to suffer them to be spoiled of their enemy, specially
seeing he perceived that all the brunt of the war was turned upon their necks.
Moved with their entreata^ce, he removed his camp from Bourges toward Auverne.
But Caesar after he had tarried two days in those quarters, forasmuch as his
mind mysgaue him before, that Uercingetorix would do some such thing, upon
excuse to raise a new supplement, and to get mo horsemen, he departed from his
army, and left a young Gentylman named Brutus to be Captain in his stead. Him
he warned to let the horsemen scowre the Country every way as far as might
be, promising so to use the matter, that he would not be past three days from
the camp. When he had ordered these things in this wise, none of his me^
witting whereabout he went, by as great iorneyes as could be he came to
Uienna. There having gotten a fresh crew of horsemen which he had sent thither
many days before, without ceasing his travel day or night, he went through the
country of the Heduanes unto the Lingones, where two of his Legions wintered:
to thentent that if the Heduanes also should conspyre any thing otherwise
than well against him, he might by celerity prevent them. When he came thither,
he sent to the other Legions, and assembled them all together into one place,
before that any tidings of his coming could be borne to the men of Auverne.
Uercingetorix having knowledge hereof, conveyed his army again unto Bourges:
and proceeding from thence, determined to assault Gergobine a town of the
People of Burbone.
Boyans, whom Caesar (having vanquished them in the battle against the
Heluetians) had placed there, and put in subjection to the Heduanes. This
matter put Caesar greatly to his shifts what advise he should take. For if he
should during the rest of the winter keep his Legions together in one place,
it was to be feared least the hired soldiers of the Heduanes being
discomfited, al Gallia should revolt, forasmuch as it might seem to his
friends* that there was no hope of help and comfort in him: again if he should
go over sone out of garriso^, it was to be doubted least he should want
v^ctuall for la^ke of carriage. Nevertheless he thought it better to endure all the distresses that might be, then by receiving so great a foil, to withdraw
the good wyls of al his friends from him. Wherefore exhortinge the Heduanes to
bring victuals after him, he sent messengers before to the Boyans, to certifye
them of his coming, and to encourage them to continue faithful, and to
sustain the brunt of their enemies valiantly. He left two Legions and all the
stuff of his army at Sens.
Agendicum, and with the rest went toward the Boyans. The next day after, when
he came to Uellaunodunum a town of the Senones, to thentent he would not leave
any back friend behind him, and that he might the more spedelye have his
victuals conveyed to him, he determined to assault it: and thereupon he
entrenched it about within ye space of two days: the third day when
commissioners were sent out of the Town to entreat with him for the giving of
it up, he commanded them to bring all their armor in to one place, to bring
forth their beasts of carriage, and to deliver him six hundred hostages: and
for the acco^plishing hereof, he left behynd him his Lieuetenant C. Trebonius.
He himself to make the more speed in his voyage, took his way to Genabum
among the Caruntes, who before that time hearing nothing of the siege of
Uallaunodunum, for as much as they believed that the matter would have asked a
longer time to bring it to pass, began to levy a power to send to Orleance.
Genabum for the defense of the town. Caesar in two days came hither, and
pitching his tents before the town, because that day was to far spent,
delayed thassault till the next morninge, wyllinge his soldiers in the mean
while to put all things in a redynes for the purpose. And for because the town
of Genabum had a bridge over the river of Loyre, Caesar fearyng least they
should steal out of the town in the night time, commanded two Legions to
watch in harness. The townsmen somewhat before midnight stealinge secretly
out, began to pass the River. The which when Caesar was informed of by his
scoultes, by and by burninge down the gates he sent in the Legions which he
appointed before in a readiness, and wan the town: few or none of his ennemies
escapinge his hands, but that they were all taken prisoners, because the
Bridge and the ways were so narrow, that they could not readely pass away.
He beat down the town and set it on fire: gave the spoil of it to his
soldiers: passed his army over Loyre: and came into the marches of Berrey.
When Uercingetorix understood of Cesars approach, he raised his siege and went
to mete him. He was purposed to have besieged Noyowne in Berrey.
Nouiodunu^ a town in the Country of Berrey standinge in his way. Out of the
which town when as ambassadors came unto him to entreat for mercy and pardon
of their lives, to thinte^t to dispatche the rest of his affairs with like
speed as he had done many already, he commanded them to bring together their
armor, render up their horses, and to give him pledges. Part of the hostages
being already delivered, while the other things were in executing, few of our
Centurions and soldiers being let in to fetch out tharmor and horses, the
horsemen of our enemies which were the foreriders of Uercingetorixes host came
within view. Whom as soon as the Townsmen had espied, hopinge of rescow and
succor, they gave a great shout, and taking them to their weapons, began to
shet the gates, and to place themselves upon the batlements of the walls. The
Centurions within the town understanding by the signification of the Galls
themselves that they went about some treason, drew their swords, and
recovering the gates conveyed all their men away in sauftye. Caesar commanded
his horsemen to be led out of his ca^p, and encountered with them on horsbacke.
Now when he saw his men like to go by ye worse, he sent to their rescow the
number of a CCCC. Germane horsemen, which from the beginning he had oppoynted
to be always about himself. The Galls not able to sustain their force,
were put to flight, and with the loss of many retired to their maine battle.
The which also being put to flight, the townsmen stricken again with great
fear, apprehended such as they thought were the stirrers of the people to this
trecherye, and bringinge them unto Caesar, submitted themselves unto him. When
Caesar had dispatched these matters, he went to Newcastel or Uiarron.
Auaricum one of the greatest and strongest Towns in all the Country of
Berrey, situate in a most plentiful and rich soil: because that if he might
come by that Town, he was in good hope to bring the City of Bourges it self in
subjection. Uerringetorix having received so many displeasures at
Uellaunodunu^, Genabum and Nouiodunum, called his men to counsel. He told
them that they must take a clean contrary way in their wars to that which
they had hitherto done. This one thing was to be endeavored by all means, that
the Romans might be kept from forage and victuales. The which thing was easy
to bring to pass, in as much as they had a greater power of horsemen then they,
and that the time of the year should further them. There was no forage abroad
for them to cut down: but of necessitye they must disperse themselves to fetch
it out of houses: in doing whereof they might daily be licked up by his
horsemen. Moreover for the common wealths sake, private commodities ought to be
neglected, villages and buildings ought to be set on fire, in all the coast
from Boia round about every way, as far as the Romans might seem to have any
access for forage. On the contrary part of all these things they themselves
should have abundance, because they should be found with the goods of them, in
whose country they should make war: Whereas the Romans either should not be able
to endure the scarcety, or else in straying far from their camp, should ever
run in danger of coming short home. And it made no matter whether they slew
them out of hand, or put them beside their cariages, the which being ones
lost, they could in no wise be able to make war. Furthermore all such towns
ought to be set on fire, as either by fortifiyng or situacion of the place,
were not of sufficient strength to defend themselves from all danger: to
thentent they should not either be lurking holes for such of their people as
cowardlye slipped aside from the wars, or else be as things of set purpose
appointed for the Romans to sack, and vittaile themselves withal. If these
things seemed greiuous and bitter, much more grievous and bitter were the
consequentes to be esteemed: as namely the drawyng into captivity of their
wives and children, the slaughter of themselves, which miseries must of
necessity happen to them that be vanquished. By the consent of all men this
counsel was allowed: and in one day were burnt mo than xx. cities of the
country of Berrey. The like also was done in the rest of the Cities. In all
parts were fires seen: the which although it were a great grief to them al to
endure: yet notwythstandinge this comfort they set before their eyes, that in
getting thupper hand, they trusted to recover quickly the things they had
lost. There was much debating in the common counsel, concerning Auaricum
whether it were better to burn it or to defend it. The men of Bourges fell
down at the feet of al the other Galls, beseching them that they might not be
compelled to set on fire with their own hands the goodlyest city almost of
al Gallia, which might be both a defense and a beawtye to the common weal.
Alleging that they might easly defend it, because of the situacion of the
place, by reason that well near on all sides it was environed with the river
and with marisground, and had but only one way to come to it which was very
narrow. At their suit pardon was granted, Uercingetorix at the first
persuading the contrary, but afterward relenting unto them upon their
earnest entretance and for pitye of the people. Hereuppon were mete persons
appointed for the defense of the town. Uercingetorix by easy and small
iorneies followed after Caesar, and chose a place to encampe in fortified with
woods and marisgroundes, about xv. miles distante from Auaricum. There he
understood by his spies every hour of the day from time to time what was done
at Auaricum, and likewise sent them word again what he would have done. He
watched us continuallye when we went out for forage or for corn, and suddenly
assailed our men scattered, as they had occasion to go any thing far, and did
us great displeasure. Albeit as much as could be foresene by reason, our men
prevented them, by going forth diverse ways at times uncertain. Caesar planting
his siege against that part of the town where as was the narrow passage (as we
showed before) between the river and the marris, began to cast up a mount, to
make Uines, and to build two Towers: for the nature of the place would not
suffer him to entrench the^ round about. For victual he ceased not to call
upon the Boyans and Heduanes: of whom the one because they did it more then
half against their wills, did not greatly help us: and the other because they
were of no great ability, inasmuch as their city was but small and weak, had
sone consumed that which they had. Albeit that our army were brought in great
distress for want of corn, through the poverty of the Boyans on thoneside,
and the slacknes of the Heduanes on the other side, together with the burning of
the houses, inso much that many days together the souldyers wanted bread, and
were feign to appease their extreme hungar with flesh of beasts only, the
which also they fet out of villages a great way of: Yet notwythstanding there
was not heard amongst them any talk unseemly for the majesty of the people
of Rome, or their former victoryes. But rather when Caesar as they were at their
work, would speak unto them, and tell them that if they took this famine
grieuouslye he would break up his siege, they all be sought him he should not
so do, for they had served under him now many years together in such sort,
that they never yet took any foil, nor never departed from any place with
out accomplishing their purpose: Wherefore it should turn to their great
shame and reproach, if they left their siege which they had begone: it were
better for them to abide all the sorrows that could be devised, than not to
revenge the deaths of their countrymen, that were murdered at Genabum through
the treason of the Galls. The same things also did they talk to their
Capteynes and ye Marshals of the host, to thente^t they should make report
thereof unto Caesar. At such time as our towers were now nere unto the walls,
Caesar understood by his prisoners, that Uercingetorix having spent al his
forage, had removed his Camp nerer unto Auaricum, and that he himself with his
horsemen and the light armed fotemen that were wo^t to feight among the horsemen,
was gone forth to lie in Ambush, in that place whither he thought our men should
come the next day for forage. Upon knowledge whereof, Caesar setting forth
softly about midnyght, came in the morning to the camp of his enemies. They
having speedy warning by their skoutes of his coming, bestowed their caryages
and stuff in close woods, and set al their army in order of battle, in an
high and an open ground. When tidinges hereof came unto Caesar, he commanded
that his men should out of hand lay all their fardels on a heap together, and
take them to their weapons. The hill was somewhat rising by littel and littell
from the foot, and was environed almost on all sides with a Lake very hard
and troublesome to pass, not above fiyftye foot broad. On this same hill
having first broken all the bridges, the Frenchmen trusting to the strength of
the place, kept them selves, and dividing themselves into companyes every city
by himself, kept all the shallowes and passages of the lake with a good guard:
fullye purposed in mind to assail from the higher ground the Romans sticking
in the mier, if they attempted to get over by force: So that whosoever had seen
how nere they stood together, would have thought they had been almost ready to
have come to hand strokes: and he that had known thaduauntage of the one part
and the disaduauntage of the other, might well have thought it to have been but a
cou^terfet brag. Caesar perceiving his soldiers greatly offended, that their
enemies should be able to look upon the^ having no greater space betwixt them:
and thervpo^ desiring earnestly a toke^ of battle, declared unto the^ how great
loss, and how great slaughter of valiant men yt victory would of necessity cost
him. And when he saw them nevertheless so affectioned, that they would refuse no
peril for his honor, he thought himself worthy to have been condemned of to
much wyckednes, if he should not have set more by their life, than by his own.
And so comforting them, he conveyed the^ back again the same day into his
camp, and went in hand with the accomplishing of the rest of such things, as
perteyned to the assault of the town. As Soon as Uercingetorix was returned
home, he was accused of treason: as that he had removed his Camp nerer to the
Romans: that he had departed with all his horsemen: that he had abandoned so
great an army without leaving any deputy in his stead: that upon his departure
the Romans came with such speed and celerity: all the which things could not
have happened by chance: or without advice, unless he had been desirous to
have the souereintye of Gallia by Cesars permission, rather than by their
benefit. He answered to this accusation in this wise. whereas he had removed
his camp, it was done for want of forage, and that by their advise. For that
he came nearer to the Romans, he was persuaded so to do, by reason of
thaduauntage of the place, which was so strong of it self, as that it neded
none other defense. As for the horsemen there could be no mistre of their help
in a fennye and moorysh ground, and they served to a good purpose in the place
whither they went. In that at his departure he left no deputy behind him, he
did it for the nones, least the same what soever he were, through the wilfulnes
of the multitude, should have been compelled to feight: whereunto of a certain
faintness of courage, he saw them all enclyned, because they were weary to
endure that pain and travel any lengar. If the Romans came in the mean season
by chance, they might thank fortune: if they were called by any man's
declaration, yet they had cause to thank him, for that he had so placed them
that from the higher ground they might both view the sle^der number of their
enemies and despise their valiantness, and who having not the courage to
feight, retired shamefulli into their Camp. It was no part of his desire to
obtain the souereinty at Cesars hand by treason, which he might get by
conquest, in manner already assured to him and all the Galls. And yet he was
contented to surrender it into their hands again, if they thought that he
received thereby more honor, than they did receive saufty by him. To thentent
(quod he) ye may understand that I forge not any thing in this behalf, hear
what the Roman soldiers say: And with that word, he brought forth certain
slaves whom he had taken a few days before as they went a forraging, and had
tormented them with hungar and irons. These being taught before what answer
they should make to the demaundes, said they were soldiers of the Legions,
and that enforced by famine and penury they had stolen priuilye out of the
camp, to see if they could find any corn or cattle in the fields: all the
whole army was constreined with like distress, in so much that every manns
strength began to fail him, and they were not able to hold out with their
labor: Whereupon the Graundcapteine was determined to dislodge his army within
three days, if he saw no good to be done in thassault of the town. Lo (quod
Uercingetorix) these are the good turns that ye have by means of me, whom ye
appeache of treason, by whose workinge, without sheadinge of your blood, ye
see that howge victorious army, welnere pined with hungar, against whose
shameful flighte and retire, I have provided before hand, that no city shall
receive him into their territory. Than all the multitude cried out, and after
their manner crashed their harness together, (which thing they are wont to do
in his case whose oration they like well of) saying, ye Uercingetorix was their
chief captain, of whose faithfulness there was no mistrust to be had, and
that the war could not have been handled with greater pollicye and wisdom.
They decreed that ten thousand men chosen out of al their host, should be sent
into the town: for they thought that the saufgarde of the whole common weal,
was not to be committed to the men of Bourges alone, because they perceived that
the whole stay of victory rested almost in the keeping of that Town. The
prowess of our soldiers was not so great, but that the deuyses of the Galls
by all means prevented the^: as they are in deed a kind of people most
politic, and most apt both to conceive and to work whatsoever is taught
them. For with cords they turned away our hokes, and having so stayed them,
they drew them in to them with engines, and also abated our mountes with mines:
so much the more cunningly, because among them are great iron mines, and all
kind of mining is known and practysed among them. Moreover they had rered up
towers upon the walls round about on al sides, and had covered them with
leather. Furthermore issuing out oftentimes both by day and night, they either
set fire on our Rampire, or else assaulted our Soldiers as they were busy
about their work: And look how much our Turrets grew in height by daily
raising of the Rampire, so much did they build theyres higher, by piecing the
timber work of them. Also having discovered onr mines, they stopped them with
stakes sharpened and hardened in the fire, and with boiled pytch, and with
stones of unmeasurable weight, and would not suffer them to approach nere the
walls. All the walls of the Gallian Cities are builded in manner after this
facion. Great posts of straight timber set on a row equally dystant a two
foot space one from another, are let into the ground and fastened again on
the inside, and rammed surely with a great deal of earth. The spaces between
the posts are filled up before with great stones, upon the which being well
cowched and cemented, is wrought another layne, so that the foresaid distance
may be continually kept, and the posts not touch one another: but being
severed with equal space, every piece of timber may wy^h the stone work that
lies between post and post, be streightlye and just closed: continuing after
the same sort, until the wall be finished to his full height. This kind of
workemanshippe intermedled of stone and timber, keepyng their courses even and
directly by line and level, is no evil sight: partly for the bewtye and
variety thereof, but specially it is very commodius and profitable for the
defense of Cities, because that the stonework withstandeth the fire, and the
timberworke the battle Ram. The which timberwork being fastened on the inside
with a like row of Rafters for the most part of xl. foot long, can neither be
burst, nor pulled a sunder. Albeit that thassault were with these so many
things encombered, and that our soldiers during all the time were troubled
with continual cold and rain, yet with restles labor they overcome al these
things: and in xxv. days made a Mount of CCCxxx. foot broad and lxxx. foot
high. Now when this mount was at the point to have touched the wall of the
town, and that Caesar of ordinary kept watch himself at ye work, exhorting his
soldiers not to cease at any time from their labor, somewhat before the third
watch, it was perceived that the Mount smoked: for his ennemies in deed
undermining it had set it on fire. And at the same instant raysinge a great
shout from all the wall, a salye was made out at two gates on both sides of the
Towers: Some threw a far of fire and dry stuff from the wall unto the Mount:
some powered down pytche and other such geere as lightlye takes fire: so that
reason was scarce able to teach, to what place were best to run first, or what
thing was first to be helped. Notwithstanding, forasmuch as two Legions by
Cesars commandment did continually watch before the Camp, and other two by
turns labored in the work, it quiklye came to pass that some resisted them
that issued out, and othersome drew back the towers and cut of the Mount: and
all the rest came running out of the Camp to quench the fire. While in all
places (the rest of the night being now spent) there was feighting yet still,
and that our enemies were ever in better hope of victory, so much the rather,
because they saw the penthouses of our turrettes burned down, and that our
men could not with ease go uncovered to save them, whereas they themselves ever
succeeded fresh in the roumes of them that were wearyed, forasmuch as they
thought that all the welfare of Gallia lay upon the success of that instant
of time: there happened even in our sight a thing worthy memory, which I
thought not to be passed over. A certain Gall who standing before the town
gate, received by hand balls of tallowe and pitch, and threw them into the
fire directly against the Turret, was strycken through the right side with the
quarrel of a Crossebow and fell down dead. One of his next fellows steppyng
over him, supplied his office. Who being in like facion slain with the quarrel
of a Crossbow, the third succeeded, and so likewise the fowrth: neither was
that place left naked of defendantes, before such time as the Mount being
quenched, and our enemies quight driven away from that part, an end was
made of feightinge. The Galls having tried all things and brought nothing to
good success, by the advice and commandment of Uercingetorix took counsel
the next day after to fly out of the Town. The which thing if they attempted
in the still of the night, they thought they might do it without any great
loss of their men, because that the Camp of Uercingetorix was not far of from
the town, and the marris which was all the way between the^, should stop the
Romans from pursewyng them. Now were they about so to do in the night time:
when suddenly the married women came running forth, and casting themselves at the
fete of their husbands with tears, besought them most piteouslye, that they
would not abandon them and their children to the crueltye of the enemy, who^
the infirmitye of nature and want of strength would not suffer to make any
shift for themselves by flight. When they saw them continue in their purpose,
(for it is commonly seen that in extreme peril fear oftentimes excludes
mercy) they began to shrieke out, and so to give knowledge to the Romans of
the townesmens flight. Whereupon the Galls being stricken in great fear,
least the ways should be forelayd by the Roman horemen, desisted from their
purpose. The next day when Caesar had moved forward his tower, and finished the
works which he had purposed to make, there fell a great shower of rain. The
which he taking for a fit occasion to work some feat, forasmuch as he had a
littell before perceived the watch upon the wall to be somewhat slightly set,
commanded his men also to go about their work more loyteringly, and showed
them what he would have done. After he had encouraged his soldiers standing in
a redines with in the Uines, now at the length to reap ye fruit of victory due
to their so great travels, he appointed rewards to such as first scaled the
walls, and therwyth gave them a toke^ that they should to thassault. They made
no more a do, but brake out suddenly on al sides, and quickly took the wall. Our
enemies dismayed with the sodennes of the matter, and being beaten from the
wall and the towers, clustred them selves together in the market and other open
places: of purpose that if there were assault made upon them from any side,
they might be ready in array to encounter them. When they saw no man come down
into the plain ground to them, but that they swarmed still all about the
walls, fearing least there should be no means at al for them to escape,
they threw away their weapons, and ran as fast as they could to the furtheste
parts of the town. There some of them as they pestered one another to get
out of the gates were slain by the soldiers: and some being gotten out were
slain by the horsemen: for there was not any man that gave himself to the
spoil. So greatly were they moved to wrath, what with the murder that was
committed at Genabum, and what with the pain that they had taken in their
work, that they spared neither old men, nor women, nor children. In so much
that of all the whole number, which was about fortye thousand, scarce eight
hundred which at the hering of the first noise had wound the^ selves out of the
Town, came saufe unto Uercingetorix. And yet he received those out of the
chase very late in the night and very secretlye, causing them to be conveyed
out of sight and to be saufconducted to their acquaintance by his friends and
noble men of the Cities, whom he had placed far of in the way, as every City
had been lotted to any part of the camp from the beginning, for fear least
upon their repair, through pitifulnes of the common people, there might rise
any sedicion in the camp. The next day calling an asse^bly, he comforted and
exhorted them that they should not be to much discouraged or troubled for the
displeasure that had happened, forasmuch as the Romans had not won any thing
by manhod or feighting in a pitched field, but by a certain pollicye and
cunning in assaultinge, whereof the Galls were altogether unskillful. They
were much deceived, if there were any that in war would look to have always
good success. As for his own part, he never liked it that Auaricum should be
defended, as they themselves were able to witness with him. But it came to pass
through thunaduisednes of the men of Bourges, and the over light consent of
the rest, that this harm was sustained: and yet he would find the manes ere it
were long to make all whole again, yea and that to their furtherance and
commodity. For such Cities as now dissented from the rest of the Galls, would
he by his industrye alye unto them, and make one counsel of al Gallia,
against the consent whereof, all the whole world should not be able to make
resistance. The which thing he had in manner brought to pass already.
Nevertheless it was but right and reason that for the sauftye of the common
weal* they should condescende to fortify their camp, to the intent they might
the easlyer withstand the sodeine invasions of their enemies. This oration
disliked not the Galls, chieflye for that Uercingetorix was not dysmaid in his
mind at the receipt of so great a loss, nor hyd himself out of sight, nor
eschewed the open face of the world. Yea he was thought to be a man of the
more foresight and foreknowledge, in that before any thing was amiss, he was
of opinion first that Auaricum should be set on fire, and afterward that it
should be abandoned. Therefore as adversity is wont to diminish the authority of
other Capteines, so clean contrary wise, his estimation was from day to day
augmented by receiving this displeasure. And moreover upon his assurance, they
had ye more hope that the rest of the Cities should be alyed with them. Then
first of all began the Galls to fortifye their camps, and they were so
dismayde in heart, because they were men not acquainted with pains taking,
that they thought all things that were commanded them, were to be suffered
and abidde^ to thuttermost. And Uercingetorix endeavored to have done no less
by his good will, than he promised, which was, to knit the rest of the cities in
leage together, alluring the Princes and noble men of them with gifts and
large promises. For the performance whereof he chose out fit personages, even
such as were easiest to be caught by suttel persuasion or color of friendship.
He caused al those to be new armed and apparelled, that had escaped when
Auaricum was won. And therewythall to thentent his host which was sore
dimynyshed, might be supplied again, he appointed every City to find him a
certain number of soldiers, the which he commannded to be brought unto his
camp by a day limited. Moreover he caused search to be made for all Archers (of
who^ there was a great company in Gallia,) and made them to be sent to him:
By this means was the loss taken at Auaricu^ sone supplied. In the mean
season Teutomatus the son of Ollouicon king of the The people about
Mou^tpellier.
Nitiobriges, (whose father had been accepted by our senate for their friend)
came to him with a great power of his horsemen that he had hired out of
Aquitaine. Caesar tariyng many days at Auaricum, and finding there great
abundaunce of corn and other vyctual left by the citizens, releued his army
of their travel and penurye. Now at such time as winter was welnere spent,
and that the very season of the year called him forth to warfare, so that he
was fully purposed to go against the enemy, either to train him out of his
woods and marisses by some policy: or else to enuiron him with a siege if it
were possible: The Heduanes sent certain of their noblemen Ambassadors unto
him, desiring him to come and succor their city either tha^ out of hand or
never. For ye matter lay in great peril, upon this occasion: that whereas of
old time there was wont to be but one magistrate created and he to exercise
thauthoritye of a king for that year, now there were two that bare that office,
both of them vaunted the^ selves to be created by order of law. Of the which
the one was called Conu^tolitane, a noble and lustye young gentilman, the other
Cottus, born of an ancient house, a man of very great power and well alied,
whose Brother Ualetiacus had borne the same office the year before. All the
whole City was in armor, the Senate was divided, the people was divided, and
each of the^ held his faction a part by himself. If this controversy should be
nourished any long time, it would come pass that the City should run together
by the ears among the^seues. The remedy whereof lay only in his spedye
assistence and authority. Caesar albeit he thought it a dangerous matter to
leave of his wars and to depart from his enemy: yet notwythstanding because
be was not ignorant how great inconveniences were wont to grow of dissension,
least that so great and so neyghborly a city as that had been to the Romans,
the which he had always cherished, and garnished by all the means he could
devise, should be put to the hazard of battle, and least the part that least
trusted him, should send for help to Uercingetorix, he thought it best to
prevent the matter betimes. And for as much as by the laws of the Heduanes, it
was not lawful for them that were chief magistrates, to abse^t themselves out
of ye country, to thentent he would not seem to diminishe any part of their
right or do any thing against their laws, he went in proper person unto them,
and called before him all their counsel, and them between who^ the
controversy was. When almost all the City was assembled thither, and that
information was given him, how by the consent of a few called togegether
privily in other place and other time than was mete, the one brother had
subrogated the other in his stead, contrary to the laws which prohibited two of
one lineage being both alive, not only to be created magistrates, but also
to be admitted into ye Senate, compelled Cottus to give up his office, and
commanded Conuictolitane (who according to the custom of the City, upon the
ceasing of the former Magystrates had been created by the Priests) to enjoy
his authority. After that he had made this decree, having exthorted the
Heduanes to forget all controversies and dissentions, and that al these other
things set a part, they should bend themselves wholly to this war, assuring them
that as soon as he had subdewed Gallia he would reward the^ according to their
deserts: and willing them that with all speed they should send him all their
horsemen and ten thousand fotemen, that he might place them in garrison for the
defense of his victuals: he divided his army into two parts. Four Legions he
committed to Labienus to lead among the Senones and Parisians: and he himself
led six into Auverne to the town of Cleremount in Auverne*
Gergouia along the river The river of Alier.
Elauer: of his horsemen, part he ga^e to him, and part he kept to himself. The
which thing being known, Uercingetorix breaking all the bridges that were upon
that stream, began to make his journey on the other side of Elauer. Now when
either army was in sight of other, and that they pitched their Ca^pes one in
manner right over against another, the enemy continually sending forth scoults
that the Romans should any not where frame a bridge to pass over their host,
Cesars affairs were in great distres, lest ye river should cause him to lose
the most part of the summer, because that Elauer for the most part is not wont
to fall so low that men may wade through it, before the latter end of Harvest.
Wherefore least that should happen, he pitched his ca^p in a woody ground,
directly against one of those bridges that Uercingetorix had caused to be
hewed down, and the next day lay in Ambushe with two legions, sending
forward the rest of his army with all their cariages as had been wont, saving
a few Cohorts, to the^tent that tharmy should seem to consiste of his full
number of Legions. Having given them commandment to go as far forward as
they could, when as he coniectured by the time of the day that they were now
lodged in camp, he began to repair the bridge upon the same stoulpes that
stood yet whole within the water. The which work being quikly brought of of
hand, he passed over his army, and taking a mete ground to encamp in, called
back again the rest of his host. Uercingertorix under standing the matter, to
thentent he would not be compelled to feight against his will, went on before
by great iorneyes. Caesar at five remouings from that place came to Gergouia,
and there making a light skirmish the same day with his horsemen, after he had
well viewed the situacion of the City, which stood upon a very high hill, and
on all sides was hard to come unto, he thought it was not possible to win
it by assault: and he determined not to meddle with besieging it, before such
time as he had well furnished himself with provision of grain. But
Uercingetorix pitchyng his tents nere unto the City upon the top of the
hill, had placed round about him a littel way one from another, the power of
every City severally by the selves: so that it was a terrible sight to
behold, how every littell knap of the hill, was occupied as far as a man's
eye could reach. Also if there were any thing to be consulted upon, or any
thing to be put in execution, he commanded the Princes of the Cities whom he
had chosen to be of his counsel, to come to him every morning by the break
of day. And lightly he did not let pass any day, but that in skirmishing on
horsback with archers mixed among them, he made a trial what courage and
valiantness was in every of his men. There was over against the town, a
littel hill hard under the foot of the mountain, notably fortified, and on all
sides, pared stepe, the which if our men might come by, they were like to put
their enemies for the most part from wateringe and from forage at their
pleasure. But ye same place was kept by them with a slender garrison. Now in the
dead of the ^ight, Caesar stealing out of his ca^p, did cast out the said
garrison before that any rescow could come from the town, and keeping the
place, lodged two Legions there, and drew a double trench of twelve foot from
the greater camp to this less, so that me^ might walk from the one to the other
even alone without peril of sodeine surprisinge by the enemy. While these
things were a doing at Gergouia, Conuictolitane the Heduane (whom Caesar (as we
have showed before) denounced chief magistrate,) allured with money by the men
of Auuerne, fell in communication with certain young gentelmen, of who^ the
chief were Litauicus and his brothers young gentelmen of a very noble house.
With these he has conference first, exhorting them to remember that they were
Gentelmen and borne to bear rule. The City of the Heduanes was thonly stay
that disappointed all Gallia of most certain victory, as by the authority
whereof all the rest were kept in awe, and the which being withdrawn from the^,
there should be no place in all Gallia for the Romans to rest in. He confessed
he had received a great good turn at Cesars hand, but yet in such wise, as
that he could have done no less considering the right of his case: Howbeit he
thought he was bound to have more respect to ye liberty of his country: for why
should the Heduans rather resort to Caesar to debate their laws and customs
before him, tha^ the Romans resort to ye Heduanes? The young men what with the
oration of the magistrate, and what with rewards being soon lured, in so much
that they professed to become chief doers in the enterprise, sought means how
to bring the matter to effect. And forasmuch as they were not in any hope that
the City would hastelye consent to rere war, it was thought good that Litauicus
should have the charge of those ten thousand that were to be sent to Caesar,
and that he should see them led, and that his brothers should run before unto
Caesar. How all other things should be handled, they determined also.
Litauicus having received the army, when he came within a xxx. miles of
Gergouia, called his soldiers together suddenly, and weping said: Whither go we
my soldiers? all our horsemen, all our nobilitye is destroyed. Eporedorix and
Uiridomarus Princes of our City being appeached of treason, are put to death
by the Romans, and their case not tried: enquire the truth hereof, of the^ that
have escaped from the slaughter themselves. For I am so stricken at the heart
with sorrow, for loss of my brothers and al my kinsfolk, which are murdered,
that I am not able to utter ye things that are done. Herewith al were brought
forth such as he had taught before what he would have said: who made report to
the people, of the same things that Litauicus had spoken before: as that all the Heduan horsemen were slain, upon presumption that they had had communication
with the men of Auverne, and that they themselves by hiding them in the throng
of the other souldyers, had escaped, even when the slaughter was a doing. Than
the Heduanes cried all together unto Litauicus, requesting him to counsel them
what they should do. As who should say (quod he) that it were a matter to be
taken counsel in, and that rather it stood us not in hand for our own
saufty, to go forthwith to Gergouia and join our selves with the men of
Auverne. Can we think any other, but that after the committing of so heinous a
cruelty, the Romans are coming hytherward, to murder us in likewise? And
therefore if there be any heart in us, let us revenge the death of our friends
that are most shamefullye murdered, and bathe our swords in the blood of
these traitors. With that word he pointed to certain Citizens of Rome, who
upon trust of his defense were in company with him. By and by he spoiled a
great mass of corn and victualles: kills them cruelly with torments: and
sends messengers over all the country of the Heduanes, exciting them with
the same forged tale of the slaughter of their horsemen and noblemen: and
exhorts them to revenge their wrongs in like sort as he had done.
Eporedorix an Heduan a noble yo^ge gentelman of great authority in his country,
and one Uiridomarus of like age and estymation, but unlike of birth, whom Caesar
upon the commendation of Diuitiacus, had raised from low degree to great
honor, came both together into the order of knighthod called thereunto of him by
name. Between these two was contencion for the souereintye. And in the foresaid
controuersye of the magystrates, the one of them had held tothe and nail with
Conuictolitane, and the other with Cottus. Now Eporedorix having knowledge of
Litauicus enterprise, about mydnight bare word of it to Caesar. He besought
him that he would not suffer the City to renounce the frendshyp of the people
of Rome, through the lewd counsel of light young men: the which he foresawe
would come to pass, if so many thousand men should join themselves with his
enemies, the welfare of who^ neither their kinsfolk might neglect, nor the
City make small account of. Caesar being stricken in great heaviness at this
news, because he had always borne a special favor to the common weal of the
Heduanes, without making any doubting in the matter, led out of his camp four
Legions well appointed and al his horsemen. Neither had he leisure to draw his
Camp closer together, in as much as ye matter seemed to stand altogether upon
spedy dispatch. So he left C. Fabius his Lieuetenant with two Legions to depend
his camp: and when he had commanded the brothers of Litauicus to be
apprehended, he found that they were fled to the enemy a littel before. When
he had encouraged his soldiers that they should not be discontented with the
travel of their journey in the time of necessity, they went all very willingly,
and at a xxv. miles end espying the host of the Heduanes, he sent his horsemen
to them, to let them and stay them of their journey, geuinge straight charge
to them all, that they should not flea any man. Eporedorix and Uiridomarus
(who^ they thought to have been put to death) he wylled to show themselves
among the foremost horsemen, and to call to their acquaintance. When this was
known, and the deceit of Litauicus brought to light, the Heduanes began to
hold up their hands, to give signification that they would yield themselves,
and throwing away their weapons, to desire to have their lives spared.
Litauicus with his rete^^ers, (to whom by the custom of the Galls it is not
lawful to forsake their masters even in most extremity) fled to Gergouia.
Caesar after he had sent messengers to the City of the Heduanes to declare unto
them that he had of his courtesy saved them who^ by the law of arms he
might have put to the swoorde, and given three hours respit to his army to
take their rest in, removed his Camp to Gergouia. He was scarce half onward
on his way, but that horsemen came to him from Fabius, and told him in how great
danger the matter stood. They showed him that the Camp was assaulted with a
great power, fresh always succeding in the roumes of the^ that were weary,
and ouertrauelling our men with continual toil, who by reason of the
largenes of the camp, were fain to abide evermore at one part of the Rampyre
without shifting of their places: many were wounded with shot of arrows, and
all other kind of artillerye: for the wythstandinge whereof t^eir engines did
them great case: at their coming away, Fabius reserving two gates, had caused
the residewe to be stopped up, and rered up penthouses upon the Rampire,
preparing himself to the like adventure against the next day. When Caesar knew
this, he made such speed through the wyllingnes of his souldyers that the next
morninge by the sun risinge he returned into his camp, while these things
were a doing at Gergouia, the Heduanes immediately upon the first rumor that
Litauicus spread among them, took no leisure to examine the truth of the
matter: But being driven a head, some through covetousness, and some through
irefulnes and rashness, (as it is in deed a peculier fault ingraffed by nature
in that sort of people to take every light report for a matter of certainty)
they riffled ye goods of the Roman Citizens, murdered diverse of them, and
took diverse of them prisoners to be their slaves. The matter was not so
soon set a broche, but Convictolitane helped to further it: and provoked the
people to a frenzy, to thentent that when they had committed so heinous an
act, they might be ashamed to be reformed, Mar. Aristius Tribune of ye
soldiers as he was taking his journey toward his Legion, they conveyed out of
the town of Cauillone, upon faithful promis of securitye, The like also they
compelled them to do that abode there in the way of traffic. And when they
had them without they set suddenly upon them by the way and strypped them of
all that ever they had. The Soldiers standinge at defense they besieged a
whole day and a night, and after that many were slain on both sides, they
raised a greater multitude against them. In the mean while when tidinges was
brought that all their Soldiers were in Cesars power to do with them what he
list, they came running to Aristius, and told him that nothing had been done by
commandment of the counsel, promising to make inquisition for the goods that
had been ryffled. They ceased upon the goods of Litauicus and his brothers as
forfeited, and sent commissioners to Caesar to make their purgation: All the
which was done for none other intent but to get their people out of his hands.
For being defiled with so heinous a crime, and led with covetousness of the
goods that they had gotten, because the case appertained to many, and moreover
being afraid of punishment, they began to consult secretly of war, and
solicited the other cities by ambassades. The which their doings although that
Caesar understood, yet he spoke unto their Commissioners as gently as he could
devise, saying he had not any thing the worse opinion of the whole City, for
those things that the common people had done of lightness for want of skill,
nor yet that he bare the Heduanes any less good will than he did before. Loking
in deed for a greater insurrection in Gallia, least he might be beset of all
the Cities at ones, he took counsel after what sort he might depart from
Gergouia, and gather to gether all his whole power again, that his departure
rising upon fear of rebellion, might nor seem a running away. As he was
devising her of, there seemed a fytte occasion to happen of bringing ye matter
well to pass. For as he came into his lesser Camp to see how the works went
forward, he perceived that the hyl where his enemies lay, the which
heretofore could scarslye be seen for ye multitude that swarmed upon it, was
now quite naked and void of men. Wondering at it, he demanded the cause of
his runnagates, of whom a great number resorted to him day by day. It was the
opinion of them all, (the which thing Caesar understood by his spies also)
that the back of the same hill was in manner a level ground, but yet woody and
narrow, by the which there was a way to thotherside of the town. This place
they stood greatly in fear of, and they thought none other, but that the
Romans having gained one hyl from them already, if they should obtain the other
also, they should be as good as entrenched and foreclosed from stirring
abroad, or going a forraging. Wherefore Uercingetorix had called them al
thither to defend that place. When Caesar knew this matter, he sent forth
diverse troops of horsemen about midnight to the same place: commau^ding them to
raunge abroad every where, somewhat more disorderlye than their custom was to
do. And in ye dawning of the day, he willed a great deal of stuff to be taken
out of the Camp, and the Mulettors with sallets on their heads, as it were for
a show of horsemen, to coast about the hills. Among these he appointed a few
horsemen to raunge somewhat abroad for the greater appearance, bidding them
fetch a windlasse a great way about, and to make al toward one place. These
things might be seen a far of out of the town (as in deed Gergouia ouerloked
the camp very far) but it could not well be discerned so far of, what it
should be. Moreover he sent one Legion by the same side of the hill: and when
it had gone a littell way, he wythdrew it into a lower ground, and there hid it
among the woods. The Galls mistrusted the matter more and more, and conveyed
thither all the power they could make for the strengthening of the place. Caesar
perceiving the camp of his enemies to be empty, rolled up his banners, and hid
the penons and antesignes of his soldiers, and conueying his soldiers by
slender companies out of his greater camp into the lesser, to thentent it
should not be perceived out of the town, showed the Lieuetenants of every
Legion, what he would have done. First and foremost he gave the^ charge, to hold
in their Soldiers, that neither for desire of feightinge nor hope of spoil,
they straied to far. Declaring unto them what displeasure the disaduauntage of
the place might work them, the which might be avoided by swiftness and none
otherwise. He said this attempt was to take thaduauntage of a present occasion
offered, and not to give battle. When he had given these instructions, he
gave a sign, and at the same time sent up the Heduanes by another way on the
right side of ye hyl. The wall of the town was disstant from the plain and from
the first rising of it, but a thousand and two hundred paces out right, if
there had been no windinges by the way. Now look how much they were fain to
fetch about for the easier climbing of the hill, so much was the length of
their way increased. The Galls had drawn alonge almost from the mids of the
hill, as nere as the ground would suffer it, a wall of great stone of six foot
high, to stop our sodeine irruptions: and leaving all the nether part bare, had
replenished all the upper part of the hyl, even hard to the wall of the town,
with tents and pauilions as thick as one could be strayned by another. Our
souldyers as soon as the watcheword was given, stepped quiklye to the wall, and
passing slightlye over it, took three Camps. And they made such speed in
performing their enterprise, that Theutomatus king of the Nitiobriges being
taken unawares in his tent, as he lay at rest about midday with the upper part
of his body bare, had much a do to wynd himself out of ye hands of soldiers,
that had entered for spoil, and yet his horse was wounded under him. Caesar
having sped his purpose, commanded the retreit to be blown, and therewith the
standerdes of the tenth Legion (to which he had given ye warning before, stood
still. But the soldiers of the other Legions hearing not the sound of the
Trumpet, because there was a good great bottom betwyxt them, were nevertheless
by their Lieuetenantes and Marshalles (as Caesar had commanded) held back for
a time. But in continuance puffed up with hope of spedy victory and the flight
of their enemies, together with their prosperous success in former battelles,
they thought there was nothing so far above reach, whereunto by their prowess
they were not able to attain: so that in conclusion they could not be stayed
from pursewing, until such time as they approached to the walls of the Town.
Than in all parts of the City there arose a cry, insomuch that they which were
the further of: dismayed with the sodeine uproar, and mistrusting that their
enemies had gotten within the gates, ran headlongs out of the town. And the
married women casting apparel and monye from the wall, and auauncinge themselves
with bare breasts, held up their hands to the Romans, besechinge them to
spare the^, and that they would not (as they had done at Auaricum) destroy both
women and children. Diverse of them also sliding down the wall by their hands,
yielded themselves to the soldiers. Luc. Fabius a Centurion of the eighth
legion (who the same day as it is known, said to his company that he was so
encouraged with his reward at Auaricum, that he would not let it come to pass,
that any man should get upon the wall before him,) taking unto him three of his
hand, and being lifted up by the^, gate up upon the wall. These in like wise did
he draw up to him one after another. In the mean while, they which were
resorted to ye other side of the town (as I showed before) to strengthen it,
as soon as they heard the first cry, being also hasted from thence by diverse
messengers which told them that the town was taken by the Romans, sent their
horsemen thither before, and followed after the^ selves as thick as hoppes. As
every of them came first thither, so took he his place under the wall, and
increased the number of his fellows that were feighting: of whom when a great
multitude was assembled, the women that late before stretched their hands to
the Romans from the wall, began to entreat their husbands, and after the
manner of Gallia to show their hear looce about their shoulders, and to bring
their children into their sight. The Romans were vnequallye matched, both in
place and number, and therwythal being moreover weary with travel in running
and feighting so long a space, they could not easly endure against them that
were fresh and lustye. Caesar when he saw how thencounter was in an
vnindifferent place, and that the power of his enemies continually increased,
fearyng the success of his men, sent to T. Sextius his Lieuetenant, whone he
had left behind for the defense of his greter camp, that without delay he
should bring forth his Cohortes, and set them in array under the foot of the
hill on the right hand of his enemies, to the intent that if he saw our men
driven from their ground, he should put ye enemies in such fear, as they should
have less liberty to pursew them. And he himself removing a littel forward
with his legio^ out of ye place where he stood, abode to see what end
the^cou^ter would come unto. At such time as the feight was sharpest, and that
the enemies trusted to the place and their multitude, and our men in their
manhood and prowess: sodeinly on the open side of our men appeared the
Heduanes who^ Caesar had sent up on the right ^ide by another way, to thentent
to stay the power of our enemies from coming thither. These by reason of the
likeness of their armor, did greatly abash our men, and albeit they were
known what they were by showing their right shoulders bare, which is wont to
be a token of them that are at peace with us: yet notwithstanding our soldiers
thought it had been done by their enemies, to the^tent to deceive them withal.
The same time L. Fabius the Centurio^, and such as had attained the wall with
him, were enclosed and slain and cast down from the wall. M. Petreius another
Centurion of the same Legion, as he was about to break open the gates, being
oppressed of the multitude and despairinge in himself, and besides that sore
wounded in diverse places, said to his companions that followed him: Forasmuch
as I cannot save my self and you too, I will at least wise provide for the
saufgard of you, whom I being blinded with desire of vain glory have brought
in danger. Sirs save your selves while you may. Therewythal he thrusts into
the mids of his enemies, and sleaing a couple out of hand, drives the rest
somewhat from the gate. As his men went about to help him, it is but follye for
you (quod he) to go about to save my life, in whom both blood and strength
fails, and therefore get you hence while you may, and recover your selves to
the Legion. Feighting in this wise, within a while after he fell down, and
with his own death saved the lives of his men. Our men being ouerlayd on all
sides, with the loss of.xlvi. Centurions were thrown down from the place.
Nevertheless the tenth Legion which stood for a stale in a ground somewhat
more indifferent, stopped the Galls as they followed the chase very whotlye.
At the receipt of them again stood the Cohortes of the.xiii. Legion, which T.
Sextius the Lieuetenaunt had brought out of the lesser Camp, and placed in a
higher ground. As Soon as ye Legions came upon plain ground, they turned their
faces with displaid banners upon their ennemies: And Uercingetorix wythdrewe
his men from the foot of the mountain, into their fortifications. The same
day^ we lost littel less then seven hundred of our soldiers. The next day
Caesar calling his army before him, reproved the rashness and gredines of his
soldiers, in that they took upon the^ to be their own masters how far they
should go, or what they had to do, and in that they would neither stay
themselves when the retreit was blown, nor suffer theymselues to be kept in
order by their Marshals and Lieuetenants. He declared unto the^ what the
disaduauntage of a place might do, and what he had counseled the^ at Auaricum,
where findinge his enemies without a Captain and without horsemen, he had let
an assured victory slip out of his hands, and all for doubt least never so
littel loss might happen in thencounter, by means of the dysaduauntage of the
ground. As much as he commended the hault courages of them, who^ not the
fortifications of the camps, not the height of the Mountain, nor the wall of
the town was able to stay: so much again he disallowed their disorder and
arrogancye, that they thought themselves able to foresee more as concerning
the victory and the sequel of things: than their Graundcaptein: for he
thought that modestye and obediens was no less requisite in a soldier, than
manhod or haultnes of courage. When he had made this oration unto them, and in
the latter end encouraged them that they should not for this occasion be
disquyetted in mind, nor attribute that to ye manhod of thenemy, which had
happened through the ^^saduau^tage of the place, being of ye same opinion for
his setting forth yt he was of before, he led his legio^s out of ye ca^p, and
set them in order of battle in a mete place. When he saw he could never
themore thereby allure Uercingetorix into the indifferent ground, he made a
light skirmish with his horsemen (but that prosperously), and conveyed his army
into their Camp again. Having done as much the next day, deming it
sufficient to abate the braggyng of the Galls, and to harten his soldiers
again, he dislodged from thence against the Heduanes, and yet would not his
enemies even then pursewe him. The third day he repaired the Bridges upon
the river Elauer, and passed over his army. There falling in communication with
Uiridomarus and Eporedorix Heduans, he understood how Litauicns with all his
horsemen was gone to styr the Heduanes to rebellion. Wherefore it was needful
that they went before, to keep the City in obedience. Caesar albeit that by
many ways he perfectly now understood the falsehod of the Heduanes, and that by
the departure of those that were with him he thought the whole City would make
the more have to rebel, yet notwythstandinge he thought it not good to keep
them still, least he should either seem to do them wrong, or give them cause to
think he stood in fear of them. At their departure, he brieflye rehearsed
unto them his deserts toward the Heduanes, as namely at how low an ebb he
had found them, pestered up in their Towns, amerced with the loss of their
lands, bereft of all their men of war, charged with a tribute, constreined
to give hostages with as much shame as could be: and to what good fortune, and
to how great preferment he had advanced the^: insomuch that they had not only
recovered their ancient estate, but also (as it well appeared) had aspired to
such dignitye and estimation, as they never knew of in times past. With this
lesson he gave them leave to depart. There was a town of the Heduanes called
Noyoune that stood upon the river of Loyre in a convenient place. Hither had
Caesar conveyed al ye hostages of Gallia, grain, common threasure, and a great
part of the furniture as well of himself as of his army. Hither had he sent a
great number of horses, bought before in Spain and Italy, purposely for this
war. When Eporedorir and Uiridomarus came thither, and understood the state
of the City, how the Heduanes had received Litauicus at Benwin.
Bibracte, which is a town of chief authority among them: and that
Conuictolitane the Magistrate and a great part of the Senate were come thither
to him: and that ambassadors by public asse^t were sent to Uercingetorix to
conclude peace and friendship with him: they thought that such an oportunitye
was not to be let slip. And therefore sleaing the kepers of Nouiodunum, and al
such as came thither to bye and sell, they parted the horses and threasure
among them, they caused the hostages of the Cities to be conveyed to the
Magistrate to Bibracte: the town it self (because they thought themselves not
able to keep it) they set on fire, to thente^t the Romans should have no good
of it: as much of ye grain as could be shipped upon the sodeine, they carried a
way: the rest they either threw into the River, or else burned it: they
themselves levied men out of ye next Provinces, and set garrisons and wards
alonge the River of Loyre, and sent forth horsemen to raunge over all the coast,
to thentent to cause us to be afraid, if peradventure they might keep the
Romans from victuals, or else bring them to so low an ebb through penurye, as
that they might be able to drive them out of the Country. The which hope of
theirs was greatly furthered, in that the river of Loyre was risen so high with
snow, that there was not any foord to pass at. When Caesar knew of these
things, he thought it mete to make speed, and to attempt to make Bridges, to
thentent he might encounter with them, before any greater power were thither
assembled. For as to alter his purpose, and to turn his journey into Province,
he thought it behooved him not at ye time so to do: partlye because the infamye
and dishonor of the deed, and the mountain Gebenua which was betwixt him and
the country, and the crabbednes of the ways were a let to him: but
inespecially for that he was sore afraid for Labienus, who was disseuered from
him, and for the Legions that he had sent forth under him. Wherefore taking
unmeasurable great iourneyes night and day, contrary to thopinion of all me^ he
came to the river of Loyre: and finding there a foord by his horsemen such a one
as would serve the turn in such a time of necessitye, (for they could have no
more but their shoulders and arms free above the water to wielde their
harness and weapons wythall) placing his horsemen on each side to break the
force of the stream, he so abashed his ennemies at the first sight, that he
passed his army sauflye: and finding plenty of corn and cattle in the fields,
he furnyshed his army therewyth, and took his journey toward ye Senones, While
these things were in doing with Caesar, Labienus leauinge at Agendicum the
supplement of Soldiers that came lately out of Italy, to thentent they should
be a defense to the caryages, went with four Legions to Lutetia, which is a
town of the Parisians situate in an Island of the River of Seane. Whose
coming being known to the enemy, a great power resorted thither out of ye
Cities therabout. The government of ye whole host was committed to Camulogenus
an Aulerk, who albeit he were almost wythered for age, yet for his singular
knowledge in feats of war, he was called to that honor. He perceiving that the
Lake which falls into Seane was never dry but kept always at one height,
and that it greatly anoied all that quarter, settled himself there, intending to
keep our men from passing over. At ye first Labienus went about to make Uinets,
and to fill up the lake with hurdles and turfe, and to force away to pass
saufly over, but when he perceived it was to difficult a matter to bring to
pass, he went secretly out of his camp in the third watch, and came to
Melune ye same way that he had gone thence. It is a town of ye People of Sens.
Senones standing in an Island of Seane, as we said a littell before of
Lutetia. There taking about fiftye Barges, and fastening them quickly together,
and putting his soldiers in them, he so amazed the Townsmen with the
straungenes of the matter, of whom the greater part had been already called out
to the wars, that he took the Town without resistance: and repayring the
bridge which his enemies had broken certain days before, conveyed over his
^^my: and kept on his journey down the stream toward Lutetia. His enemies
having knowledge of the matter by such as fled from Melune, commanded Lutetia
to be burned, and the brydges of the town to be cut down: and they themselves
removing from the lake that was upon the bank of the river of Seane, encamped
directly over against Lutetia in the face of Labienus Camp. By this time they
heard that Caesar was dislodged from Gergouia, and rumors were brought of the
rebelling of the Heduanes, and of the prosperous insurrectio^ of Gallia. And
now the Galls in their talk assured themselves for a troth, that Caesar
being stopped of his journey, and of passage over Loyre, was driven for want of
corn to make toward Prouynce. The people of Beawuoys also who of themselves
had before times been disloyal, hearing that the Heduanes had rebelled, began
to raise men, and prepare for the war openly. Then Labienus in so great
alteration of things, perceived that it behooved him to work far otherwise, tha^
he had heretofore done. Neither studied he now any more how to conquer any
thing, or how he might egg his enemies to encounter, but how he might convey
again his army sauf to Agendicum. For on the one side, the me^ of Beawnoys (which
City is reputed in Gallia to be of very great force) were ready to sit on his
skyrtes: and again Camulogenus held thotherside with ^ys army redye and well
furnyshed: Moreover there was a great River between him and home, so that his
army could neither recover to their garriso^, nor come by their stuff and
cariages. Being beset upon the sodein with so many distresses, he saw there
was no help to be sought, but by valiantnes of courage. Hereupon he called a
counsel toward the Evening, and exhorting them to put in execution diligently
and polletiquely such things as he should command them, he appointed the
Roman horsemen to take the Barges single that he had brought from Melune, and
as soon as the first watch were ended, to go their ways with them a four
miles down ye stream without any noise, and there to abide his coming. Five
Cohortes which he thought lest able to endure the bru^t of battle, he left
behind him to keep his Camp. The Other five of the same legion, he commanded to
go up the stream about midnight, with all the stuff and cariages with a great
noise. Also he gate together botes, and caused them to be rowed up the stream
with much noise of beating with the ores. He himself a littel while after,
went forth secretly with three Legions toward the same place where he
commanded the Barges to ariue. When he came thither, it fortuned by means of a
great storm which rose suddenly: that the scoult watch of our enemies as they
were placed alo^g the banks on both sides of the River, were surprysed unawares
by our men: and both our fotemen and horsemen by the service of the Roman
horsemen whom he had appointed to have the doing of the matter, were quickly
ferrried over. Almost at one instant a littel be fore day light, tidings was
brought to the enemy, that contrary to their custom, the Romans made an
uproar in their camp, and that a great company was going up the stream, and a
great noise of Ores heard that way, and that a littell beneath, men of war
were ferrying over in Barges. When they had heard this, forasmuch as they
thought that the Legions were passing in three places, and that al of the^
troubled with the rebellion of the Heduanes, prepared themselves to flight,
they also divided their army into three parts. For leaving a convenient number
for defense against our camp, they sent a small band toward Corbeit.
Metiosedum, which should proceed no further tha^ they saw the Botes go, and
with all the rest of their power they went against Labienus. By the break of
day, both all our men were ferried over, and the battle of our enemies
appeared within sight. Labienus having encouraged his soldiers to be mindful
of their ancient prowess, and of so many prosperous fields that they had
fought, and to think with themselves that Caesar (under whose banner they had
many a time and often foiled their enemies,) was there present, he bade blow up
to the battle. At the first encounter, on the right wing where the seventh
Legion stood, our ennemies were driven back and put to flighte: on the left
wyng, (which place the xv. Legion held,) albeit that the first ranks of our
enemies were stricken through with Darts and fell down dead, yet nevertheless
the rest stood earnestly at defense, and there was not any man that made
countenance to run his way. The Captain Camulogenus himself was ever at
hand, and encouraged them: While the victory hung yet in doubtful balance.
The Marshals of the vii. Legion hearing what was done in the left wynge,
showed the Legion at the back of their enemies, and advanced their banners
against them. Yet for all that, there was not any man even at that time that
forsook his ground, but were all enclosed round about and slain euerychone.
Camulogenus also took such fortune as his soldiers did. Now they that were
left for defense against Labienus camp, when they heard that the battle was
joined, went to succor their fellows, and took a hill: but they were not able
to wythstand the force of our soldiers, specially being conquerors. So
intermedling themselves with the rest of their company that fled, al such
forasmuch as there were neither woods nor mountains to hyde them, they were
al slain. When Labienus had dispatched this matter, he returned to Age^dicum
where the stuff of ye whole army was left, and from thence he came with all his
power unto Caesar. Upon knowledge that the Heduanes rebelled, the war was
increased: Ambassades were dispatched into all parts: as far as either their
favor, authority, or money was able to stretch, they streined themselves to
solicit the Cities. Having gotten into their hands the hostages that Caesar
had bestowed among them, they put the neuters in fear that they would put them
to death. The Heduanes requested Uercingetorix that he would come to the^, and
consult with them for thorder of the war. When they had obtained their
request, they sewed to have the chief doing committed to themselves: and they
brought the matter so far in controversy, that a counsel of all Gallia was
called at Beaw^^e.
Bibracte, to the which place resorted great numbers of people from al
quarters, and the matter was put to voices: by which it was concluded
generallye, that Uercingetorix should be Grau^dcapteine still. From this
counsel were absent the men of Rhemes, the Lingones, and the Treuires. The men
of Rhemes and the Lingones were away because they cleaued to the frendshippe
of the Romans: the Treuires by reason they were far distant, and were
infested by ye Germans, which was the cause, that they came not of all the
time of the war, nor sent any aid to any of both parties. The Heduanes
took the matter very heauilye that they were set beside the souereintye: they
lamented the change of their estate, wyshinge that Caesar would pardon them.
And yet having enterprysed ye war already, they durst not wythdraw themselves
to take counsel alone from the rest. Eporedorix and Uiridomarus young gentelmen
of great towardnes, could ill abide to be at the commandment of
Uercingetorix. Howbeit he commanded all the other Cities to give him pledges,
and wylled them to bring them in by a day. Ouermore he bade that all their
horsemen to the number of.xv. thousand should with all speed possible resort
hither to him. As for fotemen he said he would content himself with those that
he had already: for he would neither try the courtesye of fortune, nor put the
matter to a pytched field: But forasmuch as he had so good store of horsemen,
it was an easy matter to compass, to prohibit the Romans from fetchinge corn
and forage, so that they could find in their hearts to abide the destroying
of their own corn and the burning of their own houses, through loss of
which their private goods, they saw they should attain souereinty and
liberty for ever. When he had set things thus at a stay, he commanded the
Heduanes and Secusianes which were borderers upon the Province, to find him
ten thousand footmen, and for an overplus, eight hundred horsemen, over whom he
made captein the brother of Eporedorix, commanding him to make war upon the
people of Allobrogians. On the other side he sent the Gabales together with the
next hundreds of Auverne against the Heluians: and the Ruthenes and Cadurkes
to wast the borders of the Uolces in Arminacke. Nevertheless by secret
messages and ambassages he solliciteth the Allobrogians, whose minds he hoped
were not yet quietted syns the last war. Unto their noble men he promised
monye, and to the City, the superiority of all the whole country. For a defense
against all these chau^ces, were provided before hand two and twentye Cohortes.
The which being raised out of the very Province, were by the Lieuetenant L.
Caesar in all places set as a Bulwark against the enemy. The Heluians of their
own head encounteryng with their borderers, were put to the worse, and with ye
loss of the Prince of their City C. Ualerius Denotaurus the son of Caburus
and many other that were slain in the field, were driven to take their walled
Towns. The Allobrogians placing diverse garrisons upon the River of Rhone,
defended their borders with great care and diligens. Caesar because he perceived
his enemies to be better furnished of horsemen than himself, and that all the
ways were so forlayd, that he could not be relieved with any thing out of
Province or Italye, sent over the Rhine into Germanye, unto those Cities which
the other years before he had pacified, and demanded of them horsemen, and
fotemen light harnessed which were wont to feight amongst them. At their
coming, forasmuch as they had not so handsome horses, he took the horses from
the Marshals and Roman horsemen, and from such as he had raised upon the
sodeine, and distributed them among ye Germans. In the mean time that these
things were a doing, the fotemen out of Auuerne and the horsemen that were
enjoined to all Gallia assembled together. The number of these men of war being
very huge when they were come together, at such time as Caesar was passing
toward ye Sequanes by the uttermost borders of La^gres, that he might the
easlyer succor the Province: Uercingetorix lodged in three camps about ten
miles of from the Romans, and calling to counsel the Capteines of his
horsemen, he told them the time of victory was come: for the Romans were
flyinge into Province, and glad to get them out of Gallia. The which suffysed
to obtein liberty for the present time, but littel or nothing auailed, to keep
peace and quietness in time to come. For they would return again with a greater
power, and never make an end of the war. And therefore now was time to set
upon them, while they were troubled with their cariages. For if the fotemen
adventured to rescow their goods, and made any tarience about it, they could
not continue on their journey. Again if forsakinge their cariages (which he
believed would rather come to pass) they had regard to their lives, they must
needs be spoiled both of their furniture and of their honor. For as touching
his enemies horsemen, they might well assure themselves that none of the^ durst
be so ^olde as ones to put his head out of ye battle. The which thing to
thentent they might with better courage attempt, he said he would stand before
his Ca^p in battle ray, with all his whole power to put his enemies in fear.
The horsemen cried out all at ones, that a solemn oath ought to be taken of
the^, that he should not be received under any roof, nor have recourse to his
children, nor to his parents, nor to his wife, that had not twyce at the
least, rode through the battle of his enemies. When the matter was agreed
upon and every man put to his oath, the next day seuering their horsemen into
three battles, two of them showed them selves on the two sides, and the third
meeting us face to face assaid to stop us of our journey. The which thing when
Caesar hard of, dividing his horsemen likewise into three troops, he commanded
the^ to proceed against their ennemies. All the three battles fought at one
instant. Our battle of footmen stood close together, and received the
cariages in among the Legions. Look wheresoever our men seemed to be in danger
or to sore laid at, thither Caesar wylled the standerdes to be advanced, and
the battle to be turned that way. The which thing was both a stop to the
ennemies that they could not pursew, and also an encouragement to our men with
hope of succor. At the length the Germans on the right side gettinge the top
of the hill, drove their enemies down, and following the chase upon them hard
to the river where Uercingetorix abode with his battle of foteme^, slew many
of them. When the rest perceived that, fearinge to be enclosed about, they
took them to flight. Tha^ was there nothing but slaughter in all places. Three
of the chiefest of the nobility of the Heduanes were brought prisoners unto
Caesar: Cottus the Lieuetenant of the horsemen who at the last election stood
competitor against Conuictolitane. Cauarill who after the reuolting of
Litauicus became capteyne of the footmen, and Eporedorix who before the
coming of Caesar had been Captein General of the Heduanes in their wars
against the Sequanes. After that all his horsemen were put to flight,
Uercingetorix retiring with his army in the same order that he had set them
before his camp, began forth with to take his journey toward Aleria a town of
the Mandubians, commanding his stuff to be brought out the camp with all
speed, and to follow after him. Caesar bestowing his cariages in the next hill,
and leaving there two Legions for the defense of them, followed after him as far
as the time of the day would suffer, and when he had slain to the number of
a three thousand or thereabouts of his enemies that were in ye rereward, ye
next day after he pitched his Camp before Alexia. When he had viewed the
situacion of ye town, and put his enemies in fear, because their horsemen (in
which part of the army they put greatest trust) were put to flight,
encouraging his soldiers to the work, he began to cast a trenche about
Alexia. The town itself stood upon the top of an hill in a very high place,
that it seemed not possible to be won, but by continewance of siege. At the
foot of the said hill ran two rivers on two sides thereof. Before the town was
a plain of a three miles long. On al other parts the town was environed with
diverse hyls all of a like height, dista^t a good pretye space one from
another. Under the wall, as much of the hill as was toward the sun rising,
the Galls had whollye occupied with their tents, and had drawn a trench and
a wall of stone without mortar of six foot in height all the way. The
compass of that fortification which the Romans were about, was eleven miles.
Their tents were pytched in places convenient, and there were rered three and
twenty castles, in the which men warded all the day time, that there should not
be any saly made out upon the sodein: and the same in the night season were
kept with a strong watch and ward to defend them. At the beginning of the
work, there was an encounter of horsemen in the plain that we spoke of
before of three miles long between the hills. Great prowess was showed on
both parts. When our men were in any danger, Caesar sent in the Germans to
their rescow, and placed his footmen in battle ray before his camp, least the
footmen of his enemies should suddenly break out upon them. Our men perceiving
that the Legions stood ready to rescowe them, took heart unto them: insomuch
that our enemies being put to flight, did hinder one another with their
multitude, and pestred themselves in getting in at ye narrow gates. The
Germans chased them egrely eue^ hard to their fortifications. Great slaughter
was made: and many forsaking their horses, went about to pass the dyche, and
to climb over the wall. Caesar commanded his Legions whom he had set before
the Ra^pyer, to auau^ce themselves somewhat forward. Whereat the Galls that were
within hold, were no less troubled tha^ they that were without. For they
thought that we had made toward them, and thereupon cried by and by to harnes,
and diverse of them for fear rushed into the town. Uercingetorix bade shet
the gates, that the Camp were not left naked. The Germans after they had
slain a great number of men, and taken a great sort of horses, retired.
Uercingetorix took advice to send away all his horsemen by night, before the
Romans had finished their fortifications. At their departure, he gave them
commandment, that every man should repair home to his own country, and
thrust forth to the wars, all that ever were of years able to bear armor.
He puts them in remembrance of his benefits toward them, desiring them
heartily that they would have regard of his welfare, and not abandon him into
the hands of his enemies to be put to torture, who had so well deserved in
seking the liberty of al Gallia: considering that through their negligens
fowerscore thousand chosen men were like to perish with him. Upon account
taken, he said he had corn scarce sufficient to find them.xxx. days:
Nevertheless with sparing he thought he should be able to draw it out somewhat
further in length. When he had given them this warning, he sends away his
horsemen secretly in the second watch by that way whither our work was not yet
brought, and commanded all the grain to be brought unto him, upon pain of
death to such as were disobedient. The Cattle whereof the Mandubians had driven
thither great store, he distributed by the poll: the grain he purposed to give
out by measure sparelye, and by a littell at ones: al his army which he had
placed without the walls, he received into the town. After this sort he
addressed himself to abide the succor of the Galls, and to take order for the
war. Caesar having knowledge hereof by such as fled unto him and by his
prisoners, began a fortification of this sort. He drew a diche of.xx. foot
with straight sides: that look how much distance was between the uppermost
brewes of the dyche, so broad also was it in the bottom: All his other
fortifications he withdrew CCCC. foot from that diche. He did it for this
purpose, that forbicause he was driven of necessity to take in so great a
ground, as that his whole work should not easlye be beset round about, nor
his enemy come hastelye with any great number to his fortifications, either
on the sodeyne or in the night time: or be able to throw Darts at our me^ as
they were busy at their work in the day time. This said space of CCCC. foot
being left out, he drew two other diches of xv. foot broad a piece of the
same depth: of the which he filled the innermost with water conveyed from the
River by the plain and low bottomes. Behynd them he cast up a mount and a
Rampire of xii. foot. The which also he coped, and set up Battylmentes upon
it, with great forked posts stycking out at the joining of the loopeholes and
the Battilmentes, to hinder the coming up of thenemy. Moreover he rered up
towers round about ye work, lxxx. foot dista^t one from another. We were driven
at that time to this extremity both to fetch in timber and grain, and also to
make so great fortifications all at ones, whereby our army was diminished by
going far from our camp. And oftentimes y^e Galls would be busy with our
works, and make salies upon us forcibly at many gates at ones. Wherefore Caesar
thought it convenient to add somewhat to these works, whereby they might be
defended with less number of soldiers. And hereuppon cutting of from ye
bodies of trees such boughs as were not very strong, and setting the tops of
them straight and making them very sharp, he caused long diches to be drawn
of five foot deep: the trees being put into these diches, and fastened in the
bottom that they should not be pulled up, sticked out with their boughs. There
were five rows of them joined and twysted one within another, so that
whosoever ventured in, must needs gore them selves upon the sharp points of
the stakes. These they termed by the name of stocks. Before these were dug
in rows indented chequerwise of five points, pits of three foot deep
growing slope wise somewhat narrower toward the bottom than above. Wherein were
pytched round stakes of the bigness of a man's thyghe, sharpened above and
hardened in the fire, in such manner that they stycked not past four fingars
above the ground. And to thentent they should stand the stro^glier and surer,
every one of the^ were rammed with earth three foot above the bottom of the pit.
The rest of the pit was covered over with twigges and brushe, to hyde the
conueyance wythall. Of this sort were drawn out eight rows with three foot
disstance between each of them. This deuyse because of the likeness of it to a
Lilly, they called a lilly. Before these were fastened altogether with in the
ground scatteringlye every where with a littell space betwyxt them, stakes of
a foot long stickt full of Iron hokes, and these they called gaddes. After that
Caesar had finished these things, following the leuellest ground he could find
as the nature of the place gave, he took in fowertene miles compass, and
furnished it with like kinds of fortifications, on the outer side of these,
against the foreign enemy, so that not even with a great multitude, (if it
should so happen upon his departure) his bulwarks and fortifications could be
assaulted round about. And to thentent they should not be constreyned at their
peril to go abroad from their camp, he commanded every man to convey in
before hand, as much corn and forage, as would serve him for.xxx. days. While
these things were a doing at Alexia, the Galls sommonynge a Parliament of their
noblemen, decreed, not that so many as were able to bear armor (as
Uercingetorir had appointed) should be called together, but that every city
should be charged with a certain number: least in such a confused multitude,
they should be able neither to rule them, nor to discern one from another, nor
to get sufficient victual for them. And therefore they determined that the
Heduanes and their adherentes the Secusians, Ambiuarets, Aulerkes, Bra^nouikes
and Brannouians, should find.35000 men: the like number was enjoined to the men
of Auverne, together with ye Cadurkes, Heleuteria^s, Gaballes, and Uellannians,
which were under the dominion of Auverne: To the Sequanes, Senones, Bituriges,
Santons, Ruthenes, Caruntes, 12000. men a piece: To the Bellouacanes, 10000: as
many to the Lemouikes: To the men of Poyters, to the men of Turon, to the
Parisians, and to ye Heluetians eight thousand a piece: To the Swessions,
Ambianes, Mediomatrikes, Petrocorians, Neruians, Morines, and the Nitiobrigia^s
five thousand a piece: To the Aulerkes Cenomannues as many: To the
Atrebatians.4000: To the Bellocassies, Lexobians, and Aulerkes Eburones, three a
piece: To ye Raurakes, and Boyans 2000. a piece: To all the Cities that border
upon ye Ocean and which after their manner are called Armorike, in the which
number are the Curiosolites, Rhedones, Ambibarians, Cadetes, Osissines,
Lemouikes, and Uuelles 6000. Of these, the Bellouacanes sent not their number,
because they said they would in their own quarrel and at their own pleasure
make war with the Romans, and not be at any stranngers commandment.
Nevertheless at thentreatance of Comius, in respect that he had been a soiourner
among them, they sent two thousand. This Comius (as we showed before) had done
Caesar faithful and profitable seruis certain years past in Britain. In
recompense whereof Caesar had privileged his country from trybute, restored
them their laws and customs, and given him the Morines in reward.
Notwythstanding all this, the consent of all Gallia was such for the defense
of their liberty, and for the recovery of their ancient renown in feats of
war, that neither benefits nor the remembrance of friendship could move them,
but that all together with life and goods they bent themselves to this war:
insomuch that they raised a power of eight thousand horsemen, and about two
hundred and fortye thousand foteme^. These were musstred in the borders of the
Heduans, and the number taken, and Capteines appointed them. Comius of Arras,
Uiridomarus and Eporedorix Heduans, and Uergasillaunus of Auverne
Uercingetorixes susters son, were made Capteines General, and unto them
were assigned certain chosen persons of the Cities as cou^sellers for the
war. They went al toward Alexia with a chierfull courage in hope of a boon
viage: for there was not among them al, that thought us able to have abidden
so much as the sight of so huge a multitude, specially in a doubtful
encounter, where the towns me^ should break out and feyghte with us on the one
side, and such a power of horsemen and fotemen come upon us from thope^ field on
the other side. But they that were besieged in Alexia, when the day was past that
they looked for the succor of their country folk, having spent al their corn,
and knowing not what was done among the Heduanes, sommoned a counsel, and
consulted of the end of their estate. After sundry verdits given, of which
some persuaded to yield, and some to issue out and feyghte with the enemy,
while there remained strength in them: one Critognatus made an oration to them,
which for the horrible and singular cruelty thereof, seems worthy to be noted.
This Critognatus being borne of a noble house in Auverne, and acccompted a man
of great authority said: As touching the verdit of them that color most
shameful bondage with the glorious name of submission, I have nothing to say:
for I thynk them not worthy either to be accounted for our countrymen, or yet
to be called to counsel. With them have I to do that persuade issuing out,
upon whose advise seems to be grounded the remembrance of the ancient
prowess of us al. This is a faintnes of heart and not prowess, not to be
able to suffer penury for a while. It is an easier matter to find such as
will willinglye offer themselves to death, than such as can endure grief
pacie^tly. And surely I have so great regard of my worship, that I could well
allow this advise, if I saw there were no further loss than of our lives. But
in taking counsel, let us have a respect to all Gallia, which we have raised
to succor us. I pray you when fowerscore thousand of us shall be slain in one
place, what courage shall our n^re friends and kinsfolk have, being
constreyned to feight in manner upon our carkesses? Bereue them not wilfullye of
your help, who for your welfares sake have not regarded their own peril.
Nor go not about through your own rashness and folly, or rather through your
faint hartednesse, to bring all Gallia under foot, and to cast it into
perpetual bondage. Are ye in doubt of their faythfulnesse and constancy,
because they are not come at the day appointed? For what purpose think you
then, are the Romans day by day so busily occupied in those their outtermoste
fortifications? is it but only for pleasure think you? Seeing you can receive
no comfortable message from your Alies, inasmuche as all the passages are
forlayd by the enemy, you need no better wytnes of their approach, than the
Romans themselves, who being stricke^ with fear thereof, stick to their work
day and night. You will than ask me what is to be done? It is mine advice to do
as our ancestors did in the war of the Cimbrians and Dutchmen, though that war
were nothing like this: who being driven into their walled towns and
constreined with famine, did there prolonge their days and live by the flesh
of such as for their years were unmeet for the wars, and would not yield
themselves to their enemies. And if we had no such example given us heretofore,
yet I would think it the greatest honor that could be, to have it founded by
us and left to posterity, in the behalf of our liberty. For what thing was
there ever like unto that war? The Cimbrians having wasted our country, and
brought us to great misery, at length departed out of our coasts, and went
into other lands, leaving still unto us our laws, customs, possessions, and
libertyes. But the Romans what other thing seek they, or what other thing
desire they, but eue^ of very spite to plant them selves in the lands and
Cities of such, as they know to be renowned and puissant in battle, and to
bring them into endless thraldom. For they never yet made war to any other
end. And if you be ignorant of their dealing with Nations a far of, look
upon your next neighbor Gallia: the which being brought into thorder of one
of their Provinces, has altered her laws and customs, submitted her neck
under the heading are, and is oppressed with continual bondage.

After that every man had said his mind, they decreed that all such as either
by sickness or age were unnecessary for the wars, should void the Town,
purposing to make al ye shyftes that could be, ere they fell to the counsel of
Critognatus. Nevertheless they determined to use that to, if the case so
constreyned them, and their succors tarried over long from them, rather than to
admit any condition, either of yelding or of peace. The Mandubians who had
received them into their Town, were compelled to depart out themselves with
their wives and children. Who coming to the fortifications of the Romans,
besought them most earnestlye with tears in their eyes, that he would take
them to be his bondslaues so he helped the^ with meat and drink. But Caesar
setting watch in diverse places of the trenche gave straight commandment that
they should not be received.

In the mean season, Comi^s of Arras and the rest of the Capteynes that were
put in trust with thorder of the wars, came with all their power to Alexia,
and taking an outer hill, rested not past a mile from our Camp. The next day
after their coming, bringinge their men of arms out of their Camp, they
filled all that plain which we declared to be three miles in length: and they
placed their fotemen secretly a littel from thence in a higher ground. There
was a prospect from the town of Alexia down into the field. As Soon as these
succors were seen, there was runnynge together: there was recioycinge one
with another: and every ma^s mind was moved to gladness. And thereupon bringyng
their power forth, they placed themselves before the town, and casting bardles
into the dyche that was next unto them, filled it up with turf, putting
themselves in a redynes to issue out upon us, and to abide all hasardes. Caesar
placing al his army on both sides of his fortifications, to thente^t that if
need should so require, every man might know his standing and keep him to it,
commanded his horsemen to be led forth, and to skirmish with them. There was
from all the Camps which were pitched upon the top of the hill round about,
a prospect downward, and all the soldiers setting their minds upon
thencounter, were desirous to see what end the skirmishe would come unto. The
Galls had myngled here and there among their men of arms, ar^hers and nimble
footmen light harnessed, to succor their own men when they retired, and to
break the force of our men when they pursewed. Many of our men being wounded
by them, drew themselves out of the battle. At such time as ye Galls were in
hope that their men should have had thupper hand, and saw our men ouerpressed
with their great number, both they that were within our fortifications, and
those that were come to the rescow of ye town, with a great shout and cry
hartned each of them their fellows. Now forasmuch as the thing was done in the
sight of all men, and that nothing whether it were valia^tly or cowardly done,
could escape unseen, the desire of praise and fear of reproach, enforced
either part to valiantness. When the battle had continued in doubtful
balance, from noone until the sun was almost down, the Germans knitting
themselves close together gave a fresh charge upon their enemies, and made them
lose ground: After whose flight the archers were by and by enclosed and slain.
Moreover our men out of the other parts following the chase upon them even hard
to their camp, gave them no respit to gather theymselues together again. They
that were come out of Alexia, in manner despayring of all good success,
retired with heavy hearts into the town.

After one days respit, ye Galls with a great number of hardles, scaling
ladders, and hooks which they had made in that littel while, setting privily
out of their camp without any noise about midnyght, approached to our
fortifications that were to ward the champion fields: where sodeinly giving a
great shout, (which was as a watch word to their fellows that were beseged,
to give the^ understanding of their coming) they began to throw in their
hurdles, and to beat our men from the Rampire with slinges, shot of arrows,
and casting of stones, and to do all other things that appertain to an assault.
Uercingetorix heryng the shout, called his men together by the sound of a
Trumpet, and the same instant led them out of the town. Our men according as
every man's place was appointed him a few days before, came to the
fortifications. There with slinges that went with wynches, and stakes which
they had pitched in a readiness, and with pellets, they put the Galls in
fear. And because the darkness took away their sight, many wounds were
received on both sides, and a great number of artillery was discharged together
at adventure with engines. But M. Antonius and C. Trebonius Lieuetenantes to
whom those parts were allotted to defend, took soldiers out of the further
bulwarks, and sent them to the rescow, whersoeuer they perceived our men to
be ouercharged. As long as the Galls were any thing far of from our
fortifications, they had thaduantage by reason of the great number of the darts
that they threw: but after that they came nerer within our danger, either they
gored themselves unawares upon the gaddes, or else they slided in to the pits and
were thrust through, or else were strycken with pykes from the wall and from
the Towers and so peryshed. When they had taken many foyles on all sides, and
could break through none of our fortifications, and that the day light began
to appear, fearing to be beset on thopen side by such as might issue out of
our higher camp, they retired back to the rest of their company. And those
that were with in, as they were bringing forth such things as had been prepared
by Uercingetorix for their issuing ^^te and were fylling of the uttermost
dikes, about the which things they were feign to spend a good piece of the
time, understood that their fellows were departed before that they could come
to our fortifications: and so with out accomplishinge the thing they came for,
they retired into the town.

The Galls having twice with great loss ben put to the worse, consulted what
they might do: and called to them such as were skillful of the places. Of them
they learned the situation and fortifiynge of thupper part of our camp. There
was on the North side a hill, the which because our men for the great circuit
thereof, could not comprehend within their work, they were compelled almost of
necessity to pitch their tents in an unhandsome place and somewhat a falling
ground. The keeping hereof had Ca. Antistius of Rhegium, and L. Caninius Regulus
two of Cesars Lieuetenants with two Legions. The Capteynes of our enemies
learning the places by their spies, chose out of their whole number, three
score thousand men of those Cities that had the report of most prowes, and
agreed secretly among themselves what, and how every thing should be done,
appoynting a time certain when to go about it, which was even when it should
seem to be high none. Of this army they committed the leading to Uergasillaunus
of Auverne one of the four principal Capteynes, the nere kinsman of
Uercingetorix. Who setting out of the Camp at the first watch, and having
welnere come to his journeys end by daylight, hid himself behind a hill, and
bade his soldiers rest themselves after their nyghtes journey. Now when mid day
seemed to draw me, he made toward the upper Camp that we spoke of before, and at
the same instant their horsemen began to approach to our forfications that
were toward the playnes, and the rest of their army began to show themselves
before their camp. Uercingetorix beholding his company out of the tower of
Alexia, marched out of ye town, and brought forth with him his Rakes, Poles,
Muscules, hooks and such other things as he had purueied before for to issue
out with. Thassault was given in all places at ones, and nothing was left
unattempted. Look what part seemed weakest, thither was most resorting. The
fortifications of ye Romans were of such a copasse, that their power was
disseuered far a su^der, and could not easly defend many places. To put our me^
in fear withal, greatly auayled ye noise that was behind their backs as they
fought: because they saw their peril consist in other men's prowess. For
commonly those things that are not seen, do more vehemently trouble men's minds
than those things that are seen. Caesar having gotten a mete place for the
purpose, had word brought him what was done every where, and sent succor
to such as were in danger. Both parts did set before their minds, that that
was thonlye time wherein it behooved to show most stoutnesse. For ye Galls
knew that their good days were past, if they brake not through our
fortifications: and the Romans if they gate thupper hand, looked for an end of
all their travels. The greatest danger was at our upper fortifications,
whyther we told you that Uergasillaunus was sent. The grabbednes of the top of
a place to a falling ground has in it great advantage. Some threw darts:
some cast their shieldes over their heads and preased upward: fresh men
succeeded in the roumes of them that were tired: the Rampire being cast down
by them all into the trench, did both make way for the Galls to get up,
and also did cover such things as the Romans had hidden in the ground:
and now our men had neither weapons nor strength to help themselves with.
Caesar having knowledge hereof, sent Labienus with six Cohortes to rescowe such
as were in peril: and commanded that if he were not able to sustain his
enemies, he should issue out with his Cohortes and feyghte with them
abroad: but he warned him in any wise not to do so, unless there were none
other remedy. He him self goes to the rest, and hartened them that they
should not faint in their travel. He told them that the fruit of all their
former encounters, consisted altogether in that day and in that one hour.
Those that were within, despayryng to do any good at the champion places,
because of ye hougenes of our fortifications, attempted to get up to the stepe
places, and thither they carried all their provision. There with the multitude
of darts they beat the defendantes from the towers: they fill up the dikes
with earth and hurdles: and with their hooks rend down the Rampyer and the
Uamure. Caesar sent thither first young Brutus with six Cohortes: and afterward
his Lieuetenant C. Fabius with other vii. and last of all. When thencounter
wared somewhat to whot, he himself brought fresh men to their succor. Whereby
renewing the battle and driving his enemies back, he went thither as he had
sent Labienus. He took with him iiii. Cohorts out of the next bulwark, and
commanded part of his horsemen to follow him, and part to fetch a circuit
about the uttermost fortifications, and to set upon his enemies behind. When
Labienus saw that neither Ra^piers nor dikes were able to hold against the
violence of his enemies, he assembled nine and thirty Cohortes which he met by
chance coming out of the next Bulwarks, and sent word by a messenger unto
Caesar, what he thought was to be done. Caesar hereupon made have to be present
at the feight. As Soon as he was perceived to be come by the color of his
garment, (the which he used in battles as a mark to be known by) and that the
Cohortes and troops of horsemen which he had commanded to follow him, were seen
(as they might easlie be perceived from such high grounds being so steep and
falling,) his enemies gave him battle. A great shoute was raised on both
sides, and like shoutinge was heard again from the Camp and from al our
fortifications. Our men discharginge their darts, came to hand strokes.
Sodeinly appeared our horsemen behind them, and other Cohortes came upon them.
Then our enemies turned their backs, and our horsemen meting with the^ made a
great slaughter of them. Sedulius Captain and Prince of the Lemouikes was
slain: Uergasillaunus of Auverne was taken alive in ye chase: threescore and
fowretene banners and antes^gnes were brought unto Caesar: few of that great
number recovered sauf into their Camp. The Townsmen beholdinge out of the
Town the flighte and slaughter of their company, castinge away all hope of
welfare, wythdrew their army from our fortifications. Immediately upon the
receipt of this heavy tidings, the Galls fled out of their camp: insomuch that
if our soldiers had not been fortrauelled with rescowing so many sundry
places, and with the toil of that day, all the whole power of our enemies
might have been distroied utterly. Our horsemen being sent out after midnight,
ouertoke their rerewarde, and slew and took prisoners a great number of them:
the rest escaped out of ye chase into the next Cities.

The next day, Uercingetorix calling an assemblye, declared unto them how he
had taken that war in hand, not for any necessitye that he was driven to
himself, but for the liberty of the whole Realm: and for as much as there was
no shift but to give place unto fortune, he offered himself unto the^ both
ways, choose whether they would satisfy the Romans with his death, or yield him
into their hands alive. Hereupon were Commissioners sent unto Caesar. He
commanded them to deliver up their armor, and to bring forth their noblemen.
He sat upon the Rampyer before his Camp, and thither were the Capteynes
brought unto him. Uercingetorix was yielded, and the armor cast out before him.
Reserving the Heduanes and the men of Auverne, to the^tent to recover their
countries by them, if it might be, all the rest of the prisoners he dystrybuted
among his soldiers every man one in name of a pray. When he had dispatched
these matters, he went among the Heduanes, and recovered their City again.
Thither came ambassadors to him from the men of Auverne, proferynge to be at
his commandment. He put them to a great number of hossages, and sent his
Legions into garrison. He delivered about twenty thousand prisoners of the
Heduanes and men of Auverne without ransom. T. Labienns he commanded to
take his journey with two Legions and his horsemen against the Sequanes,
appointinge M. Sempronius Rutilus to assist him. He placed his Lieuetenant C.
Fabius and Lu. Minutius Basilius with two Legions among the men of Rhemes, to
thente^t they should not take any wrong at the hands of the Bellouacanes
their next neyghbors. He sent C. Antistius of Rhegium to the Ambiuarets: Titus
Sextius to the people of Berrey, and Caninius Rebilus to the Ruthenes, and with
each of them a Legion. He placed Q. Tullius Cicero and P. Sulpitius, the one at
Cabillon and the other at Matiscone, among the Heduanes by the river of Soan, to
make provision of corn and victuals: and he himself determined to winter at
Bibracte. When these things were known at Rome by his letters, common
supplications were proclaimed for twentye days.

FINIS.
The preface of A. Hircius, or Oppius upon the last book of the Commentaries
of the wars in Gallia.
COMPELLED BY THY continual calling upon me, (my friend Balbus: least through
my daily refusal I might seem, not so much to excuse my self by the
difficulty of the matter, as to seek delay for slothfulness, I have taken
in hand a right difficult matter: I have patched up the Comme^taries of our
Caesar concerning his doings in Gallia, nothing comparable either to the
things he wrate before or since: and I have finyshed his last book which he
left imperfect, from the things that were done at Alexandria, unto the end,
not of the civil discord whereof we see no end, but of the life of Caesar. The
which who so ever shall read, would God they knew how vnwillinglye I took
upon me to wright them, to thentent I be not blamed of folly and arrogance for
intermedling my self with Caesar's wrightings. For all men agree upon this,
that there is no thing done so workmanly by others, which gives not place to
the elegancy of these commentaries: which were put forth by him to thentent
that wrighters should not want the knowledge of so noble deeds: and they are so
highly allowed by the judgment of all men, that occasion of matter may seem
not to be ministered, but rather to be quight taken from other wrighters. The
which thing I must needs more wonder at than all others. For other know how well
and exquisitely, and I know besides also, how easly and swiftly he performed
the^. There was in Caesar, not only abundance of matter and elegancy of
wrighting, but also most certain knowledge how to express his devises and
conceits. For my part, I had not so good chance, as to be present at the
wars of Aegipt and Affricke: the which wars although they be partlye known
to me by the report of Caesar: yet notwithstanding we are wont to hear those
things that with their straungenes do delight us or make us to marvel, after
another sort than those things which we are minded to report again as
vprighte witnesses. But whiles I unadvisedly gather together all the causes of
excuse, for the which I should not be compared with Caesar? I do^ thereby
run in danger of the reproach of arrogancye, in that I surmise any man to be
so far ouersene, to compare me with Caesar.

Fare well.
THE EIGHTH BOOK of A. Hircius concerning those things that were left
imperfect by C. Julius Caesar of the wars in Gallia.
AFTER THAT ALL Gallia was subdued, forasmuch as Caesar had respited no part of
the former summer from war, he was desirous to refresh his soldiers after so
great peynes taken, with the rest of the winter season, when news was brought
him that many Cities at the self same time, did lay their heads together
again about war, and make conspiracies. Whereof there was reported a very
likelye cause, in that it was known to all the Galls, that there could not
any power so great be assembled into one place, as should be able to
wythstande the Romans. Neither if many Cities at ones made war in diverse
places at one instant, could the army of the people of Rome have sufficient,
either of aid or of time, or of men of war to pursew al at ones: And there
ought not any City to refuse the lot of their misfortune, if by the respit
thereof, the rest might set themselves at liberty. The which opinion to
thentent it should not settle in the mynds of the Galls, Caesar leaving M.
Antonius his Threasorer with charge of his winter garrisons, went with a strong
company of horsemen the last day of December from Bibracte to his.xii. Legion,
which he had placed not far from the borders of the Heduanes in the Country
of Berrey, and takes thereunto the xi. Legion which was next unto it.
Leauinge two Cohortes to defend his stuff and cariages, he led the rest of
his army into the most plentiful fields of Berrey: the which being a large
Country and full of Towns, could not be kept in awe with the garrison of one
Legion, but that they prepared for war and made conspyracyes. By the sodeine
coming of Caesar, it came to pass (which must needs happen to such as are
unprovided and scattered abroad) that such as were tillynge the ground without
fear, were surprised in the fields by our horsemen, before they could get
them into the Towns. For at that time, the common token of invasion which is
wont to be perceived by burning of houses, was by Cesars commandment laid
away, least they should either want forage and corn if they were minded to
make any further rode into the Country, or else that their enemies for fear
of the fyers, should convey themselves out of the way. After that many
thousands of men had been taken, the me^ of Berrey being sore afraid, such of
them as could escape out of the Romans hands at their first coming, upon
confidence either of the old acquaintance and familiaritye that had been
privately between them, by reason of resortinge a guestwyse one to another, or
of their mutual agreement and partaking in the same deuyses, fled into the next
cities: but all was in vain. For Caesar by great iorneis came so sodeinly upon
all places, that he gave not any city leisure, to think of the saufgard of
other folks rather than of themselves. Through the which speed, he both kept
his friends faithful unto him, and put the wavering sort in such fear, that
he compelled them to be glad to receive peace. The matter standing in this
case, when ye me^ of Berrey saw that through Cesars gentelnesse, there was yet
a way for the^ to return into his favor again, and that the next Cities had
delivered him hostages and were thereupon received to mercy without further
punnishment: they themselves did in like wise. Caesar for because his men had
patiently endured so great travel in the winter days, in most combersome ways,
in intolerable cold, and continued most earnestly in the same to the
uttermost, promised to give to his soldiers Which after iiii. s. the ownce
amou^teth to.xxv. s a piece.
C C. sefterties a piece, and to the After the same rate amounted to xii. li.
x. s. a piece.
capteines two thousand a piece, in the name of a pray: and so se^ding his
Legions again into their wintering places, he himself returned to Bibracte
the.xl. day after his setting forth. There as he was minystring of Justice,
the men of Berrey sent messengers unto him desyring help against the Caruntes,
whom they complained to make war upon the^. Upon the receipt of this news, when
he had not lien in garriso^ past eightene days, he draws the xiiii. and xvi.
Legions out of garrison from the river of Soane, where he had placed the^ for
the spedy purueiance of corn and victual, as was showed you in the last
book: and with those two Legions went to persecute the Caruntes. When our
enemies heard of the coming of our army, the Caruntes moved with the
calamitye of others, left up their towns and villages that they dwelled in,
which they had made upon the sodein with littell cotages for necessities sake
to keep of ye winter: (for sins they were conquered a late, they had lost many
of their walled towns) and fled scattering abroad. Caesar forasmuch as he
would not put his soldiers to thabiding of thunreasonable sharp storms
which chieflye at that time fell, encamped himself within Genabum a town of the
Caruntes and housed his soldiers partlye in the buildings of the Galls, and
partlye in such buildinges as being vnfinyshed they thatched in haste with the
straw that was brought in to cover their tents and Cabanes. Nevertheless he
sends abroad his horsemen and fotemen strangers, into al coasts whyther he
heard his ennemies resorted: and that was not in vain. For commonly our men
returned ever with a great bootye. The Carunts being oppressed with the
hardness of the winter, and the terror of the danger, being driven out of
house and home, and daringe not stay any where any long time, the woods being
not able to defend them from the cruelnesse of the storms, were scattred
abroad, and with the loss of a great part of them, dispersed into the next
Cities. Caesar in that hardest time of the year, thynking it enough to disperse
ye powers that were assembling, to thentent no beginning of war might spring
up, forasmuch as he could not perceive so far as reason was able to reach,
that any great war of the whole country could be rered in the beginning
of the next summer: he placed C. Trebonius in garriso^ at Genabu^ with those
two Legions that he had there about him: and for as much as he was by often
messages certified from the men of Rhemes, that the Bellouacanes (who excelled
all the Galls and the Belgies also in the renown of cheualrye) and the Cities
adjoining unto them, by the conduct of Corbey of Beawvoys and Comius of Arras,
levied men of war and assembled them into one place, to thentent with their
whole power to invade the marches of Soyssons, which was an appurtenance of the
men of Rhemes: thynkinge it stood not only upon his honor, but also upon his
good success hereafter, to save his alies which had deserved well of the
common weal, from displeasure and damage, he called the eleventh Legion again
out of garrison. Moreover he wrate to C. Fabius to bring the two Legions that
he had, into the marches of Soyssons: and sent for one of those two Legions
that were with T. Labienus. So according as his garrisons lay for the purpose,
and as the state of ye war required, to his own continual pain, he put
sometime one sort of his Legions and sometime another, to make voyages by
turns. With this power that he had assembled he went against the Bellouacanes:
and pitching his camp in their country, sent abroad his horsemen into all
quarters to lick up some of them, by whose means he might learn what his
enemies purposed to do. His horsemen doing their duty, brought word how few
were found in the houses, and those not of such as had abidden behind to till
the ground, for they were aduisedlye removed out of al places: but of such as
had been sent back agian to spy. Of whom Caesar enquiring in what place the
power of the Bellouacanes were, and what was their intent, found that all the
Bellouacanes were gathered together into one place: and that the Ambianes,
Aulerkes, Caletanes, Uelocassia^s, and Atrebatians had chosen a very high
ground to encamp in, enclosed with a troublesome marris, and had conveyed all
their stuff into woods that were further of, of the which war there were
many nobleme^ that were ringleaders, but the multitude obeyed Corbey most,
because they understood that he hated most the name of the people of Rome: And
that Comius of Arras was a few days before gone to fetch aid of the Germans,
who were their next neighbors and swarmed in multitude of people. He learned
moreover at their hands, that the Bellouacanes by the consent of all the
noblemen at the earnest instance of the commons, were determined if Caesar came
(as it was said he would) but with three legions, to offer him battle, least
afterward to more disaduauntage and hinderance they should be compelled to
encounter with his whole host: And if he brought a greater power with him,
then to keep themselves still in the same ground that they had chosen, and to
lay ambushes to keep the Romans from forage (which by reason of the time of
the year was scarce, and also lay scattering) and from corn and other
victualles and things necessary for their host. The which things when Caesar
understood by the agreeable report of many, considering how the device of them
was full of wisdom and far from the rashness that barbarous people are wont
to use, he determined to take opportunity in all things, to thentent his enemies
disdayning his small company, should make the more have to come into the field.
For he had three old practiced Legions the.vii.viii. and.ix. of singular
manhod and prowess: and the.xi. which was of chosen young men of great hope
and towardnes, the which having at that time received eyghte years wages, was
notwithstanding in comparison of thothers, not yet come to the like worship of
continuance and prowess. Wherefore sommoning an assemblye, and there declaring
all things that had been reported unto him, he strengthened the hearts of the
common soldiers, if peradventure with the number of three Legions he might tol
out his ennemies to feight with him in the field. He set his battelles in such
order, that the.vii.viii. and.ix. Legions went before all the cariages, and that
the xi. closed in the array of all the cariages, the which notwithstanding was
but mean, as is wont to be in rodes: least the enemies might think they saw
a greater number than they required themselves. By this means, in a square
battle almost, he brought his host in sight of his enemies sooner than they
looked for him. The which Legions so suddenly set in order, when the Galls
beheld marchyng toward them a measurable pace as it had been in a pitched
field, whereas it was reported to Caesar that they had purposed matters before
of a stout courage, whether it were for the peril of the^counter, or the
sodeinnesse of our coming, or that they looked to see what we intended to do,
they set the^ selves in order of battle before their camp, and would not
descend from the higher ground. Albeit that Caesar was desirous to have fought
with them, yet because he marvelled at ye great number of his ennemies, he
pitched his camp directlye over against theirs, on the other side of a valley,
which was more in depenes downward than in wydenesse any way in the bottom.
This Camp he commanded to be fortified with a Rampire of.xii. foot, and an
open gallery to be builded upon it according to the measure of the same
height: and a double dike to be made of xv. foot a piece with sides plomme
down: and many turrettes to be rered of three stories heyghth, and to be
joined together with draw brydges to let down at pleasure, the frontes whereof
were fenced with grates of wicker* to thentent the enemy might be repulsed with
double rows of defendantes: of the which the one from the bridges the more out
of danger they were by reason of the heyghth, so much the boldlier and the
further of might they send their darts: the other the nearer they were placed to
their enemy upon the Rampire, so much the better should they be covered aloft
from thartillerye that might fall down upon them: and over the gates he made
high towers. This kind of fortificatio^ was to two good purposes: for by the
greatness of his works and his pretense of fear, he hoped to set the
barbarous Galls in a great pride, and whenever he should have occasion to
send out any thing far for forage or victuals, he saw that the camp might be
defended with a small power, the strength of the fortificatio^s was so great. In
the mean while, diverse times a few of both sides would go out and skirmish in
ye marris that was between our two camps, the which oftentimes either the
Galls and Germans that were of our host would pass and egrely pursew their
enemies: or else in like manner our enemies passing over it, did send our men
further of. It happened in our daily forraging (as there was none other shyft,
forasmuch as we were feign to fetch forage at houses that stood scattering
far a sunder) that our forragers being disseuered in unhandsome places, were
entrapped. The which thing as it was some loss to us of our beasts of
carriage and slaves, so it kindled the foolish courages of the barbarous Galls:
and that so much the more, because Comius of Arras (whom we declared before,
to have been gone to fetch aid of the Germans,) was come with horsemen: of
whom although there was not above the number of five hundred, yet the Galls
were puffed up at the coming of the Germans.

When Caesar perceived how his enemies held themselves many days together
within their camp, which was fortified both with a marris and also with
advantage of the ground: and that he could neither assault them without
manifest peril, nor enclose the place where they were with any
fortifications, without a greater army, he directed his letters to Trebonius,
that he should with all haste possible send for the xiii. Legion which
wintred in Berrey under T. Sextius his Lieuetenant, and so with three Legions
make long iorneyes to come to him. In the mean season he sent out ever by
turns the horsemen of Rhemes and Langres and of other Cities, of whom he had
called forth a great number, to saufconduct the forragers and to wythstande
the sodein assaults of the enemy. The which being done day by day, and our
men taking now less head, because it was an ordinary matter with them,
which thing for the most part comes to pass by dailye custom, the
Bellouacanes with a band of chose^ fotemen, knowing the places where our
horsemen dailye kept their standinges, laid ambushes in woody places: and the
next day, they sent thither their horsemen, first to toll out our men into the
danger of their bushmentes, and than to assail them as they were enclosed.
The lot of this evil luck lighted upon the men of Rhemes, whose turn it was
to supply that room that day. For they, when they had espied the horsemen of
their enemies upon the sodein, dyspising them because they were not of like
number to them, followed them over gredelye and were enclosed by the fotemen.
Whereby being put out of array, they retired more hastelye than horsemen are
accustomed to do in battle, with the loss of Uertisco the Prince of their
City, and Captain of their horsemen. Who being scarce able to sit upon a horse
by reason of his age, would notwythstanding according to the custom of the
Galls, neither seek to disburden himself of the Capteinship by excuse of his
age, nor suffer thencounter to be fought without him. With this luckye battle
wherein they slew the Prince and Capteyne of the men of Rhemes, the courages of
our enemies were inflamed and quickened: and our men were taught by their own
harm, to search ye places better where they should keep their standinges, and
to follow their enemy more advisedly when he fled. In the mean while ceased
not ye daily skirmishes in the sight of both our camps, which were made at the
foordes and passages of the marris. In the which kind of exercise, when as the
Germans (whom Caesar had for the same purpose fet over the Rhine, that they
should feyght intermedled with his horsemen in the battle,) had al stoutly
passed the marris, and sleaing a few in making resistance, followed egrely
upon the rest of the multitude: not only they that were overthrown at hand
or wounded aloof, but also they that were wont to succor a far of, were so
strycken with fear, that they ran away shamefullye: and never left fliynge,
from higher ground to higher which they oftentimes lost, before they either
recovered into their Camp, or (as some did for very shame) fled further of.
With the danger of whom the rest of the host was so sore troubled, that it can
scarslye he judged, whether good success (were it never so small) would make
them more arrogant, or a misfortune (were it never so mean,) would make them
more fearful.

After they had lurked many dais in the same Camp, when the Capteynes of the
Bellouacanes understood that C. Trebonius one of Cesars Lieuetenants was at
hand with mo Legions, fearinge the like siege as was at Alexia, they sent away
in the night all such as by reason of years or otherwise wanted strength, and
all such as wanted armor among them, and with them they sent away also their
cariages: of whom while they were setting forth the troubled and confused
company, (for the Galls even when they go lightest, are wont to have a great
multitude of Carts following them) daylight came upon them, and therefore they
set their me^ in battle ray in their camp, least the Romans should pursewe
them, before the company of their cariages could get any thing forward. But
Caesar thought it not good to assail them being ready at defense, having so
high a hyl to mount up unto the^, and yet he thought to come so nere them with
his host, as that our enemies might not depart out of the place where they
were, without danger, our men being hard at hand redye to fall upon them.
Wherefore whereas he perceived that ye troublesome marris parted Camp from camp,
(the unhandsome passage whereof might hinder the spedye pursewt of our enemies)
and that the same ridge of the hill which went from the further side of the
marris almost to the Camp of his enemies, was parted from their said Camp with
a mean valley: He made bridges over the marris and passing over his army, gate
quicklye into the plain of the said ridge, the which on two sides was
fortified with a stepe fallinge. There settinge his men in array, he came to the
furthest end of the ridge: and ordered his battelles in such a place, from
whence with an engine artillery might have been shot among the thyckest of
his enemies. The Galls trustyng to thaduauntage of the place, when they
would neither have refused thencounter, if perchance the Romans would have
adventured up the hill against them, nor yet durst by little and littel
diminish their battle by seuering them selves, least when they had been out of
array, they might hap to have been troubled, kept themselves still in order of
battle. Whose wilfulnes Caesar perceiving, kept.xx. Cohortes in a readiness,
and pytching his tents in the same place, commanded his Camp should be
fortified. As Soon as the works were finished, he set his Legions in array
before the Rampire, and appointed the horsemen to their standinges with their
horses ready bridled. When the Bellouacanes saw the Romans in a readynes to
pursew them, and that them selves could not without peril either lodge that
night, or continue any lengar in the same place where they were, they devised
this shift to recover themselves. In the place where they were set together,
(for it is declared in Cesars former commentaries how the Galls are wont to
sit down in the battle) they received from hand to hand one of another,
bundels of straw and fagots, whereof there was great store in their Camp, and
cast it all on a heap before their battle, and in the latter end of the day,
by a watchword that was given, they set it on fire all at one instant: by
means whereof the continual flame sodeinly took away the sight of all their
army from the Romans: and therwithall ye savage Galls fled away as fast
as their legs could bear them. Albeit that Caesar could not perceive the
departing of his enemies by reason of the flame that was betwyxt them, yet
notwythstandinge forasmuch as ^e suspected it to be a practice wrought by them,
that they might the sauflier fly away: he removed his footmen forward, and
sent his horsemen to pursue them. Howbeit for fear of treason, least perhaps
his ennemies should stay still in the same place and egg us forth into a
ground of disaduauntage, he went the slower pace. His horsemen fearyng to enter
into the smoke and thick flame, and if any were so earnest as to enter in;
they could scarce see the formest parts of their own horses, for doubt to be
betrapped, gave ye Bellouacanes free liberty to recover themselves whither
they would. Thus our ennemies through their flight which was full both of fear
and wiliness, escaping without any loss, went but ten miles of, and encamped
themselves in a very strong ground. From whence by laying bushments oftentimes
both of horsemen and fotemen in diverse places, they did the Romans great
displeasures as they went a forraging. After it had happened so many and sundry
times, Caesar learned of a certain prisoner, that Corbey Capteyne of the
Bellouacanes, had chosen out of his whole host, six thousand of the valeantest
fotemen, and a thousand horsemen, the which he had laid in ambushe in the same
place whither (for the plentye of forage and corn that was there) he judged
the Romans would send for forage.

The which purpose being known, Caesar brought forth mo legions than he was
wont, and sends before his horsemen after the same manner he was wont to send
them to saufconduct his forragers. Among the^ he intermedled for their
assistence a number of light armed footmen, and himself with his Legions
follows as nere them as he can. His enemies that were laid in ambush, having
chosen a field for their purpose, not passing a mile wide accompting every
way, environed round about, either with co^bersome woods, or else a very deep
river, beset it with their bushment, as it had been with a toil. Our me^
forasmuch as they were privy to the devise of their enemies before hand, being
ready both with heart and hand to feight, seeing their Legions followed hard
after them, would refuse no encounter: but went rank by rank down into the
said place. At the coming of whom* Corbey thinking an occasion of good luck
to be fallen into his hands, is one of the first that shows himself with a
few, and gives charge upon the next troops. Our men stoutly withstand the
brunt of those that lay in wayt for them, and flock not many into one place
at ones: yt which thing in skirmishes on horsbacke is wont commonly to happen
upon some fear, and their clustringe together turns to their own loss. At
such time as setting themselves in several places by their troops, they
fought a few at ones by turns, and would not suffer their fellows to be
assaulted on the sides, the rest brake out of ye woods while Corbey was
feighting. Then was thencounter whote and diverse. After it had continued
indifferent a good space, by littel and littell came their fotemen in array out
of the woods, which compelled our horsemen to give back. They were quickly
res^owed again by the light armed fotemen, which I told you were sent before
our Legions, who being intermedled among the horsemen fought boldlye.
Thencounter continued a good while indifferent. Afterward as thorder of
battle required, they that had withstode the first brunt of them that lay in
ambush for them, had herby thaduau^tage, because they received not unawares
any foil at their hands that lay in wait for the^. In the mean while our
Legions drew nerer hand, and diverse messengers brought word both to our men and
to our enemies at one time, that the Graundcaptein was at hand with his host
in battle ray. The which thing being known, our horsemen trustyng to the
help of the Cohorts, laid their hands about them very egerly, least if they
should have forslowed the matter, they might seem to have made the fotemen
partakers of thonor of the victory. Therwithal our enemies hearts began to
quail: and they sought to fly by diverse ways: but all was in vain. For by
the disaduauntage of the same places in which they would have enclosed the
Romans, were they themselves taken tardy and could not get out.
Notwythstandinge, being vanquished and altogether discouraged, when they had
lost the greatest part of their company, like men amazed they gave themselves
to flight, and some made toward the woods, and some toward the river, the
which being overtaken by our men that followed egerly upon them, were all
slain: when in the mean time, Corbey whose heart could by no misfortune be
overcome, never departed out of the battle, nor made toward the woods,
neither could by thentreatance of our men be persuaded to yield himself: but
that feightinge most valiantly, and hurting many of our men, he set the
co^querors in such an anger, that he enforced them to throw darts at him.

When the matter was dispatched in this wise, Caesar entering into the place
immediatlye after the battle was ended, for as much as he thought that his
enemies being discouraged with so great a mysfortune, would immediatlye upon
the news thereof, forsake ye place where they were encamped which was said to
be not above eight miles from the same place where the slaughter was made,
although he saw it would be some trouble to him to pass ye river: yet passed
he his army and marched toward them. But the Bellouacanes and the other Cities
upon the sodeine retire of a few and those wounded, out of the chase, which had
escaped the mischaunce by benefit of the woods, understanding by them their
own great misfortune and misery, as by the death of Corbey, the loss of
their horsemen, and the slaughter of their stoutest footmen, and mistrustinge
that the Romans would out of hand come upon them, immediately called an
assembly by the sound of a Trumpet, and cried al with one voice to send
ambassadors and hostages to Caesar. When Comius of Arras perceived that this
devise should take place, he fled to those Germans of whom he had borrowed aid
to that war. The rest sent ambassadors out of hand unto Caesar, desiring him to
content himself with that punishment of his enemies, the which if he might have
laid upon them with out battle in their chief prosperity, they were well
assured that of his gentelnes and courtesy he would not. The Bellouacanes said
their power was abated by the loss of their horsemen, many thousands of their
chosen footmen were perished, scarce escaped any to bring tidings of the
slaughter: and yet considering their great misfortune, they had by that
battle received a great good turn, for that Corbey the author of the war
and rayser of the multitude, was slain. For as long as he was alive, the
Senate could never bear so great sway in the City, as the unskillful
commonalty. As thambassadors were speakinge these things, Caesar put them in
remembrance, that about the same time the last year before, the Bellouacanes
and the other Cities of Gallia rered war, and that they above al others stood
most stiffly in their opinion, and would not be brought to conformitye by the
submission of the rest. He told them he knew and understood it was an easy
matter, to lay the fault of their offense upon them that were dead. And he was
sure that there was no man of so great power, that against the noblemens
wylles, the Senate resisting him, and all good men wythstanding him, could
with a weak handful of the commonaltye, raise war and go through with it.
Nevertheless he was contented with that punishment which they had brought upon
themselves. The night followynge, thambassadors brought answer to their
heads, and made hostages. Then also thambassadors of the other Cities which lay
in ye wind to see what success the Bellouacanes should have, came thither a
pace, delivering hostages and executinge his commandment, saving Comius who
durst not for fear commit his life into any man's hands. For the year before,
Titus Labienus perceiving how while Caesar was ministering justice in the hither
Gallia, Comius stirred up the Cities and made conspiracies against Caesar,
thought he might without any spot of unfaithfulness revenge his traitorous
demeanor. And thereuppon because he thought he would not at his sending come
into the camp* to the^tent he would not by tempting him make him more ware, he
sent C. Uolusenus Quadratus to murder him under pretense of communycation with
him: and for the performance of the matter, he appointed him certain chose
peticapteines for the purpose. When they came to communicatio^, and that
Uolusenus (as was agreed upon) had caught Comius by the right hand, one of the
peticapteines as if he had been moved at some strange matter, gave Comius a
sore blow on the head with his sword, howbeit he could not kill him out of
hand, because his friends stepped in and saved him. By and by was drawyng of
swords on both sides, and yet none of both parts minded to feight, but to
fly away: our men because they believed that Comius had had his deaths wou^d:
ye Galls because perceiving there was treason wrought, they feared there had
been more behind than they saw. Upon the which fact it is reported, that Comius
vowed he would never come in the sight of any Roman.

When Caesar had subdued the Nations that were most warlike, perceiving there
was now no City that prepared war, to stand against him, but that many to
eschew the present yoke of the Roman Empier, fleted out of their towns and
fled out of the fields, be determined to send his army abroad into diverse
quarters. M. Antonius his Threasorer with the xii. Legion he took to himself.
C. Fabius his Lieuetenant with xxv. Cohorts he sends into the furthest part
of all Gallia, because he heard say that certain Cities were there in arms,
and that he thought his Lieuetenant C. Caninius Rebilus had not a sufficient
strength of those two Legions that were with him already. T. Labienus he
called from the place where he was unto him: and the xii. Legion which wintered
under him, he sent into Togata Gallia to defend the towns that the Romans had
newlye peopled with their own Citizens, least any like harm should happen to
them by invasion of the barbarous people, as had happened the summer before to
the Their City is now called Triest.
Tergestines, who were surprised and spoiled of their goods by their sodeine
invasions. He himself set forward to wast and spoil the borders of Ambiorix,
whom flyinge for fear from place to place when he saw there was no hope to
get into his hands, he thought it was most for his honor, in such wise to
spoil his country, of people, buildings, and cattle, that his countrymen
might so hate him (if fortune reserved any country men for him,) that for ye
calamities he had brought upon his country, he might never have access
thither again. After he had sent abroad his host into all parts of
Ambiorixes country, and wasted all places with slaughter, fire, and rauishing,
having slain and taken prisoners a great number of men, he sent Labienus with
two legions among the Treuires: whose country by reason of the nereness^
thereof unto Germany, being daily inured to ye wars, is not much unlike to
the Germans in rude trade of living and sauagenes, neither did they obey the
commandments of Caesar at any time, lengar than we had an army in their
country to compel them.

In the mean^ season Ca. Caninius the Lieuetenant, understanding by the
messengers and letters of Durace, (who had continuallye perisisted in the
friendship of the people of Rome,) that a great number of enemies were assembled
in ye borders of the Pictones, forasmuch as a piece of that City had
renounced their obedience, went to the town of Lemouicum. When he came nere
the town, and had understood by his prisoners, how that Dumnacus captain of
the Andians, with many thousands of men had enclosed Durace, and that
Lemouicum was besieged: he durst not with his weak Legions adventure upon his
ennemies, but pytched his Camp in a strong ground. Dumnacus hearing of the
approach of Caninius, turned all his power against the Roman host,
determining to assault them in their Camp. After he had spent many days
therein, and had lost many of his people, and yet could not break down any
part of their fortificatio^s, he returned again to besiege Lemouicu^. The same
time, C. Fabius receives many cities by composition, and byndeth them with
hostages: and is advertised by Caninius letters, of those things that were done
among the Pictones. Upon ye knowledge whereof, he sets forth to rescow
Durace. But Du^nacus having understanding of Fabius coming, forasmuch as he
thought he should be in hazard to lose all, if at one instant he should be
compelled both to abide the Romans his foreign enemies, and also to have an
eye and stand in fear of the towns men, retired sodeinlye with all his power
out of the same place, and he could not think himself to be sufficiently in
saufty, before he had passed his army over ye river Loyre, which because of ye
greatness thereof, was to be passed by a bridge and not otherwise. Although
that Fabius was not yet come with in sight of his enemies, nor had joined
himself with Caninius, yet forasmuch as he was thoroughly informed by such as
knew the coast of the country, he believed verily that his enemies would not go
to that place toward the which they made their journey. Therefore he marches
with his army too the same bridge where his enemies had passed, and commanded
his horsemen to go no further before the battle of his foteme^, than they
might when they were at the furthest, retire into the same ca^p without tiring
of their horses. Our men of arms as was commanded them, ouertoke the host of
Dumnacus and set upon the^, and assayling them flying and amazed under their
fardelles, as they iorneyed, slew a great number and took a great pray: and
so with good success retired into their camp. The next night following, Fabius
sent his horsemen before, so furnished, as that they might encounter, and stay
all the whole army until he might overtake them. Q. Titatius Uarus the
Lieuetena^t of the horsemen, a man of singular courage and wisdom, exhorted
his company to follow this his counsel: who ouertaking the host of his enemies,
disposed certain of his troops in places convenient, and with the rest of his
horsemen gave charge upon his enemies. The horsemen of the enemy fought with
them so much the more boldly, because the foteme^ served them by turns, who
through the whole battle as often as their horsemen had occasion to stay, did
succor them against our men. Thencounter was very sharp. For our men
despising their enemies whom they had vanquished the day before, and remembering
that the battle of their footmen followed at hand, for shame to give ground,
and for desire to dyspatche the battle before their coming, fought very
valiantly against the footmen. On the other side our ennemies beleuinge that no
greater power more had followed after, according as they had seen the day
before, thought a meet opportunitye had been offered them, to destroy our
horsemen utterly. When they had fought a good while very egerly, Du^nacus
made a battle to rescow his men of arms by turn. But sodeinly our enemies
espied our Legions come close together, at the sight of who^, their horsemen
were stricken in such a fear, and the footmen were so amazed, that breaking
through the array of their cariages, with a great noise and trampling they gave
themselves every where to flight. Then our men of arms, who a littell before
had their hands full, being heartned with joy of the victory, raised a great
shout on all sides, and castinge them selves about the^ as they gave way, made
slaughter of them as far as their horses breathes would serve to pursue them,
and their arms would serve to strike them. Insomuch that having slain above
twelve thousand of armed men and of such as for fear had cast away their armor,
they took all their cariages as many as were of them. Out of the which chase,
for as much as it was certainly known, that there escaped Drapes the Senon, who
as soon as Gallia first began to r^bell, gathering to him the ruffions out of
al places, calling the bondmen to liberty: and enterteyning the outlawes of
all countries: had like a thief cut of the cariages and victuals of the
Romans: was going toward the Province with a five thousand men and not above,
which he had gathered out of the chase, and that Lucterius of Cahors alied him
self with him, who in the former treatise is known to have made a voyage into
Province at the first insurrection of Gallia: Caninius the Lieuetenant with two
Legio^s, pursued after them, least to the disquietnesse and loss of the
Province, some great dishonor might be received by the theuery of those lewd
unthrifts.

C. Fabins with the rest of tharmy, went against the Caruntes and the other
Cytyes, whose power he knew to be abated in the same battle that was fought
against Dumnacus. For he doubted not, but he should find them more treatable
to deal with, by reason of the late overthrow: whereas if he should give the^
time of respit, by thinstigation of the said Dumnacus, they might be raised
again. In the which enterprise, Fabius had marvelous good luck and speed to
recover the Cities. For the Caruntes, who had been disquietted oftentimes
before, and yet would never make mention of peace, now ge^ing hostages, came in
subjection. And the rest of the Cities which are situate in the furthest parts
of Gallia borderyng upon the sea, which are called Armorike, following
thexample of the Caruntes, at the coming of Fabius with his Legions,
condescended to his commandments without delay. Dumnacus being driven out of
his own country, wa^dring and lurking in corners alone, was compelled to seek
thuttermost countries of al Gallia. But Drapes and Lucterius, when they
understood that Caninius approached with his army, perceiving they could not
without manifest peril enter within the bounds of the Province, considering how
the army pursewed the^, nor yet raunge abroad and go a theuinge at their
pleasure, stayed together in the country of the Cadurkes. There Lucterius, who
in times past while he was in his prosperitye, was able to wey greatly with
his country men, and had gotten great estimation among the rude people, as
one that was ever a practiser of new devises: he took with his own power and
the power of Drapes, a Town called Urellodunum, which had been in his tuicion,
a place excelle^tly well fortified, by the situacion thereof, and causes the
townsmen to take part with him. Unto the which town when Caninius out of
hand was come, perceyuinge that all parts of the same were fortified with
cragged clyffes, insomuch that though no man were there to defend it, yet were
it a hard matter for men in harness to get up, and seeing that the mouables of
the towns men were great, the which if they should go about to steal
privily away with, they could not only not escape their horsemen, but also not
escape their fot^men: he divided his Cohorts into three parts, and made three
Camps upon a very high ground: from the which by littel and littel as much as
his host was able, he determined to cast a Ra^pier round about the town. The
towns men perceyuinge that, and remembringe the miserable case of Alexia,
feared the like chance, and that above all others Lucterius who had tasted the
smarte of that misfortune warned them to lay for corn before hand, they
determined by general consent, that leaving a part of tharmy there for the
defense of the town, Lucterius and Drapes with the best furnished, should go
forth to fetch in corn. This counsel being allowed, the next night, Drapes and
Lucterius leaving two thousand armed me^ behind them, led the rest out of the
town. They after a few days tariaunce, brought in a great mass of grain
out of the country of the Cadurkes, who partly were wylling to help them
therewith, and partly durst not gainsaye their taking of it, because they were
not able to make their part good against them. Often times also they would make
rodes in the night, and assault the castles of our camp. For the which
consideration C. Caninius stayed in making fortifications round about the
town, for doubt lest he should not be able either to defend ye whole work when
it was finished, or else should make him self weak by settinge his men toward
in so many places at ones. When they had brought together a great mass of
grain, Drapes and Lucterius took up their standinges not passing ten miles
from the town, to thentent by littell and littell to convey it in: and they
parted the charge between them. Drapes tarried behind with part of tharmye to
keep the Camp. Lucterius drove the beasts with their cariages toward the
town: and settinge stales there for his defense, about ten of the clock in
the night purposed by narrow ways through the woods, to convey the corn
into the Town. The trampling of whose feet the watch men of our Camp
hearing, and the scoultes being sent out reportinge what was a doing,
Caninius caused his Cohorts to arm them quickly, and about the break of day
made assault out of the next castles upon the forragers. Who being feared
with the sodeinnesse of the mischief, fled to their stales. The which as soon
as our men perceived, they flew more fiercely upon the armed men, and suffered
none to be taken alive. Luccerius fled from thence with a few, but he
returned not to his Ca^p. After this good success, Caninius understood by his
prisoners, that part of the army was behind in the Camp with Drapes, not past
a xii. miles of. The which thing when he had learned by many to be of truth,
perceyuinge that one of the Capteynes being alredye put to flight, the remnant
of the company aflighted might easly be oppressed: he thought it a token of
great good luck, that none escaped from the slaughter into the Camp, to carye
tidinges of the mishap unto Drapes. And forasmuch as he saw there was no
danger in puttinge the matter in proof, he sent all his horsemen and the
Germane fotemen swyft and nimble fellows, before, to the Camp of his enemies.
One of his Legions he distributed in his camp, and the other disburdened of all
cariages he took with him. When he came nere his enemies, his scoultes that he
had sent before him, brought him word that (as the custom of the barbarous
nations commonly is) they had abandoned the higher ground, and enca^ped
themselves by the River side, and that our horsemen and the Germans had flewen
upon them suddenly ere they were aware, and given charge upon them. As Soon as
he knew that, he hasted forward with his Legion well armed and well appointed:
and so giving sodeinly a token on all sides, the higher places were taken. At
the doing whereof, the Germans and our men of arms seeing the standerdes of our
Legio^, fought very vehemently: and by and by all our Cohortes gave charge upon
them round about, so that in conclusion, al were either stain, or caught
prisoners, and a great booty taken. Drapes himself was also taken in the same
conflict. Caninius having accomplished his matter most luckely without almost
any hurt at al to his soldiers, returned to besiege the towns men, and now
having destroyed his foreign enemy, for fear of who^ he durst not heretofore
divide his garrisons, nor enuiron the town with fortifications, he commands
the works to be gone forward with round about the town. The next day came
thither C. Fabius with his power, and took another part of the town to besiege.

In the mean time, Caesar left M. Antonius his Threasorer with xv. Cohortes
among the Bellouanes, to thentent the Belgies should not have any liberty to
practice new devises again: and he himself went unto the other Cities, and there
charge them with mo hostages, and with comfortable words heals the fearful
hearts of the^ al. When he came among the Caruntes, in whose cou^trye (as Caesar
has declared in his former treatise) the war first of al begone, forasmuch as
he perceived the^ to be chiefly afraid for remembrance of their crime, to
thentent he might the more spedely deliver the country from fear, he required
to have Guturnate the chief worker of that mischief, and raiser of the
rebellion delivered unto him to be punished: who albeit he betoke not himself
eue^ to his own country men, yet al men made so dilligent search for him, that
he was soon found out and brought to the camp. Caesar contrary to his own
nature, was compelled to punnishe him whether he would or no, by the
importunatenesse of his souldyers, who imputed all the perils and losses that
they took by this war unto Guturnate: insomuch that his body after it astonished
with whipping, was beheaded. There by many letters from Caninius, he was
advertised what was done about Drapes and Lucterius, and in what mind the
towns men perseuered: the small number of who^ although he despised, yet he
demed their wilfulness worthy grievous punishment: least they might give
occasion to all Gallia, to think that they wanted not strength, but constancy
to withstand ye Romans: or least by their example, other cities of Gallia
trusting to thopportunity of the places, should attempt to set themselves at
liberty: specially seeing he was sure that all ye Galls knew how his
commission lasted but one summer longar, the which if they could hold out,
they should need to fear no danger hereafter. And therefore leaving his
Lieuetenant C. Calenus behind with his footmen to follow leysurely after him
by reasonable iorneyes, he himself with all his men of arms went in all have
to Caninius.

When Caesar contrary to al men's expectacion was come to Uxellodunum, and saw
the town environed with fortifications, perceiving that it was not for him to
break up his siege for any condition, and lerning moreover by runneawayes that
the towns men had great abundance of victuals: he assayed to cut of the water
from his enemy. Now there was a river that ran through the bottom of the
valley, the which environed welnere all the hyl whereon the town stood rough and
stepe on all sides. The nature of the place would not suffer this stream to be
turned any other way. For it ran in such sort at the very foot of the hill,
that there could be no dike cut low enough to drayne it. The towns men had
hard and very stepe coming down to it, in so much that if our men withstode
the^, they could not without wounds or danger of their lives, either come
down to the river, or get up the stepe hill again. The which distress of
theirs Caesar knowing of, disposed archers and slingers and other artillery also
against such places whereas was easiest coming down, to keep ye towns me^
from the water of the river: who afterward resorted for water al to one place.
For almost hard under ye walls of the town there gushed out a great spring of
water, on that side where there was a space almost of three hundred foot
vnenuironed with ye river. Now when all the rest wished, and only Caesar
perceived, that this spring might be taken from the towns men, he began to
raise Uines directly against it toward the hill, and to make mountes, with great
travel and continual feighting. For ye towns men came running down from the
higher ground, and fought with our men aloof without danger, and wounded many
of the^ that preased up wilfully Notwithstanding, our men were not feared from
bringing forward their Uines, endeavoring to overcome the crabbednes of the
place, with very labor and works. The same time they drew secret mines to the
head of the spring, the which kind of work they might do without any danger
or mystrust of their enemies. A mount was cast up of a six foot high, and
thereupon was raised a Tower of ten stories, not such a one as might reach to
the height of the walls, (for that was not possible to be done by any work)
but such a one as might excede the top of the spryng. From the which when
darts were sent with engynes to the brym of the spryng, so that the towns men
could not fetch water without danger, not only all sorts of cattle, but
also a great number of men died for thyrst. With the which distres the
townsmen being greatly feared, filled barrels with grease, pitch and shingles
and setting them on fire rolled them down upon our works, and at the same time
also fought very earnestly, to thentent with ye peril of feighting, to keep the
Romans from quenchinge the fire. Sodeinlye there was a great flame in our
works. For whatsoever was thrown down from that stepe place, the same being
stayed against the Uines and rampire, took hold upon the things that staid them.
On the contrary part, our soldiers albeit they were hindered both with the
perlousenes of thencounter, and with the disaduauntage of ye place, yet they
bare out all things with a stout courage. For the thing was done both in a high
place, and also in the sight of our army: and a great cry was raised on both
sides. So that as much as every man could, (specially he that was notable,) to
thentent his hardynesse might the better be known and wytnessed,) offered
himself to the fire and the weapons of his enemies. Caesar when he saw very many
of his men wounded, commanded his Cohorts to make a clymbing up the hyl on al
sides of ye town, and to raise a noise as if they purposed to take the walls.
Wherwt the townsmen being put in fear, for as much as they wist not what was a
doing in other places, called back their armed men from assaulting our works,
and placed them upon the walls. So our men having respit from feighting, did
quickly either quench ye works that were a fire, or else cut the^ of from the
rest. When the townsmen wilfully resisted, yea even after they had lost a
great number of their company by thirst, continuing still al in one mind, at the
length the veins of the spring were cut of within the ground by mines, and
turned a another way. By means whereof the fountain of the running water, was
now drayned: ye which thing so daunted the hearts of the townsmen, that they
believed it not to be wrought by man's policye, but by ye will of God: and
therefore when they saw there was none other remedy, they yielded themselves.
Caesar being assured that his gentelnesse was thoroughly known to al folk, and
therefore neding not to fear that it would be imputed to the cruelnes of his
nature, if he dealt any thing sharply with them: and besides that, perceiuinge it
might well be thought he smallye regarded the good success of his own
affairs, if by such sufferance, diverse other should begin to rebel in sundry
places: demed it requisite to put ye rest in fear, by the punishment of them.
And therefore he cut of the hands of as many of the^ as were able to bear
armor, and let them live still, to thente^t the punishment of evil persons might
be more manifest to ye world. Drapes whom I declared to have been taken by
Caninius, whether it were for treafnes and grief that he was in hands, or for
fear of more grievous punishment, fasted a few days from meat, and so
starued. The same time Lucterius that escaped by flight from the battle (as I
showed before,) fell into the hands of Epasnactus of Auvern. For in often
fletinge from place to place, he was feign to commit himself to the courtesy
of many, because he thought he could never continue any long time in a place
without danger, forasmuch as his heart misgaue him how much he had deserved
to have Caesar his heavy master. Epasnactus of Auuerne being a faithful friend
to ye people of Rome, as soon as he had gotten him into his hands, carried him
without any further delay bound unto Caesar.

In ye mean while Labienus feighteth prosperously against the Treuires: and
having slain many both of ye Treuires and also of the Germans, who denied no
man help against the Romans, gate ye chief of them alive into his hands,
among whom was Surus a Heduan a man both for ma^hod and for birth greatly
ennobled, who all only of the Heduans had unto that day continued in arms
against ye people of Rome. When Caesar knew thereof, forasmuch as he saw his
affairs went well forward in all parts of Gallia, weying with himself how al
Celtica and Belgica were the former summers conquered and subdued, and that he
had never hitherto visited Aquitaine, saving that he made a kind of entrance
into it by certain victoryes gotten by P. Crassus: He went thither with two
Legions, to thentent to bestow the latter time of his summers there. The which
thing (as he had don al other before) he dispatched quickly and luckely. For
all the Cities of Aquitain sent ambassadors unto him, and gave him hostages.
After thacco^plishment of which things, he went to Narbone with his guard of
horsemen, and sent his fotemen into their wintering places by his Lieuetena^ts.
Four Legions he placed in Belgica under his Lieuetenants M. Antonius, and C.
Trebonius, and P. Uatinius, and Q. Tullius. Two he set over the Heduans, who^
he knew to be of greatest authority in all Gallia. Two mo he set over the
Turones in ye borders of the Caruntes, to be a stay to all that country that lay
upon the sea coast. The other two he placed in the borders of ye Lemouikes not
far from Auverne, to the^te^t there should not be any part of Gallia without an
army. After he had tarried a few days in Province, and there with speed perused
al their Courts, sitting upon public controversies, and awarding recompense
to such as had deserved well, (for he had great desire to understand how every
man had been minded toward ye common weal in the time of the general rebellion
of al Gallia, ye which he had born out through the faithfulness and assistence
of the said Province) as soon as he had dispatched these things, he returned to
his Legions into Belgicke, and wintred at Nemetocerna There he had knowledge
given him, how Comius of Arras had encountered with his men of arms. For after
that An^ony was come into his wintergarrison, and that the city of Arras
continued in obedience, Comius who after his wou^ding that we spoke of before,
was wont ever to be ready at hand to his country men at every stir, to
thente^t that if they would practice any new den^ses, they should not want a
head and a captein for the wars: as long as the city obeyed the Romans, he
with his horsemen found him self and his retinew by theuing, and for laying the
ways, cut of many conueyes that were going with provision to the Roman
garriso^s. There was appointed to Antony for Lieuetena^t of his horsemen C.
Uolusenus Quadratus, to winter in garrison with him: him did Antony send to
pursue y^ horsemen of his enemies. Uolusenus besides the singular prowess that
was in him, did also bear a great hatred toward Comius, which was a cause that
he so much the more willingly executed the thing that was commanded him.
Wherefore laying diverse ambushes, he oftentimes set upon Comius horsemen and put
them to the worse. Last of al when the contencion grew more vehement, and that
Uolusenus for desire to cut of Comius himself, followed him somewhat more egerly
with a few: and that Comius on the other side fled ye faster away, to the^tent to
draw him further from his company, at length espying his advantage Comius
suddenly cried out upon all his men, that as they were true unto him they should
aid him, and not suffer the wound that was given him under color of friendship,
to be unrevenged: and therwithall turning his horse, so^what unadvisedly he
lets him run from ye rest of his company upon Uolusenus. Al his horsemen did
ye like, and because there were but a few of our men, they made them turn head
and pursued them. Comius putting spurs to his horse, encou^tred the horse of
Quadratus, and with his spear ready charged in ye rest, thrust Uolusenus by
great violence through ye thigh. When our horsemen saw their captein wounded,
they bestirred themselves, and turning their horses put their enemies back.
After the which chauns, many of our ennemies being amazed at the great force of
our men, were wounded: of who^ some were overthrown in the chase, and some
were taken prisoners. The which misaduenture like as Comius escaped by the
swiftness of his horse: so our captain being by him in this prosperous
battle sore wounded, was carried into the ca^p in such case, as it was not
likely he should have lived. And Comius, whether it were that he thought his
grief sufficiently reue^ged, or because he had lost a great part of his
company, sent messengers to Antony, assuring him by hostages, that he would
continue where it should please him to appoint, and do whatsoever he should
command him. Only one request he made, wherein he besought him to bear with his
fearfulnes, that he might not come in the sight of any Roman. The which
request for as much as Antony judged it to proceed of fear in deed, and not
without good cause, he pardoned him according to his desire, and received his
hostages.

I know that Caesar made of every year by it self a several treatise: the which
thing I thought was not need full for me to do, because the year following when
L. Paulus, and C. Marcellus were Consuls, there were no notable feats done in
Gallia. Nevertheless to thentent men may know in what places Caesar and his
armies were at ye same time, I have thought good to wright yet a littel more
and to annex it to this treatise. During ye time that Caesar wintred in
Belgicke, this one thing was his chief purpose, to keep the Cities together in
amitye, and to minister no hope nor cause of war, for he minded nothing less,
than to deal in such wise, as he should he constreyned to have war at the
time of his departure: least when he would wtdraw his army, there should be left
any war behind, the which all Gallia could willingly find in heart to
enterprise, so it might be without present peril. And therefore, by entreating
the Cities honorablye, by rewarding the noble men highlye, by burdening the
country with no new impositions, he easly kept in quiet under a better state of
obedience; all Gallia, which now was wearied with so many unfortunate battles.
When winter time was expired, contrary to his custom, he goes into Italy with
as much e^peditio^ as might be, to talk with the fraunchised and new inhabited
towns, and to comme^d unto them the suit of his Threasorer M. Antonius for the
high Priesthod. For he made all the friendship he could, both gladly because the
same Antony who^ he had sent before to sew for that promotio^, was his very
dear friend, and also earnestly, as in despite of the partaking and forcible
working of a few me^, who by serting Antonye beside his purpose, sought means
to disgrace Caesar now going out of his office. Albeit he had tidings by the
way before he came nere Italye, that Antonye was made Augur, yet he thought he
had as good cause as before, to go unto the fraunchised and new towns, to
thentent to give them thanks for making their appearance, and for their
gentilnesse showed in the behalf of Antony: and also to commend unto them his
own case, for the honorable rou^^e which he purposed to sew for the next year
fo^lowinge: and that the rather, because his adversaries proudly made their
boast, that L. Lentulus and C. Marcellus were created Consuls, to bereue Caesar
of al honor and authority: and that the Consulshyp was wrested from Sergius
Galba when he had more favorable voices on his side, because he had been alyed
to Caesar by familiarity and friendship, and had been bound unto him as his
Lieuetenant. Caesar at his coming among the fraunchised and new towns, was
enterteyned wonderful lovingly and honorably. For that was the first time
that he came from the general wars in Gallia. Nothing was omitted that could
be devised for the decking and garnisshing of the gates, and ways, and places,
where Caesar should pass. All the commons came forth with their children to mete
him by ye way: sacrifices were every where offered: the temples and market
places were hanged with clothes of Tapisrie and Arras: that a man would have
thought by their gladness, there had been some great triumph looked for and
laid for before: So great costlines was among the richer sort, and so earnest
desire was among the meaner sort.

When Caesar had lightly passed through all the Countries of Gallia Now called
Lumbardye.
Togata, he returned with all speed to his army at Nemetocerna, and calling al
his Legions out of their wintering places into the country of the Treuires, he
went thither and there took musters of them. T. Labienus he made governor of
Gallia Togata to the^tent thereby to get him the more favor and estimation
toward his suit for the Consulship. He himself made so many iorneyes as he
thought sufficient for change of the places for healthsomnesse. There albeit
he hard oftentimes that Labienus was moved by his enemies, and was also
advertised how it was done by thaduise of a few, to thentent that by the
commandment of the Senate he might be spoiled of part of his army: yet not
withstanding he neither gave credit to any thing that was reported of Labienus,
no nor would be moved to do any thing contrary to the authority of the Senate.
For he believed that if the Senators might give their verdits freely, he should
easly obtein his purpose. For C. Curio Protector of the commonalty, who had
taken upon him to defend Cesars cause and dignity, had oftentimes proffered,
that if the fear of Cesars power hindered any man, and seeing that the Lordlynes
and power of Pompey did put ye Court in no small fear, let both of them lay
down their weapons and dysmysse their armies: and so should the City be at
liberty to use her own right as she listed. And he not only proffered this
thing, but began of himself to wythdraw his power: which thing the Consuls
and the friends of Pompey commanded should not be done: and so ruling the
matter as they listed, they departed. This was a great wytnes of the whole
Senate, and agreeable to the former act. For Marcellus the next year after,
when he impugned Cesars estimation contrary to the law of Pompey and Crassus,
had put up a bill to the Senate for the charge of Caesar before the time of his
commission was expired: and when the sentences were pronounced, Marcellus who
sought al his estimation by working spite against Caesar, departed aside* and
the Senate fell al of the^ by and by to other matters. Whereby the courages of
Cesars ennemies were no whitte appalled, but rather styrred up to make mo
friends, thereby to compel the Senate to allow that which they had determined.
Hervpon was made a decree, that Cneus Pompeius should send one Legio^ and Caesar
another, to the war against the Parthians. But it was easy to be seen, that
both these Legio^s were taken from Caesar. For the first Legion which Cneus
Pompeius had sent unto Caesar levied in the musters of the Province, he gave
unto Caesar as one of his own number. Nevertheless albeit that no man need to
doubt that Caesar was spoiled at the pleasure of his enemies, yet he sent Pompey
his Legion again: and in his own name he willed the.xv. Legion which he had
in the hither Gallia, to be delivered to him by the decree of the Senate. In
stead thereof he sent the.xiii. Legion into Italy, to lie in garrison in the
same place from whence the.xv. was set. The^ he distributed his army into
garrisons. C. Trebonius with iiii. legio^s he placed in Belgicke: C. Fabius
with as many, he co^ueieth to ye Heduanes. For so he thought Gallia should be in
most saufty, if the Belgies who were of most prowess, and the Heduans who were
of most authority, had armies among them to keep the^ in obedience. This done,
he took his way into Italye. When he came thither, he understood by Caius
Marcellus the Consul, that the two Legions which he had dismissed, which by the
decree of the Senate should have been led to the Parthia^ war, were delivered to
Pompey and kept still in Italy. Although by this dealing it was evident to all the world, what was purposed against Caesar, yet Caesar determined to suffer al
things, as long as he had any hope left to decide his controversies rather by
the law than by the sword.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by William Seres.

AN EXPOSITION OF the old names of the Countries, Cities, Towns, Hills, and
Rivers mentioned in this book, together with a description of certain Engines
of war used in those days by the Romans.
ADVATICKES. PEOple of Belgicke between Louan and Aldenburg in Braband now
called people of Bosleduke. Agendicum. a Town of the Senons in Celticke called
Sens or Province. Alduasdubis, or after Ptolome Alduasdusius a River of
Celticke, rising about the mount S. Claud and deuidinge Burgundye from
Swicerland, which falls into the river Soan not far from the City Cabillon:
it is now called in Latin Dubious and in French Doux. Alexia, a Town of
Celticke in Burgundye not far from Langres now called Alse^, or Lausoys or
Alyse, as Raymu^d Marlian affirms in his Annotacions upon Cesars
Commentaries. But according to thopinion of Joseph Molet in his Commentaries
upon Ptolomies Geographie it is a town of Artoys in Belgicke called Arras.
Allobrogians people of Province containing the Countries of Sauoy and
Delphinoys. Alps the high hills which divide France and Italy a sunder.
Ambarrrians, people of Celticke supposed of some to be the people of Burbon:
and of some, the people of Niuers. Iucundus calls the^ the people of Semar
and Montar. Amagetobria a place in Celticke where Ariouistus king of the
Germans vanquished the power of the Galls, not far from the Rhine, supposed
to be called Toa^t. Ambians a people of Picardy about the city Amiens: it is
in Belgicke. Ambibarets people also adjoining to the city Amiens. Ambibarians
a people of littell Britain in Celticke. Ambiliares the people of Auranches in
littell Britain. Ambiuarits, ye people of Braband in Belgic Andians, the
people of Aniow in Celticke. Antuates the people of Uawd in Sauoy. Aquileia a
town of Italy at the Gulf of Uenice upon the river Natisone. Armoricke the
country of littell Britain. Ardeine a forest in Belgicke beginning at the
Rhine and so runninge by the space of more than five hundred miles through the
territory of Triers to the en^ra^ce of the bounds of Rhemes. Arar a river of
Celticke now called Soan which springs in the borders of Burgundy and Loreyn
not far from the mountain Uosegus, and falls into Rhone at Lions Ar^comikes,
or Aremikes, or Artomikes people of Arminacke in Province. Atrebatians the
people of Artoys in Belgic Auaricum the town of Uiarron, or Bourges in Berrey
in Celticke. Auenticum the town of Auench in the country of Uaud. or the
town of Wilburg. Au^erkes people of Celticke sometime reteyners of the
Heduanes, now called people of Auge or of Roane. Aulerkes Cenomannes, the
people of Main in Celticke. Aulerkes Diabolites, or Diablinthres, the people
Leondu^l. Auscians, or Auscitanes people about Aux in Aquitaine. Axona the name
of two rivers the one called Disne in Guien, and the other in Belgicke in the
country of Rhemes called Aesne.
B.
Bacenis a forest in Germanye which some suppose to be part of the forest
Hercinia which runs through Germany even to the borders of the Dacers, and
the ten of Meotis, it is now called Swartswald. Baleares are two Islands in
the midland sea nere unto Spain, whereof the one is called Maiorica and the other
Minorica. Batauians the Hollanders a people of Belgicke. Bellocassians a people
of Celtick about Bayews. Bellouacanes the people of Beawuoysin in Celtik.
Bibract the town of Beawne in the Duchy of Burgundy. Bibrax the town of Bray
by the river Aesne in Belgicke. Biturigians the people of Berrey in Celtick
Bibrokes people of great Britain inhabiting the sea coast whose English name
is yet unknown. Bigerrones the people of Bierne and Bigor in Aquitaine. Boians
a people sometime of Germany marching upon Franconia, thalpes of Italy, the
sowtherne Swoabes, and the river Danow, the which country is now called
Bauier. These passing the Rhine in the time of Caesar and taking part with the
Heluetians, against him, being vanquished were placed by him under the
jurisdiction of the Heduanes (which now with the Sequanes are called
Burgonions,) in the country which now is called Burbon in Celticke. Brannouians
or Bra^nouikes people of Celticke called Moriane nere unto Burgundy.
Bratuspantium a town of Beawuoysin.
C.
Cabillon the town of Chalons in Burgu^dy upon the river Soan. Cadetes the
people of Hipercorentine or (as some think) of Castlebria^t in littel Britain.
Cadurkes the people of Cahors in Celticke. Cherusciens people of Germanye
inhabiting sometime those countries whereas are now the territories of the
Princes of Anholt, Stolberg, Maunsfield, and Swartzburg. Ceresians a people of
Germany. Caletanes the people about Calis in Belgic Cantabrians the people of
Biscay in Spain. Carnutes the people about Charters in Celticke. Carcason a
city in Province called Caracasso^ Catuakes people about Doway. Caturigians
these with the Garoceles and Centrones are now the people of Tarantayse under
the dominion of the Duke of Sauoy. Cauillon bears the same name still. it is
a city in Province. Centrones look Caturigians. the chief city of this
country is called Munster. Cimbrians people of Germany which held sometime all the coast of Megalburg eue^ unto Cimbrica. Chersonesus. These passing the Rhine
before Cesars time and leaving certain to keep their stuff and baggage which
they left in France, made a viage into Italye. of them discende those that are
now thinhabiters of Zeland. Condrusians the people between Utreight and
Iuliers. Creta the I Will of Candy. Curiosolites the people of Cornewal in littell
Britain.
D.
Diablinters people about Londull in littell Britain. Daces a people beyond
the Rhine boundinge upon the River Danow and the forest of Hartswald who are
supposed to have sometime inhabited a piece of Hungary and from thence removed
to the hither part of Norwey. Danow one of ye famousest rivers in Europe which
(as So^mus affirms) risinge in the hills of Germany and receiving into it
lxx. rivers all able to bear ships, lastly falls with seven mouths into
the sea called Pontus.
E.
Eburones the people of Liege in Belgicke. Eburonikes or Eburouikes the people
of Eureux in Celticke. Elauer a river of Celticke now called Allyer running by
Cleremount in Auverne. Essuans the people of Reteiois beyond Touray.
F.
Flustates the people of the county of Flusse in Aquitaine.
G.
Gaballes the people of Ledesue in Celticke. Garites the people of Agenoys in
Guien. Garumnes people of Aquitaine by the River Gerond whereof they take their
name. Gerond a river that springs out of the mountains Pyrenes and falls
into the weste Ocean according to Caesar, it deuideth Aquitaine from Celticke.
Garocels look in Caturigians. Gebenna the mountains called also Cemenij now
named the mountains of Auverne, which separate Celticke from Province
according unto Caesar. Genabuin the city of Orleance upon the river Loyre.
Geneua a city of Sauoy standing upon Rhone not far from the Lake Losan, out
of the which town there is a bridge into Swicerland. Gergobia or Gergouia the
Town of Cleremount in Auverne. Gordunes the people of Gaunt in Flaunders
Grudians people about Louane.
H.
Harudes people inhabiting upon the further side of the Rhine about the city
Constance. Heduanes a people of Celticke who together with the Sequanes are
now the Burgonions. Heluetians the Switzers or Swicers and (and as some hold
opinion) the Quades. Heluians people bordering upon Auverne now called Albians.
Hercinia look Bacenis.
I.
Iura, or Iurassus, a Mountain in Celticke which deuideth Burgundye from
Swicerland. it is now called mount S. Claud. of the Swicers it is called
Leuerberg: and of the men of Sauoy Iarten. Itius portus the town of Calis.
Illericke. this and Dalmatia are called both by the name of Slauony.
L.
Lacobrigians or Latobrigians or Latouikes the people of Losan. under the Duke
of Sauoy. or the people of Ualoys. Leman, the Lake of Geneua called also Lake
Losan. Lemouikes ye people of Limosins in Celticke Lepontians the people of
Graundpunter, or (as Marlian says) the people called Switers inhabiting
between the head of the river Rhone and the Alps of Rhetia, among whom
springs the River Rhine. Giles Tschude affirms they be now called Rhin
walders. Leuakes the people of Louane according to Marlian. Lewkes the people
of the Bishopric of Tul or Toll in Celticke. Lexobians or Lexouians the people
of Lysiewx in Celticke in the duchy of Normandy Lingones the people of Langres
in the said Bishopric of Tull in Celticke. Loyre a river which springs in
low Burgundy and running through Celticke (according to Caesar) falls into
the west Ocean. but according to Ptolomie it deuideth Celticke from Aquitaine.
Lutetia the City of Paris standinge upon Seane accounted unto Belgic. it is
now the head city of France.
M.
Menapians the people of Gelderlande and Cleueland. or as some suppose the
people of Iuliers in Belgicke. Mandubians a people of Celticke about the City
Alexia called now Lausoys. Marcomannes people of Germanye beyond the Rhine
which came over with Ariouistus and afterward inhabited the valey that
bordereth upon Swicerland which is called Marecomana next unto high Burgundy
and the mountain Iura: with whom M. Antonius the emperor surnamed the
Philosopher had long and perilous war, until at length being vanquished by
the prayers of the Christians they submitted themselves. Marne, a river rising
in the borders of Langres which runs through Shalons in Campaine and
dividing partlye the Celtes from the Belgies falls into Seane a littell about
Paris. Matiscon a city of Celticke by the river Soan in the borders of low
Burgu^dy between the towns of Lions and Cauillo^. it is now called Mascon or
Macon. Maze or meuse a river which springs out of the mountain Uogesus in
Celticke in the borders of Langres not far from the heads of Marne and Soan,
and taking into it an arm of the Rhine called walis about fowerscore miles
from the sea it makes an Island which is called Holland. Mediomatrikes the
people of Lorein about Mets. Meldians people of Meaulx. Melodunum a town in
an Island of the river Seane nere unto Parris called Melune. Metiosedum or
Iosedum a town upon the river Seane called Corbeil. Morines the people of
Tirwin in Belgicke. or (as Joseph Molet says) the Flemings.
N.
Nannets people of Nau^tes in Britain Britonant. Nantuates or Antuates people
of Germany on this side the Rhyne about Constance, called the people of Uawd.
Narbone the chief City of Province whereof all the Prouynce was called
Narbonensis. Nemets the people about Spire. Nitiobriges or Nitiobrigia^s people
of Mount pelyer in Celticke, Uzes. Neruians the people about Tornay in
Belgycke. Noreia the city of Norimberg in Germanye. Noricum the country about
the said city. Nouiodunum the name of three cities. whereof one is in Belgicke,
not far from Paris, and is called Noyon. the other two are in Celtycke the one in
the country of Berrey nere unto Bourges, and the other in low Burgundy at the
river Loyre. Numidians people of Affrycke.
O.
Ocelum, (which also is called Oscelium) a town in Piemount by the river
Duria. Octodure the city Martanach in lower Ualoys. Orcinia look Bacenis.
Osissines the people of Landgriguer in Brytayne.
P.
Parthians a people of Asia. Petrocorians the people of Perrygort in Aquitayne.
Pictones the people of Poyters in Aquitain. Pleumosians the Flemynges.
Precianes people of Aquitayne nere unto Bierne. Pirustes people of Dalmatia
which now is a part of Slauony. Po, the chyef river of Italy which ryseth at
the foot of the mountain Uesulus and afterward receiving xxx. ryuers into him
falls with seven chanelles into the Adriatike sea. Pyrenes, the Mountains
which deuyde France from Spain they are now called the mountains of Foyes
and Rounceual.
R.
Rauracians people of Celticke about Basil. Rhedones people about Rhenes in
Britain. Rhegium a towe in Italye on the sea coast over against the promontary
of Sicill called Pelorus. Rhemes a town in Champaine in Belgycke and the
people of the country therabout. Rhone a river rising out of thalpes which
deuydeth the Roman Prouynce from the Swycers, and then turning into the south,
cutteth through the myds of the Province, and lastly falls into the mydland
sea. Ruthenes a people of the Prouynce called Rhodes.
S.
Sabis the river Sambre in Belgyck which runs into Maze by the Town of
Namures. Samarobrina the town of Cambray in Belgycke. Santones the people of
Santon in Aquitain. Scaldis the river Skeld in Belgycke it runs through
Cornay and falls into Maze. Seane a River rysinge nere the borders of Langres
and low Burgundy in ye country of Al^et. It runs through Paris, and
deuidynge Celticke from Belgicke falls into the Britysh Ocean by Newhauen.
Sebusians, Secusians, or Segusians people of Celticke nere unto Sauoy and
Burgundy between the dyocesses of Lausan and Lions which by conjecture should
be about the City Biz^nce. or the people of Bresse. Sedunes or Sedusians the
people about Sion in Ualoys. Senons the people of Sens in Celticke. Sequanes
look Heduans. Sycambers the people of Gelderland. Swessions ye people of
Soysons in Belgic. Swevians people on the furthersyde of the Rhyne now called
the Swoabes, or (as Melancthon affirms) the Pomeranes. Soan look Arar.
T.
Tarbelles the people about Tarb or Bayon in Guyen. Tarusats people about Turse
in Guyen. Tectosages the people of Languedock in Province. Teucthers sometime a
people of Germany beyond the Rhyne now thought to be the people of Iulyers on
this side the Rhyne. Tiguryne the Canton of Zurich in Swicerland. Tolous a
city in Prouynce. Tolosatians people of the country about ye city. Treuires
people of Tryers and the country thereabouts. Triwkes the people about
Strawsbrough Turones the people about Towers upon Loyre in Celticke.
Tulingians the people of Loreyne.
U.
Uangions the people of wormbes and thereaboutes. Uatuca, Uaruta, or Ratuca as
some suppose was a Castle whereas is now the town of Iulyers. Uacalos an arm
of the Rhyne called walis which falls into the river Maze. Ubians the people
about Colon on the other side of the Rhyne. Uellaunians the people of Uellay
about S. Flower in Celticke. Uellaunodunum Uilleneuf in Loreine. Uenets the
people of Uannes in Britain, Ueragrians people of lower Ualoys about
Martanach. Ueromanduans the people of Uermandoys in Picardy. Uesontio the City
Besanson in Burgundy. Uienna the city of Uien in Delphynoys. Uuelles the
people of Perch. Uocontians look in Centrones. Uogesus or Uosegus a Mountain
in the marches of Langres, out of the which the Maze spryngeth. Uolces
Tectosages are the people of La^gnedocke about Avinion. Uolces Arecomickes,
look Arecomikes. Urellodunum the City Cadenacke in Quercye in Celticke.
FINIS:
OF the battle Ram Uegetius in his iiii. book of cheualry makes a short
dyscription, Battle Ram.
lykenyng it to the engine called a Tortoyse, in these words. Of ^ymber and
words is framed the Tortoyse: which because it should not be hurt with fire, is
covered with raw hydes, or with hayres and course cloth. This inwardly
receives a train which is armed before with a hooked piece of iron called a
Sithe because it boweth inward to pull stones out of the wall with. Or else
is the head thereof clad with steel, and it is called a Ram, either because it
has a very hard front, which pusheth up the walls, or else because after the
manner of Rams it goes baske to thentent to stryke with greater violence.
Now the Tortoyse has his name of his likeness to the true Tortoyse: because
that as the Tortoyse sometime puts forth her head and sometime draws it
into her shell again: so the engy^e does one while put back the beam and
another while thruste it forward again to thentent it may stryke with greater
vyolence. these are the words of Uegetius. Josephus in his book of the wars
in Iewry descrybeth it in this wise. The manner of the iron Ram says he is
thus. First they take a great long thycke beam: upon the forepart whereof they
put a great strong head made like unto a Rams head with horns all of
pryncipal strong iron the weight whereof is as much as half the beam, and
covers the beam also to the ^yds. Then fasten they into the ground against
the place that they intend to batter, two great trees like mas^es of ships,
between which they hang the beam that is called the Ram with strong ropes of
hemp and iron wire twysted together. At the hinder part of this beam from the
wallwarde are rings of iron fastened with like ropes of hemp and iron wier
tied to them, that when thassaulters will batter the walls, they pushe forward
the beam as though it were a spear, and fasten his strong horns among the
stones of the wall, then hang they weights at the rings in the hinder part,
and much people a f^r of take hold of the ropes that come through the rings
behynd, and hale the hinder part of the beam upon the ground, by such means
that they shake the wall, and wrinch out the stones, so that afterward the
walls fall down. There be also (as the same author in the same place
affirms) other Bammes that are driven upon wheles by force of people after
the same sort and facion. Leonarde Are^^n^ in his first book of the wars in
Italye against the Goths describes it in this wise. Four posts (says he)
of like height equally distant are set square one against another, and
fastened with four beams above and as many beneath, so that they stand like a
pretty square house: the which is covered over with leather, to thentent that
such as are within it should not be hurt from the walls. Aloft is laid a
beam ouertwhart, at the end whereof hangs down another beam, as it were to
the middle of the pillars fastened with plates of iron, the which has a great
square head of steel like an Anuield. The whole engyne is drawn upon four
wheles fastened in the fete of the pillars, and when it is removed, there are
not fewer than fifty soldiers within it to drive it forward. who after the
time they have brought it to the wall, do with a winche wey up the foresaid
beam, and when they have it aloft let it fall with all the sway and violence
it has. Then the head of the beam being let down, partlye with violence of
the men and partly with weight of it self, falling upon the wall does batter
and break in pieces all that ever it lights upon. There are also other
facions of the Battle Ram: which whosoever desires to know, shall find them plainly
discribed, about the latter end of the tenth book of Robert Ualtur concerning
Cheualry.

Uines or Uinets are engines compacted of smaller timber eighte foot high,
Uines or Uinets.
seven foot broad, and six foot long. the rofe whereof is made both of timber
and boordes, and the sides are splented to defend them that are within from
Stones and other weapons and artillerye sent from the walls and to save theme
from her they be covered with raw hydes. Many of these were wont to be made
and set one by one on a row for men to go under sau^ly to ^udermyne and dygge
down the walls of Towns. muscules.


Muscules so called of their likeness to the muscles in the sea, were lesser
engines much of the same making that the Uinets are, under which men of war
went sauf to fill up the diches and to make plain and level the way* for the
moveable towers to come to the walls. Pluties Pluties.
(which in this book I have translated penthowses and sheddes) were engines of
wycker made like a helmet covered over with raw hydes or hayres which went
upon three wheles whereof two were before and one in the mids, and were
moveable every way at pleasure like a wagon. Under the defense of the which,
souldyers did beat the defendantes from the walls with shot of arrows,
crossebowes, slinges. etc. that their fellows might ye caslier come to
scalyng. They were also Penthowses joined to the mouable towers to bear of the
violence of Artillerye from the^ that fought within at the loopeholes and
wyndowes.

Legion. Cohort.
Every Legion (as says Uegetius) consisted often Cohortes. Whereof the first
Cohort had in it a thousand a hundred and five footmen, and a hundred and two
and thyrty horsemen. The second Cohort had in it five hundred fifty and five
fotemen, and threscore and six horsemen, and so had likewise all the other eight
so that a full Legion co^sisted of syx thousand and a hundred fotemen and seven
hundred xxvi. horsemen.

Of Tribunes (which we call Marshals) there were two in every Legion. Tribun^
The high or chief Marshall was always admytted and assigned by the letters
patentes of the Emperor, and before there were Emperors by the Lieuetenant
general of the field. The under marshall was promoted thereto for his good
service. The Tribune or Marshall had always the leading of the first Cohort.
and his duty was to see all the whole Legion well furnished, decked, garnished,
practiced, and exercised, and therefore it behooved him to be a man of great
knowledge and experience.

There were in every Legion. 155. Centurio^
Centurions of whom the chief* who was called Centurio primipili (or Captain
of the chief ba^d) had the charge of.400. soldiers.

The Lieuetenant according to his name supplied the room of the General when
he was absent. Lieuetenant.


FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Willyam Seres, dwelling at the west end of Paul's, at
the sign of the Hedgehog.


