A PROGNOSTIGATION MADE FOR THE YEAR OF OUR LORD GOD. M. D. LXXXII.

Containing meet matter for such a worn: gathered out of learned Authors, and
set down to profit such as lack the knowledge thereof.

By Thomas Buckmaster.

Cecinimus vobis, et non saltastis: Lamentauimus vobis, et non planxistis.
Math. 11. 17.

Imprinted at London, by Richard Watkins and James Robertes. CVM PRIVILEGIO.

Ponde.

and Prognostication for the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ Being he first after
leap year.

the la^^tude and meridian of the honorable City of London, and may very well
serve for all England: wherein are contained diverse necessary and profitable
rules for all men to know, more then heretofore has been written: the
contents whereof do ^riefly declare the same in the next two pages following.

the Mathematics.

assigns of James Robertes.

Dade.

A prognostication in which you may behold the state of this present year of
our Lord God, M. DC.

Made and set forth by John Dade Cent. practicioner in Physic.

Imprinted at London for Edward White, the assign of James Roberts.

Ponde. 1601.

A Prognostication for this year of our Lord MDCI. Being the first year after
leap year.

Wherein are contained, the inclination or disposition of the weather for every
day: the change, full and quarters of the Moon, with diverse other things
necessary to know: Calculated for the Elevation and Meridian, of the Honorable
City of London, and may very well serve for all England.

By Edward Ponde practisioner in the Mathimaticks.

Imprinted at London by E. White the assign of James Roberts.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

Dade.

Prognostication in which this year of our Lord God 1600.

Being leap year.

Dade Gent, practitioner in Physic.

Richard Watkins and James Robertes.

The Prognostication for this year of our Lord God, 1581.

Written by George Hartgill.

Jonah. 3. 8. Let man and beast put on sackecloth, and cry mightily unto God:
yea let every man turn from his evil way, and from the wickedness that is in
their hands.



Imprinted at London, by Richard Watkins, and James Robertes. Cum Priuilegio.


