A re-examination of the five articles enacted at Perth anno 1618.

To wit.

Concerning The communicants gesture in the act of receaving. The observation
of festival days. Episcopal confirmation or bishopping. The administration
of baptism in private places. And The supper of the Lord in private places.


Printed anno 1636.

To the Reader.
YOu know (good Reader) if a man have a precious Jewel, he will be exceeding
careful to keep it from any tash. True religion is more precious then the most
precious jewel, it should be the breath of our nosthrils, and the ^oy of our
hearts. We find that in all ages the preservation of religion in purity has
been dearer to the godly then their very lives. As the preservation of
religion in purity has been maintained, so has the restoration to purity
been purchased with the blood of Martyrs, and grievous troubles of many
confessors. The reformation of the Church within this realm was not obtained
without the martyrdom of some, and the hazard of the lives and estates of many
other of our worthy predecessors. The temple was thoroughly built, and the
headstone brought forth, with the acclamation of other reformed Churches, (the
Church of England, which as Bucerus observed in histime, stands in the midst
betwixt the Roman and reformed, only excepted) crying Grace grace unto it. No
where was the doctrine sounder, the divine worship purer, the government fitter
for the building of Gods house. But of late years the doctrine is leavened
with Arminianisme and popery, the worship of God defiled with superstition and
idolatry, the joint government of Pastors in presbyteries, synodall and
general assemblies, with subordination of presbyteries to synods, and synods
to general assemblies, is changed into tyrannical oligarchie: So that it may
be observed in our times to be true, which was noted by Aventinus, to have
been done among the Popes in his time, that the same deeds are at one time
branded with the mark of superstition; and at another time set out with the
glorious title of piety, at one time attributed to Antichrist, at another time
to Christ: at one time judged tyrannical and unjust, at another time just and
righteous. That which before we rejected as superstitious or idolatrous, is now
called truly religious: that which before was called Antichristian and
tyrannical, is received now as ancient, and Apostolical.

Is it not lamentable to see that government which maintained the kingdom of
Antichrist in former times, and with much pains thrown forth, to be
reestablished. Some idle ministers, deserting their own particular flocks,
have taken upon them to be diocesan pastors, the principal and only pastors
of all the congregations within an whole diocie, to plant and transplant
Ministers without consent of presbyteries, to stay their proceedings against
heinous offenders, to sit as Princes amongst priests at their diocesan synods,
to suspend and deprive Ministers by the power of the high Commission, without
the consent of any lawful, let be pretended assembly of the Church, to fine,
confine, imprison Ministers, or other professors, without consent of the
estates, to sit in the Checker, Counsel, Session, and to bear offices of
estate, to vote in Parliament in name of the Church, without consent of the
Church, many of the Ministry repyning, and none consenting, but upon
conditions and cautions which are not regarded, to send Commissioners to Court,
as directed from the Clergy or Church, who return with articles in favors of
Papists, or for advancement of their estate: is not the office of Deane, and
election of bishops by deane and chapter, rejected as Popish by our general
assemblies, recalled again, without consent of the Church, or so much as a
pretended assembly? Are not the best qualified exspectants debarred from
entry to the Ministry, unless they subscrive such articles as the pretended
bishops have devised, and others obtruded upon congregations to their great
grief. Ministers are troubled by them with the acts of pretended assemblies,
whereas themselves transgress the acts of many laudable assembly. Ministers
are become dissolute, and erroneus doctrine is taught without controlement. We
have cause to fear ere it be long, that sound and faithful Ministers shall
become as rare as wedges of gold.

Consider further, that soon after the government was changed, idolatrous,
superstitious, and ridiculous ceremonies were introduced into the worship of
GOD with the five famous articles, of which we are now to treat. More are
intended in the cannos lately ^^blished, and yet more expected with the liturgle
not yet printed: neither can we look for an end, till the whole worship of God
be defiled. And yet these ceremonies are either commended as ancient, or
slighted as matters indifferent.

It is called in question, if not altogether denied, whether the Pope be the
great Antichrist or not: the possibility of reconciliation with Rome is
maintained, and to this end erroneous points of doctrine delivered in public,
or defended in p^ivate, or our differences from the Romish church slighted as
not fundamental. Books of this kind are printed with privilege in our
neighbor church, and in private commended by such amongst us, as apprehend the
maintenance of this course to be the easiest way to preferment. Doctor
Francis White in his treatise of the Sabbath ranketh among the traditions of
the church, the baptism of infants, religious observation of the Lords day,
the administration of baptism, and the Lords supper in public assemblies and
congregations, the deliverie of the elements of the holy communion in both
kinds, the service of the church in a known language. The Reader may find
more of this stuff in Coz^ns devotions, in Montagues Gagg and Appeal, and in
Shelfords sermons. Have we not need to f^ar the burning of our own house,
when our neighbors house is in fire? Have we not greater cause to fear and
bestirre our selves, when the fire has seized upon the thack of our own house,
and poysonable errors are vented amongst our selves,

Do we then complain without just cause, or for matters of no importance? The
reconcilers cry peace, peace, but mean to peace, till we be at peace with
Rome. The Prelates charge us with shisme and sedition, but they mean to peace
without peaceable possession of their places, and obedience to their
directions. They call us shismaticks, and yet cannot endure general
assemblies, the ordinary remedy of division and shismes, as was acknowledged
by the Kings Commissioners, and such as were acquainted with his Majesty's
mind at Linlithgow, anno 1606. To what end was it enacted with their own
consent at Glasgow, 1610. that those who were called bishops, should be liable
to the trial and censure of the general assembly, for their office and
benefice, life and conversation, if we have not yearly or set general
assemblies, to try them, or censure us, if we shall be found guilty of shisme.
Grievances presented by Ministers to parliam^nts, which should be the chief
sanctuaries of refuge to all distressed subjects, are suppressed, and not
suffered to be read in public before the Estates: yea laws are made in
parliament concerning matters Ecclesiastical, without the knowledge or consent
of the general assembly, and acts of pretended assemblies are ratified,
sometime made worse with omissions, additions, alterations. We want our
assemblies to direct commissioners with articles, grievances, and petitions, to
parliaments, conventions, court and counsel, and to treat of all the affairs
of the Church: what wonder is it then that all be out of frame?

But we are still charged with frowardness, that we ever except against
assemblies when we have them. So did the Ubiquitars the Theologues in the
Palatinat, Synodum appellatis, said they, and synodum detrectatis. The
Theologues answered in their admonition, Hinc istae lachrymae, quod synodum
ejusmodi vellent, qualem principibus praescripscrunt, in qui ipsi fuissent
accusatores, ipsi judices, ipsi saltarent, ^c spectarent suam fabulam, and ipsi
sibi plausum d^ent. So do we answer to our Prelates, if they will suffer no
assemblies, but such as they themselves overrule at pleasure, they can not
pretend desire of peace. We call for no other assemblies then such as shall
be constitute according to the order agreed upon with his Majesty's own
consent, in the general assembly holden, anno 1598, such as shall have
liberty to conveen yearly, or at set times, and to treat of all affairs
belonging to the Church, such as shall have freedom in their proceedings. It
were dangerous to acknowledge every meeting, which claims to it self the name
and authority of a general assembly.

Can we acknowledge that convention at Perth, anno 1618. for one of our
lawful general assemblies? The pretended pri^at occupied the place of the
Moderator, without the election of the assembly, which was contrare to the
order ever observedi^^ ^ur Church, even when we had Superintendents, and
contrare to the cautions agreed upon at Montross, anno 1600, and at Linlithgow,
anno 1606. These who were entitled bishops; wanting commission from
presbyteries, where they should make residence, had place to vote contrare to
the cautions agreed upon at Montrose, and notwithstanding they had put in
practice before kneeling, and observation of festival days. Mo^ ministers
then three out of a presbytery were admitted, or rather drawn to that meeting
to give their voice. Some moderators of presbyteries being the bishops
substituts, were admitted without commission. No Baron ought to vote according
to the act made at Dundie, anno 1598, but one out of the bounds of a
presbytery having commission. But a number were present at this assembly,
being only required by his Majesty's missives' and their voices were numbered
with the rest Some minister^ were the Kings pensioners, or looked for
augmentation of stipends, or were threatened in private by their diocesan bishop
with deposition, or were circumveened with promises, that they should not be
urged with practice. Necessity of yielding was urged, under no less danger
then of the wrath of authority, and utter subversion of the order and state of
our Church. Such as had courage to oppose, were checked, interrupted,
threatened: yea, it was plainly professed, that neither reasoning nor voting
should carry the matter: All the five articles were put to once voting, with
this certificat, He that denied one should be reputed to have denied all. Much
more might be said to this purpose, but these few particulars are sufficient
to justify our exceptions against that assembly, as null in it self.

Because many are desirous of information concerning these five articles
enacted at this assembly, and treatises formerl^ printed are become scarce, we
were moved to prease through many difficulties to the publishing of this
Re-examinatio^ Here you shall find the ab^idgement of what was w^i^ten
be^fore, with a more particular reply to Doctor Lindseyes defense, than that
which is in Altar (...), or to any objection of moment moved by Doctor Burges,
or Master Pa^bodie. Doctor Forbes has nothing but what he has borrowed from
our Doctors defense.

I beseech you (good Reader) read and ponder without a mind preoccupied,
either with fear of trouble, or hope of preferment, and submit your judgment
to the light of the truth. For that is the way to apostasy to seek for shifts
and fig tree leafes, when the truth is born in upon us. What has made so many
so unsettled in religion this day, and prone to receave Pop^ie, as the defense
of the late novations with frivolous cavillation? Men glory now to dispute
like Scepticks upon the very articles of our faith, so that they are like to
lose the sense of all religion. The detaining of the truth of God in
unrighteousness brings men at last to a reprobat sense. Pity the case of
our Church, which is more pitiful then in foreign parts, where the blo^de:
sword rages. For howbeit their external peace be troubled, yet they hold
fast without backsliding. If the Lord will spew the luckwarm out of his mouth,
what may backsliders look for? Remember the words delivered by M. George
Wishart, which he uttered a little before his martyrdom, God shall send you
comfort after me, This realm shall be illuminated with the light of the
gospel, als dearly as ever was any realm sines the days of the Apostles: the
house of God shall be builded in it, yea it shall not lack, whatsoever the
enemy imagine in the contrare, the kaipstone, meaning, that it should once be
brought to the full perfection: Neither (said he) shall the time be long,
till that the glory of God shall evidently appear, and once triumph in despite
of Satan: there shall many not suffer after me. But, alace, if the people
shall prove unthankefull, fearful and terrible shall the plagues be, that
shell follow.

By our Doctor, or L. or D. L. I mean Doctor Lindsey: by B. or D. B. Doctor
Burges. by P. or M. P. Master Paybodie.
OF THE COMMVNICANTS GESTVRE IN THE ACT of receaving, eating and drinking.
The Introduction.
MAster ^nox, one of the first and chief instruments of reformation of
religion within this Realm, was called before the Counsel of England in the
days of King Edward the sixth, anno 1553 and demanded, Why the kneeled not at
the receaving of the Sacrament. He answered, Christ's action was perfect, that
it was with sitting and without kneeling, that it was surest to follow his
example. After hot reasoning, it was said unto him, That he was not called
before them of any evil mind, yet they were sorry to find him of a contrary
mind to the common order. He answered, I am sorry that the common order is
contrary to Christ's ir^stitution. This I find in one of his manuscripts.
Within a year after, being exiled after the death of King Edward, Admonition
page 35.
in his Admonition d^rected to England, which was printed anno 1554, he ranketh
kneeling at the Lords table among the superstitious orders; which profane
Christ's true religion, and censureth the English reformation for retaining of
it. When some of the English in the English Church at Frankford, where ^ee was
Minister, contended for the receaving of the English Liturgy, he opposed
stoutly to it. And when the contention was like to grow to some hight, he and
his Colleague Master Wittingham, with some others, drew forth of the English
book a plat in Latin, and sent it to Master Calvin. Howbeit the description
of the corruptions was favorably set down, yet kneeling at the receaving of
the elements is noted up among the rest in that extract. Among his letters
which are extant in writ, we find one dated the year 1559 at Deep, and
directed to Mastresse Anna Lock, where he calls the cross in Baptism, and
kneeling at the Lords table Diabolical inventions.

After his return to his native country, he ministered the Communion according
to the order of the English church at Geneva, where he had been last Minister.
This order was observed in all the reformed congregations, before the reformed
religion was established by authority of Parliament, and is yet extant before
the Psalms in meeter, with addition of the treatises of fasting and
excommunication, some prayers, the form and manner of the election and
admission of Superintendents. In the con^ession of faith prefixed and approved
by our Church, we have these words, Neither must we in the administration of
the Sacraments follow man's phant^s^^s, but as Christ him self has ordained,
so must they be ministered. In the order of celebrating the Lords supper we
have these words, The exhortation being ended, the Minister comes down from
the pulpit, and sits at the table, every man and woman likewise taking their
place as occasion best serves. And again, The Minister breaks the bread,
and delivers it to the people, who distribute and devide the same among
themselfes, according to our Saviors commandment: And likewise gives the
cup.

In the second head of the first b^oke of discipline drawn up in the first
year of public and universal reformation, we have these words, The table of
the Lord is then rightly min^stred, when it approaches ne^rest unto Christ's
own action. But plain it is that at Supper Christ Jesus sat with his
disciples; and therefore do we judge that sitting at a table is most
convenient to that holy action. And again, That the M^nister break the bread
and distribute the same to these that be next to him, commanding the rest,
every one with sobriety and reverence to break (...) other, we think it
nearest to Christ's action and to the perfect prac^ice. Ye see our first
Reformers preferred (...) kneeling, but also to standing, and (...) none of
them approached so (...) When they rejected standing (...) man judge what they
thought of kneeling. (...) ye may perceive that they rested upon (...), ^o only
for a time, because of the abuse of kneeling, (...), because most agreeable to
the pattern.

It was ordained in the general assembly holden the year 1562, That the order
of Geneva be of served (...) ministration of the Sacraments. By the order of
Geneva was meant the order which was observed in the English Church at Geneva,
where Master Knox had been of late Minister, which order is called in the
first book of discipline, The order of Geneva, and The book of Common order.
This order, as I have already said, is set down before the Psalms in meeter.
In the assembly holden anno 1564 Ministers are referred to the order set do,
(...) before the Psalms, which is a renewing of the former act. In the
Parliament holden the year 1567 it was declared, that whosoever refused to
participate of the Sacraments, as they were then publicly administered in this
reformed Church, were not to be reputed members of this Church. An act was
likewise made concerning the Kings oath to be given at his coronation to
maintain the religion then professed, and in special the due and right
administration of the Sacraments then received. This act concerning the Kings
oath was ratified again by acts of Parliament in the year 1581, and again in
the year 1592. In the year 1572 it was ordained by act of Parliament, that
such as did not communicate, and partake of the Sacraments as they were then
truly ministered in the Church of Scotland, if they continue obstinate and
disobedient, shall be reputed infamous, and unable to sit or stand in
judgment, pursue, bear office, etc. When in the second confession of faith,
which is commonly called the Kings confession, we profess that we detest the
ceremonies of the Roman Antichrist added to the ministration of the Sacraments,
we profess we detest kneeling in the act of receaving the sacramental
elements of bread and wine.

The order of celebrating the Lords supper, which has been received and
observed since the beginning of reformation, and acknowledged both by general
assemblies and Parliaments, to be the due and right order, was perverted by a
number of noble men, Barons, Ministers, and pretended Bishops conveened at
Perth, in the year 1618, either having no lawful commission, or terrified
with threats, or corrupted one way or other. They in their full and pretended
assembly to please King James, made this act following, as it is extant among
the acts of Parliament:

Since we are commanded by God himself, that when we come to worship him, we
fall down and kneel before the Lord our Maker, and considering withal, that
there is no part of divine worship more heavenly and spiritual, then is the
holy receaving of the blessed body and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ: Like as the most humble and reverent gesture of the b^dy in our
meditation and lifting up of our hearts best becomes so divine and sacred an
action, therefore (notwithstanding that our Church has used, since the
reformation of religion, to celebrate the holy Communion to the people sitting,
by reason of the great abuse of kneeling used in the idolatrous worship of the
Sacrament by the Papists, yet now, seeing all memory of bypast superst^tion
is past) in rev^rence of God, and in due regard of so divine a mystery, and in
remembrance of so mystical an union, as we are made partakers of* the assembly
thinks good, that that blessed Sacrament be celebrated hereafter meekly and
reverently upon their knees.

This act, if the lying parenthesis were culled out, which is insert only to
deceave, may pass among Papists and Lutherans. It is untrue that all memory of
bypast superstition is past, and untrue that the abuse of kneeling among the
papists was the only occasion that moved our first reformers to make choice of
sitting, but the pattern of the first supper at the institution was the chief
cause. And therefore they not only rejected kneeling, but also standing and
taking in passing by, as we have showed before.

We shall first defend the communicants sitting, and next impugn their
kneeling in the act of receiving the sacramental elements of bread and (...)
we shall prove it first to be warrantable; next, (...) down our reasons
whereupon we (...) instituted.

THE FIRST PART Concerns the defense of sitting.
CHAP. I.
That the Communicants sitting in the act of receaving eating and drinking is
lawful and warrantable.
WE have the exemple of Christ and his Apostles at the first supper to warrant
the communicants Sitting warrantable.
to sit in the act of receaving. No man ever doubted of it, till of late two or
three wranglers has called that in question, which has been holden as an
undoubted truth in all ages. After the ordinary washing of their hands they
sat down to the first course of the paschall supper to eat the paschall lamb
with the unleavened bread, then they rose again to the washing of their feet.
Thereafter they sat down again to the second course of the paschall supper,
and did eat of a sallet made of sour herbs, which they dipped in a composed
liquour as thick as mustard. This second course was a part of the paschall
supper, Scaliger de emendat temporum lib. 6.
as Scaliger and others of the learned prove out of the Jewish writers, and not
their common and vulgar supper. M. P. yields to this, because the paschall
supper was a sufficient meal of it self, and therefore they needed no other
supper. It is clear that they sat howbeit not upright, yet leaning on their
elbowes at the paschall supper. Scaliger cites out of a book set forth before
Christ's time, entitled Kidd^sh pesach, a canon for twice washing, and that
kind of sitting at the eating of the paschall supper. The Evangelists likewise
make mention, that after they rose, and Christ had washed their feet, they sat
down again. Now while they were eating after this sitting down to the second
course of the paschall supper, and consequently while they were yet sitting,
Christ took bread, and gave thanks, etc. that is, he instituted, and ministered
the evangelicall supper, Matthew. 26. 26. Mark. 14. 22. Yea the very close or
conclusion of the second course, or whole paschall supper was changed by Christ
into the evangelicall supper. Luke and Paul relate that Christ took the cup
after supper. The consecrating, breaking, and eating of the bread had
interveened between the second course and the taking up of the cup. Therefore
they might well say, After supper he took the cup. Yea they might have said
also after supper he took the bread, to wit after both the first and second
course of the paschall supper, but then it must be meant immediately, and
without any other action interveening, because Matthew and Mark say, While
they were eating. Hear Ba^radius a Jesuit, Barradas in concor. evangelist. Tom.
4. lib. 3. cap. 2
Howbeit the whole Sacrament was instituted after supper, yet it was instituted
in the end of the supper, while as they were sitting and eating, for they did
eat other meat, till the time of the institution of the heavenly food, and
therefore Matthew and Mark say, That the Sacrament was inst^tute while as they
were eating, for they were yet eating when the Lord took bread, blessed, and
brake. Quamvis autem totum sacramentum post coenam institutum fuerit, in ipsius
tamen coenae fine institutum est, cum adhuc discumberent and m^nducarent, Nam
manducarunt cibos alios quousque ad institutionem caelestis cibi ventum est.
Ideoque Mattheus and Marcus aiunt, manducantibus ipsis effectum sse hoc
sacramentum. Adhuc enim manducabant cum Dominus accepit panem benedixit and
fregit. Barona^^al. ^om. 2. an. 34. number. 14.
Baronius the Cardinal collecteth that they were sitting, beca^se Matthew and
Mark say, they were supping or eating, Vnde quod dicit Matthaeus coenantibus
autem iis accepit Jesus p^nom and benedixit, and quod Marcus ait, and
manduoantibus illis accepit Jesus panem and benedicens fregit, idem est acsi
dixisset, Chrysostom. hom. de prodit. Iud. And Pope Leo sermon. 7. de passione Domini.
recumbentibus illis. Chrys^stome likewise, that wh^le they were eating and
drinking, Christ ^ooke bread. The collection is so clear, that none either of
the ancient or modern Writers, Popish or Protestant did call it in question.
In steed of many testimonies therefore I content me with the old hymns. M John
Mair on Matthew. 26. brings in an old hymn to this purpose, as follows, Rex
sedet in coena turba cinctus duodena. Se tenet in manibus, Se cibat ipse cibus.
And the like we have in the Roman Rituall, In supremae nocte coenae Recumbens
cum fratribus, Observata lege plene Cibis in legalibus, Cibum turbae ducdenae,
Se dat suis manibus.

But it is likely, That Christ and his Apostles kneeled not. Athenaens lib. 4.
say some, when Christ gave thank^s, that he and the Apostles kneeled. I
answer, There is no likelihood at all. What the Naucratits did at their idol
feasts on the birth day of Vesta, or Apollo Cumaeus, is ^o matter. It is noted
as singular in them, and not according to the custom of other Ethnicks. It was
the custom of the Jews to sit in time of blessing the bread and cup at the
paschall supper. The words, which they used, were sooner uttered, then they
could conveniently change sitting in kneeling and rise again. Luke 24. 30.
Mat. 14. 13. Mark. 6. (...) 7. Luke 9. Ioh. 1. and 27.
We never read that the Jews kneeled when they blessed their meat. Christ sat
when he brake bread and gave thanks at Emaus. When he sat with the
multitude, which he fed with five loaves, and two fishes he blessed the bread.

P. grants that Christ and his Apostles used the same gesture in blessing and
giving thanks that he did in receiving. Suppose they had kneeled in time of
the blessing before the breaking of the bread, it would not follow, Page 39.
that they continued kneeling, or received the elements with that gesture. All
agree, ancient and modern that they were sitting, when Christ spoke to them,
Haec verba (nempe bibite ex eo omnes) dicuntur solis Apostolis, De eucharist
lib. 4. ca^. ^5
qui tum ad mensam cum Christo sedebant, says Bellarmine, Becanus, and others,
as ye may see in the testimonies cited in this and the chapter following. The
Naucratits after they had supplicated upon their knees, sat down again upon
their feasting beds, as Atheneus reports.

We prove also by collection from some circumstances, That Christ and his
disciples sat.
and the form of the celebration, that they sat. They neither stood nor
kneeled. Therefore they sat. They stood not, for the beds upon which they sat
leaning on their elbowes, were so near to the tables, that they might reach to
it, so that they could not easily stand betwixt. It were ridiculous to allege
that they stood upon the beds. John 14. 31
And Christ when he had ended, says to them, Arise, let us go hence. If they
had been standing, he could not say to them, Arise. It may be gathered
likewise that they kneeled not. 1. If there had been a change from sitting,
which was the ordinary gesture at the Paschall supper, into kneeling a gesture
of adoration at the Evangelicall supper, some of the Evangelists would have
made mention of it, for they make mention of other changes. 2. If there had
been such a change, then kneeling should have been institute, and all have
sinned that have not kneeled since the first supper, which our opposits dare
not affirm. To what end should the change have been made, if not that that
gesture might be observed afterward. 3. The form of celebration could not
comply with the gesture of kneeling: for Christ spoke in an enunciative form,
and not prayerwise, and the elements were carried from hand to hand, and
divided by the Apostles among themselves. The distributing of the elements by
the Communicants among themselves is not compatible with kneeling, a gesture of
adoration which should be directed to God. We conclude then with Mouline,
that the Apostles continued sitting at the table to the very end of the action.
On the Lords supper. 1 part page 136.


But say they, the site or posture of Christ and his Apostles at the first
supper was lying and not sitting. Therefore their example is no warrant for
sitting. That their gesture was a kind of sitting gesture.
I answer, it was not lying altogether, but partly sitting, partly leaning,
and therefore says Casaubone the Hebrew doctors call that posture sitting on
beds. Hic situs neque plane jacentis est, Exercit. page 490.
neque plane sedentis: idcirco Hebraei hoc dixerunt sedere in lectis. And to
this purpose he alleges also Ezechiel 23. 41. where the Prophet expresses
that posture by sitting in a bed. And where the scriptures speak of upright
sitting as in Genes. 43. 33. Onkelos expresses it by a word which signifies
sitting with leaning: and Josephus in his history by a Greek word (...),
signifying the same, as if it were indifferent which of the expressions to use
for any of the forms. Christ himself while he was at table expresses it by
another word, which expresses upright sitting, Luke 22, 27, and alludeth unto
it in the same word, verse 30. As a man may stand upright, or stand leaning, so
he may sit upright, or sit leaning. There sitting, our sitting, and the Turks
answer analogically to other. L. at Perth assembly confessed the two gestures
were analoga. D. Mortoun confesses it was a kind of sitting gesture. The
English translators express it by sitting, and not by lying. Neither are the
words used by the Evangelists the proper words which express that gesture, but
(...), as Beza observes on Matthew. chap. 8. 11.

M. P. page 69, protests and witnesses to the world, that the holds the
gesture of sitting at the Lords table in it self lawful and commendable. P.
acknowledges sitting lawful.
What a madness is it then to drive poor souls from a sure way to a dangerous
and doubtsome way: In dubiis animae insistendum est in via tutiori, In all
doubts of the soul we should insist in the surest way. But we shall clear the
doubts, and prove it pernicious.

CHAP. II.
That we are bound to sitting in the act of receaving eating, and drinking.
THat the sitting of Christ and his Apostles at the first supper serves not
only for a warrant, but also for a direction to us to follow, appears by
these reasons.

First, Christ's example our direction.
Examples in setting down a pattern, serve ordinarily for directions in times to
come, if there be not some singular occasion to hinder him that sets down
the pattern to do otherwise. D. Mortoun in his late work of the institution of
the Sacrament, page 47.
while as he is maintaining Communion under both kinds, lays down the same
rule in these words, Were it not that we had no precept of Christ to do this,
but only the example of his doing it in the first institution, this should be
a rule for us to observe it punctuallie, except in some circumstances, which
only occasionallie and accidentally happened therein, and therefore dar not
give a non-obstant against the example of Christ as your council of Constance
has done, and which your Jesuit also teaches, as if the example of Christ
were no argument of proof at all. Ye see he acknowledges the force of Christ's
example, even where there is not a commandment in express words, unless
there be circumstances occasionallie or accidentally happening therein.

Moulius in his heavenly alarm, page 56. says, Christ and his Apostles sat
at the table, without any kind of adoration, and that the first institution
was given for a pattern, whereunto we ought to conform. When our opposits
object, that if we must imitate the pattern, then we ought to celebrate in an
upper chalmer, exclude women, put off and on our upper garment, wash our feet,
sit leaning on beds, eat unleavened bread, with twelve in number, in the
even-tide after supper. But these particulars were accidental and occasional,
and therefore excepted in the rule, or were not in the time of the evangelicall
supper. The washing of the disciples feet, the putting off and on of Christ's
upper garment, were ended before they sat down to the second course of the
paschall supper, and consequently the second course interveened between and the
evangelicall supper. The evangelicall supper being instituted after the
paschall supper, to which it was to succeed, and Christ's suffering so near at
hand, they might not lawfully eat leavened bread, nor at any other time eat the
paschall supper, to which the evangelicall supper was to succeed, but in the
evening.

The Jews were commanded to eat the lamb not in the temple, but in houses; and
upper chalmers served for strangers that come to Jerusalem, as other private
houses did to the inhabitants. There might not be fewer then ten for one lamb,
but their number might amount to twenty, as ^eza upon Matthew. 26. 20. observes.

They might not eat the passover but in one society, and if two societies
were in one house, they might not mix together, as some have observed out of
the Jewish Doctors. Those who eat of one lamb together, were called the sons of
society, as if we would say Communicants at one table. There ye see,
wherefore they were so few. And yet seeing there might be twenty in one
society, what warrant have we to affirm there were only twelve, to wit, the
twelve apostles. The Canon of the mass says, he gave to his Apostles and
disciples. And by the same reason, what warrant have they to affirm that no
women were present, seeing the Jews among their precepts ordain that male and
female celebrate the passover rightly, Iudeorum praecept.
ut mas and faeminae pascha rite faciant. It can not be proved, says Fulk,
that no women were present. Ye may see his reason upon 1 Cor. 11. 23.
Cassa^dri opera page 737
Cassander in his tractar. de baptismo infantium, says, that it is sufficient
that they are fit for the communion, seeing they appertain to the society of
the members of Christ. Satis est quod eas aplas off (...) communion^ constet,
cum and ipsae ad societatem membr^^^. Christi pert n^ant.

But let it be gr^^^ed, that none were present, but the Apostles, Answer to
the Rhemists. Matthew. 20. 20.
the reason may be partly the number was sufficient to make up one society
for the lamb, partly as M. Cariwright observes, that as other things so the
holy Sacrament should not come to the church but by the hands of the Apostles.
Their manner and kind of sitting with leaning on the left elbow was the form
observed among the Jews at their common feasts, and at the paschall supper, by
reason of the paschall canons, because it was the most solemn time the Jews
had. So all the particular instances above mentioned were only occasional and
accidentarie, falling out by reason of the paschall supper, which might not
lawfully or conveniently be changed, yea at whatsoever time it had been
celebrate, some circumstances might occur, which belong not to the action, as
at every action there occur individual circumstances, as time and place,
nothing belonging to that action except it be so appointed. The Rhem^sts
(says M. Cartwright) assign things done in the Lords supper some impossible
to be done by us, On. 1. Cor. 11. 23
some inconvenient to be done in our sacrament, which were necessarlie done in
that action of our Savior Christ. Their sitting might easily have been
changed in kneeling, and very commodiously, seeing they sat upon beds leaning
on their elbowes, yet Christ would retain the same gesture at the evangelicall
supper which they used at the paschall.

But at the institution of the first passover the Jews stood, Standing at the
passover changed.
and yet afterward they sat, as ye see here, Christ and his Apostles sat. As
they changed their standing at the first supper, which was their pattern, why
may not we likewise change sitting into kneeling? I answer, when standing is
changed in sitting, it is not changed into a gesture of adoration, as when
sitting is changed into kneeling, which is no gesture for a feast. Next, it
cannot be proved, that the people of God stood at the first passover in the
judgment of sundry of the learned; let be at the rest following as P.
acknowledges, page 57. Howbeit L. page 68. affirms that they stood. There is
neither express mention made of their standing, howbeit every ceremony be set
down punctuallie, nor can it be collected by necessary consequence, Tom. 4.
l. 1. c. 17.
says Barradius. But let it pass as undoubted, yet it was extraordinary, and
for that night only to signify their hasty departure out of Egypt. Iunius and
Tremel. in Mat. 26. 20. in Exodus 12. 11. Scaliger.
All the Hebrew Doctors both ancient and modern with full consent deliver,
that the commandment of sprinkling the door posts with blood, putting on
shoes, gird^ng up the loins, tak^ng staves in their hands, and eating the lamb
with h^ste, was not to be extended to the following ages, but belonged only to
that night that they were to depart out of Egypt. If standing had been
commanded, and that for times to come as well as for that night, the Jews had
transgressed in sitting, and Christ would not have applied himself unto their
custom.

Next, Sitting suitable with the supper.
it appears that sitting was the ordinary gesture used at all religious
feasts. The Gentiles no doubt borrowing their custom from the people of God,
sat at their feasts made of the remainder of the sacrifices offered to their
idols, Amos 2. 1 Corin. 8. 10. to profess their communion and society, with
their idol, or fellowship with devils, as the Apostle calls it, 1 Corin. 10.
20. The Ethnikes sat not at the altars of their Gods, but at tables in the
idol chapel. Ethnicos insuis altaribus bibisse ne quidem fando auditum est,
Alstedius in supplemento tom. 4. Paustrat^e cap. 10. The Lord instituting his
supper to be the only religious feast to be used in the Christian Church,
observed the same gesture, which was used at the paschall supper, and other
religious feasts. So that the using of this gesture at the first supper, was as
it were a ratification, that the common and ordinary gesture of religious
feasts should not be altered at this feast. Further, seeing this supper was in
form of a banquet, and represented another spiritual banquet, as sitting is
the usual gesture at banquets or feasts, even when men are invited by kings,
in token of that familiar society wherewith they are honored, so it
represents that which is answerable the familiarity of the soul with Christ at
the spiritual banquet. Christ intended not only to represent unto us our
spiritual nouritour, for then it had sufficed he had given the signs any way
without a table, without dividing and distributing among themselfes, without
sitting, but in celebrating after this manner, Piscator in Matthew. 26. 26.
in speciem convivii, as Piscator terms it, he intended further then to
represent spiritual nourishment, to wit society and fellowship with him, and
that he was to sup and feast with us, as it is said, Revel. 3. 20. Coenam
Domini esse convivium v^lepulum liquet exeo quod d^scipuli de pane illo
ederunt, and de po^ulo illo biberunt acc^mbentes simul ad mensam, Piscator in
Matthew. 26. in observat in verse. 26. and seqq. Kneeling obscureth that
familiarity and rejoicing, which the Lordwould have signified and sealed at
that time. The Polonian Baron Johannes Alasco, maintains further, That our
sitting eating and drinking at the communion table is a figure and
representation of our sitting at the heavenly. In Matthew. 26
Musculus says, That this supper is a type of the supper to come. Aquin. par.
quest. 60.
Aqu^nas says, it is not only a sign commemorative of Christ's passion, which
is past, and demonstrative of a present benefit, but also (...) futurae
gloriae; A foreshewing sign of our glory to come. Christ himself expresses
our peaceable fruition of the joys of heaven by sitting with Abraham, Is^ac,
and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 8. 11. Alluding to feasts, where
the feasters feasted at one table, sitting leaning on beds, as here at Christ's
supper. In another place he brings in Lazarus resting in Abraham's bosom;
Luke 16. that is sitting at the heavenly table, and leaning upon Abraham's
bosom after the same manner that John lay on Christ's bosom, when he sat at
this table, John 16 And Christ himself while he was at table promised to his
Apostles that they should eat and drink at his table in his kingdom, and sit
upon twelve throns, Luke 22. 30. He has slender affection to the glory of
Christ, (...) form and maniere du ministre ecclsiastique. fol. 84.
or persuasion of his eternal felicity, that would abolish out of the kirk
that image of our eternal felicity in the celestial glory to co ^e, which is
so much recommended unto us by Christ himself our Lord, by the symbol of
sitting at a banquet to the unspeakable comfort of all the faithful, says
Alasco.

It follows, that Christ precept Hoc facite, do this, comprehends sitting,
Christ's precept, Do this.
as if Christ should have said, Celebrate this holy ordinance after the same
manner as ye have now seen the pattern set before your eyes, that is as a feast
or banquet with the forms ye have now seen, sitting, eating, drinking,
distributing* etc. Time and place were not comprehended, because they were more
circumstances or occasional. But gestures are mere then mere circumstances,
as M. P. page 34. confesses: and a a suitable gesture for a feast was chosen by
Christ, whereunto he was not forced through necessity. John Alasco presses
this precept for sitting in special, both in the former work, and in book de
^acramentis. Hoc faci^e. Ad totam illam actionem hoc referendum est, De
sacrament fol. 95.
ut qued tum Christus cum discipulis fecit, itidem nos in sacris coetibus
factitemas, and quemadmodum discipul^ in illa ipsa vespera dispositi ab ipso
Christo hoc acceperunt sacramentum, ita and nunc d^sponam is, says Marlorat.
in. 1. Cor. 11.

It appears thirdly by the practice of the Apostolical kirks, The Apostles
continued sitting.
observing still this gesture, howbeit other circumstances of time and place
and other things, which fell out occasionally at the first supper are not
regarded. Their practice may be a commentary to the precept Do this, that we
may take up what is comprehended under it. Howbeit Christ had not said Hoc
facite, Do this, his example in setting down the pattern, and put in practice by
the Apostles afterward, is equivalent to a precept: Christi and Apostolorum
exempla sunt n^strum exempla^ ^exemplar Amesius in Bellarm. enervato. tom. 3.
p. 177.
autem rei faciendae probat rem esse praeceptam and necessariam. Christ himself
after he was sitting at table in Em^us with the two disciples, Luke 24. 30.
he took bread, blessed it, brake it, and gave to them. This place is
interpreted by sundry ancients and modern of the breaking of the sacramental
bread, which may be granted without any vantage to the Papists for
communicating in one kind, because the example is extraordinary: and by the
Hebrew phrase of breaking of bread synecdochically may be meant the whole
supper.

M. P. thinks likewise, page 86.
that it is like, this breaking of bread was sacramental: but, says he, the
sitting was only occasional. But there was no occasion to hinder him to use
another gesture, when he come to that action. Ye see then in the judgemeut of
all the interpreters, who expound this place of the sacrament of the supper,
that Christ celebrate this sacrament, while he and his disciples were sitting,
and used no other gesture, but that which they had used at their ordinary
eating before.

It is objected, The Corinthians sa^.
that the Apostle in the rehearsal of the words of the institution, 1 Cor. 11.
makes no mention of sitting. I answer, that the Apostle rehearses not all
that was requisite for the celebration of the supper. His chief purpose was to
correct the abuse of the Corinthians, that is, their not staying upon other;
For the Lord that night he was betrayed said to all his disciples conveened
together, 1 Cor. 11. 19.
Take ye, eat ye, drink ye all of this. Illa coena (Christi) omnes commun ver
accumbentes habuit. That supper had all sitting in common together, says
Chrysostom, rebuking such as neglected to communicate with the poor. In illud
oportct haereses esse.
O^^umenius has the like. This is not to eat the Lords supper, he means that
supper, which Christ delivered, when all his disciples were present. For in
that supper the Lord and all his servants sat together. Hierom in 1 Cor. 11.
The Lords supper ought to be common to all, because he deliver^d the sacraments
equally to all his disciples that were present. It was not the Corinthians
fault that they sat ^t table, but that neither at their common meats, nor at
the Lords table would they sit together, but sorted themselfes in factions and
companies, says D. ^ilson in his book of obedience. Page 654. edit. in 40.
And again, Saint Paul, as Chrysistome thinks, brought the table and supper,
where the Lord himself was, and ^t which his d^sc^ples sat, for an example to
show them, that that is rightly judged to be the Lords supper, [quae omn^bus
simul convocatis concordi^er and commun^ter sumitur] which is received in
common, Ibid.
and with one consent of all assembled together. The Apostle says not, I
deliver to you here all that I received of the Lord, but I have received of the
Lord, that which I have delivered unto you.

The Apostle presupposes a lawful minister, a table, and sitting at the
table, and rehearses only Christ's actions, and his words uttered to
communicants sitting at that table together, bidding them all eat, drink, etc.
conveened together. Not yet all his actions and words, as giving of the bread,
blessing of the cup, either severally or conjunctly with the bread, and the
precept, to drink all of it. Decretal. l. 3. ^t. 41. cap. 6.
Ipsi et am Evangel stae mutuo inter se supplev^sse leguntur, quae ab e^rum
aliquo vel aliquibus sunt om^ ssa. The Evangel^sts themselses supply mutually,
what is omitted by any of the rest, says Innocentius 3 in the Decretals.

There was but one action, says Casaubon, which consisted of the holy and
common banquet, Exercit. 16. page 511.
and from the nobler part was called the supper of the Lord. Totam illam
Corinth. orum actionem, quae sacro and communi convivio constabat, a potiori
part vocat coenam dominicam. The love-feast then and the Lords supper went
together, the love feasts in these times preceding, Estius in 1. Cor. 11. 20.
and the Lords supper immediately following. For as Estius a professor in
Doway reasons. It is likely that in imitation of Christ's example at the first
supper, they celebrat after the love-feast. Next, they stayed not upon other at
the commoun supper, which could not have been, if they had communicated
together before, as the Greek fathers conceave, who are of the other opinion.
Thirdly, the Apostle puts them in mind of trial before, and good
behavior. If these abuses had fallen forth after, the Apostles exhortation had
not been so pertinent. Fourthly, this opinion is confirmed by the custom,
which was observed after in many Churches, even till Augustinus days. Will^ts
in his synopsis. page 677. In the end of those feasts they used to r^ceave the
sacrament. ^or. 11.
Cornelius a Lapide a Professor in Lovane affirms likewise, that the
love-feast preceeded the holy supper. Agape haec tempore Paul fiebat ante non
post sacram synaxin. Druthmarus who wrote about the year 800. says, that the
Apostles celebrated after meat, as Christ did: Fe^^runt autem Apostoli multo
tempore similiter post alium elbum dominicum fumentos. D. Bilson says
likewise, by Saint Paul's words, it should appear, the communion was distributed
to them after meals, Obek. page 653.
but (says he) to us it is all one, whether before or after at their banquets
and feasts it was ministered and even served at the^r t^bles, Page
^s Augustine notes, epist. 118. And again, Because these brotherly repasts
did either end or begin with the Lords supper, they could not devide themselfes
each from other, and disdain the poor at the^r common meat, but they must
off^r the same abuse at the Lords supper, which was m^nistred to them as they
sat at the^r tabl^s immediately before or after their usual and corporal
refreshings. M. P. page 86. and 94.
M. P. a la ^e champion for kneeling, thinking it likely that Christ ministered
the sacrament at Emaus has this observation. Hereupon I think together with
the institution it self, after supper were grounded the love feasts, by
continued occasion whereof, the disciples might possibly for a time use
sitting in the very act of receiving. Second sermon. page 61.
D. Downame Bishop of Derrie confesses sitting to receave the sacrament to
have been used in the Churches in the Apostles times.

I pass by the names of Table, Other circumstances not continued.
and Supper, and breaking of bread, and the opposition made by the Apostle
betwixt communicating at the Lords table, and sitting at the tables of Idols,
which may import this gesture, because I will have occasion to treat of them in
the second part. Only let it be observed that the occasional circumstances of
the first supper were not followed as the gesture was, but upon special
occasion. By the practice of the Apostles, we see the time was indifferent,
Act. 2. and 20. Paraeus de symbolis and ritib. euchar. page 152.
Neque Apostoli ad tempus vespertixum sese adstrinxerunt, sedipro o^ asione
coenam administraru^t, alias d^urno tempore, (...) lege^e est, Act. 2. 46.
alias intempesta nocte ut, Act. 20. quo pacto satis ostenderunt tempus c^enae
esse indi^^e^ens. As for the denomination of supper, it does not import, that
we should celebrat ever at night. It is true, in our language this word Supper
signifies only the evening meal, but the original word (...), signifies
indefinitly the repast that a man take^h any time of the day. The proper Greek
word for a supper is (...) or (...). I refer the Reader for further clearing
of this point to C^saubon his exercitations. Exercit. page 511.
The like may be said of the number, the sex, the parlour, the manner of
sitting, etc. They were not continued by the Apostolical Churches, as sitting
was, which was also continued at some times, and in some places in the ages
following.

CHAP. III.
That sitting in the act of receaving has continued to our times.
HOwbeit the supper of the Lord soon after the Apostles days began to be
stained with some rust, Sitting continued in ages following.
as M. Calvine observes, yet was this gesture of sitting continued at some
times, Calvin. instit. l. 4. c. 17. s. 13.
namely upon the Thursday, which is now called Maundie thursday, the day of the
Lords supper, because upon that day the Lords supper was f^rst celebrate,
Mornaeus de missa lib. 1. c. 1. and 5.
and institute. Mornaeus reports that in the monasteries of S. Bennet, they
have no other form of Mass for three days before Easter, but this following.

The Abbot sanctifies the bread and the wine, and the Monks do communicate
sitting, receaving the elements out of the Abbots hand, and this form is by
them called Mandatum, the commandment. But Bullinger more plainly, that not
only in the monasteries of the Benedictines, but also in the cathedral kirks
upon this day the tables are set in order, they sit down, break bread, and
reach the cup every one to other, every man following the footsteps of the
ancient supper. Vnde nimirum ritus ille ad nos d^manavit, De origin error. page
46
quo vel hodie incathedralibus ecclestis, and in Monasteriis Benedict ^orum ^n
die coenae Domini ante parasceuen, Coe^^a Do^i^^ palam and splendidius
celebratur. Nam Evangelium Iohannis a diacono public praelegitun, and
dulcissima c^llo ^uia Christ (...) abiturus cum discipulis habuit, recita^^ur,
i^terim or (...) disposi is mensis convivae assident, panem azymum frangen es,
and calioem invicem propinantes, and in to^um veteris coenae vestigium
praeferentes. Now it was the custom of old, not only for the Monks, but also
other Christians to communicate upon this day, except offenders, as appears
evidently in Gratians decree. And therefore the gloss both old and new upon
that place, has these words, Decreti part. 3. de consecrat. distat. ^ cap. 17.
Sic olim, modo non sic est, sed Monachi faciunt, that is, It was so of old,
that the faithful did communicate, but it is not so now, only the Monks do
it. Augustine epist. 18. ad Ianuarium reports, that in his time the custom
was in many kirks to communicate after supper upon Thursday. And whereas there
is sundry Canons for communicating fasting, yet that anniversarie Thursday was
excepted, as ye may see in Conc^l. Carthag. 3. can. 31. Ne Sacramenta altaris,
n^si a jejunis hominibus celebrentur, excepto uno die ann^versario, quo coena
Domini celebratur.

What the Monks of S. Bennets order retained, we may very well judge it to
have been the ancient form of celebration upon that day. For no doubt in
that other Christians celebrated after meat which they needed not, they
neglected not sitting and distributing. The two thousand soldiers, who were
reconciled to the Emperor Mauritius, about the year 590. by the travel of
Gregorius Bishop of Antioch, received the Sacrament sitting upon the ground,
Euagrius l. 6. cap. 13.
as Euagrius reports. Doctor Lindsay alleges the like done to the Scottish
army at Bannockburn, in the days of King Robert Bruce. L. his defense, page
53. 54.


But beside this day, which was called Coena Domini, that all the faithful did
communicate, we find that at other times also the people communicated in
sundry places immediately after meat, as Socrates reports of the Aegypt^ans,
Hist. l. 5. c. 23
who dwelt near to Al^xandr^a, and the inhabitants of Thebais, Nam ubiepulati
sunt, and var^is cibariis se satur^runt sub vesperam oblatione fact a mysteriis
communicant, Ni^ephorus reports the same. Nicephor. l. 12. c. 34.
Balsamo upon the 90 (...) of Concilium Trullanum says, the devoter sort upon
Saturday at midnight fate in the kirk and communicate. Alexander de Holes in
the second part of his tractat. concerning the Mass, says, The Pope
communicates sitting in remembrance, that the Apostles at the last supper
communicated sitting. Si quaeratur quare Dominus Papa sed endo communicate,
Potest dici quod hoc fit in recordation^m, quod ^eatus Petrus, and alii
Apostoli, sedendo corpus Domini in coena ultima acceperunt.

The Waldens^s, who are justly called the pure seed of the ancient kirk, and
have continued since the days of Pope Silvester, some think from the days of
the Apostles, says Rainerius the Inquisitor, and their enemy, celebrated the
Communion sitting. Concern^ng the supper of the Lord their faith was, that it
was orda^n^d to be eaten, and not to be showed or worshipped, for a memorial,
not for a sacrifice: First volum page 209. edit. 1610.
to serve for the present ministration, and not for reservation, to be received
at table, and not to be carried out of doors, according to the use of the
primitive Church, when they used to communicate sitting, and this they prove by
an old Chronicle called Chronica gestorum, says Master Fox in his acts and
monuments. His warrant I find in their apology against one Doctor Augustine,
which is extant in Lydii Waldensia, Existo manifestum est, quod primitiva
ecclesia hane fidem habuit, and illam, confessa est, and non fecit reverentiam
hu^c sacramento, quia illo tempore exemplo Christi sedentes statim acceperunt
and nihil retinuerunt, nec extra domum extulerunt, and haec institutio
di^stetit, sicut Chronica gestorum estendunt. The like they have in the
confession of their faith sent to Vladiflaus king of Hungary. Namque
discipulis Christus discumbentibus dedie utendum.

Luther expounding the epistle upon Saint Stephens day, says, Christ so
instituted the sacrament, that in it we should sit at the sacrament. But all
things are changed, and the idle ordinances of men, are come in place of divine
ordinances. Zwinglius setting down the form of c^lebration used at Berne,
Zwingl. expositio fidei Christianae edita Bu^ling. anno 1536.
Zurick, Basile, and other neighbor towns, says, Sedentes and tacit
auscultantes verbo Domini edimus and bibimus coenae sacramentum: Sitting and
harkning with silence to the word of the Lord, we eat and drink the sacrament
of the supper. Alas^o I have cited already. Not only the strangers Churches at
London in his time communicated sitting, but even to this day other Churches in
the Low countries, etc. Other Churches as in Pole such as adheered to the
confession of Hel^etia sat, as we may see in Confensus Poloniae. Standing not
so convenient as sitting.


Standing about the table may consist with the distribution of the elements by
the communicants, but in regard by it is pretended more reverence, the gesture
of sitting is indirectly taxed, and that pretended reverence takes away that
representation of familiar f^llowship, whereof sitting is a more lively
representation, seeing standing is not the usual and ordinary gesture at
civil feasts. Communicating in passing by does not only indirectly take
sitting, but takes away the ^oresaid distribution, Of which more afterward.

THE SECOND PART.
Concerning the unlawfulness of kneeling in the act of receaving, etc.
CHAP. I.
Kneeling in the act, etc. not warranted by the example of Christ and his
Apostles.
WE should (as we said before) take us in all doubts to the surest way.
Kneeling not warranted by the example of Christ.
Our warrant for sitting can not be doubted of. We have the example of Christ
and his Apostles, and the practice of the apostolical Church for warrant to
sit, but not to kneel. When Christ himself ministered and was present, the
Apostles kneeled not. Though the Apostles did not always worship Christ while
he was present, especially being occupied in cruel and common acts, yet upon
extraordinary occasions they and others worshipped him, Matthew. 8. 2. and 9. 18.
and 14. 33. and 20. 20. Luke 5. 8. Ioh. 9. 38. Nor yet directed any outward
adoration to God the Father. Though they were sitting at supper, yet they
m^gh^s^on have changed their gesture, especially seeing the leg^ll supper was
finished, and Christ's Supper began, says W^ll^ts, page 648. Instit. lib. 4. c.
37. sect. 33.
They who receave, as is commanded, w^thou^ adoration, are secure that they
depart not from Gods commandment, then the which securit^e there can be
nothing be^ter, when we intrepris^ any thing. They have the example of the
Apostles, whom we read not to have adored prostrate, but as they were sitting
they receav^d, and did eat. They have the pract^se of the Apostol^ck Churches,
where it is declared, that the Faithful did communicate, not in adoration, but
in breaking of bread, says Calvine.

Beza in his disput against Iodocus Harchius says, So l^ke, as when the Lord
truly to be adored as God and man, Beza centra Harch. vol. 3. page 182.
at table did inst^tute this holy supper, that the Disciples arose to the end,
that falling upon their knees, they might receav^ that bread and wine out of
his hand. And so lik^ as the Ap^s^les were ignorant how to deliver to the
Churches the mann^r how to celebrate these holy mysteries. It is known well
enough, that the Love feasts could hardly, or sca^ce a^^ll ^dmit g^niculation.
Agapa^ quidem certe constat (...) quidem geniculationem admississe. Hist.
sacrament. lib. 4. page 182.
Hospi^nsa (...) The Waldenses in the apology above (...) hujus testimonio
est, quod Dominus noster Jesus C^ristus sedentibus ded^t, and successores longo
tempore per domos fregerunt panem, and acceperunt cibum cum benedictione, and
non fecerunt reverentiam.

CHAP. II.
Kneeling in the act of receaving is not suitable with the form of a banquet,
or use of a supper-table.
THis holy action is denominate the Lords table, Kneeling not suitable to the
Suppertable.
and the Lords supper, from the use of the one, and forms of the other.
Wonderful is the subtilitie of our Doctor, L. page 51.
who answers, that the sustaining of meat set on the table is the only use of
a table, but of beds and furmes to sit upon. We say, this also is the use of a
table, that the guests, or persons invited may sit at and about it, and partake
of the meat set upon the table. Otherwise, if there be no use of a table but
to set meat upon it, a dressour or a cupboord may be called a table. Whereas
they say, the altar is called the table of the Lord Malach. 1. and yet none did
sit at it. True and so do the Papists also call the lid of their altar a table.
But it is plain we speak of a supper or feasting table.

The Altar is called the Lords table, because the Lords meat, ( Levit. 22. 25.)
that which was burnt with fire in oblation to GOD, was consumed on it. But the
Lords supper is called the Lords table, because our Lord and Savior appointed
it for his guests, whom he inviteth to it. So the table of the show bread might
be called the Lords table, but not in our sense, not a supper or feast table,
and therefore impertinentlie alleged by L. page 54. Kneeling is a gesture
more agreeable to the Popish altar, where the Priests beside communicated
kneeling, then with a feast table wherewith it agrees not at all. We have put
down altars, says Alasco, and use a table, because it agrees better with a
supper, and the Apostle has given the title of a table to denom^nate the Lords
supper. And again, The terms Supper, and Table of the Lord, ver^e familiar
with the Apostle Paul, seem to require sitting rather then standing, kneeling,
or passing by.

Where the Apostle says, L. page 43. 44.
Ye cannot partake of the table of the Lord, and the table of devils: Our
Doctor says, there is no material and artificial table to be understood, but
things offered to Idols in the one speech, and Christ's body and blood in the
other. But both are to be understood: for meat offered to Idols can not be
called the table of devils, unless there had been a material table, upon
which the meat was set. The Apostle tells us, that they sat at these tables
in the Idols chapels, 1 Cor. 8. 10. The Idolaters had a table, whereon they
eated the remainder of the sacrifice, which was offered upon the Altar, as the
Jews had, Habebant Iudiei primum altaria ubi sacrificabant, deinde mensa^,
quas instr^ebant reliquiis ob^^i jam sacrificis, atque in illis mensis
epulabantur, says Zanchius, Tilen. synt. de sacrif. missae sect. 32. Wille^s
synops page 478 edit. 1614.
tom. 4. col. 466. See Tilenus, Willets, and Cornelius a ^ap^de, a Popish
writer upon 1 Cor. 10. 21. and 1 Cor. 8. 10. So the by table of the Lord must
likewise be understood, not the bare elements, or as the Doctor speaks, the
body and blood of Christ in the sacrament, but with all a material table. And
Beza out of the same verse, 1 Cor. 10. 21. infers, that in the primitive
Church they had material tables, and not altars. Willets infers the like in
his Synopsis. page 681.
The Lords supper then is called the Lords table, by a trope called Metonymia
subjecti, because the elements were set on the table, when Christ said, This
cup (meaning the wine which was in the cup) Is the new testament in my blood,
the metonymicall speech imports necessarlie, that he had a material cup in
his hand, when he uttered these words. But says the Doctor it was possible
for a man to sit at both the material tables. It is true, if ye look to
ability and not to right or warrant, Ad possibilitatem facti non juris.
Apostolis demonstrat. Corinthios bona conscientia non posse esse participes
conviviorum idolatricorum, quippe qui participes esse soleant coenae Domini,
A^stedius in supplimente. page 45.

We require not of necessity an artificial table of timber consecrated, and
set apart for that use only. A bull hide or a plot of ground may serve in time
of necessity, and answers analogically to a standing table, as the plot of
ground did, whereabout the multitude sat in rows by fifties and fifties, Mark
6. Neither do we stand upon the fashion, whither it be long or round. We look
to the use more then to the matter o^ fashion, and require, that the
Communicants always sit tablewise, that they may observe the form of a feast.

The Ethnicks of old thought the Gods were present, when they feasted at their
ta^les.

Ante foces ^lim longis considere mensis
M^s erat and mensae credere ad^sse deus. Ovid. Fast. 5

The Poets bring in sometime their Gods feasting (...) their tables. The Jews
say, That when some alter^a^^^n arose in the house of Ishbosheth the son of
Saul, the servant incontinent spread the table, and the alteration ceased.
There is a noble saying of Bensyra, Mensa parata sive posita contentio
tollitur. Men^am and salem non transgredi, was an old proverbiall speech
importing, that the table, was, and should be a band of fellowship.

The other denomination imports, The Communion celebrate in form of a feast.
that this holy action was celebrat, as a supper or in form of a feast or
(...). Piscator says, That the holy supper was so institued, and at the first
time so celebrated by our Lord and his disciples, Piscator in Matthew. 26. in
observationi^bus in versu 26. and seqq.
while they sat together at table, that it had the ^^ew or resemblance of a
banquet, Ita ut haec actio habuerit (...) convivit, imo fuerit convivium, sed
sacrum, and (...) divine ca^se, and ad piorum c^nsolationem institu^^m. Plessie
says likewise, Mornaeus de eucharist. lib. 4. cap. 7.
That of old, and not at the (...) only, this sacred supper was celebrated in
the for^e of a banquet. (...) sacrum coenam o^im c^nvivii instar, in quo
discumbeba^ur, celebratam, cujus etiamnum (...) norum mandato vestigium. The
Waldenses (...) the supper in form of a banquet, says their ene^^ Hayneri^s.
Now the form of a feast or banquet (...) not kneeling. None entertaineth men
after that (...) Alasco, Forma min^^ster. ecclesia^ster.
tbat they who are invited to a banquet (...) standing, walking, or kneeling,
but they will the (...) at table, that all may eat together with repose of
(...) and mind. They use to cause servants stand, or walk ^^^hout the table,
not these who are invited. Kneeling is not a gesture which has been used at
feasts or banquets, but rather a gesture of supplicants. Plessie, ye see,
says, Conviv^i instar in quo discumbebatur.

They say, It may be called a supper in respect of the thing signified, whereof
the souls of the faithful are partakers. This is just the Jesuits answer, for
the bread without the cup; But is not the spiritual supper represented by the
external resemblance of a supper. Sacramentu^ hoc nego dici convivium ratione
rei ipsius significatae, sed ratione significationis sumptae a rebus
visbiilibus, says Cham^er de ^ucharist. lib. 8. cap. 6. number. 26. It may be
called a supper rightly, howbeit it resemble not a supper in all things.
Neither do we require all the forms used at common feasts, but these which
Christ the Institutour and master of the feast thought sufficient. And this is
likewise an answer to that which they allege for other religious feasts, that
they kneeled not at the eating of the passover, because it was coena recta a
full meal, and endured a good space, but the action of the communicant is
soon dispatched. For it is not the length or shortness of time, that we
consider so much as the form of a feast, whereunto the gesture of kneeling is
not suitable. The same forms, which were used at the close of the paschall
supper, were used at this, with a little change. Further, they kneeled not at
any part of the paschall supper, no not when the cup of praise was reached
from hand to hand, which was done in a very short time, or when the bread was
eaten in the quantity of an olive, and less then an egg.

We desire this to be observed throughout all this dispute, that if we will
speak not in the terms invented by men, Observation upon the form of speech.
as to receave or give the sacrament or eucharist, but in scripture language,
as to celebrate the Lords supper, to partake of the Lords table, to come
together to break bread, Act. 2. 46. Act. 20. 7. the weakness of all
arguments for kneeling will appear more clearly, and on the other side, the
pith of our arguments for a table gesture, namely sitting.

The ancient Doctors, On the Lords supper, part. 1. page 8.
says Moulins, had done better, if they had held themselves to the terms
expressed in God^ word: for they had not by this means (though besides their
meaning) opened the door to this a buse, giving example to others which came
after them, to invent other new names less proper, and to pluck away from this
sacrament the inscrtption, which served to show the nature thereof, for the
small^st faults can Satan manage with dexterity, and by the least sparks in a
small time kindle a great fire. But, says he, the manner of speech usual
among the Apostles, to wit, to come together to break bread, is become foolish
and vain in this age.

It were harsh language to use these phrases; They brake bread together
kneeling, they compassed the table of the Lord kneeling, they celebrate the
supper of the Lard kneeling. To shu^t this harshnesse, the common phrases are,
to receave the sacrament, or eucharist, or sacramental elements kneeling.

CHAP. III.
The distribution of the elements by the Communicants among themselfes
excludes kneeling in the act of receaving.
TO kneel for adoration, The distribution by the Communicants excludes
kneeling.
and to break and distribute the bread, and reach the cup from hand to hand,
are not compatible. Nor was it ever heard that the like was practiced in any
part of the world, but where Doctor Lindsey has been, that is, at Dundy, as
appears, page 63. But what is absurd or gross in that man's eyes? Can the
Communicant be both adoring God upon his knees, and at that very instant be
reaching the elements to his brother likewise kneeling and adoring. Ye have
heard out of Culvine before, that the faithful in the Apostolical Churches did
not communicate with adoration, but breaking of bread, as if adoration and
breaking of bread could not consist together. We shall have occasion again to
treat more of confusion of actions, or different acts and parts of Gods worship.

Christ reaching the cup to his disciples, Christ commanded them to devide the
cup.
commanded them to divide it among them, Luke 22. 17. This cup is the
evangelicall cup, or which is all one, the last paschall cup changed into the
evangelicall. Luke applies Christ's protestation, that he would drink no more
of the fruit of the vine, etc. to the cup, which he commanded them to divide
among themselfes. But that protestation is applied to the communion cup by
Matthew and Mark, who make mention only of the cup of the Lords supper, in the
verses immediately preceding. If it had not been the communion cup, how could
Christ protest, that he would drink no more of the fruit of the vine in this
life, if he was to drink incontinent after of the communion cup, as they
oppose the paschall cup to the evangelicall. Cyprian by this protestation
proves that vine was in the cup, Hierom. epist. ad Hedibiam.
Epist. 63. ad Coecilium. Hierom says, Christ was both Conv^va and convivium,
the fellow-feaster, and the feast it self; commedens, and qui comedi ur, one
who did eat, and was eaten. The old hymn bears the same, Se nascens dedit
socium, Clemens Alexan. in p^edagog. ^. c. 2.
convescens in edulium. See another hymn to the same purpose cited before.
Clemens Alexandrinus disputing against the Euc^atits, who abhorred wine,
proves, that Christ himself drank wine, by this, that he drank of this cup.
When the Schoolmen would prove, that wine was one of the elements at the
evangelicall supper, they cannot find a (...) all the Evangelists, but in this
protestation. I think there is no man will deny that wine was in the cup,
Muscul. de coena Domitu^.
says Museulus, seeing the Lord said, Matthew. 26. Luke 22. That he would drink
no more of the fruit of the w^ne. Fulk (...), The demonstrative pronoune This,
Mat^h. 26. 29. declares that he spoke of the wine in his hand, tha^ is, of the
communion cup. Dominus etiam in^nducavit, utest communis sententia, says
Bellarmine de euchar. ^t. lib. 4. cap. 16. Further Christ in his protestation
alludeth to the Canon or custom of the Jews. forbidding to taste of any thing
after the last cup, which was called the cup of praise. Annot. in Marc. 14. 25.
Alludit ad morem quo nefas crat post poculum illud apolyticon quicquam cibi in
posterum diem (...), says Beza. Meuschii defens. harm. generalis cap. 4.
Theobaldus Meuschius proves likewise by this custom of the Jews, that this
protestation concerned the communion cup. To imagine that Christ protested
twice, and that he bad devide the one, and not the other, is a fiction without
any ground in the text. For none of the Evangelists make mention of two
protestations, or to what end two, seeing the last paschall cup and the
evangelicall was all one, the one being changed in the other. Or to what end
should he have bidden them devide the paschall cup more then the evangelicall.
And if there were two protestations for two several cups, the later should
have crossed the former. Vasquez proves by this protestation, that Luke meant
only of one cup, howbeit he makes mention of it twice, that it was in the
communion cup, that the protestation contains the cause, wherefore he willed
them to drink of it, and devide it among them, because now at his last
farewell, In 3. part. tom. 3. quast. 78. number. 41.
he would testify his love to them, and join them in mutual love to other.
Ipsos inter^e mut^a charitate conjungeret, dum ex eodem calica eis propinaret.
Another reason, that the cup, which Christ commanded them to divide, was the
communion cup, is, that he gave thanks; when he took it in his hand. Matthew
and Mark refer the thanksgiving to the communion cup. Luke therefore, makes no
mention of this thanksgiving, when he makes mention of the cup the second
time, because he had made mention of it before; But uses an article referring
to that cup, of which he had made mention before (...), as Euthymius has
observed. Luke then by way of anticipation, before he come to the order of the
institution, brings in Christ protesting in the 17. verse, that the
protestation of not drinking more, may be joined with the protestation of not
eating more, preceding in the former verse. Therefore when he comes to the
order of the institution, verse. 20. he omitteth the protestation and
thanksgiving, which are recorded by other Evangelists, because he made mention
of them before, verse. 17. and 18. This anticipation or inversion of order in
the Evangelist Luke, was observed by Augustine and Euthymius, Barradius the
Jesuit, Jansenius, and Swarez. Swarez. in 3. part. tom. 3. p. 909.
Meuschius observes other inversions in the same chapter. For Judas went out
immediately after he got the sop, and consequently before the evangelicall
supper. And yet Luke makes mention of his going out after he has set down
the evangelicall supper. Beza conjectureth, that through the negligence, and
caresesnesse of writers of manuscripts, the verses have been transposed, and
not by the Evangelist himself, and that the 19. and 20. verses should be
subjoyned to the 16, and that the 17. and 18. verses should be subjoyned to the
19. and 20. Me^schius says, It is likely, yea, almost necessary to think,
that the 17. and 18. verses were taken out of the institution of the supper
which follows, and placed here by the negligence of Scribes. Verisimile
igiturest and prope necessarium hos versiculos ex sacrae coenae inst. tutione
huc esse a scribis trajectos. I might, if it were needful, cite more
testimonies, that the protestation concerned the communion cup, and
consequently that Christ bad them devide it, but the reasons I have brought are
of themselfes snfficient to evince it. L. 62.
And L. does not gansay it.

But yet, says he, Christ's meaning was not, that they should reach the cup to
other, but that one should not drink all out. This silly shift he has
borrowed from Bellarmine de eu^haristia lib. 4. cap. 25. B^canus de (...) sub
utraque specie. c. 10. has the same. Will he have the first set down the cup
that the next may take it. But this is ridiculous or superstitious, not
accipere, but sumere. Nor yet gave he to every one the cup out of his hand,
which had been sufficient for parting of it, if no further had been intended,
but only to the first, the first reached it to the second, Hospin. hist. sacra.
l. 1. c. 1. and lib. 2. c. 1. p. 31.
and so sorth, says Hospinian. So says Piscator on Matthew 26. So says
Swarez the Jesuit, speaking of the cup, Fuit per (...) as Ap^stolorum manus ab
uno ad al^um delatus. Swarez in 3. part. Thomae tom. 3. p. 861. Bellarm. de
euchar. l. 4. cap. 25. Piscator in Matthew. 26. v. 26. in schoilis.
And so says Bellarmine, Calicem autem n^n fregit, nec d^v^sit ipse
discumbentibus, sed dedit integrum ^ unus alteri porrigeret. The last paschall
cup it self; which was changed into the evangelicall, was reached from hand to
hand. Christ then divided it not, but bad them devide it among themselfes, as
the manner was at the paschall, and is usual at common feasts. To drink of
one cup, represents fellowship in one common benefit, but not that
communieation of mutu^ll love and amity, which is represented by reaching the
same cup to other. The guests at civil banquets of old, entertaining others
courteously, Antiquita^um convivialium lib. 3. cap. 10.
reached a cup of wi^e to others, which cappe they called philotefia,
metonymica^^y, because it was a symbol of love or fr^endship, which name any
man may justly impose upon the cup of the hol. supper of the Lord, says
Stu^kius. In iis eaim, amicitiae ergo humanite^se mut^^ accipi^n^es, vini
calicem sibi invicem porrigeb^^^, quem philo^esiam appella^an, metonym ce
nimirum, quia symbolum erat amoris and amicitiae, quo nom ne ver^ssi^ me quis
illud sacrosancti Dom^ni coenae poculum insigni^rit. One of our Doctors says,
That they had in the primitive Church other tokens of love and friendship, as
love feasts, and the kiss of peace, but one token should not justle out
another. Beside that, both are worn out of use, and the kiss is turned into
the kiss of the pax. So much the rather should that sign and token which was
recommended by Christ himself, be preserved.

If there were no more, They distributed not only the cup, but the bread.
but reaching of the cup from one to another, and deviding of it, it were
sufficient to exclude kneeling, howbeit the communicants did not break and
distribute the bread to other. For what reason were there to kneel at the
receaving of the bread, and not at the receaving of the cup. Were it not also
absurd to see the Communicants reaching the cup to other, and the minister
walking along to give to every one the bread. Is the bread holier then the
wine? Analogy requires, that the bread should be distributed by the
Communicants, as well as the wine. When the Evangelists say, Christ gave the
bread, they meant not to every one severally, more then when he gave the cup,
or the disciples the bread to five thousand, Matthew. 14. 19. for Mark 6. 4. they
set the bread before five thousand. Pilat gave the body of Christ, that is
commanded it to be given, Mark. 15. 45. Matthew. 27. 17. Christ said in the
plural number, Take ye, ca^ye, this is my body, as well as he said, Piscat. in
Matthew. 26.
(...) devide ye. It is probable (says Piscator) that (...) brake the bread in
two parts, and gave one of them, ^o him that sate^ arest on the right hand, the
other, to him that sat on the left, and that they reached in order to the
near^st. Tossanus upon Matthew. 26. says the like, and Hospinian, and Estius a
popish writer. Sit autem and Chr^sti discipulos in ul^ima coena fe^^sse nonest
improbabile, ut quibus Chr^stus d^^erit, accipite and dividite inter v^s, Luc.
22. qu^d et side caliced^ctum sit, nihil tamen vetat d^pine similiter intell
gi^ Beza says, Hosp. hist. facr^m. lib. 2. p. 31.
That the manner of their sitting could not permit Christ to give every one
severally the Bread, Estius in 1 Cor. 10. 16 Beza epist. 2.
but as he gave the cup to the nearest, and the nixt reached to the nearest, so
it is probable that those, who sat most remote, received the bread from the
nearest. Moulins maintains, On the Lords supper, 2. part page 97.
That Christ might with as good reason have said, Eat ye all of this, as dr^nke
ye all of this; his reason is, Consider^ng that being set at table among (...)
persons, he could not deliver the bread into every one of the disciples hands:
especially considering that the parties, lying half a long upon beds at the
table, took up more room then they do now adays. The Canon of the Mass
has, Drink ye all of this, Bellarm. de euchar. lib. 4. cap. 25.
Mand^cate ex eo omnis, which Bellarmine alle^geth, they have received by
tradition from the Apostles. But to us there is the like force in the words,
Eat ye, and Eat ye all of this; for speaking in the plural number, he spoke to
all.

The Apostolical Churches, The Apostles continued this distribution.
and such as in the ages following celebrated, as near as they could, to the
^^terne, continued this distribution. P. acknowledges page 92. 101. 104. that
the Communicants at the first supper did communicate the bread and cup one with
another, as also in the Apossles times, page 95. Of the Monks of Saint Bennets
orders ye may see before, and that was a footstep of the order observed
universally before upon the anniversarie day, called the day of the Lords
supper. Raynerius in summa.
Friar Raynerius says, The Leonists, for so he calls the W^ald^rses,
celebrate the sacrament of the ^uchar^st in their conventicles ( so it pleased
the Friar to call the assembly of the persecuted) r^hearsing the words of the
Gospel at their table, and participating mutually as was done at Christ's
supper; In conventiculis suis celebrant, verba illa evangelii rec^ an^es in
mensasua, sibique mutuo participantes, sicut in Christi coena. Bull^nger says,
That the supper of the Lord is then rightly celebrated, when the communicants
distribut the bread and the cup among themselfes. Bulling dec^d. 6. sermon. 9.
fol. 364.
Idcirco legittime coenam Domini celebrantes, mu^^o inter se panem Demin de
manibus ministrorum Christi acceptum fran unt, distribu(...) and manducant,
poculum insuper Domini de manibus m^nistrorium Christi acceptum, inter
sedistributam omnes pota^. fol. 364.
And again, Primogen^^ simply tati and institutioni magis conven^t, and sedere
and sacram^nt aln manus propr^ as accipere de man bus praesidentium, deinde
vero frangere, percipere and alliis impertir. Vt en^m Dominus ad mensam cum
discipulis accubui^, ita dixit porrectis symbolis, fol. 360.
(...)pite, dividite inter vos And again, Acconstat veteres non exhibuisse ca
nantibus buccellas, sed mutuum fr gisse panem. It is well known ( says he)
that the an^ien's gave no to the Communicants at the suppermorsels, but they
brake bread one with another. Hom. 118.
Gualter in his homilies upon Mark setting down the best form of celebration,
requires that they break the bread to other, and distribute the cup, deinde
cum solenni gratiarum action panem inter se mutuo frangant, and poculum Demian
distribu^^ (...) que in coetum illum convenorunt. And when he (...), he
says, Est hic ritus simplicissimu^, and Christi (...) nititur, quae sola nebis
in omnibus sufficere debe^, This is the most simple for me, and is grounded
upon Christ's (...) which alone should be sufficient to us in all things.
Tindall in his tractat upon the Lords supper page 477. requires, that every
man break, and reach forth to his neighbor. In the later consession of
Holvetia, which was approved by many reformed Churches, and by our own, anno
1566. The bread is offered by the Minister, and the words of the Lord are
heard, Receave it, this is my body, divide it amongst you, Drink ye all of
this, This is my blood.

The Lords supper was denominate breaking of bread from that rite, or ceremony
of breaking of the bread by the faithful: It is said, Act. 2. 42. that the
Christians continued in breaking of bread. This place is interpreted of the
sacrament breaking, not only by ancient, but also modern writers, both popish
and Protestant, as also Act. 20. And the Syrian interpreter translateth it
eucharist in both the places. But the breaking of the bread in both the places
is attributed not to the Ministers or Pastors only, but to the people also, and
is made common to the whole meeting. In the one place ^^is said, they continued
in breaking of bread: and in the other place yet more clearly, the Disciples
conveened to break bread, which is clearer then if Luke had said, Bellar. de
eu. charist. lib. 4. cap. 24.
they conveened to the breaking of bread. Bellarmine says, that Luke
descriveth what the people did, not what the Apostles did. He might have said,
both the Apostles, and the people.

Estius a popish professor in ^^way acknowledges the same, Estius in 1 Cor.
10. 16.
and says, Fiebat autem ^ujus panis fractio Tempore primitive Ecclesiae,
primum quidem (...) sbyter is and diaconis, deinde vero magisque particulatim a
singulis fidelibus, quibus eucharstia, dabatur in manus ut ea n^, si porro
^nter se vel domi inter fuos distribuerent. In the primitive church (says he)
they had the breaking of bread which was first done by the presbyters and
deacons, and after them in smaller pieces by the faithful to whom it was
given, that they might distribute the same among themselfes, or at home among
theirowne. For Luke means so much, when he attributes this breaking to the
faithful in general, Act. 2. For their distributing in the convention he
alleges Act. 20. For distributing at home, he alleges Act. 2. 46.
whereas the meaning is, that the faithful conveened sometime in one house,
sometime in another, for fear of persecution, or not having yet appointed, and
certain places for meeting. The Apostle 1 Cor. 10. 16. says, The bread which
we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? that is, the bread
which we break, distribute, and eat. For the breaking alone by the Minister is
not the communion of the body of Christ, P^nis que^ frangimus (1 Cor. 10.)
idem est, atque inter nos dividimus: The bread which we break, that is, the
bread which we divide amongst us, R. Stephan. glossa in Mat. 26.
says Robertus Stephanus. Whereas the Apostle says, the cup which we
bless, the words may be spoken generally in the persons of all the faithful,
who are present. Qui quidem omnes ^alici benedicunt, eo modo and sensu, quo
omnes ibidem praesentes dicuntur una cum sacerdote offerre, Estius in 1 Cor.
10. 16.
videlicet animi consensu and devotioone, says Estius. The Minister blesses
in name of the rest as their mouth: so the blessing may be attributed to the
people likewise. The Apostle rehearsing the words of the institution, said
(...) but in the plural number, Durand. Rationa^^^. c. 1.
Tak^ ye^, eat ye. (...) says, that the Apostles celebrated as Christ did,
e^ndem (...) teriam in rebus, and formam in verbis. It appears not then, that
the Apostles gave to every one severally, saying to each one, Take thou, eat
thou: but that speaking in the plural number to all at once, the Communicants
brack and distributed among themselfes. Now that rite from which the
Apostolical Church denominate the whole action is sacramental and necessary,
says Paraeus in 1 Cor. 11.

When the holy supper is called breaking of bread, it is not to be imagined,
that there was only communicating in bread, but the whole is denominated from a
part according to a custom of speech usual among the Jews, who used the
phrase of breaking of bread to express their full meals, or common civil
feasts, as Ierem. 1^. 7. As the Grecians on the contrary, took the
denomination sometime from the drinking, and called their feast symposium a
drinking together. Yea, one of the names, which of old was given to this holy
feast, was synaxis. Now (...), Casaub. oxercit. page 537.
says H^sychius, is (...), to drink with other.

The breaking of the bread served for two uses: Breaking of bread for
representation.
First, for representation of Christ's sufferings. If their pouring of the wine
out of the cup into the mouth be a mystical representation of the effusion
of his blood, their breaking may have the like use. We can well allow of a
mystical shedding of Christ's blood in the supper, Against the Rhen^ists, or
Mat. 26. 28.
faith Master Cartwright, for when the wine is powered out of the cup into the
mouth, thereby mystically and sacramentally, is shed the blood of Christ out of
his blessed body into the earth, that is the shedding of it is (...). So says
Prosper in his book of sentences, Dum sangu^^ (...) sidelium sunditur, sanguinu
de latere effusio defignatur Lanfranous, Lanfranc. de euchar. Alger. de
sacrament. lib. 2. cap. 8. Chamierde cucharl. 7. c. 13. number. 14. Bullinger
Decad. 5. sermon. 7.
and A^gerus say the like. Solenne (...) est cum frangitur panis, (...) calix
in^^ fidelium funditu, tunc significari sacrificium illud quod in cruce
immolatun est, says Chamierus. The Communicants taking, eating, drinking, are
mystical, why may not also his breaking of the bread. Bullinger says, Ac nos
ipsi quidem panem Domini proprits frangi^us manibus. Nos enim ipsi in culpa
sumus quod ille ait^itus. That is, We break the bread of the Lord with our
own hands: for we ou^selfes are to be blamed, that he was bruifed. Our sins
wounded him, we crucified him. We reach not only the bread and cup to other,
but partake our selfs. For we believe not only that he suffered for others,
but in special for our selfs. Gualt. Homil. 295. in Matthew.
Gualter in his Homilies upon Matthew. Vt vero Christus panem accepit, and
fregit, postquam gratias egisset, ita eundem discipulos quoque accipere and
frangere voluit, ut ita singuli admonerentur hunc ad se privatim pertinere, se
item necis illius authors esse, ad hac debitores omnibus ut eos in Christi,
atque salutis que in eo habetur, societatem adducant. That is, As Christ had
taken the bread, and after thanksgiving brack, so he would have his disciples
to do the like, that thereby every one might be admonished, that he belongs
to every one of them particularly, that they were the authors of his death,
that they are debtours to all, to bring them to the fellowship of Christ and
the salvation which is to be found in him. And in his 118. homil. upon Mark, he
says, Fractio panis Christi passionem and mortem representat, and dum singuli
panem ipsi frangunt, se ex little numero esse fatentur, qui Christo mortis
authors fuerunt, id quod peccatorum (...) servit, and animum ad punitentiam
extimulat.

The other use is for distribution, Breaking of bread for distribution.
and reaching to other, to testify mutual love and amity, which duty is
expressed in a more lively manner, then if they should drink only of one cup
together. Therefore L. his reason page 60. that it appertains only to the
minister, be, cause it is mystical, is naught, for it serves both for
repraesentation and distribution. Fractio non solum ad distribuendum, sedetiam
ad significandum ordinatur, Bellarmine de missa, lib. 2. cap. 10. For the
representation ye have heard already sundry Divines. If two should drink out
of one cup, and yet not reach it to other, it might well be thought, there were
no great kindness betwixt them, Communion in one common benefit is one thing,
and the communication of mutual duties and tokens of love and friendship
another. It is one thing to the guests to participate of the same dainties,
which are to be united to their bodies, another to interchange and communicate
with other tokens of love. Justly may the communion cup for this cause be
called Philotesia, says Stuckius. To divide the bread also, Se^rariu^ in
Iosuam 6. 9. quest 6.
and to eat together in token of love and been volence, was a custom observed
in all the oriental countries, and is yet observed in ma^y countries of the
west, say Lyra and Arias Montanas, as Serrarius the Jesuit relates. Bulling
(...) decad. 5. sermon. 7.
Facit ad amicitiam conciliandam, reparandam, and conservandam, quod de uno
pane participamus, quod panem offerimus fratribus, quodque de manu fratrum
poculum accipientes bibimus. Non enim aliam ob causam videntur veteres coenam
appellasse synaxin, says Bullinger. That is, It serves for the procu^^ng,
reparing, and keeping of friendship, that we participate of one bread, that we
offer bread to our brethren, and that we drink taking the cup out of the hands
of our brethren. It seems for no other cause the ancients called the Lords
supper Synaxis. And in the 9. sermon of the same decade, Quondam arctissima
faed ra fractione panis consecrabantur. Of old, Leagues or covenants were
confirmed by breaking of bread. Hom. 118. in Marc.
Gualter says, Panem and peculum pii inter se distribuunt, quod illis
charitatis officium commendat, and de conjunctione mutua eos admonet, ut se
unum iu Christo corpus esse intelligant, and sibi invicem officiis mutuis
inserviant, quemadmodum in corporibus nostris membra facere videmus. The godly
distribut the bread and wine among themselfes, which recommendeth to them the
duty of chariti, and puts them in mind of mutual conjunction, that they
may understand that they are one body in Christ, and serve one another with
mutual duties, as we see the members to do in our own bodies. Zwinglius in
his exposition of the Christian faith, Expos. fidei Christian. ad Reg.
Christian in 80. fol. 40.
sets down a notable proof of this. How that some sitting together
casually, and participating after this manner, were reconciled, who before had
been at variance, and that this fell forth often. Deprehensum est saepenumero,
quod quidam, qui tem^re consederant, qui tamen simultates and odiaprius inter
se exercuissent, ex hac participatione sive panis, sive potus, animi
impotentiam deposuerunt. The ancients had the kiss, which was a familiar kind
of salutation among the Orientals, as the striking of hands with us, they
joined hands also, and embraced another at the communion. Seeing so many
signs, and protestations of love were thought requisite at this banquet of love,
ought we not to be the more careful to retain that sign, which was practiced
in the pattern.

I end this section with a passage out of Lauaterus, descriving the form of
celebration used in the Church of Zurich, to wit, with sitting, and the
communicants distributing: posthac per totam ecclesiam ministri, De ri^ibus
ecclesiae Tigurinae c. 13.
that is, those that serve, az mumpanem in ^^tinis circumserunt, at accipit
quisque particulam de exhibito pane, and postea reliquam partem dat proxime
assidenti: Deinde sequuntur alii ministri cum poculis and cantharis, ac praebet
alius alii poculum Dominicum, atque sit omnes de uxo pane participant.

If none must give the sacramental bread, Not necessary that the minister
dispense the elements.
but the minister, because he acts the person of Christ, who gave his own
body, by the same reason, they may not reach the cup to other, as the Apostles
did at the first supper, where they represented the faithful, and communicate
not as pastors, but as disciples, as guests, as faithful, as all our divines
do hold, and among the rest Musculus himself cited by L. page 59. All that was
done in prison, Joseph was the doer of it, because he was direct our, and
commander of every thing that was to be done, Genesis 39. 22. ^. confesses the
cup may be reached from one communicant to another. Proceedings at Perth
asscmbly, page 60. 61.
For (says he) he in whose name the commandment is uttered, is properly the
giver and propiner, because by his authority it is given, and by the warrant
of his word it is ceaved. When the King drinks to any of his servants, and
sends it by the hands of his servant, the servant is not properly the giver and
propiner, but the deliverer of the gift and propine. He grants likewise, that
the Communicants may deliver the cup to other, the minister still acting
Christ's person in his own place. page 61. 62. So may we say, that Christ at
the first supper, or the minister representing Christ's person, is properly the
giver of the bread, because by his commandment or direction it is given. When
I brake the five loaves among five thousand, that is, brake and gave to the
disciples to set before them to be further broken. The disciples in setting the
bread before five thousand, Mark 6. 41. gave the bread to five thousand, Matthew.
14. 19. Christ gave the cup to his Apostles, say the Evangelists, because at
his direction they reached one to another. Swarez says, Swarez in ^. part.
tom. 3. p. 861.
It is one thing to distribute as a dispenser, or as of power, another to
touch, carry, or apply this sacrament to the mouth of the receaver. Aliud est
dispensative, seu ex potestate distribuere hoc sacramentum, aliud vero illud
tangore, defer, aut ad os sumentis applicare. Let them make of the word
dispense what they will, we say the Communicant may carry the bread, and apply
it to the hand of another Communicant. Again, if none but the minister might
do it, because he represents Christ's person, then might not the deacon in the
ancient Church do it, because he represented not Christ's person, yet his giving
was called dispensing. Vazquez in part. 3. tom. 3. disp. 219. number. 12. and 13.
Vazquez confesses, That it is not forbidden by divine law, that the sacrament
be ministered, or carried by a layman, but by humane laws. Non quia jure divino
vetitum sit hoc sacramentum per laicum ministrari aut deferri. But humane laws
forbad laymen to touch it with their hands. I would ask, when the minister
comes from his own place, and goes along to deliver the elements, how does
he act the person of Christ the master of the feast. There can be no other
reason of this guise, but to nourish a superstitious conceat, that it is holier
to receave out of the h^nd of the minister, who perhaps is a Judas, then out of
the hand of a faithful brother, as if his hands profaned or polluted it. Are
not the peoples hands as holy as the ministers? says P. page 313. Nay
superstition increasing, at last they might not take the sacrament in their
own hand to put it in their mouth, but it behoved the priest to put it in
their mouth. Such superstitious conceats condemn Christ and his Apostles, and
the faithful in their time who distributed to other, and deprive us of the
profitable uses of fraction, or breaking of bread, whereof we have already
treated. The representation and form of a feast or banquet is not observed. It
is rather Sportula, which is opposite to coena, then coena, that is, rather
like a dole of meat, then a supper. For Sportula was a dole of meat distributed
by the princes to the people, which was called Sportula, from the panier, or
basket, in which it was brought.

This giving of the elements to every one severally, The inconveniences
following upon the ministers dispensing.
whither the communicants sit, stand, or kneel, brings in also confusion of
actions, and private communions in the public assembly. For while the
ministers are giving the elements to every one, the people is in the mean time
exercised in hearing the word read, or psalms sung, and hear not what they
say to the communicants, nor do the communicants understand, what is read or
sung in public. Yea, sometimes two ministers will be speaking at once to
sundry communicants. So the communicants communicate a part, and might as well
go aside, or to an I Will of the Church, to communicate, yea, and far better.
For the minister can scarce know his own voice, when he speaks to the
commucant, being troubled with the exercise of the whole congregation, as one
of the ministers of Edinburgh confessed publicly in pulpit. The exercise is
dead, and cold, when the minister gives to every one severally. Therefore they
are forced to reading and singing in the mean time, to drive away tediousness,
and so bring in confusion of actions. But if they would speak in the plur^ll
number to the communicants, as Christ did, saying, Take ye, eat ye, and not to
every one, Take thou, eat thou, the action should be more comfortable. For the
phrase of speech in the plural number, ^fittest (says Fenner in the doctrine
of the sacraments) to note ^ut the fellowship and communion of the Church in
this work, the person of Christ by the minister bidding all his guests with
one love, as from him, to be merry, and eat with faith one spiritual meat
togeither. It sets an edge upon us, when with one hear, as it were, and
together we apply every one of us to our selfs, that which is uttered by the
minister. But when the action is prolonged with speaking to every one, the
minds of men languish and wander.

Our Doctor says, L. page 56. Christ spoke in the plural number at the
deliverie.
they utter the words in the plural number at the consecrating of the
elements, he means at the rehearsal of the words of the institution, at, or
before the thanksgiving, but Christ uttered them at the deliverie of the
elements, which they do not. Next (says he) they apply the general command to
every one in particular, as if the Apostles, or other communicants, to whom the
words were uttered in the plural number, did not apply to themselfes
particularly, when every one did take, eat, and drink. And the Doctor
himself confesses, that every worthy receaver ought to apply the words to
himself in particular. If Christ spoke in the plural number, when the
communicants were so few, what would he have done, if there had been a great
multitude present. Another profound Doctor imagines, that Christ spoke first
to all generally in the (...) Number, and after in the singular delivering to
every one particularly. But this imagination is without any ground of
appearance in the text. And Swar^z rejects this fancy, because it changes
the order of the text set down with so full consent of the Apostle Paul and
the Evangelists, no reason forcing them so to do. (...) rullairatio cogit,
Suarez in ^ part. tom. 3. page 702.
non oprte ordinem textus mutare, praefertim cum ab Evangelistis and Paulo
tanta consensione obiervatus sit.

This rate of fraction or breaking of bread after thanksgiving, Paraeus de
symbolis page 166
either for representation or distributation, is not enjoined by the English
service book. Paraeus reports, That the Lutheran Churches have it not, but
have the bread cut in small pieces, before it be brought to the hand of the
minister, which is not the sacramental breaking.

The Doctor says, Distribution continued in ages, following;
That in the ancient Church the sacrament was delivered by the pastor, or the
deacon who helped him, and supplied his place, but not by any of the people. If
so were, we ought to take h^ed, says Cyprian, not what any before us has
done, but what Christ before all has done, we must not follow the custom of
men, Calvin. institint l. 4. c. 13. etc. s. 11.
but the truth of God. Calvin says, That the ancients went nerer to a
judaicall manner of sacrificing, then the ordinance of Christ and course of the
Gospel could suffer. They carried the ^read of the sacrament home to their
houses in Tertullians time, that is, about 200 years (...) Christ. The custom
of giving the communion to infants continued for 600 years. Yet we have
already produced some instances in the contrary, as of the Waldenses, and some
footsteps of the ancient Church, howbeit declining, yet remaining among the
Monks of Saint Bennets order, when they celebrated lebrated according to the
pattern. The deacon, as I have said, represented not Christ's person, and
therefore should not have ministered or delivered the elements, if that were
true, that none should deliver them immediately but the pastor, because he
represents Christ's person. It is like at the first, that deacons ministering
at tables in time of love feasts, served likewise at the communion, which was
conjoined with them, and carried only the platters and cups, out of which the
communicants them selfs took the elements, and distributed. Olim ex patin^
suis quisque ma^ibus suam sumpsit particulam, See Salme^on in Mor^on of the
in^tution ^31.
ut morisfait ad sextam usque synodum, nempe Caesar angustanam, says Salmeron.
Thereafter they gave the elements themselfes, both the bread and the wine, and
did not help the minister going along. In process of time indeed the minister
went along with the bread, and the deacon delivered the cup. And words were
put in their mouth to be uttered at the deliverie, as Sauguis Christi; calix
vitae. At last they were made half priests, Clemens Alexandrinus says, That
the communicants took the eucharist themselfes; Str^^at. l. 1.
Cum eucharistiam quidam, ut mos est, diviserint, permittitur unicui que e
populo partem sumere. In Tertullians time it seems, that in Africa they took
the elements out of the hands of their rulers or presidents, that is, the
bishop, elder, or deacon, when he says, De corona militis c. 3.
Eucharisti ^m non aliorum qu^m de pr^es^. dentium in m^nu sumin^us. For so not
only Ju^^us, but also ^^mel. us in his annotations expone that place. All these
forms were aberrations from the right form, and opened a doreto let in many
corruptions. For if the distribution of the communicants had been at all times
continued, as it was at some times in the year, kneeling had not entered, the
words uttered by Christ at the deliverie of the elements had not been changed,
confusion of actions, and a private form of communicating had not taken place,
the form of a feast, which is now changed into the manner of distributing a
dole, had been preserved. Therefore suppose the distributing of the
communicants were not recommended to us, nor had no other profitable use, make
it only lawful, this is a most profitable use, that it is a bar to hold out
so many corruptions. The first assault therefore was made upon it, at a meeting
in Saint Andrewis, in the year preceding Perth assembly. But that meeting,
neither was nor is acknowledged to be a free general assembly. For as long as
we retain the distribution by the communicants, they perceave there was no
place for kneeling. Therefore as we would stand for the preservation of that
holy action, from being profaned with confusion of actions, and polluted with
private communion, superstitious receaving out of the minister^ hand, and the
idolatrous gesture of kneeling, let us stand for this distribution. Homil. 118.
in Marcum.
What shall we say then of those, who this day ^^ke away the chief parts of
the Lords institution, to wit, the b^e king of the br^ad, and distribution, and
involve this most wholesome m^ster ew^th superstitious, and contentious (...).
They may perhaps have the popes supper, or some other men's, whom they prop^ne
to themselfes to be imitated, but they cannot have Christ's supper, till leav^ng
the i^v^ntions of me^, they foll w^le first institution, ^aith Gu^lt^r. Quid
ergo de illis hodied cem^ts, qui praecipuas institution is dom n^ae parts,
fractionem (...) mirum, and distributionem tollunt, simulque mysterium (...)
saluberrimum superstitiosis, and contentiosis opini^nibus involvunt. Habent
illi fortassis caenam Pape aut alterius cujusdam, quem sibi imitandum
proponunt. At Christi Jesu caenam non habebunt, nisi relictis hominum ad
inventionibus primam ejus institutionem sequantur.

If any man then will ask, Christ's form the most perfect.
where is kneeling forbidden in the act of receaving? We answer, In the
institution. For the whole frame of the pattern forbids it, where magisterio
vel exemplo; by precept or exemple, as Cyprian speaks, we are directed to
celebrat after the form of a feast or banquet, to fit, which is the usual
gesture, and most suitable to a feast, and to break and distribute. Christ's
form was most perfect ( says Bullinger) Bulling. Decad. 5. sermon. 9.
and to what purpose is it the Lord himself having devised a^^st simple and
perfect form, and the Apostles receaving it, to devise another. Who can devise
a better, then the Son of God himself, the supreme high Priest of his
Church: Quorsum attine simpli issima, optima, perfectissima que illa coenandi
formula, ab ipso Christo tradita, and ab Apostolis ejus accepta, comminis^i
aliam? Quis enim m^liorem tradet ipso Dei filio pontifice catholiae ecclesiae
summo? Hospin. histor. sacrament lib. 1. cap. ^. etc. 5.
If another more commedious and better form could have been devised, out of
all doubt ( says Hospinian) Christ would have devised it, and the Apostles
would have recommended it to the Churches; and therefore wills, that if any
thing be found different, either in the nature and proper sense of words, or in
rite or external ceremony from this rule, that it be amended according to the
same, as the most holy, most excellent, most uncorrupted, and most certain
rule. Great. de co^secrat. did. 2. cap. 3.
Sed vide, frater charissime, si quis de antecessoribus nostris, velignoranter,
vel siplmiciter, non hoc servavi^ and tenuit, quod nos Dominus and magisterio
and exemplo suo docuit, potest simplicitati ejus de indulgentia Domini venia
concedi, nobis vero non poterit ignosci; qui nunc a Domino ^dmoniti and
instructi sumus. But see, most dear brother, if any of our ancestors, either
through ignorance or simplicity, has not kept or holden, that which the
Lord has taught us, both by precept and example, his simplicity may be
pardoned of the Lords indulgence, but we cannot be forgiven, who now are
admonished and instructed, says Cyprian. The testimony ye may find in
Gratian.

Doctor Mortoun in his late work of the institution of the supper, page 49.
says, It was good divinity in Cyprian, and pope Julius days, to argue from
the example of Christ's instituti^n negatively, by rejecting such acts, and
accounting them as centrarie to the institution of Christ, which accord not
with his example, and which are not comprised within the Canon of Christ his
hoc facite.

Bellarmine himself puts It out of all doubt, that that is best, which
Christ did, and what he did is to be done, Neque enim dubita^i potest, quin
illud sit mel^us, and faciendum quod Christus feci^, De^ucharist. lib. 4. cap.
7. And yet Master Struther was not ashamed to aver, that Christ's form might
be bettered.

THE FOVRTH PART.
CHAP. IV.
It makes us conform to the Papists in a rite devised, by man horribly
abused, and not necessary.
WE ought not to keep conformity in the worship of God with idolaters,
Conformity with idolaters forbidden.
papists in special, in any rite or ordinance devised by man, specially the
man of sin, if after it has been abused, or be still abused to idolatry or
superstition, if the same be not necessary, though the original were lawful,
far more, if the first use or institution of it was unlawful.

The Lord forbad his people to round the corners of their heads, or mart the
corners of their beard, Levit. 19. 26. and 49. 32. The Egyptians and other
Gentiles, says Becanus, Becan. analogia vet. and novi testamenti.
thought the Gods delighted in the round figure, therefore they rounded their
heads, and builded round temples to them, least the Jews should seem to be
like the Gentiles, they were forbidden to imitate them in this. The Lord would
have his people to be dignosced by other people, by their very habi^s.
Therefore they were frobidden to wear linsey-woolsey, because the Gentiles used
such in the worship of their gods, Aqui^, 1. 2. quaest. 10^, ^^rt. 6. ad 6.
says Aquinas. They were forbidden to sow their field with mingled seed. The
priests were forbidden to make their heads bald, or shave off the corner of
their beard for the dead, Levit. 21. 5. 5. These fashions were observed by
Egyptians, Arabians, Syrians, Canaanits, and others, says Iunius upon that
place, The priests shall neither shave their head, nor suffer their locks to
grow long, Bellarm. de monach. cap. 40.
they shall only powle their head, Ezech. 44. 20. Bellarmine says, This
shaving was not forbidden, because it was evil in it self, but least they
should seem to be like to the priests of the Gentiles, beside whom they dwelt,
who sacrificed to their idols with their whole head shaven. Iunius says,
Howbeit the matter was free, the equity or reason remains. Ne vel sign^, vel
specie quidem communicare nos cum superstitione piet iti adversa opertere. That
is, We must not by any sign or show communi^te with superstition, which is
contrary to piety. They might not plant any groves of trees near the altar of
the Lord, Deuteronomy. 16. 22. the Gentiles did so, Exodus 34. 13. Say not how did
these nation^ se, ve their gods. so will I do likewise, thou shall not do so to
the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 12. 30. After their doing ye shall not do, nor after
their ordinances, Levit. 18. 3. the words are general, howbeit in that chapter
be brought in some instances of their wicked and impious deeds: for he opposes
to that general, the judgments and ordinances of the Lord in general on the
other side. And some instances, we have already brought of facts in themselfes
not abominal le. Although rounding or cutting the hair was in it self
indifferent, yet God would not have it indifferent to his people, but will have
them to be altogether unlike to the aliens and uncircumcised, specially in
those rites, wherein religion was showed, Lyra on Lev. 18. ^. Intendit
excludere e filiis Israelitum omnem Gentilem ritum: Calvin on (...)
He intended to exclude from the children of Isra^l every rite of the Gentiles.
The Gentiles worshipped their Gods in and by images, God would not be so
worshipped, but expressly forbad it in the second commandment. And therefore
says Zanchius, That the sum of the second precept, Zanch. de redempt, l^. r.
c. 14. circa initium.
is, that we must not devise of our own heads any thing in ceremonies, or the
worship of God, nor borrow from the rites of idolatrous nations, but to be
content with these rites and ceremonies, which God has prescrived.

Tertullian says, That Christians might not wash their hands (meaning for a
ceremony) or lay aside their cloaks before prayer, Tertul. de oration. c. 12.
Sic enim adeunt ad idola nationes: because the Gentiles go after that manner
to their idols. And such like, that they might not sit upon beds after prayer,
meaning for a ceremony, Por^o cum perinde faciunt nation^s adoratis
sigillaribus suis residendo, vel prepterea in nobis reprehendi meretur, quod
apud idola c^^e bretur: because the Gentiles do sit, after they h^ve ^dored
their small imag^s, it deserves to be reproved in us, which is obs^^ved beside
ido^s. When he has rebuked Christians for observing some of the Ethnicks
days, De idol. cap. 14.
he cries out, That the nations have a greater regard to their own sect, who
will claim to no solemnity of the Christians, not the Lords day, nor
pentecost, and if they know them, they will not communicate with them, in that
observation, timerent enim ne Christiani viderentur, De corona militis.
for, they wou^d be asray^d last they should seem to be Christian. He stands
much upon this, that a Christian man ought not to go which a laurel garl^nd
upon his head, because the Heathen used so to go. August. confess. l. 6. c. 2.
August ne says, his mother Menica le^t bringing of wine and cakes to the
church, for that she was war^ed, it was a resemblance of the superstition of
the Heathen, Quod superstitioni Gen ilium essent simillima. In the second
council of Bracara it was decreed, Brac. 2. can. 73.
that Christians deck not their houses with laurel and green boughs upon the
first day of the month, quia tota haec observatio paganismi est, because all
this custom is heathnish. The ancients having the like reason, carried
themselfes after the same manner toward Jews and Heretics. They would not
keep Easter on that day that the Jews did. If they had carried themselfes so
constantly, both toward Jews and Gentiles, so much superstition had not entered
into the Church, as we hear of this day. Because the Manichees fasted on the
Lords day, August epist. 86.
they forbore fasting on that day, says Augustine. The fourth council of
Tolledo decreed, Tolled. 4. can. 5.
That once dipping in baptism only be used, not three, n^ videantur apud nos
qui tertio m^rgunt haereticorum approbare assertionem, dum sequuntur and morem;
least these who dippe thrice, seem to approve the assertion of heretic, while
they follow their custom. Brac. 1. can. 32.
The first council of Bracara forbad clergy men ^bstinence from eating of
flesh, to cut off all suspicion of the Priscill^an heresy. To come to our own
times. S^are^ in 3. part. tom. 3. dis^. sect. 2.
Even Suarez the Jesuit says, The Church shunneth all fellowship or appearant
conformity with Jews or other infidels in ce^emonies and observances, as may
be gathered out of Augustine epist. 119. and Epiphanius 3. book against
heresies about the end.

I said, That conformity is to be avoided not only in things impious, but even
in things indifferent, when they are abused to idolatry or superstition,
except they have some necessary uses, howbeit their first use or institution
has been lawful. Last ed^t. page 40^.
Zanchius has this ground, writing upon the second precept. Rive^tus page 205.
Rivetus likewise writing upon the fourth precept of the d^^logue, It is a
rule, that things indifferent, not being necessary, if they be polluted with
idolatry, are to be abolished. Adiaphora non necessaria, horrenda idolomania
polluta esse adolenda. Nay the light of nature has taught even a Pope to
acknowledge this much, howbeit it has not been put in practice, as often, as
occasion required. Distinct. 63. cap. Quia sancta.
Si non nulli ex praedecessoribus nostris fecerunt aliqua, quae illo tempere
potuerunt esse sine culp^, and postea vert^ntur in enrorem and superstiti^nem,
sine tanditate aliqua, and magna cum authoritate destruantur, says Pope
Stephen. That is, If some of our ancestors have done some things, which in the
mean time might be without blame, and after are turned to e^rour or
superstition, let them be abolished without delay, for they have a good
warrant, to wit, the exemple of Ez^kias, who brake the bra^en serpent in
pieces. This is registered in Gratians detree. And the gloss upon this place
says, Successories debere mutare facta and instituta (...) ^essorum etiam
bona, si vid rint ea ess pern ci^sa exempl^, Successors should change the
deeds and ordinaries of the ^ancestours, howbeit good, if they see, they become
pernicious by ill exemple. I added that clause, unless they be of necess^rie
use, to answer to such, as object the abuse of Gods creatures, and things
profitable for the use of man. For the sun, moon, stars, and other
creatures, have been abused and adored, but they are Gods creatures, and of
necessary use. Gold, silver, temples, are profitable helps unto the
necessities of man's life, as Tertullian speaks, Certa subsidia necessi^atibus
vite humanae procur^nt. The gold, brass, and iron of Jericho taken into the
Lords treasury, were the civil goods of idolaters, and had no state in their
idolatrous worship, as kneeling has.

We should shun conformity with Papists in special, because the Pope their
head is the great Antichrist, and we are more troubled with rites abused, and
polluted by him, then by any other, we dwell nearer to papists then to any
other idolaters, and they dwell or converse amongst us. Bellarm. d^ Monach.
cap. 40.
For this c^use perhaps, says B^llarmine, priests were not shaven in Hierome
and Ambrose time: for yet in their time the priests of Isis, were shaven. Is it
not very frivolous which our Doctor answers, page 116.
that by this reason, we should not pray kneeling, nor rest upon the Lords
day, because the papists pray kneeling to Saints, and rest on the Lords day,
seeing the one is allowed by God to himself, and the other commanded. Suchlike
the burning of incense, howbeit abused to the worship of the brazen serpent,
our question is of humane inventions. If ye would know, what rite or ceremony,
to call popish, Cap. de tradition.
Musculus will tell you, I call these rites pepish (says he) which either of
the^r own nat^re, or by abuse do s^rv^ unto popish impuritie, superstition and
blindness, allwhich, I am persw^ded, are to be detested, as much as is
possible. (...) says, Censura. c. 4.
That S^tan wrought powerfully and cunningly these many ages by his Roman
Antichrist, to obtrude the bread upon us to be ador^d for Christ, therefore we
should put to flight whats^ever may seem to nourish this bread worship in the
minds of the simple. Censura. c. 9.
And in the ninth chapter, That; if we love God and our Savior Christ, none
of these things, words, or gestures, will find or keep place among us, which
have appearance of affinity with the impieties, and abomin^tio^s brought in by
Antichist upon the holy mysteries, or which may be taken hold of, to make up
any commendation of them, howbeit unjustly and without cause offered. Nihilque
loci vel invonient vel retinebunt apud nos, e^e^res omnes, verba, and g^stus,
in quibus appareat esse aliquid tantis impietatibus affine, aut ad ullam
rapiatur, quanquam improbe and absque data causa harum su^rum impi tatum
commendationem.

The equity of this rule or direction, The equity of none conformity with
idolaters.
that we should not conform with idolaters in such rites and ordinances, as
are above described, appears evidently, first, in that we show not, as we
ought, our hatred and detestation of idolatry, when we retain any monument or
memorial of it. God will not have us to utter with our lips the very name of
the idol, with respect or any honor. The brazen serpent, after the miraculous
use of it, for which it was set up, ceased, was kept 700 years for a
memorial of that miracle, and as a monument of Gods mercy, and benefit
received at that time. Yet, when it began to be abused, and polluted with
idolatry, Ezekias brake it in pieces. Far more ought the monuments and
memorials of idols, or idolatry. We honor the idol and idolatrous worship,
when we retain any monument or memorial of idolatry. Next, in so doing, we
keep a stumbling block in the Church, and both harden the idolater in his
idolatry, and lay a stumbling block and snare before our self and our
brethren, by retaining of such allurements and provocations, to commit the same
kind of spiritual fornication and adultery, and so to fall in an heinous and
most derestable sin. Woe be to him that gives offense, it were better, that
a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the deep of
the sea.

That kneeling in the act of receaving the sacrament, has been abused to
idolatire, Kneeling a monument of idolatry.
can not be denied. Nay, it is confessed, that kneeling in that act has been
abused to the vilest idolatry, that ever was, to the worshipping of a piece
bread, which the worshipper esteemed to be his god. To retain it therefore, is
to retain a memorial or monument of that vile idolatry, because we use that
same gesture, in that same very act, and without necessity. For our opposits
affirm, That all the maine gestures are indifferent. page 370.
Master P. has a poor shift, when he says, No ordinance of God can be a
monument of idolatry, gesturs are Gods ordinances, and his outward worship
consists in them. Such like, that no creature of God can be a monument of
idolatry, but all gesturs are Gods creatures or abilities, whereunto man is
disposed by creation. page 118.
And our Doctor says, That kneeling is not an humane invention, but a
religious ceremony appointed by God. But they should first have made good,
that kneeling in the act of receaving the sacramental elemen^s was Gods
ordinance, and then indeed the ret^ining of it had not been a retaining of a
monument of idolatry. It is gross, that he calls gesturs abilities. The
power or ability is natural to man, but the gesture it self is volnntarie,
free, and accidental. A man has ability to stand upon one of his legs, or
with his back to the elements, is such a posture of the parts of a man's body,
therefore lawful in the act of receaving. Seeing neither by Gods ordinance,
nor any natural necessity we are bound to kneel in that act, the retaining of
kneeling so horribly abused in that act, is the retaining of a vile monument of
idolatry.

How dangerous it is, Kneeling scandalous to papists.
consider it first in the papist. The papist is confirmed in his vile idolatry
by our conformity with him in that gesture. Do they not vaunt, that we are
coming home to them, and hope for the full restoring of popery again,
because we kneel at the receaving of the eucharist as they do. It is confessed
also by conformitants. The ministers of Edinburgh, after they had vexed the
people ten years with their kneeling, and seeming to be wearied by contending
with them, sent up a supplication to the king for dispensation with kneeling.
In the instructions given to the bearer M. William Lev Lev^ngstoun, subserived
also by them, they have these words, The Papists se^^g us in that gesture,
having some external symbolizing with them, are thereby confirmed in their
errors, as though that our practice were an approaching to them, and an
increase to their idolatry and bread worship. These instructions were
subscrived by all the ministers of Edinburgh in April anno 1628. M. Struther,
Sydserf, Maxwell, and the rest.

It is a scandal given to the godly, Scandalous to the godly.
because it is not a necessar duty, and is a provocation and Intisement to
idolatry. We are forbidden all provocations and entisements to idolatry, as
in all other precepts, we are forbidden, as well the provocations and
entisements to evil, as the evil it self. In 2. praecept. page 387.
If thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, that is, whatsoever is an impediment
unto us to hinder us to do good, and to worship God, though it were never so
dear to us, is to be removed out of the way, much more if it be a cause or
occasion to do evil, says Zanchias. Last edit. de redempt. page 541.
Whatsoever be the intention of the doer, intent (...) ^ntis, ye^, if the
quality of the work it self conditio operis be induct^ve to scandal, it
ought to be eshewed. They ask, what apinesse there is in the gesture to entice
us to idolatry, We answer, it is the same in form and fashion that idolaters
use in that same very act, and it is done for reverence as they also do. We are
more prove by nature to idolatry, then any other sin. Therefore greater
diligence is to be used in avoiding the o^casions of this sin, then of any
other, says Zanchius. What needs further proof, if it be true, which they
seem to grant themselfes, that adoration in the act of receaving the bread
has opened an occasion to breed worship or artolatrie. Beza in his 8. epist.
faith, The event and lamentable face of the Church, does more then sufficiently
teach us, how hurtful it is, and commends those Churches which abolished it
with no less care then other manifest made idolatry, apert as idolomanias.
Peter Martyr being a stranger, when he was a professor in Oxford, was loath to
contradict the order, which was retained for the appeasing the papists, who
were a strong party at that time, excuses the matter the best he could, but
with all, privy to the insuffiencie of his excusus, he wishes it were
removed. And writing against Gardin^r, Col. 160.
he wishes, that it were not, howbeit the kneelers direct their worship not to
the symbols themselfes, but to Christ reigning in the heavens. But after the
revolt of England in Qu^ene Mary's days, when he was in Zurich, writing to the
Polonian ministers, he says, Let the evil seed, and rotten roots be plucked
up at the first beginning, for if they be neglected at the first (I know what I
speak) it is more difficill to take them away afterward: And this is wisely to
be looked to, as in the sacraments, so specially in the e^charist, that it be
most sincerely done. For there are there, believe me, pestilent seeds of
idolatry, which unless they be taken away, the Church of Christ will never be
beautified with pure and sincere worship. Let not the sacraments be contemned,
as empty and vo^d signs; And on the other side, let them not give greater
honor to them, then their institution will suffer. Averruncentur sub ipsis
initiis mala semina, and putres radices. Nam si principio negligantur, (scio to
quod loquor) pestea difficilius tolluntur. Idque providendum est, ut in
sacramentis, and prae^ipue in encharistiae quam sincerissime fiat, ibi sunt,
mibi creed, idololatriae pestifera semina, que porr^, ^isis^i^ lara suerint,
ecclesia Christi puro sinceroque cul^ nunquam erit o^nata. Non centemnantur
sacramenta, ut in^nla and (...) signa. Rursmque non illis plus tribuant
homines, quam (...) institutio ferat. This was his advice, after experience he
had in England, and in the same epistle he (...), That^ite in the ministration
of the sacraments (...) be (...) which is most of all, and furthest rem^ue
(...) from papisticall toys and ceremonies, and comes (...) to that purity,
which Christ and his Apostles used. (...) in his S. sennon upon Ienah says,
The outward gesthred and behavior of the receaver should want all kind (...)
show orinelination to idolatry. Wherefore seeing kneeling is a show and
external kind of honoring and worshipping, and heretofore grieveus and
damnable idolatry heth been committed by (...) the sacram^nt, I could wish it
were commanded by the magistrate, that the communicants might receave it sitting
or standing. Reply 2 part page 164.
Master Cartamight reports, that in diverse places the people have knocked on
their breasts, and holden up their hands, whilst the minister was in giving the
bread, and not only those who received it, but also those who looked on, and
were in the Church. In a national synod of the Belgic and French Churches in
the Low Countries holden in Junie 1578. they concluded against geniculation.
Genuflexionem non admittimus ob periculum adorations (...) admit not kneeling
for peril of the adoration of bread worship. And in a national synod holden
at Midleburgh, it was likewise concluded, Genuflexio omnino omittetur propter
periculum superstitiosae adoratienis; Kneeling shall altogether be omitted,
because of the danger of superstitious adoration. Homij specimen controy Belg.
in fine.
Festus Homi^s out of these consti^utions, ^^th set down their mind in the
harmony of their synods, to the same effect, That the communionibe not
celebrated kneeling for the danger of bread worship. page 123.
Our Doctor answers, That they knew best, what served to the edification of
their own Church, as if the Hollanders were more prone to bread worship, then
Scots on English. P. acknowledges, page 70.
that they which kneel may receave too reverently. Cyprian answering to some
maids, who walked with young men, talked with them, went to bed with them, and
said, they abstained notwithstanding from the act, Cyprian. lib. 1 epist. 11.
says, Non est locus d^ndus Diabolo^^ mo diu tutus periculo proxim^s; We
should not give place to the devil: No man that is near danger can be long in
surety.

They allege a Polonian synod allowing kneeling or standing, The Polonian
synods mistaking.
but not sitting. But they must know first, that they were far mistaken. For
they thought in synodo Graconiensi anno 1573. and Vledislanitensi anno 1523.
that none but the Arrians or Arrianabaptists among themselfes did sit. It is
strange, that they should thereupon exhort to the forbearance of sitting,
seeing the Arrians did not sit upon conceat of par^ie, or equality with Christ.
It is gross mistaking, says P. that fellowship and society necessarily
imports equality, page 200.
who knows not, that a king and a mean man may be fellow-like and sociable,
and yet remainefarre unequals. Next, it is as strange, that they should be
ignorant, that the gesture of sitting was in use even then, to wit 1573. 1578.
1583. in sundry Churches in Europe, as in the Low Countries, Helvetia,
Scotland. Yea, as a worthy Polonian, as that Church has bred in his time, that
Polonian Baron Johannes Alasco, wrote before the holding of that synod more
amply, and more earnestly for sitting; then any man else; and put it in
practice in the Churches where he had credit and authority. We are not
therefore conform to Arrians in the gesture of sitting, for it is not their
invention, nor is it approved only by them; It was in use before ever the name
of Arrius was heard. Yet, howbeit their synods were mixed, and consisted partly
of Lutherans, partly of such as adheared to the Boh^^mian, partly of such as
adheared to the Helvetian confession, they would urge no man, fearing that
urging would draw on censures, which they thought neither commendable nor
expedient. For they confess, That it is neither the will of God, nor the
custom of the pur^r Church, to smite m^n with ecclesiastical discipline for
external rites. Propter externos ritus homines pios ferire, neque est Dom^ni
v^tun^as, neque purioris ecclesiaemos. As ye may see in Synodus Petriconi
insis, which was holden anno 1578.

Their next shift is, The pretended remedy of preaching naught.
that ^he people may be taught and informed to direct ^he^r adoration internal
and external to God, and so all erroneous opinion may be removed. But we have
told them, that it is better to fill up the pit in the way, then to set one
beside to warn the passingers, that they fall not in. Watchmen are sometime
negligent, sometime blind and ignorant, or corrupt and perverse: meat does not
nourish so fast, as poison does corrupt. Time should be better spent, then in
leading poor souls through dangerous ways, which may be forsaken. Their
strength should not be tried by bringing them to the brinke of danger. Suppose
information by doctrine were used at all times, and every where all are not
alike capable, example and appearance of evil would work more powerfully, then
the doctrine. Epist. 121.
Of the insufficiency of this remedy, see Calvin in his epistle to the
protector of England.

The third shift is, Commandment of the magistrate no just e^cuse. In 3
praecept. col. 634.
that the command of the supreme magistrate in things indifferent takes away
the scandal. There are two sorts of indifferent things, says Z^n^hius, some
that are manifest occasions of sinning, others are not of that kind. Res
adiaphorae duplices sunt. Quaelam su^t alicui aport^e occasiones peccatorum,
ita ut exillis vere immineat p^ricul^m, peceandi: alie vero non ita se habent.
For the first sort, that we ought to abstain from (...) evil, and all
manifest occasion of evil: For who, says he, will venture to pass along a
ruinous bridge, if he perceave manifest danger of falling into the river. Can
the supreme magistrate take away that aptness and fitness, that any thing
has to intise and provoke men to sin. The Apostle Paul says, he had rather
never eat flesh, then offend a weak brother for eating flesh offered to the
idol, and sold in the market. And I think, he had greater, authority in such
matters, nor any prince or general assembly.

The Belgic synods, ye see, would not take so much upon them, but for ad
kneeling for fear of idolatry. If the Church (to whom the rule for directing
the use of things indifferent in matters of religion are laid down, to wit,
that all things be done decently, in order, to edification, without offense)
may not presume so far, far less may the magistrate; for his power is
cumulative to assist the Church, not privative, to deprive the Church of her
power. The magistrates countenance makes the scandal the greater, and he
strengthens it by his authority, whereas he should remove scandals, and not
lay stumbling blocks in the way of the people. The brazen serpent was but a
passive, (...) active scandal, and yet Ezekias brake it in pieces: for more
should active scandals be removed. These Cour^-clawbacks tell us, we should
rather offend the people, then the supreme magistrate. But better offend, that
is, displease him, nor offend, that is, give occasion to the poorest soul, let
be many thousands, to fall into any sin, let be so heinous a sin, as is the
sin of idolatry. The magistrate is not in danger of stumbling, for (ye say)
he esteems the matter indifferent. Is not the supreme magistrate a sinful
man? May he not make Israel to sin? May he not abuse things indifferent, and
transgress the rules above mentioned? May he not be a secret friend to the
pope, or an a bettor of superstition? Suppose he have no such intention, yet
he can not by his authority alter conditionem operis, the quality of the
work it self, and make a thing, which of it self is inductive to scandal not
inductive. Does his commandment make all so sure, that none can be
scandalized? That is impossible, considering the show of evil in the deed it
self, the ignorance of many thousands, the disposition of the ignorants to
superstition, the pronnesse of men's nature to idolatry, and the increase of
papists.

Ioab was guilty of Vriahs blood, notwithstanding of the Kings commandment, so
art thou of thy brothers falling, 1 King 20, 39.
Thy life for his life, if he be a missing. Say not therefore with Cain, Am I
my brothers keeper? Active obedience to the magistrate ought not to be a rule
of thy love to Gods glory, and the salvation of thy brother. Passive obedience
is not denied; but defenses by laws aright first to be heard. Whereas they
allege, that sitting is dangerous for breeding contempt and profanation. To
pass by the institution, experience is a testimony in the contrare.
Rusticitie in the behavior of simple ones, not acquainted with all the points
of civili^^, is not profanation, but may be where the mind is in good order
Horrible profane were the words of our blind bishop to a gentle woman in the
offering of the elements, because she would not kneel.

We maintain, Kneeling established by the Antichrist, and not by the ancient
Church.
that kneeling in the act of receaving the sacramental elements was not
devised, or at least authorized, till the great Antichrist overruled. We need
not to poin^^ at the time when it first began: for there are many corruptions
in the Roman Church, which can not be ded^^ed (...) a certain beginning, by
the Romanists themselfs. It is sufficient, that we point out a time, wherein
it was not in use. There can not be an authentic testimony alleged for
kneeling in the act of receaving the sacramental elements, before the opinion
of real presence yea, or of transubstantiation began to spread, or to come to
a more certain date, for the space of a thousand years after Christ. I say,
authentic testimony: for we regard not supposititions, or counterfite works.
Origens first homily in diverse loca, is brought in, saying, Thou therefore
humbling thy self, ^^itat the Centurie^, and say, Lord, I am not worthy, etc.
but that works is acknowledged by the papists themselfs to be counterfite. See
Riveti specimen critici sacri. lib. 2. cap. 13. Bellarm. de script. page 84.
Suchlike counterfi^e Cyrillus of Jerusalem in his fifth catechism says, Then
come to the cup of the blood, not stretching out thy hand, sed pr^nus and in
modum adorationis and venerationis, dicens Anten^ But stow^ing downward, or
with the face bended downward in manner of adoration or veneration, saying,
Amen. He says not, Cade pronu^, fall down on thy fa^e, sed accede pronus, but
come inclyning or bowing thy he^d, or upper part of thy body, as men use to do,
when they make courtesy for men can not come falling flat. But what need we
trouble our selfs with his words, seeing he is marked for a counterfite by
Moulias on the Lords supper, part. 2. page 65.
the bishop of Spalato, and Plessie, who in his answer to the bishop of
Evereux says, Spalat. de rep. eccles. l. 5. c. 6. number. 69.
These catec^ismes of Cyrillus are supposititious, and come not to light, but
in our time. M. Down in his treatise of transubstantiation. page 3^. 38. says,
Ad E^roicensem epist. page 241.
That these catecbeticall book are but of a very late edition, that Harding
acknowledges, that in his time they were known to ve^ie few, and in ^rite,
that they have been published since in print, and perhaps, to win more
authority to them, misfathered upon Cyrillus of Jerusalem. This Cyrill directs
the Communicant to touch his lips, which are sanctified with the touch of
Christ's body and blood, that by the touch of that finger he may sanctify his
eyes, brow, and others. No authentic testimony can they produce bearing the
word kneeling, which is an adoration not in a large, but strict sense.

The testimonies bearing the word adore, are either counterfite, or to be
understood of inward adoration, as Doctor Burges himself confesses, sundry
of the learned do construe them, or of adoration in time of prayer before they
communicate: or adoration is taken taken only for veneration. See Jewel in the
article of adoration. Bilson in his book of obedience, and Mortoun the late
defender of the ceremonies, in his latest work entitled, Of the institution
of the sacrament. He brings in sundry exemples to prove the latitude of the
word Adore. When Theodor^t says, dialog. 2. that the mystical signs are
adored, he should speak very grossly, if the word adore meant not only reverent
usage. Moulines on the Lords supper, 2. part. page 24. translateth Theodoret
(...), reverenced, and disputes against adored, as not agreeable to his
meaning. And so Bilson expounds Theodoret, and to this purpose alleges the
gloss of the Canon law. In hoc sensu possumus q^am libet rem sacr^m adorare,
id est, reveren^iam exhibere. Ana. stasius says, De consecratio. did. 3. cap.
venera ^ilis. De consecratio. did. 1. cap. Apostolica. Tertull. advers.
Hermoginem.
Dominica verba attente audiant, and si leliter adorent 1. venerantur, says
the gloss. Adore plenitudinem scripturae. I adore the fullness of the
scripture, says Tertullian. Doctor Burges is forced to constru^ the word
adored, in this sense, when he would give a right sense to some words of
Jewel. The sacraments in that sort, in respect of that, which they signify,
and not in respect of that which they are of themselfes, are the flesh of
Christ, and are so understood and believed and adored, but the whole honor
rests not in them, but is passed over from them to the things, which be
signified, D. B. of kneeling. page 85.
says Jewel. His meaning is (says the Doctor) that no more is or may be done
respectively to the sacrament, then that which we call veneration, that, which
in strict sense, we call adoration or divine worship is reserved to God.
Chrysostom means spiritual reverence, in 1 Corin. 11. and therefore he
uses emphaticall speeches of ascending up to the gates of heaven, Fulk in 1
Cor. 11. sect. 18.
even the heaven of heavens, like eagles, says Doctor Fulk. (...) follows
not that they kneeled in Augustines time, because the Ethnicks objected, that
Christians honored Bacchus and Ceres. The reverene carriage of Christians at
the participation of the sacrament all bread and wine, was sufficient to be an
occasion of the mistaking. Averroes the Arabian Spaniard, about 400 years
since, objected, That Christians adored that which they did eat. It may be,
that in his time they kneeled, and gave just occasion to Averroes reproach. But
his time is not within our date. In a word, look how old they can prove
kneeling, we shall prove real presence.

Doctor Purges has found out a place which was never found out before,
Tertullians testimony vindicated.
wher^^ he confidently concludes, that the communicants k^eeled in
Tertull^ans time, for (faith he) the people shunned to take the sacrament, when
they might not kneel in the act of receaving or partaking of it, and therefore
forbore to come to the communion table on the station days, because it behoved
them the stand on these days. Tertullian, says he, inviteth them to come, and
take the bread standing at the table publicly, and to reserve and carry it
away with them and receave it at home, as they desired, kneeling, and so both
duties should be performed, the receaving of the eucharist, and the tradition
of standing on these days observed. Lib. de oratione. c. 14.
Tertullians words are, Similiter de stationum diebus, non putant plerique
sacrificiorum orationibus interveniendum, qu^d statio solvenda sit accepto
corpore Domini. Which last words he translateth, because station or standing is
then to be performed in receaving the body of the Lord: whereas he should
^ranst^te, because the fast is then to be brocken after the receaving of the
body of the Lord. For the word statio in Tertullians language is taken for
fasting, both in this place, and in his book De corona militis, cap. 11. and
in his book De jejuniis, cap. 2. 10. 14. as Pamelius has well observed upon
that place, and after him Baronius in his annals. In his book De jejuniis he
brings in for illustration Moses persevering in prayer, till the going down
of the sun, when the people was fighting against the Amalekits, Nonne statio
fuit sera, says he. Did Joshua dyne that day, says he, that he fought against
the Ammorits, that commanded the sun to stand in Gibeon, and the moon in
Askalon? That God gave such authority to Saul's commandment concerning fasting
till even, that I^nathan for tasting a little honey was scarce delivered at the
instant request of the people, Tantam authoritatem dedit edicto stationis
Saulis, ut Jonathan filius, etc. H. brings in such exemples for the custom
their own sect of the Mountanists had brought in, which was to keep these
fasts till evening, whereas the custom of the Church was to keep them only to
the ninth, that is, our third hour afternoon. In the 2. and 14. chapter he
makes mention of weddensday and f^yday: appointed for these fasts, Cur quartam
and sextam sabbathi st^tionibus dicamus? speaking of the custom of the Church
at that time. The meaning of Tertullian, in the place above cited, is, They
were in an error, who thought that if they had received the sacrament, their
fast should be broken, which should have continued to the set hour. For (says
he) does the encharist lose that service which we have devoted unto God, or
rather does it bind us more to God. Nonne solennior erit statio tua, si and ad
aram Dei steteris; Shall not thy fast be the more solemn, if thou stand also
at the altar of God; th^^ is, the communion table. Accepto corpore Domini and
reservata (as Iunius reade^^) id est stationis officio, (not reservato) that it
may answer to the other member, both are safe, and participatis sacrificti and
exc^utio off^cii, both the participation of the sacrifice and performance of
thy service, id est, jejunii, (says (...) his answer to the theologues of
Burde^ux. page 54.
(...) his answer to the bishop of Ever^ux, page 225.
he says, That Tertullian would remove that scruple, that after they had
communicated, their fast was broken, they thought, a^ si particip^tio euch
aristiae jejunium abrumpere^ (...) if the participation of the eucharist had
broken up their fast: Ambrose gives the reason, wherefore these set fasts were
called Stationes, quod stantos and commarantes in eis inimicos insidiantes
repellimus; because standing and sta^ing in them we rep^ll our enemies lying
in wait for us, meaning spiritual enemies. The metaphore is borrowed from
soldiers, who behoved to fast so long as they were in statio^; Metaphora a
militi^m sumpta quod quamdiu in statione erant, jejunare (...) oportebat. See
Pamelius upon both the places. Doctor Burges finding, that Tertullian lib. 2.
ad uxorem, makes mention of jejunia, fasts, after he had made mention of
stationes, concludes in his own fancy, that stationes were not fasts,
whereas he might have seen stationes distinguished, a jejuniis in the former
place also, but by the one he means of such as fasted at any time of their
owe free accord; by the other the set days of fasting. Iejunium est
indifferenter cujuslibet Di^i abstinentia, non perleg^m sed secundum propriam
voluntatem, statio statutorum dierum vel temporum. And this difference Pamelius
acknowledges, he has out of Rabanus Ma^rus. The very phrase it self solvere
stationem, might have guided him aright: For what more frequent a phrase for
breaking of a fast, then solvere jejuniums. We deny not that they stood both
these days, and other also, but that statio signifies only standing in
Tertullians phrase, when he says, Solennior statio, or solvere stationem. I
have insisted the longer upon this testimony, because Doctor Burges does so
confidently gather out of it, which never man did before, that the Christians
then did, and before had used to take the sacrament kneeling.

This raw, Sitting or standing practiced in the ancient Church. See Eusebius.
histor. lib. 7. cap. 9.
but too confident antiquarie, his collection may be refuted by other
testimonies, witnessing, that s^metimes they sa^e, of which we have alleged
some before, or at other tim^s stood. Pionysius Alexandrinus writing to Xystus
bishop of Rome, concerning one that was in sorrow, because he was baptized by
heretics, says, he du^st not baptize him over again, because he had a long
time stood at the table, and reached forth his hand to receave the holy food,
and had been for a long time partaker of the body and blood of Christ.
Justinius tells us, That the people rose, and the deacons gave to every one to
partake of the bread and the wine. Is it likely, that they kneeled, when the
deacons gave the elements? Homil. in oncoeniis.
In the homily which goes under the name of Chrysostom, Stemus trementes
timidi and demissis ocutis; Let us stand trembling with fear and our eyes
casten down. So ye see both before and after Tertullians time testimonies for
standing.

There was an ancient custom in the Church (which, Bellarminus de cultu
sanctor. cap. 11.
Bellarmine says, was left off but about 500. year before his time) to stand
upon the Lords day even in time of prayer. Zovaras in synod 6. can. 90. s^ith,
That no ways might they kneel betwixt the evening service on satterday and the
Lords day at evening. Tertull. de Corona militis.
Die dominico de geniculis ad orarenesa^, says Tertullian. And such like,
betwixt easter and pentecost, not only upon the Lords day, but no day of the
week might they kneel. Yea, by the decree of Alexand^r the third, they might
not kneel upon the Lords day in public, Decretal. l. 3. tit. de celebrat.
Missa. cap. sarct.
but only at the consecration of Bishops, and giving of orders* he that did
consecrate, and he that was consecrated might kneel, and this was decreed about
the year 1159. at which (...) it seems this one exception entered in. Now
will any man affirm, That they never communicated upon the Lords day, for a
thousand year, or 1159. or imagine as Doctor Burges does, that because they
might not kneel, that all this time they took the sacrament standing in the
Church, and went home to their houses, where they eated kneeling, or to their
seats in the Church, where they might not kneel. L. page 52. confesses, That
the communican^s in the primitive Church stood at the table, when they received
the sacrament on the Lords day. Well, say they, seeing they prayed standing,
they used that gesture in the receaving of the eucharist, which they thought
fittest for prayer. I answer, they thought not that gesture fittest for prayer.
The author of the questions extant in Justinius, Quaest. 1^5.
says, Genu^m inclinatio in precatione magis peccatores Deo commendat, qu^m
sistantes orent. He prefers, ye see, kneeling in prayer before standing:
But both are indifferent. They stood to signify their joy for Christ's
resurrection, and not because they though it the fittest gesture for prayer. It
was a conceat they took up, which entered not in the Apostle Paul's mind: for
we find Acts 20. that he kneeled between Easter and Pentecost. Alwise by
that custom, ye may see, they communicated standing. The testimonies above
cited have not relation to any day, and the custom observed yet to this day in
the oriental Churches, to communicate standing, notwithstanding, that other
custom has ceased, declares that they intended never geniculation in the act
of receaving.

Ephraim Placit in his Christianographie, descriving the manner of the
administration of the Lords supper in the Greek Church, in the Churches of the
Mengrellians, Circassians, Georgians, Muscovits, Melchits or Syrians, Armenian,
Iacobits, the Christians falsely called Nestorians, the Cophti or Egyptian
Christians, the Abyssinos or Ethiopian Christians, produces no instance for
kneeling in the act of receaving, eating, drinking, which he would not have
pretermined, being conform, and dedicating his book to the bishop of Elie.
Cassander in his Liturgicks, descriving the order observed in the Churches of
the Arm^n^ans, Muscovits, and in the kingdom of priest John makes no mention
of kneeling, but of standing. Il^ssie in his 4. bo^ke of the Mass, trusseth up
all in few words. Quare orientales ecclesiae adorationem sacramenti admiserunt
nusqu^m, non quae patriarchae Consta tinopolitano obsequuntur, n^n quae
Antiocheno. Et in Abyssnis etiam ipsis hodie st^ntes sacramenta participant,
nec ^^minus reverenter; The oriental Churches no where admitted edoration of
the sacrament; not those which are obedient to the patri^rch of Constantinople,
or yet the patriar^h of Antioch. And the Abyssins themselfes participate of the
sacrament, standing, and yet not without reverence: Where by adoration he
means kneeling, whereunto be opposes standing. If ever kneeling in the act
of receaving had been in use among them, it had not been left off,
considering man's pronnesse to idolatry and superstition, and delight to stick
in the mire when he is wallowing in it. It rests then that kneeling is only
found in the Churches subject to the Pope, of old. or at the present. Other
Churches, howbeit they followed not the pattern, using another form and
gesture, not was suitable to this first, yet they degenerated not so (...) as
the Roman Church did, Synops. cuest. 8. of the mass, page 691.
The Muscovite Graecians, (...) L^tine Priest chance to say Mass upon one of
their altars, they forthwith break them down, as defiled and polluted. And
they ^old the priests of the Latin Church to be no letter then heretics, and
vouchsafe not to salute them. Willets out of Sacranus.

We have not yet heard of any authentic testimony for kneeling, which is
adoration in proper and strict sense, for the space of a thousand year after
Christ, which is the date we set down. Nor yet till after the days of Pope
Honorius the third, who lived about the year 1220. And he decreed nothing,
(...) ^owing, not of the knee, but of the head or superior bulk of the body,
at the elevation in ^he mass. The bowing of the knee at the elevation entered
not till afterward, yea, prevailed not universally even in our days. For I
find in Bochellus a decree made in a popish synod at Rhems, Bochel. decret.
lib. 3. c. 140.
anno 1583. Quoriam apud omnes sere catholicos usus modo obtinuit, ut
procumbentes adorent divin^^ eucharistiam; Because the use (...) prevailed
almost among all catholics, that falling (...) they a^ore the divine
eucharist, the holy synod exhorts, that if there be any Church, uses another
custom, and (...) the body of Christ in this sacrifice standing, that they
f^ll down her^after, while the holy mysteries are set forth to be adored.
Sancta synodus hortatur, ut si quae ecclesia altero more adhuc utatur, and
stando Christi corpus i^ hoc sacrificio adore^, proeumbat (...) sancta mysteria
proponantur adorari. Where, by the way observe, that when ye find the word
adore in the ancients, it follows not, that ye must interpret i^ kneeling.
For ye see, they that stood are said to adore, which is not to adore in strict
and proper sense. Whither kneeling at the receaving come in with that decree of
Honorius, or after, which is more likely, and that no other gesture was used at
the one, which was not used at the other, I cannot determine. Howsoever it
entered under Antichrist reigning, and is the received gesture of all such as
are wit^^^ the bounds of his jurisdiction, where he is Pat^^^ch. The Churches
under the Patriarchs of Constantinople or Antioch, has not received it, as ye
have heird. If the priests, and others of the elergic, be directed to the
Roman ri^all to kneel in receaving the eucharist, can we think any of the
people had liberty not to kneel.

Howbeit this idolatrous gesture prevailed under the reign of Antichrist,
Opposite to kneeling.
yet there wanted nor faithful witnesses to stand out against it. Of the
Walden^^^ ye heard before. Johannes Slechta a Bohemian, writing to Eras^^ in
the veare 1519, Erasm. epist. lib. 14.
tells him, that there was among them a sect, of such as were called
Pyghardi, because their first ringleader, who came to these parts in the days
of Zisca, about four score and seventeene years before, that came out of
Picardie, that they maintained, these committed idolatry, who kneeled before
the bread in the sacrament of the eucharist, or bowed before it, or adored it.
In sacramento eucharistie nihil esse divinitatis credunt, sed solum panem and
(...) consecratum signis quibusdam occultis mortem Christi (...) affirmantes,
and propterea in idolola^riam cadere omnes quot quot coram illo genua flectunt,
and incu^vant, vel illud adorant. All the Sacramentaries call it idolatry to
kneel before the eucharist, (...)
says Bellarmine. And yet so impudent is our Doctor, that he is not ashamed
to affirm, that never any divine ancient or modern to this day, except
Arrians and Anabaptists, has doubted, but Christ may and should be adored
externally in the act of receaving.

Seeing therefore this gesture entered in under Antichrist, and is maintained by
him with fire and faggot, ought we not to reject it, and retain the exemplarie
sitting of Christ and his Apostles. If at any time, we should not seem to
have communion with Antichrist, we should most of all at this holy supper,
which sets forth our communion with Christ and his Church.

But put the case this gesture in the act of receaving had been devised by
others, Kneeling to be rejected, because abused.
then the great Antichrist, or might have been used without blame, which is
not possible, yet seeing it was not commanded by Christ, or his Apostles, but
is the invention of man, has been so horribly abused, and rem^ineth still in
the own nature indifferent, as they allege, and not necessary by their own
confession, it ought to be abandoned for the danger of many thousand weak
souls, which may be brought on to bread worship. We may scandalize sometimes,
even when the fact is neither evil in it self, nor has appearance of evil.
Etiamsi factum non fit se cundum se malum, neque secundum se habeas speci^m
mali, tamen toterit esse aliquando scandalum infi^niorum, quia secund^m illorum
opinione^^ habet speciem mals. Domine. ^s Bannes in 2. 2. (...) 43. in art. ^^.
We might (...) a score here, and proceed no further. For what we have said, is
sufficient to restrain every man from kneeling. To offend one of Christ's
little ones, is a heinous sin.

CHAP. V.
Kneeling in the act of receaving the sacramental elements of the supper is
idolatry.
WE prove it to be idolatry, first considering it, as it is enjoined by the
act of that pretended assembly holden at Perth, next as the action is
considered simply in it self.

We are directed by the act of Perth to kneel in reverence of the sacrament,
The act of Perth intends idolatry.
which is idolatri^, as L. confesses, if we do so. But we are directed to
kneel in due regard of so divine a mystery, page 70.
to wit^ as is the sacrament, or as is the receaving of the body and blood of
Christ, to wit, in the sacramental manner. We will examine the act by parts,
according to L. his analysis, howbeit we acknowledge him not for the
authentike interpreter of it.

The first reason for kneeling in the narrative, The first reason of the act
examined.
is set down in these words, Since we are commanded, by God himself, that
when we come to worship him, we fall down and kneel before the Lord our
maker. Relative to this reason, we have in the conclusion this inference.
Therefore in reveren^e of God, the assembly thinks good, that the sacrament
be celebrated to the people meekly, and reverently ^^^^ling upon their knee^.
For the confirmation of this reason is alleged, Psalm. 35. verse. 7. out of
which verse the words are taken. By this reason, Christ and his Apostles, and
all that have communicated sitting, or standing, or passing, since the days of
Christ, have sinned. For if we be commended by God to kneel, we sin if we
kneel not. Next, the word translated worship, Psalm. 95. 7. is taken, not
generally for any action, or service divine, or religious expressed by the word
Cul^us in Latin, as it is taken here in the act, for then we should sin, if
we kneel not, when we bear the word read or preached, but it is taken more
strictly for a special kind of worshipping of God, to wit, adoring God by the
gesture of prostration. And so we shall be commanded to prostrat our body
with our hands and feet spread upon the ground, and not to kneel only. For the
people of God under the law used four kinds of gestures in sign of honor:
First, a bending, or bowing down of the head or face only, which was the least
degree, and is expressed by the word Cadad: next, a bending or bowing of the
superior ^uk of the body expressed by the word Carang: the third, kneeling,
expressed by the word Barach: the fourth, prostrating the body with hands and
feet spread, as I have said, expressed by the word Histachaveh. The last three
are all mentioned in the verse alleged. Thirdly, we have not here a
commandment from God, but David his exhortation, or invitation to the godly,
not to kneel or fall down before the Lord, when they come to worship him, or
as the word bears to prostrate themselfes, for that were as much as to desire
them to fall down and kneel, when they come to fall down and kneel; but he
exhorts and inviteth them to come and prostrate themselfes, bow and kneel
before the Lord their maker in token of thanksgiving, that is, in the temples
where the arc was, and where the Lord was present in a wonderful manner
sitting between the cherubims. It is gross ignorance to infer hereupon,
that we should, or are commanded to kneel at the receaving of the sacrament,
more then at the hearing of the word, or at any of them, unless they think the
sacrament the Lord their maker.

The second reason in the narrative, The second reason of the act examined.
says the Doctor, is this, And considering withal, that there is no part of
divine worship more heavenly and spiritual, then is the holy receaving of the
blessed body and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Relative to this
reason we have in the conclusion these words, And in regard of so divine a
mystery, the assembly thinks good, that that blessed sacrament be celebrated
to the people humbly, (or as the act ratified in parliament has, meekly) and
reverently upon their knees. We have here no other description of receaving the
sacrament in the narrative, but the receaving of the body and blood of Christ,
which smells strongly of the real presence. For the like, and some other
phrases has Master Prinne discovered Doctor Cou^ins to be popish in the
survey of his private devotions. Then all that communicate, receave the body and
blood of Christ in at their mouth good and bad. This shall please the Lutheran
and Papist full well.

But by mystery, L. p. 72, 73.
says the Doctor, is no meant the elements, nor is it said mysteries, but
mystery. It may well be the elements are not meant, because it may be, they
think the elements vanish away, and nothing remain but the accidents, or that
Christ's body and blood are substantially present with the elements, or some
other unknown way, as the Doctor has been mutering in private. And that is a
mystery indeed. But by mystery must be meant the sacrament: for in the
narrative we have no other phrase to express the sacrament, but the receaving
of the body and blood of Christ, which is relative to this word mystery. And
in the conclusion, the word sacrament both preceedeth and follows: So the
words in the same sense may be framed thus, Considering, there is no part of
divine worship more heavenly and spiritual then is the holy receaving of the
blessed sacrament, therefore the assembly thinks good in regard of so divine
a mystery, or in regard of so heavenly a part of Gods worship, that that
blessed sacrament be celebrated, etc. Whereas he says, the word is mystery,
not mysteries in the plural number, howbeit we find it so in the first
copies, let it be mystery; The Doctor himself in his solutions for kneeling,
uses sometime the word mysteries, sometime mysteries. Casaub. exercit. page
550.
Casaubone speaking of this sacrament, says, It is called sometime m^sterie,
sometime mysteries. Dicitur autono mastice (...), aut numero multitudinis
(...). Dionysius Areop^git a entituleth the chapter of the Lords supper, The
mystery of the syna^is or holy communion, Ambrose says, Ambrose in 1 Cor. 11.
Hieron. in Psalm. 147. Oecumen^us in 1 Cor. 11.
Indignus est Domino, qui aliter mysterium celebrat, quam ab eo institutum est.
Hierome says, Licet in mysterio possit intelligi, tamen verius corpus Christi
and sanguis ejussermo scripturarum est, Oecumenius says, That the Apostle
calls the mystery of our Master, the Lords supper. A number of testimonies
might be cited to this purpose. The reason of such speech is, because both the
sacramental signs are referred to one Christ. It is but one action the
celebration of the supper. Further, we receave the body and blood of Christ,
when we hear and believe the promises of the Gospel, read, Origin in number.
Homil. 23. and 16.
exponed, or rehearsed. Origin says, Hoc quod modo loqu mur, sunt earnes
Christi, that which we are presently speaking to you is the flesh of Christ.
And in another place, We are said to drink the blood of Christ, not only by
the rites of the sacraments, but also when we hear the word. Hierome, as ye
heard before, That more truly the speech of the scripture is the body and blood
of Christ. If then in the narrative, be no me ^o me^nt then the spiritual
receaving of Christ's body and blood, it is no more a reason for kneeling at the
receaving of the sacrament, then at hearing of the promises of the Gospel read
and exponed. The words therefore must be meant of the sacramental manner of
receaving, and the words relative in the conclusion, In regard of so divine a
mystery; must mean, In regard of the mystical o^ sacramental receaving; and
so the Communicant is directed to kneel, in regard of the sacrament.

The third reason in the narrative, The third reason examined. L. p. 74.
is the correspondence between the outward gesture of our body, and then
meditation, and lifting up our hearts, whe^^ we remember, and consider the
mystical union betwixt Christ and us, and among our selfs, whereof we are
made partakers by the receaving of Christ's body and blood. He shunneth to set
down the words of the narrative, and of the conclusion answerable to them, as
he did in the former two reasons, because he perceaved they could not be framed
to his purpose. For there is no mention made in the narrative of mystical
union, nor is it said in the narrative, that the most humble and reverent
gesture of the body, well becomes the meditation, and lifting up of our
hearts, when we remember and consider the mystical union betwixt Christ and
us, but that the most humble and reverent gesture of our body in our meditation
and lifting up of our hearts, becomes well so divine and sacred an action, to
wit, as is the receaving of the body and blood of Christ. We are not directed
by the act to meditate and lift up hearts, but to use that kind of gesture,
which becomes meditation and the lifting up of the heart; nor is kneeling a
gesture well becoming meditation. We meditate sitting, lying, walking.
Kneeling is a gesture well becoming prayer, but not meditation. By lifting up
the heart, no necessity to mean prayer: for the mind and heart may be lifted
up by faith and contemplation, without prayer. And to this lifting up the
Communicants were exhorted of old with sursum corda, least their hearts and
minds should be grovelling and only bent upon the elements. And so the lifting
up of the eyes may be a sign of lifting up of the heart and mind, in token
that we look confidently to have our desires granted by God, who dwells in
heaven, as the casting down of the eye as a token of humiliation for sin.
Suppose by lifting up of the heart prayer should be meant, yet kneeling is not
the humblest gesture for prayer, but prostration. Then we should prostrat our
selfs when we receave the sacrament. Next, if the Communicant shall pray
mentally, when he receaveth the sacrament, and in that regard kneel, he shall
be exercised other ways then the act of receaving requires. Further, a secret
mental prayer shall be commended to him in public without a vocal, and the
sign of it the humble gesture of kneeling, whereas the signs of secret and
mental prayer in public should be concealed, so far as may be. The
minister, when he delivers the elements, is not directed to use a vocal
prayer to be followed by the Communicant. And we see, the Conformitants are
not uniforme among themselfes in the words uttered at deliverie of the
elements. If we may sit, or stand, or kneel in time of prayer, then kneeling is
not enjoined in regard of prayer, but some other thing intended. But, as I have
said, we are not direct, by the act to lift up our hearts or pray; and
therefore I need not, as yet, to insist upon this pretext. Giving, that in the
conclusion these words, In remembrance of so mystical an union, ^e answerable
in the narrative, the meditation and lifting up of our heart; then by
meditation and lifting up of the heart, is meant not prayer, but remembrance.
And what is that, to say, to kneel in remembrance, that were to kneel for a
memorial. But suppone it were thus, when we remember, and as he adds
consider, to remember and consider is not to pray. Shall we kneel, whenever
we are put in mind of that mystical union? And what is meant by this
mystical union? It may mean as well a material conjunction, as they call it,
or corporal union of the body of Christ, with the bodies of the Communicants,
by touch in the mouth, swallowing down to the stomach, and mixture with the
bodies of the communicants, as spiritual with the soul. O Lord, let thy body
which I have taken, and blood which I have drunken, c^eave uut^ my guts and
en^rals, says a Roman missall. But the spiritual eating of Christ's flesh,
and drinking of his blood, and the mystical union between Christ and us
wrought by it, is as well done out of the sacrament, as in it, says Master
Down, page 46.
We are not united with Christ by receaving his flesh into our mouths, but by
faith, which may be done without ever participat^ing the sacr^ment.

That the Reader may perceave the better, how the act is contrived, let him
read it without the two lies closed within the parenthesis, seeing the act is
whole, and entire without them, and he shall see, that it may pass among
Papists and Lutherans, not one word or syllable sounding against a real
presence in the signs, and that we are directed to kneel not in regard of any
prayer, but in due regard of so divine an action or mystery, as is the
sacrament, or sacramental receaving of Christ's body and blood. The intent of
the church of England in kneeling.


We may also consider the intent of the Church of England, or rather of their
prelates and adherents, that we may take up the better the intent of our act.
For conformity with them is intended. At the first, Kneeling was left free in
the days of King Edward the sixth. The Papists making a stir for want of
reverence to the sacrament: at the second reviewing of the book of common
prayer. Kneeling was enjoined upon this reason, That the sacrament might not be
profaned, but holden in a holy and reverent estimation; this was done by the
directours and contrivers of the book, partly to pacify the Papists, partly,
because their judgment was not clear in this point. They could not see every
thing thoroughly at the dawning of the day. Yet it was not altered, but by a
sta^ute 1. Elizabeth, that second book of King Edwards was confirmed. D. B. of
kneeling, p. 30.
Doctor Burges brings in a passage to explain the matter, which, says he,
is left out by negligence of the printer. But it is more likely, that it has
been done of purpose by such as were directours. Doctor Mortoun says, That
their Church thought it fit by outward reverence in the manner of receaving the
eucharist, to testify their due estimation of such holy rites, to stop the
mouths of blasphemous Papists, vilifying the sacrament with the ignominious
names of bakers bread, vintners wine, profane elements, ale-cakes. But Doctor
Ames, in his reply to Doctor Mortoun, Reply 2. part page 50.
answers, That it was not so much for the stopping of the mouths of Papists,
but that some close dissembling adversaries did hinder the work of reformation
so much as they could, and that they have done so ever since, and do so still
to this day. It may be such pretended the scoffing of Papists; bu^ what matter
of any gloss, if kneeling be directed, that the sacrament be not profaned,
but hold in reverent estimation. Then the sacrament is profaned belike, if we
either sit, or stand, and kneel not. Master Hu^ton says, They kneel to put a
difference between the ordinary bread and wine, and these sacramental, to
which they give the more reverence, because it is more then ordinary bread and
wine. What more plain? They say not, they kneel to God that the sacrament may
not be profaned, but holden in reverence, etc. But simply, they are enjoined
to kneel, that the sacrament be not profaned, etc. And suppose they were, it
were no better shift then the Papists use, when they say they dedicate temples
to God in honor of this or that Saint. And yet we kneel not to God, but in
prayer and thanksgiving, which are not compatible with the act of receaving,
eating and drinking, of which more afterward. A bare kneeling can not be
presented without some sign of extraordinary presence, or apparition.

Some of their formalists pretend, The pretense of prayer examined.
they kneel, because of the prayer u^tered at the deliverie of the elements,
The body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for thee, preserve thy body
and soul unto everlasting life. I answer, That it is already proved, that
kneeling is enjoined for the sacraments fak^. Next, Christ prayed not at the
deliverie of the elements, but in an enunciative form uttered the word of the
promise, This is my body, This cup is the new testament. 2. The word of
promise is the special clause of the charter. The sacramental signs, are
like seals hanging at the charter. If at any time therefore the word of
promise should be uttered, then specially when the seals are delivered. The
Evangelists Matthew, Mark, Luke, and the Apostle Paul, repeat precisely and
constantly that word, so that any man may perceave, the sacramental form of
words ought precisely to be observed and uttered in the name of Christ, without
change into a prayer in name of the Church. The sacramental form of words is
observed in baptism, why not here. Our formalists forbear to to utter the
word of promise to the Communicant. They say, They have uttered it before. It
is not enough, that they were uttered before narr^iv^ly, or (...) in rehearsal
of the words of institution; For this sacrament is an imitation of Christ, not
a recital of his words and actions. It is to do as he did, and not to report
what he did, Of the eucharist. p. 95.
says Mouline. The rehearsal of the words of the institution le^terh us see,
what warrant we have to celebrate such an action, and in general of use I
read and wine. But it can not be said demonstratively of this bread and wine
in particular set on the table, that it is the body and blood of Christ, till
it be first sanctified by prayer and thanksgiving to that use, and after
delivered to the communicant, with command, to take, eat, and assurance if he
so do, the bread shall be a pledge of his body, and the wine of his blood.
Christ said not, This is my body, take, eat, but Take, eat, this is my body, or
actu continuo, bad them both take and eat. The promise is annexed to the
commandment as conditional, and has no effect otherwise, but if the condition
be performed. It is a received action among the Divines. Elementa extrausum non
sunt sacramenta: The elements out of the use are no sacraments. And sacramenta
perficiuntur usu. If the elements after the blessing be not delivered, shall
they be sacramentally Christ's body and blood? or if delivered, and not eaten?

It fares with the sacramental elements, as with pawnes and pledges in
contracts and bargans: A ring may be set a part to be a pledge in matrimony,
yet it is not actuallie a pledge, without consent of the other party, but only
a mere sing. A stone chosen out from among many, to be a sign of a march, is
not actuallie a march stone, but in the use, when it is set with consent of
parties in the march to that end. There was never a sign without the use
wherefore it was appointed to be a sign. Never a march but that which divided
land, nor a banquet but in eating and drinking, De eucharistia l. 8. c. 3. number.
22, 23.
says Chamier. So the elements are sanctified, and set a part by prayer and
rhanksgiving to this use, but are not Christ's body and blood actuallie till
they be received and used. Panis nunquam est signum corporis Christi, nisi in
edendo; nun quam vinum sanguinis, nisi in potando. And therefore this holy
ordinance is properly defined a sacred act^on, consisting of so many rites. By
a figurative kind of speech it is true, the bread may be called the sacrament
of Christ's body, because it is appointed to that end, as when Isaac said to
Abraham, Where is the sacrifice? that is, the lamb or the ram appointed for
the sacrifice, but not properly. Doctor Lindseves proceedings at ^e th. page
5^.
Now the Formalist presupponeth, that the sacrament is made already, before
he come to deliver the elements, and therefore, he says, he utters other
words at the deliverie. So ye see, they place such virtue in uttering these
words, This is my body, in the rehearsal of the institution, as the papist
does, that they think the read already Christ's body, and therefore absurd to
utter these words again at the deliverie to the Communicants: for then they
should seem to consecrate again. So gross popery is the ground of omitting
the comfortable word of promise at the delivering, and snbstituting a pray^r,
page 336.
or ministerial blessing, as P. calls it, in the rowme of it, and such a
prayer as presupposes the bread already to be Christ's body: and therefore
they say, The body of the Lord pr^serve thy body and soul. Here also is a
will worship: for howbeit prayer be of it self a pure of Gods worship
instituted and allowed by God, yet to pray unseasonablie, and out of time, at
the will and device of man, when you should be serving God in another form,
it is will worship: neither is there necessity of this, a prayer already
preceding. And surely this their prayer is a senseless one, like that old
prayer, Anima Christi sanctificaine, which is directed to Christ's soul,
whereas we should direct our prayers to his person, not to his humanity by it
self.

Let it be observed by the way, that the words of the institution are
rehearshed in the English service book, and among the rest these ords, This is
my body, to God in a continual tenor with the prayer begun before, just
according to the order observed in the Canon of the mass, when the priest
offers his sacrifice, which is an horrible abuse of the words of the
institution, which Christ uttered to the Communicants, and not unto God. I dare
be bold to affirm, the sacrifice of the mass had never en^red in the Church,
if the word of promise had been uttered at the deliverie of the elements to
the Communicants in an enunciative form, or demonstratively, as Christ did.
Thirdly, if in regard of prayer, then, if Christ's sacramental speech be
uttered without addition of a prayer, the Communicants must not kneel. Christ's
form of speech then must be thrust out, that prayer and with it kneeling may
enter in. Fourthly, suppose the prayer might be substituted in the room of the
word of promise, kneeling should not be enjoined nor urged more precisely at
that bit of prayer, then at other prayers. Yea, it is superstition to urge
kneeling at one prayer more strictly, then at another, and absurd, in my
judgment, to enjoyne it at all in any. They may as well enjoyne any man to
lift up his eyes, to knock on his breast, to bow the head, or crouch, as to
kneel: as they do in the popish service, which has made it the more
ridiculous. for kneeling, lifting up of the hands or eyes, knocking on the
breast, are natural expressions and adumbrations of the inward motions of the
soul, and proceed ex abundantia interni affectu, De sacram. lib. 1. c. 10. s.
7.
as says Chamier, and therefore ought not to be extorted by injunctions, for
that were to command men to play the hypocrites, and like comedians, to
counterfite outward signs of such inward motions, as perhaps are not in them,
so vehement as to stir them up voluntarily to such expressions. Yea, some of
them may serve for ejaculations, as the lifting up of the eyes, to knock on the
breast, and to bow the head, which bowing is finished in one instant, says L.
page 68.
All undecent and unseemly gesture in prayer, ought to be forbidden, but no
gesture ought to be commanded in special, but left free. Fifthly, that prayer
above mentioned, is but a short ejaculation, and sooner ended then the
Communicant can address himself to his knees. Sixthly, that prayer or short
wish is ended before the Minister offer the bread to the Communicant, and bid
him take it, and yet the Communicant is enjoined to continue still upon his
knees. Nor is kneeling enjoined to them by statute or their service book, in
regard of mental prayer, for none such is enjoined. what suppose kneeling were
enjoined in respect of prayer also, for if also, or principally for reverence
of the Sacrament, it is sufficient for our purpose. for to adore any other
thing but God, or with God, are both idolatrous. Master Paybodie says, P. page
334.
Concerning prayer, I do freely confess, that in as much as it is but an
occasion, and not the principal exercise of the soul, whither it be: mental
or vocal, in the sacrament all busi^esse, I do neither deem it the principal
respect of lawful kneeling, neither have I reason to deem it the principal
respect upon which the Church enjoyneth it. And again, page 299.
Suppose there be no prayer used in the time of receaving, I think never the
worse of the gesture of kneeling. No wonder he say so, for he lays down a
ground, that any of the gestures may be used in any part of Gods worship, which
is a begging of the question, and yet he can not prove kneeling at the hearing
of the word, let be in the act of receaving the sacramental elements, but out
of a misprinted place in Perth assembly, page 45. where in is put for after.

Far less can our Formalists pretend the respect of prayer. No pretense of
prayer in our act.
For we have no act enjoining either any vocal prayer to be uttered by the
minister or mental by the Communicant, when he is to receave the elements. Nor
do our Formalists observe one form of words at the deliverie, either for
prayer, or otherwise.

Wheresoever the public intent of a Church is to kneel for reverence of the
sacrament, The intent of the kneeler must be interpreted by the act.
every Communicant following her direction, is an idolater. Howbeit his private
intent were diverse from the intent of the act, which is urged as the public
intent of the Church, yet he is interpretative an idolater, and to be so
construed both before God and man. If any man receave the sacrament upon his
knees at Rome, or in any other Popish Church, whersoever were his private
intent, yet he must be interpreted to kneel according to the intent of the
Church of Rome. The heart may be carried one way, and the outward action
another way for fear, or other respects, but that outward action must be
interpreted not according to the intention of the mind, but the intent of the
injoyner. If ye fall down before an idol in Spain, suppose for fear of the
inquisition, ye commit idolatry, and honors that idol in the sight of men.

If it be asked, after what manner the Communicant must be interpreted to
adore, Of the manner of their adoration.
I answer, That upon better consideration of the act then before, I think the
Communicant may according to the act kneel with a Popish intent, carring both
the inward motion of his spirit, and outward submission of his body to the
sacrament upon opinion of transubstantiation, or with the Lutherans intent upon
opinion of consubstantiation, and that for two cases, first, because the words
of the act make mention only of the body and blood of Christ, and of the
blessed sacrament, but not one word of the elements of bread and wine. Next,
because some of our ministers the chief urgers of kneeling are popish, and have
taught in public in the pulpits of Edinburgh, that we ought not to contend,
or descant curiously upon the manner of Christ's presence in the sacrament, and
that he is present after an unknown manner. To this purpose they cite a saying
of Durandus. It is current among the English prelates. D. Ames 1. reply page 54.
part. 2.
The bishop of Rochester in his defense of kneeling, commends the simplicity
of the ancients, who disputed not whither Christ were present C^n, sub, in, or
trans, Hooker. l. 5. s. 67.
in the supper. See Hooker likewise in his fifth book of ecclesiastical
policy. And Sutton on the Lords supper, in his appendix. They will talk more
plainly, when they shall see their time. page 142, 145.
Our Doctor commends them for this. They would have us believe, that the
manner of the presence of Christ's body at the sacrament is unknown, whereas we
know very well, that Christ's body is present after a spiritual manner to the
souls of the godly receaving by faith, ^ut to the sacrament, or elemen^s only
after a sacramental manner, that is, relatively, as things signified are to
signs, howbeit far distant. That incomprehensible or unsearchable manner,
whereof they talk, is a lurking hole for adversaries to the truth, Epist. 76.
as Beza can tell him.

Our Doctor from Christ's personal omnipresence, infers, page 142. the
flesh and blood of Christ may be worshipped in the sacrament, because,
wheresoever his person is, his humanity is corjoyned with his divinity. By
this Popish reason, Christ's flesh and blood may be worshipped in a stone, in
the moon, the sun, or any other thing else. His argument is borrowed from
the Rhemists note upon Heb. 1. 8. Our doctor rejects the Vbiquitaries
conceat of Christ's humanity, extended and diffused through every place: yet
notwithstanding of this personal omnipresence, he hides himself in the
lurking hole of the imperceptible manner of the sacramental presence. He
acknowledges a spiritual presence of Christ's body in the sacrament. B^llarmine
acknowledges as much, De Eucharis. lib. 1. cap. 2.
for says he, Non habet Christus in Eucharistia modum existendi corporum, sed
spirituum. If ye will bear the word Bodily, so will Bellarmine he content,
because (says he) Christ is not present after that manner, that bodies have
existence of their own nature, unless the right explication be added: He
commends the expression of the council of Tre^^, Vere, realiter,
substantialiter, Truly reallie substantiallie, as the best and surest For the
popish sense. When our doctors will not have us to contend about the manner of
presence, whither by consubstantion, or transubstantiation, yet this takes not
away Substantially in general, but leaves place to substantially in an
unknown manner. But we proceed: If any will extend the words of the act to the
elements of bread and wine, and interpret the receaving of Christ's body and
blood, of the souls inward receaving, then howbeit he kneeleth not upon
opinion of the real presence of Christ in the sacrament, yet his adoration is
terminated, and rests someway upon the sacrament, or sacramental elements,
otherwise he cannot be said to kneel for receiving of the sacrament.

Now, as the papists agree not among themselves about the manner of worshipping
their images, so the Communicants may differ in the manner and way of
terminating that adoration or worship. Therefore suppose he believe not the
real presence or existence of the body of Christ in the bread, yet he may in
his apprehension and imagination unite them, as the papist does his image with
the prototype, and so adore the thing with the thing signified; as the purple
rob with the King is coadored or adored per accid^ns: or he may consider the
sign, as substitute in the room of the thing signified, howbeit absent, and
performs before it, or about it, that adoration which he would bestow upon
the thing signified, and by it, or in it honors the thing, signified
properly, but the sign improperly: As when a Kings Ambassador or Vicegerent
is honored at some solemnity with the honor of his Master, but improperly;
for the King is properly honored. Or as Vas^uez will have images to be
adored, to wit, with the inward motion of the mind to the thing signified the
body of Christ, and the exterior or outward sign of submission to the sign,
to be transmitted to the thing signified, or considering the signs as things
sacred, and in relation to God, whom we are serving in the use of them. So
howbeit the way and manner of terminating the reverence in the Sacrament be
different, according to the conceat of the Communicant, all come to one end, to
wit, to kneel for reverence of the Sacrament. Now to kneel for reverence, is a
gesture of adoration, page 70.
and sovereign worship, as L. ackowledgeth. It is nothing to the devil,
whether a man err this or that way. Howbeit the Communicants were not directed
to kneel for reverence of the Sacrament, dare any man say, but they may easily
fall upon it one of these ways.

I might draw another score here, for it is enough that the Communicants are
directed by the act of Perth to kneel, for reverence of the Sacrament: for
seeing he kneeleth in obedience to that act, he must be interpreted to kneel
for that end: otherwise he may go to Rome, and take Corpus Christi out of the
popes hand, reserving a secret intent to himself. Therefore howbeit kneeling in
the act of receiving might he lawful, no professor in our Church can be
excused, if he kneel.

But we proceed, Kneeling in the act of receiving can not be free of idolatry.
and setting aside the act of P^rth, we consider the act or action it self,
kneeling in the act of receaving, eating, drinking the (...) simply. We will
prove it can not be done but for reverence of the Sacrament, or sacramental
elements, and that by two arguments.

The first argument shall be this, The first argument.
To be tied to kneel, whither by direction of others, or resolution of our own
minds, to kneel with reverence, in any religious exercise (...) or senseless
creature, can not be done but for (...) of that creature. The communicant is
(...) by the direction of others, or his own (...) to kneel with reverence
before dead and senseless creatures, when he is in the act of receaving the
sacramental elements. Therefore he kneeleth for reverence of the sacramental
elements. I say, by direction of others, or resolution of our own mind. for we
can not kneel to God in prayer, but there are many things before us, a house,
a wall, a tree, etc. but they are set before us only by casual position or
situation ^^^ther can we choose to do otherwise, but we do not lie our
selfs. I add with reverence: for if a person finding himself diseased at the
hearing of the word, find himself eased with kneeling, that can not be
called kneeling with reverence. If ye be tied to kneel with reverence, when
you are to do any religious exercise, suppone prayer, before such a creature,
suppone but a'tree, and is not likewise tied when you pray before any other
creature, your gesture of adoration can not be without respect to the tree.
God himself never appointed any creature to be an object to the eyes of man,
when he was to adore him upon his knees, but only directed his people to kneel
toward a certain place, where he was present himself in an extraordinary
manner, or bound himself by promise to hear them from thence. He was present
in the Ark after an extraordinary manner, sitting between the Cherubins,
answered by a lively voice out of it to Moses, and vouchsafed to hear such as
turned toward the Temple, when they called upon him. But there is no such place
appointed under the Gospel, far less any creature before which he has
directed us to kneel. Our adoration is directed to that place, where we know
the manhood of Christ, whereof the Ark and the Temple were types, does exist
naturally or substantially, that is, to the heavens The sacramental bread is
not a place of Gods extraordinary presence, nor of the existing of Christ's
manhood substantially, or of promise to hear us from thence. It is idolatry
(says Perkinse) to turn, Treatise of idolatie^.
dispose or direct the worship of God, or any part thereof to any particular
place or creature without the appointment of God, and more specially to direct
our adoration to the bread, or the place where the bread is. The Theologues,
and ministers in the Palatinat in their admonition, touching the book of
Concord, teach us, that it is idolatry to worship God otherwise then he has
commanded: that they are guilty of this idolatry, that direct the adoration of
God to any other place or creature, then God has commanded: that for this
cause only these worshipped God aright, who in their gesture turned their faces
toward the arc, where he was, prefer^^ after a singular manner, because God
had commanded this ceremonial adoration, promising to hear such as worshipped
him after that manner. But that under the new testament all ceremonial
adoration by turning us to any certain place or thing, is damned.

In the admonition above mentioned, therefore they condemn them as guilty of
as gross idolatry, who adore Christ in, or beside, or before the sacramental
bread; ^s if he were corporally there, as those who falling down before any
common bread, a stock, or stone, would say, they adore Christ in it. Qui
igitur Christum adorant in isto vel apud istum, vel coram isto pane, tanquam
ibi corporaliter praesentem, aeque crassam ac Deo displicentem idololatriam
admittunt, atque is qui coram quovis pane communi aut quovis trunco, aut quovis
lapid: procidens, in eo Christum se aederarit dicat. They add, as corporally
present, because these against whom they were writing maintained a corporal
presence. Our doctor says, It is no error to worship Christ's flesh there,
page 142.
which must be understood as present there, whither in respect of his
personal omnipresence, or by imaginary u^ion of the bread and his body, or
that unknown manner of sacramental presence, with which they cloak perhaps a
meaning, which as yet they think not expedient to profess. Kuchlinus disp.
theolog. page 597. infers out of Ierem. 3. 11. and John 4. 23. likewise,
that our adoration should not be directed, either in body or mind, to the
altar, or the ministers hand. Ter Simecdochen enim tollit circumstantiam omnem
verti loci; ad quem in terris dirigitur adoratio Dei, quod ostendit Antithesis
manifest, sed in spiritu and veritate. Ye see then, howbeit we are not tied
to direct our adoration at all time to the place where the bread is, as the
Jews were toward the arc, because it is not always fixed in a certain
place, these divines condemn the like manner, at whatsoever time we adore
before the bread.

We uncover our heads, The uncovering of the head not like kneeling.
say they, when we receave the elements, why may we not also kneel? I answer,
first, the uncovering of the head is a gesture of reverence only, and that only
among some nations, but not of adoration. The Jews, Turks, and Mahometans
pray with their heads covered. The Grecians and Romans of old, howbeit they
walked in public with uncovered heads, except in rain, great heat, or
mourning, yet in the service of their Gods, they had their heads covered. The
Europeans this day uncover their heads when they are praying. Kneeling is a
gesture of adoration among all nations, either in civil or religious use.
Augustine says, Honorat emnis qui adorat, no autem adorat omnes quid onorat;
Every one that does adore, does honor, but not every one that honors,
adoreth. Contraserm. Arian. c. 23. I will not kneel to every one, to whom I
uncover my head civilly. Every one that stands with his head uncovered in
presence of the king, is not adoring, as he is who is presenting his petition
to the king upon his knee in their sight. A provincial synod holden at London,
anno 1603: ordained the head to be uncovered, when their service is read in the
Church, yet I think they would not have enjoined kneeling. We hear the
canonical scripture read with uncovered heads, but yet we kneel not. The words
of Christ, which he uttered at the institution, are still and often uttered;
that same voice sounds through all the tables of the world, his actions,
which were divine and holy, are reiterat. In Gratians decree, De consecrat.
did. 1. cap. 68. we have a superstitious direction of Pope Anastasius, that
when the Gospel is read in the Church, those that are present, shall not sit,
but stand venerabiliter curvi, bowing reverently, hearken and adore. Wherefore
more at the hearing of the Gospel, then the Epistle, which is also
Evangelicall? Yet you see, howbeit that standing with bowing be more then to
have the head uncovered, it was but veneration. And, whereas he says, Et
fideliter adorent, the gloss has, id est venerentur, because the word
adoring, is taken there in a large sense, as ye may see sundry places above
cited, not for that which is in a strict sense called adoration. Adoration in
strict sense is kneeling or pr^stration. Whereas Matthew says, chap 8. ^. of
the leprouse man, That he worshipped Christ, or adored Christ, as the Latin
translation has according to the original, Mark 1. 40. He kneeled dew^e to
him, and Luke 5. 12. that he fell in his face. Suchlike, where it is said of
the Cananitish woman, Matthew. 15. 25. That she worshipped, or adored him: and
adoravit eum. Mark 7. 25. it is said, That she fell at his feet. The Greek word
(...), signifies to fall down like a dog o^ ^whelp at the feet of another, as
our Lord. Further, our heads are not other way uncovered in the act of
receaving, then in the rest of the time of the celebration; when we are not
near the elements. And thirdly, the uncovering of our head is compatible with
the variety of actions in time of celebration, praying, singing, the words of
the institution, and chapters read, but adoration directed, as they pretend to
God, can not be without presenting^ our petitions, and thanks to God, which
requires a several part of the action by it self.

It is objected, Occasional. ^neeling not warrant ^^r ordinary. ^ page 88.
that 1 King. 18. 39. when the people saw the fire fall upon the sacrifice, to
consume it, the wood, the stones, the dust and lick up the water that was in
the trench, they fell on their faces, and cried, The Lord is God. I answer, The
people fell on their faces after the fire had consumed the burnt sacrifice, the
wood, the stones, and licked up the water, and not in the mean time; for it is
not likely that they fell down, till they had seen what the fire had wrought.
Next, what suppose they had fallen down^ in the mean time, that the fire was
working the work, wherefore it was sent. Is it any wonder, that men amazed
with the presence of Gods majesty in a miracle, fall down as astonished, to
worship God. Levit. 9. 23, 24. The original of unbe^eef. page 332.
Such a visible sign of Gods presence is called the glory of the Lord.
Doctor Jackson the Arminian has this rule to be observed, Such actions as
have been managed by Gods Spirit suggested by secret instinct, or extracted by
extraordinary and special occasions, are then only lawful in others, when
they are begotten by like occasions, or brought forth by like impulsions. In
matters of secular civilitie or morality, many things (says he) will beseem
one man, which are uncomely in another, and in one, and thes^^me man's
deportment many things are decent and lawful, whiles they are drawn from him
by special or rare occasions, whose usual practice upon dislike or no
occasions, becomes according to the nature of the subject, r^diculous, or
dishonest. That in the service of God, and matters spiritual, the least
digression or declination from proposed paternes, is far more dangerous. To
attempt the like enterprise unto Jonathans, upon warrant of his exemple, and
upon like speeches of enemies inviting him to come up, would be a
superstitious tempting of God. Every man may not use the like prognostication,
that Abraham's servant made use of, when he was sent to bespeak for his young
master Isaac a wife. Jacob expressed his tender affection to his son Joseph,
whom he never looked to see again, by kissing his coat, but to have hanged it
about his bed or table, that it might receave such salutations evening and
morning, or at every meals time, might have countenanced many breaches of
superstition. Charles the fifth after his fyrewell to the wars, and safe
arrival to Spain, saluted the spanish shore in such an affectionat and
prostrat manner, as his meanest vassal could nor ordinarily have saluted,
either him or it without just imputation of gross idolatry. These are Doctor
Jacksons examples, which he brings in for illustration of his rule. If there
come into the Church one that believes not, or one that is unlearned, and
hear one after another prophecy, and finding himself convinced, and the
secrets of his heart made manifest, falling down on his knees, he will report
that God is in you of a truth, 1 Corin. 14. 24, 25. Yet if he fell down
before: them ordinarily, were it not idolatrous? Thirdly, suppose they had
fallen down when the fire was in working, yet it is not said, that they fell
down with their eyes po^ing upon the fire, but upon their faces, and cried.
The Lord is God, because he had manifested by his presence and power in such a
miracle, that he was the true God, as 2 Chronicles. 7. 3. when the children of
Israel saw, how the fire came down, and consumed the sacrifices, and that the
glory of the Lord had filled the house, they bowed themselves with their faces
to the ground upon the pavem^n^, and worshipped and praised the Lord, saying,
etc.

Solomon kneeled, Salomons kneeling at the dedication of the temple.
say they, before the altar of the Lord, when he prayed at the dedication of
the temple. For it is said, 1 King. 8. 54. that when he had made an end of
praying all his prayer and application to the Lord, he arose from before the
altar of the Lord, from kneeling on his knees, and stood, and blessed the
people. I answer, The altar is not set down there as the object, toward which
he directed his countenance, when he was kneeling, but only as a circumstance
of the place where he was, when he praved at that time; for he had prepared a
brazen scaffold; and set it in the midst of the court, over against the altar
of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 6. 13. He kneeled where he had been standing on the
scaffold, and spread his hands toward the heavens, not toward the altar. It is
said; 2 Chronicles. 6. 13. That he fell down upon his knees before all the
congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands toward heaven. Neither is
it said, That he turned his face to the altar. They turned their face
ordinarily to that part of the temple, where the arc was the place of Gods
extraordinary presence. The arc was metonymically called God, 1 Samuel 4. 7.
The Lord, 1 King. 9. 25. The Lord of hosts, the King of glory, Psalm. 24. The
face of the Lord, Esa. 1. 12. for it the tabernacle was made, and the temple.
It represented Gods seat, and God delivered his oracles from the mercy seat
above it. What likelihood then is there, that they kneeled ordinarily in their
prayers looking toward the altar, or that they come never before the altar but
kneeled before it; for the altar was but dedicated at this time. It was not
already dedicated, but in fieri, says D. B. Augustine lib. Of kneeling. page 7.
2. ad Simplicianum qui. 4. says, David pr^yed before the arc, Quia ibi
sacratior and commendatior presentia Domini erat; because the presence of the
Lord there was more sacred and more to be respected. The like answer may be
given to that place, Micha 6. 6. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and
bow my self before the high God. They bowed themselves before the high God
sitting between the Cherubims, not toward the altar, they bowed, when they had
offered their oblations, not to their oblations. As when they presented the
basket with first fruits; they first set it down, and after bowed themselves
before Jehovah their God, and so went out, Deuteronomy. 26. 24. 10. What if they had
bowed, when they were offering to God? When we are in the act of receaving,
eating, drinking, we are receaving, and not offering.

They say, The pretense of objectum a quo significative.
the sacramental elements are only as objectum a quo significative, that is,
as an active object moving them to worship the things signified, or God. Put
case that were true. So said Purandus, Holcot, and Picus Mirandula; That they
adored the prototype or samplar before the image, which put them in mind of
the samplar, and spoke in as abstract a manner, of their worship, as the
Formalist does, when he pretends the purest intent he can in he manner of his
adoration. And yet were they never ranked among the Iconomachi, but by the
Papists counted good Catholics. It is true, Bellarmine and Suarez are not
content with this adoration, which they call improper adoration, when any
person or thing is honored in place of another, as when the ambassador is
honored with the honor due and proper to the king, but for the king, or, as
when all the ceremonies are celebrat about a statue in steed of the true corpse.
De imaginibus. cap. 19. 20. 21.
Bell irmine grants notwithstanding that, Coram illa, vel in illa, aut per
illam adoratur exemplar, that after their manner of worship the samplar is
adored before the image, De cultu adorat. Disp. 108. number. 73.
or in the image, or by the image. Vazquez proves, That these Doctors made
the image objectum quod, the very object passive of adoration, and that both
the samplar and the image were adored, simul cum imaginibus exemplaria proxime
and ut quod adorari. For they used the same respect to the images, that other
Catholics used, they uncovered their head to them, they bowed toward them,
kneeled before them, and kissed them. And this he defends to be the right
manner, when the image and the samplar are adored with one adoration, the
inward motion and submission of the mind, being carried to the samplar, and
the outward sign of submission to the image, being transmitted by the spirit,
or in thought and defire, De adorat. disp. 108. number. 90. number. 132. 134. and
disp. 110 number. 34. Disp. 109. number. 7.
to the samplar. That all the Catholics agree in this, that the kiss be so
fixed upon the image, and the body be bowed before it, that the affection being
inflammed with the remembrance of the samplar, be carried to it with inward
reverence, Virtute cujus externum esculum in ipsum etiam veluti sagittam
transmittat; by virtue or power whereof it transmitteth the outward kiss^, as
an arrow, to the samplar it self. So kneeling before the image, prostration,
or any other sign of submission is to be transmitted by the image to the
samplar after the same manner. For, De adorat. disp. 106. number 2. and 6.
says he, in the time of the 7. synod, there were some enemies to images, who
were content, that images were brought into the Church, not only for
decorement, sed etiam ad excitand^m f^delibus memoriam exemplaris, ut coram eis
ipsum solum ven rentur, illis tamen nullum signum honoris aut submissienis,
neque osculo, nec inclinatione corporis, nec alio modo exhiberent, id enim
idolatriam esse dicebant, ^ut also to stir up the remembrance of the samplar,
to the faithful, that before them they might reverence only the samplar, but
exhibit no sign of honor or submission, either by kiss or bowing of the
body, or any other way, for they said that was idolatry. Quare nec
osculabantur imagines, neque ipsis corpus inclinabant, nec thurificabant, sed
recti coram eis, in memoriam ex emplaris exictati, in ipsum mente sola
ferebantur. And therefore (says he) they neither kissed images, nor bowed their
body to them* nor offered incense, but standing upright before them, being
stirred up to the remembrance of the samplar, they were carried only in their
wind to it. In another place he says, Disp. 108. number. 128.
Iconomachi, qui ad solam recordationem imaginibus utuntur, ante illas genua
non flectunt, nec se prosternunt, sic enim ipsas nota extcriori adorarent, sed
erecti absque ullo gestu corporis qui reverenti^m judicet, coram imagine,
exemplaris recordantur and ipsum spiritu solum adorant. That is, The
adversaries to images, who use images only to put them in remembrance of the
samplar, they neither kneel, nor prostrat themselves before them, for so they
should adore them with the outward note or sign, but standing upright without
any gesture of the body before the image, which might be a show of reverence,
they remember the samplar, and adore it in spirit only. But these Doctors
above mentioned, howbeit their inward reverence was directed to the samplar,
yet the outward sign of submission was first directed to the image. Ye see
then, that taking the images only as objectum a quo significative, as
instruments and means to stir up their remembrance, these mangrels who were
called Semiprobi, would not kneel before them: for then, says Vazquez, they
should have adored them, which he in his Popish judgment, thinks they should
have done; but these Doctors did so. So if the elements be used only as
objectum a quo significative, to stir up their remembrance, why kneel they
before them. Nay, why are not the elements lifted up, as among the Papists,
after they have said, This is my body, (for, say they, it is made then a
sacrament) that the people being stirred up at the elevation with the sight of
the signifying object, may kneel in whatsoever part of the Church they be. And
howsoever the Doctor seems to disallow the elevation, page 119. 120. 121.
Yet he says, we may kneel before the elements, having them in our sight, or
object to our senses, as ordinary means, signs, and memorial, to stir us
up to worship God and our Savior, page 88. 92. what fault were there then to
lift them up to be seen. Seeing then they kneel before such a signifying
object, and are tied to kneel, the signification of the object does not help,
but rather be wrayeth, that they give that respect unto it, as by it to
transmit the outward sign of worship* mediatly to the thing signified, page ^5.
or to God, which L. confesses to be idolatry, hypocrisy, and a mixture of
worship: and yet this is at the least their worship. For if they used them
only as active objects, to stir them up, they would not kneel before them in
the mean time, more then when they are stirred up by the word, or works of
God, by a toad, an ass, or a flee. And therefore it is not to the purpose,
that he so often harpeth upon the use of stirring and moving. page 84. 85. 81.
92. D. B. of kneeling. page 33.
D. B. says plainly, That objectum a quo significative, is medium per quod, a
means by which, and that by the sacrament, they tender adoration to God.
Doctor Mortoun says, The adoration is relativ^ from the sign to Christ. If
it be from the sign, it must first be carried to the sign, as a mean of
conveyance unto Christ, Reply 2. part. page 65. No difference between images
and the elements in the case of adoration.
says Doctor Ames in his reply.

But D. L. in his solutions, says, there is a great difference between images,
which are the inventions of men, and the works of God and the sacraments. But
say we, in the case of adoration there is no difference. If the historical use
of images be lawful, as some now maintain, quid obstat praesentia imaginis,
says Vazquez, what does hinder you at the sight of a crucifix to fall down
before it, and worship Crist. And if the use of images to this end be
forbidden, so are also the creatures. We esteem more indeed of the works of
God, then of the workmanship of man. We owe reverence at the hearing of the
word, decent and comely usage in the participation of the sacrament, which we
owe not to images, howbeit this reverent use be not properly a spece of
adoration. L. page 77.
Gods word and works are ordained by God for our instruction, and so are not
images. But God never ordained them to this end, that in them, by them, or
before them, we should adore him, or any other thing we are put in remembrance
of by them. They are not commanded to be used, either in or out of the time of
divine service, in modo and statu accomodato ad adorationem. We may, and do
use the word and sacraments for means, occasions, instruments to stir us up
to worship God, but it follows not that we should or may worship God by
kneeling before them. The general Council holden at Constantinople, anno 750.
in condemning images, speaking by the way of this sacrament, has these words,
Ecce igitur vivificantis illius corporis imaginem totam, panis scilicet
substantiam, quam mandavit apponi, ne scilicet humana effigy figura^a,
idololatria intro duceretur; Behold therefore the whole or only image of that
quickening body, the substance of bread, which he commanded to be set before
them, least if it had a humane shape, idolatry might have been brought in.
The braz^n serpent was set up upon a pole, that these who were stinged with the
fiery serpents, looking upon it, might be cured. Yet, De adorat. disp. 104.
number. 24.
says Vazquez, God commanded them to look upon it, standing upright without
any adoration or sign of submission. The people of God had their sacraments,
yet they kneeled not before them, nor yet heard they the word either read or
exponed kneeling. When they heard the law of the passover, they bowed not
their head, howbeit it might be finished in an instant, says L. page 68.
and far less kneeled, but after they had heard. Gods works are the book
of nature to teach us many things concerning God. But we must not therefore
fall down before the sun or moon, every green tree, an ass, a toad, when
they work, at the sight of them, upon our minds, and move us to consider Gods
goodness, wisdom, power. For then we should fall into the horrible error
of Vazquez, De adorat. disp. 110.
who doubted not to aver, that not only an image, or any holy thing may be
worshipped in the same adoration with God, but also any thing in the world, the
sun, the moon, the stirs, a stock, Solut. p. ^62.
a stone, a straw: Doctor Lindsey in his solutions, to shun this absurdity,
says, To bow down, when we have seen the works of God, when we have heard
the word, and when we receave the sacraments, to ador^ him, when by his works,
the word, and sacraments, we are taught to adore, is neither to bow down to an
idol, nor to worship God in an idol. He durst not say, When we see the works
of God, when we hear the word of God, as he should have done, if he would
have showen the difference betwixt the word of God, the works of God, and
images. Nor yet does he say, When we have received the sacrament, as he said of
the other two, When we have seen the works of God, when we have heard the
word of God. But now he affirms boldly, that we may bow our knees to God
before his creatures, if we use them only as means and instruments to stir
us up to worship God, page 94. That this error grounded upon the significant
object, may be the better perceaved, consider, that the book of nature is like
the book of grace. If I were reading and meditating upon a passage of
scripture, I am then considering what is read. When I have ended that work, if
I find my self moved to pray, or give thanks, I pore not still with the eyes
of my body, and my mind upon the book, but turn my self to a wall, or a
chair, or a bed, or any other thing casually placed before me, yea perhaps
before the book it self, but casually, as before any other thing. I am not
then gathering leassons or instructions, for that exercise is ended. So when I
am beholding a tree, an ass, or toad, and considering in them the goodness,
power, and wisdom of God, I am reading upon the book of nature, I am
contemplating and gathering profitable instructions. I cannot still be
contemplating, and in the mean time adore kneeling in prayer, or praise, for
that were a confusion of holy exercises. Nor yet after my contemplation, and
preparatorie work for worship is ended, must I tie or set my self before that
ass, to ^d, or tree to kneel; for then I should kneel for a greater respect to
that creature, then to any other beside for the time, before which I might have
kneeled casually without respect. And so the moving object shall participat of
the external adoration, my kneeling being convoyed by it to God, to whom it is
directed by my spirit or affection, as Vazquez has descrived the manner of
adoration by images. The manner is not different. If the old opinion of some
Heathnike philosophers were their tenent, that the world was animated by God,
as our bodies are by our souls, then they might with some probability
conclude. Jupiter ^st quodcunque vides, All that thou see is great Jupiter,
and infer this worship before every creature. But Christian religion will not
admit such gros^e opinions.

They say, Mediat civil wor^^ip no good warrant.
men how before the chair of estate, or the princes seal, which are dead and
senseless creatures. I answer, civil worship is conveyed mediatly to the
person of the prince, by bowing before such senseless creatures, because men
think it expedient to uphold the infirmity of princely majesty by such
means. But God needs no mediat worship to uphold his majesty, nor will have
none. Again, the ceremonies of Kings and Emperors courts are no rules for
religions worship. For, De civitat. Dei lib. 10. cap. 4.
as Augustine says, Multa de cultu di vino usurpata sunt, quae honoribus
deseruntur humanis, sive humilitate nimia, sive adulatione pestifera. That
great humility or pestiferous statterie, may be the original of many honors
given to princes, borrowed from the forms used in Gods worship. Nazianzen
says, The Roman Euperours were honored with public images. Their crowns,
and diademes, and purple robes, many laws, tributs, and multitude of subjects
were not sufficient to make sure their empire, but they behoved to be adored,
not only in their own persons, but also in colors, and other works made with
men's hands, that they might seem the more venerable. That is, Chamier de
Imagine. c. 6. number. 9.
as Chemier interprets, these images proceeded ab inexplebili fostu^
Imperatorum, from the insatiable ambition of Emperors. The statues of some
Kings have had divine honors conferred on them. Doctor Abbots in his defense
of Perkinse says, It should seem s^range, that formalities observed to
princes in their courts for majesti^ and royal estate, should be made paternes
of religious devotion to be practiced in the Church.

Francis Whit in his reply to Fisher says, page 228.
Civil and religious worship are of diverse beginnings and forms, and every
thing that is possible, lawful and commendable in the one, is not so in the
other. There is civil ordin^nce for the one, but there wants divine
ordinance for the other.

But ye will say, Gods extraordinary presence in the arc.
The people of God worshipped God by the arc. I answer, They worshipped God
not by the arc, but in the arc. For God was present in the arc after an
extraordinary manner. God was likewise in the temple after a peculiar manner
hearing their prayers. De cultu Sanct. l. 3. c. 4.
Immo hic est modus qno Deus est in templo peculiaciter, nimirium quia ibi est
per exauditionem, says Bellarmine, which was true of Salomons temple, but not
rightly applied to ours. God is not in the sacramental elements after such an
extraordinary manner, nor yet the body of Christ. Nay the body of Christ is
not spiritually in the sacrament, to use the Doctors phrase, page 95. if by
sacrament be meant the sacramental elements, as commonly it is taken, for so
the meaning shall be popish as I have declared before. But there is a
spiritual presence of Christ's body, not without, but within the hearts of the
faithful. This presence of God by his spirit, or spiritual presence of
Christ's body in the heates of the faithful, is not extraordinary, but
ordinary, and common to all the godly, not exposed to the senses, but inward
and invisible.

Howbeit in words they deny a relative worship of Christ by the signs, Their
relative adoration.
to gull the simple, yet we must look to their carriage before the signs, and
their ground taken from the moving and stirring object, Yea, sometime words
escape plain enough. The Lutherans worship Christ in the sacrament as we
should do. Their error is only in the manner of presence, says our Doctor,
page 141. No error to worship Christ flesh and blood there, in respect of the
personal presen^e of Ch^ists body, page 142. There then either really, or by
imagination, as the Papist uniteth the image and the samplar, or as there, as
when an empty coffin is carried at funerals, and all the solemnities observed,
as if the corpse were present. Let him take his choice. And page 144. If ye
except out of the number of reformed Churches all that think that Christ is
present in the sacrament, and in the sacrament to be adored, I fear ye draw the
number of the reformed Churches to a very small account, whom ye call the purer
sort, such as Arrians, Anabaptists, and their followers. He abstaineth from
clear speeches, that he may lurk under the word Sacrament, and forbeareth the
expression of our divines for the manner of Christ's presence. D. Mourton, page
291. says, that in the relative reverence, which is used in their Church,
relation being made from the sign to Christ the thing signified, the sacrament
is objectum a quo significative. And what is that but reverence relative by the
sign to Christ? And what hinders adoration to be carried by a significant
object, more then by a representative? The signs in the sacr^ment,
notwithstanding of the want of humane shape, represent Christ to us.

Ye may ask, What if ye keep not a constant course, but sometimes sit,
sometime stand, and sometime kneel? I answer, Put case, ye kneel sometime for
fear like a temporizer, or of your own accord, ye take liberty indeed to sit,
stand, or kneel, but when and how often ye kneel, ye adore, and tie your self
to adore at these times before such an object, after the same manner, and for
the same respects, and considerations, which are observed by those who keep a
constant course. For it is not here as in prayer. We may pray without
external adoration, or with it, as in the petition of the mother of Zebedees
children, Matthew. 20. she came to Christ, adorans and pe^ens, worshipping him,
and petitioning. And 2 Samuel 14. 4. the woman of Tekoa fell on her face to the
ground, and did obeisance, when she petitioned the King. For every gesture in
praying to God, is no more a gesture of adoration, then in petitioning men. Now
when ye adore in prayer, your adoration is directed immediately to God, having
no object before you, but such as stands casually before you, from which you
may turn your self in the very act of praying, to which you have no more
respect then to other objects round about you. But here you (...) kneel before
such an object, an object significant, and for that respect does kneel, that
that sign of outward worship may be convoyed to Christ's flesh and blood
signified by that object.

We have in the former argument considered the sacramental elements, The
second argument.
as an object presented before us in the hand of the minister without any
further use. We are now to consider them in the use, when we take, eat, and
drink, and our next argument shall be this. To adore upon our knees, when we
are performing an outward action, which is not directed to God immediately, and
in that action are occupied about an external object, is idolatry, unless
that whereabout the action is employed be worthy of divine honor. Our taking,
eating, drinking the bread and wine at the Lords supper, is not an action
directed to God immediately, as prayer and thanksgiving is, nor is it an outward
sign of adoration, as kneeling is. De adoratione disput. 93. number. 45.
Susceptio and collatio sacramentorum, est cultus quidam sa^er, eum ea digne
tractantur, nullius tamen rei est adoratio: The receaving and giving of the
sacraments is a kind of sacred worship, but it is not the adoration of any
thing, says Vazquez. And ye^ our Doctor, to whom what is absurd, says, that
the sacrament is an act of real adoration, page 133.

They allege commonly, that we may kneel before our meat set on the table,
when we are to bless it. But they do not prosecute it to the point, because
they see, it will not frame for their purpose: First, we are to consider the
time of the blessing; The meat is to be considered not only as an object
active, (...)
putting us in mind of a benefit, but also as passive, not of adoration, but
of blessing and sanctification for our use, for the meat is not set upon the
table merely to be gazed upon, but to be blessed and sanctified for our use.
Next, we are not, nor can not be tied to bless kneeling. Yea, we read not in
scripture, that any blessed the meat upon the tabl kneeling. Christ himself
blessed sitting. Solomon kneeled, 1 King. 8. 54. when he prayed, and spoke to
God: but when he was to bless the people, it is said, he rose and stood up. It
is an incongruous thing among the Papists to adore a thing, which is not higher
then their polles, when they adorer, because they can not be said to humble
themselves to that which is lower then themselves, say D. P. and P. D. B. page
68. P. page 387.
It were incongruous likewise, and inexpedient to set the meat as high as our
polles or above, Decret. page 366.
and adore before it kneeling, and looking up to in. Bochellus cites a canon
forbidding the priest to lift up the bread to be seen before the words of
consecration be uttered, least the people adore and commit idolatry. Thirdly,
when we kneel, we are not bound to gaze upon the meat, but may turn our selves
to a chair, a wall, or a form, or any other thing set before us casually.
Yea, when we sit at table, we are not bound at the blessing to gaze upon the
meat, but may, and do ordinarily lift up our hands and our eyes to the heavens,
as Christ lifted up his eyes. But if they would come to the purpose; and make a
just comparison, they should consider next, that after the meat is blessed, it
were strange to see every one who is present sit down upon his knees, with his
countenance fixed upon the bread in the hand of the master of the family or
feast. And after this sort we have considered already in the former argument,
the elements holden in the hands of the minister. But now we are to consider
thirdly, the act of taking, eating, drinking, our meat and drink. We may not
take, eat, and drink our ordinary meat and drink upon our knees. Nature and
custom teaches us, it were rather a mocking of God, then a reverent adoration
of him. You will say, there is a differences The sacramen^ all elements are
holy bread and wi^e, the other common and ordinary. There ye betray your (...)
kneel then in taking and eating the sacramental bread, because it is holy. Now
to kneel in respect of the holiness of bread and wine, is idolatry. And the
true cause of your religious respect and bowing before it, is the holiness of
it. We are too prone to conceat too highly of things set apart to holy uses, as
if they were of greater worth then our selves, for whose use they were
instituted. Next, suppose there be a difference, yet our ordinary bread is
sanctified by the word of God and prayer, to our use. Therefore it is but a
mocking of God, unless that which you eat and drink be worthy of divine
honor. Lib. 3. de natura D^^rum.
Think their any man so (...) as to believe, that that which (...) Cicera.
Yet the Papist is thus mad. Ave^roes said, My souls shall hold with the
philosophers, since the Christ^a^s worship that which they eat. And this do our
kneelers. Yet the Papist thinks he takes and eats the body of Christ,
which by reason of the concomitance of the Godhead, he adoreth. The Lutheran
thinks both the bread and the body are present: yet they are consonant to
their erroneous grounds of the real presence, and unless Christ's body were
there really and su^stantially, they would not take, eat, and drink, adoring
upon their knees. Neither would any reasonable man be so absurd, as to take,
eat, drink, adoring, unless he believed, that he were eating, were worthy of
divine honor. It is otherwise so absurd to kneel before God after that manner.
It were absurd to kneel before an eart^^ly king, ^est eating and drinking. But
it may be our kneelers be gross enough in their opinion of the real
presence. Suarez says, Suarez in 3. part. tom. 3. p. 780. Bellar. de e^char.
l. 2. c. 3. l. 4. c. 29. Alger. de sa^cram. altar. l. 2. c. 3.
That as real presence proves adoration a priori, so adoration proves real
presence a postiriori. Bellarmine likewise proves adoration by real presence,
and real presence by adoration. Algerius writing in the eleventh centurie,
that is between a 1000. an^ 1100. year, condemns it as a vain and
senseless fancy to bestow so much reverence upon the sacrament, unless
Christ's body be present there. Tarnov. de ministe^ 10. l. 2. c. 31.
Tarnovius a Lutheran, Pre ermittendo hanc venerationem Christi externam,
genuflexionem scilicet, communicantes presentiam Christi secundum corpus
negare, and se Calvinians jungere. That is, By praetermitting this veneration,
to wit, kneeling, the communicants should seem to deny Christ's bodily
presence, and to join themselves to the Calvinians. They think, kneelers, who
believe not the real presence, worship a piece of bread.

They say, The pretense of mental prayer.
We may pray mentally in the act of receaving, therefore we may kneel or adore
in the act of receaving. I answer first, We may not pray when we are bound to
another exercise. In the act of receaving, eating, drinking, we should attend
upon the audible words, the visible signs and rites, meditat upon the analogy
between the outward signs and rites, and the things signified, take, eat,
drink mentally, and spiritually by faith. And so meditation upon the analogy,
is not the only work of the soul, page 102. 109. page 112.
as L. supposes us to imagine. Our desires are not prayers, as L. dreameth.
Prayer is more then desire. It is a manifesting of our desires to God.
Desiderium non dum dicitur oration, quousque pere intellectus loquertis cum Deo
exprimatur, (...) disp. 93. number. 11.
says Vazqu^z. This exercise of the mind, correspondent to the outward
exercise of the members and senses of the body outwardly, cannot consist with
oration continua and instructa; set prayer. The soul may send forth to the
heavens short ejaculations like darts. Prayer intermixeth it self with every
ordinance whatsomever, page 199. page 236.
s^ith P. He must mean ejaculatorie prayer, for otherwise he confesses, that
one ordinance is to be distinguished from another. But these ejaculations may
be incident to all our actions, even civil, let be religious, when we are
eating and drinking our ordinary meat and drink, transitoriae, or
ejaculatoriae orationes, as they call them, and therefore cannot be attended
with kneeling. In sudden ejaculations no other gesture is required, then that
wherein the motion of Gods spirit shall find us, says Master Down. Next,
suppose ye might pray a set prayer mentally, yet ye should not kneel in
public at your set mental prayer, when the congrega^ion is at another
exercise, nay, nor make any show by any other sign or gesture, that ye are
praying. If it be mental, it is in secret before the Lord, and the signs of
it before men should be concealed. Thirdly, it follows, not, suppose ye may
pray, that ye must pray kneeling: ^ee* use the one may sometime be without the
other. The Jews prayed standing as well as kneeling, Drusti praeterita in
Matthew. 6.
and therefore, says Drusius, of old prayers were called stations or
standings. And Rabbi Jud^ had a saying, Sine stationibus non subsisteret
mindus; The world cannot subsist without stations or standings, that is,
prayers. If ye will not, or may not pray but kneeling with reverence, when ye
come before such a creature, it cannot be imagined to be done without respect
to that creature. The like answers may be made to mental thanksgiving.
Ejaculations of thanks may agree with the proper exercise of the soul in the
time of receaving, eating, drinking, as it may also with the ordinary feeding,
or any worldly business, but not a set thanksgiving, which should require the
attention of all the powers of the soul, and cannot be done without diverting
the soul from the exercise proper for that time. Next, the signs outward
should be concealed, if it be but mental. Thirdly, what if ye must kneel, and
no other gesture will serve the turn.

But say they, The pretense of real prayer or thanksgiving.
the very action it self is a real prayer or thanksgiving, and we offer
sacrifices. I answer, prayer is a craving, our taking, eating, drinking, is not
a craving, but a receaving. Craving and receaving is not all one. But say they;
L. page 107.
it is a real thanksgiving, and therefore called eucharist. It is a showing
forth of the death of the Lord, till his coming again. I answer, it is not
properly thanksgiving. For thanksgiving is properly directed to God, as prayer
is, either mentally only, or also vocally and verbally, so is not our act of
taking, eating, drinking. Neither was the name of eucharist given by the
scripture, but by the ancients: and not for the act of taking, eating, and
drinking, but for the thanksgiving preceding, for the same reason it was
called Eulogia also, because of the blessing. For, he gave thanks, and he
blessed, are used indifferently by the Evangelists. Denominatio non est semper
(...) quata subjecto. Exercit. p. 517.
From one part of the action the whole action is called Eucharist, says
Casaubon. Eulogia and eucharistia, utraque vox a part una totam Domini
actionem designat. Whereas the Apostle says, So often as ye shall eat, etc ye
shall show forth the Lords death till he come again; is meant, say they, not
verbal, but real preaching only acted by taking, eating, drinking. So say
the Rhemists upon 1 Corinthians. 11. 26. But Doctor Fulk answers, that even
according to the judgment of the fathers, the Lords death must be showed not
only by the action, but also by words, which may stir up to remembrance, and
thankfulness. So also Willers. Willets qu. 1. of the sacraments. Pezel.
refutatio Catechismi Iefuit. page 421.
So ^ezel^us, and others. This kind of annunciation answers to the Hagadah,
that is the declaration which was made at the passover according to the
commandment, Ex^d 1. 8. And thou shall show. Therefore ^t the paschall supper
one made the declaration, expounding every ceremony in their own place, the
meaning of the lamb, of the bitter herbs, and so forth of the rest. (...)
cit. page 224.
This Ha^a^ah and d^claration of the Jews, says Casaula^us, answers to that
annunciate show forth, 1 Corinthians. 11. 26. But be it so, that the act it self
be called a declaration or setting forth of the Lo^ds death, yet that is not
properly a declaration, or commemoration, nor yet representation of his death.
Further, both representation and commemoration are to men, and not to God,
resemble preaching and not prayer. The celebration of the action it self is a
profession of thankfulness before men, for a great benefit, but is not
thanksgiving dir^cted to God. Bell^rmine himself exponing how the act of
eating and drinking may be called a showing forth, give^h this reason, that
the partakers should remember with thanksgiving the death of the Lord, De euch.
l. 4. c. 27. So the proper and principal end of the sacrament is a further
confirming and sealing of our communion with Christ, and his benefits purchased
to us by his death. The testification of our thankfulness by showing forth his
death, and commemoration of the benefits received thereby is a secondarie end.
Neither is it directed to God immediately, as thanksgiving is, howbeit honor
redound thereby to God, because his praise is proclaimed before men. De Missa.
l. 1. c. 13. and lib. 2. c. 9.
Non enim concionamur Deo neque sacramenta Domino dispersamus, sed populo.
Domino ministrare dicuntur, quia ad ejus honorem id faciunt, says Bellarmine.
To honor God is more general then to adore, for God is honored by preaching,
praying, singing, swearing; praising, and not by adoring only. Neither can
eating and drinking of bread and wine be called properly a sacrifice. For a
sacrifice properly so called, imports destruction of the thing sacrificed, by
killing, burning, effu^^^. That cannot be called properly a sacrifice, which is
only for commemoration, or representation of a sacrifice. The acting of a
tragedy upon a stage, is not a true tragedy indeed, howbeit the object
represented, was a true tragedy. Giving of alms may be called a sacrifice,
yet we kneel not when we give alms. It is a sacrifice only improperly, and
in some respect so called. The Gentiles are said to be sacrificed by the
preaching of the Gospel, Romans 15. 16. but figuratively. There is as great
difference between a sacrament and sacrifice, as taking and giving.

It is yet objected, The pretense of receaving a benefit.
that in the act of receaving, we receave an inestimable benefit. Ought not a
subject kneel, when he receaveth a benefit from a prince to testify his
thankfulness? I answer, If we were to receave a gift, suppose but a morsel of
bread out of Gods own hand immediately, we ought no doubt to adore upon our
knees, but not, if by the hand of the creature. The person who receaveth the
gift from the king, is supposed to receave it immediately from the king, or
suppose he kneel receaving from his servant, mediat civil worship are not
rules for religious adoration, which should be directed immediately to God. Now
we receave the sacrament out of the hand of the minister, not out of Christ's
own hand. Multum interest inter actionem Filii Dei perse, and per ministrum.
Illa enim est actio immediate producta a divino supposito, ista ab humano.
Bellarm. de Missa. lil. 2. cap. 4. Yea the Apostles at the first supper adored
not on their knees, when Christ himself ministered the sacrament, howbeit upon
occasion, and at other times they adored, not did they adore God the Father
upon their knees for the benefit they were receaving. The inward benefit
Christ's body and blood are received by the soul, not by the body, by the godly
only, not by all that receave the sacrament, by faith embracing Christ present
by his spirit in the soul. The godly under the law received the same gift, the
same spiritual food, and drink, and yet kneeled not. The D. page 113. says,
that in the law they had but the shadow of the gift, a popish speech, whereas
the Apostle says, the same food. If the clearer revelation make the
difference, which is without ground or reason, then adoration is not in respect
of the gift. The godly take, eat, and drink Christ's body and blood by the act
of faith and believing, Now the act of faith or believing is not an act of
adoration, as the schoolmen acknowledge, nor is it expressed outwardly by
kneeling, In a (...) fidei non potest apprehendi aliqua submissionis nota
propria religionis exhibenda ipsi excellentie Dei, In 3. tom. 1. (...) p. 93.
number. 20. and 21.
sicut nec ratio sacrificii aut laudis, says Vazquez. Never man yet adored
upon his knees, if his principal work was actual believing desire, Christ,
short ejaculations of the soul, and the acts of other graces concur, as
concomitants to remove impediments, that faith may put forth its act with
greater strength, which is the principal work of the soul in the act of
receaving the elements: All dispositions which are required unto right
receaving, can not distinctly and solemnly be expressed at the same time by
outward gestures, except we would use diverse gestures together, says P. 195.
The principal therefore must be considered. Next, we receave, eat, and drink
Christ's body and blood, as soon as we are effectually called, and begin to
believe, and as often as we hear the promises of the Gospel read and exponed,
and do believe. Christ's body is as far absent from us at the receaving of
the sacrament, as at the hearing of the word. The symbols, when they are added
to the word, while the myst^r^s are celebrated, Contra Gardener. col, 735.
edit. 1581.
I doubt not, says P^ter Martyr, serve very much for assurance, for they
s^ale the promise, tamen illa Christi nobis praesentiam magis constituere quam
verba aut promissiones, constanter pernego. That is but that they make Christ
more present to us, then the word and sacraments do, I utterly deny. The
Formalist speaks, as if Christ's body were present in the sacrament, or as if
we had never received Christ's body, till we received this sacrament, or never
but when we receave this sacrament. Whereas Augustine says, De consecrat.
did. 2. cap. 56. and did. 4. c. 131. Did. 2 c. 47.
There is no doubt, but every one of the faithful is made partaker of the body
and blood of Christ, when in baptism he is made a member of Christ, as ye may
see in Gratians decree. Again he says, Credere in eum, hoc est panem vivum
manducare, to believe in him, is to eat the living bread. The gloss says,
Christ is eaten spiritually by faith without the sacrament. We are united with
Christ, and made members of his body, before we come to this sacrament, and do
not receave his body of new at every communion, as if we had lost it since the
former; and yet there is but one body received at all the times. The
celebration of the Lords supper is not a new institution of the testament, but
a repetition of the same. This sacram^^^ (...) authentike instrument of the
testament, and as of as it ^s ministered, the same authentike instrument is
(...) over ^gain, Bellarm. de Euchar. l. 1. cap. 11. Becan. de Coena calie. c.
11.
See this illustration in Bellarmine, and ^^^anus, We are said then, to take,
eat, drink Christ's body and blood at every celebration of the holy supper,
because we put forth our faith in act at that time, and renewing the act of
faith, we take, eat, and drink by believing, that same body and blood, which
before, our faith being strengthened by the outward signs and seals to that
end, and so grow in faith, Reply to Harding. art. 1. Whittakerus de sacram.
page 68.
and by faith in union with Christ, The holy mysteries do not begin (says
Jewel) but rather continue and confirm this incorporation. Whitaker says,
Familiar^^ loquendi modus est ut fieri dicatur, quod factum obsigna^ur; That
is, It is a familiar kind of speaking to sa^^ that thing is in doing, which
being already done is sealed, and confirmed. Thirdly, the manner or form of
receaving a (...) be answerable to the manner of the offering, the nature of
the gift, and the will of the giver. If a King call his nobles to a banquet, it
is his will that they sit at table. David and Jonathan sat at table with King
Saul, as you may see, 1 Samuel, 20. Such as were called the Kings friends or
companions (for the original word signifies as well the one as the other,
Sociu^ ^s amicus) I take to have sitten ordinarily with Kings: as Zabud, 1
King. 4. 5. and Husha^ the Archite, who is called, 2 Samuel 15. 37. David's
friend, and 1 Chronicles. 27. 33. by the same translaters, the Kings companion. Such
an one was Daniel to the Babyloniah Emperor, as the Apocrypha history of
Susanna reports, cap. 14. 1. To this Christ alludeth, Joh. 15. 15. when he
says to his disciples at table, Hence forth I call you not servants, but I
have called you friends. Abraham for his faith was called Gods friend, Jam. 2.
23. By the same reason all the faithful are preferred to this dignity. As we
are friends and fellow-heires with Christ, so has he instituted this holy
feast, the only feast in the Christian Church, to assure us of our preferment,
and fellowship with him. Howsoever then otherwise, and at other occasions we
behave our selves as supplicants, we are now according to our Lords will and
pleasure, to observe that external form of a feast, which he has left to his
Church, and to act thereat in our outward carriage the persons of guests and
friends. And therefore, howbeit the inviter be a great person, the manner of
invitation is familiar, and our not acceptance the more offensive. Chrysostom
declaiming against such as were present, and did not approach to communicate,
says, Hom. 3. in epist ad Ephesios.
The King table is here, the King himself is present. Why stands thou
yawning? If thy garments be clean, (...) sit down and participat. In the
English book of common prayer, there is an exhortation to be made to the
people, when they are negligent to come to the table, where we have these
words, Ye know how grievous and unkind a thing it is, when a man has prepared
a rich feast, decked his table with all kind of provision s^ that there
lacks nothing, but the guests to sit down and yet these who be called
(without any cause) most unthankefully refuse to come. The exhortation seems
to ^ee dr^w^e out of that place of Chrysostom, but they omit the (...) words,
Sit down and participat. For all the (...) the first part of the comparison,
they bid not the Communicants sit down. But they must kneel and receave, that
which is reached to them. So that there is no more use of the table, then if it
were a cupbord or altar. Fourthly, if we should kneel, because we are receaving
a gift, by this reason we should kneel, when we receave any benefit or gift
of God, as for example, when we are taking, eating, drinking, our ordinary
meat and drink. If ye will say, the sacramental is holy bread, the other
common, then ye confess ye kneel, because of the holiness, that is, the
setting a part of it to a holy use, and that is idolatry. If ye will say, ye
receave a greater gift, then when ye receave your ordinary food, that is no
more, but then there is a greater motive. Yet, if because a gift, then
whenever, or whatsoever gift ye receave, ye ought to kneel. God deserves
thanks for the least of his benefits, and is to be adored for whatsoever
benefit spiritual or temporal received, in the time of divine service, or
out of it. For this is the common doctrine of the school men, Vazquez de
adorat. disp. 94. number. 7.
Eundem honorem adorationis, atque eodem modo Deo esse deferendum, etiamsi
varia sunt ipsius beneficia and attributa. That is, That the same honor of
adoration is to be given to God, and after the same manner, howbeit his
benefits and attributes are diverse. For the reason upon Gods part that moves
us to adore him, is the excellenie of his dignity. All his attributes concur
to make up this excellency, whatsoever benefit move us, never so mean, he
deserves honor, because bestowed by so great a Lord, who is the fountain,
and primum principium. When the Israelites were to be cured miraculously by
looking up to the brazen serpent, If we may receave upon our knees, what we
crave upon our knees.
a type of Christ, they kneeled not.

It is a frivolous objection, and scarce worthy the answering, when they say,
what we may crave upon our knees, we may receave upon our knees. They should
conclude, we must receive upon our knees. But neither the one, nor the other
does follow. For we crave our daily food upon our knees, and raiment,
therefore by their reasoning we should kneel with reverence, when we receave
our food in at our mouth, or put on our doublet. Yet say they, what we crave
of God upon our knees in public worship, we may receave upon our knees. But
this is yet as frivolous. For we may crave in time of public worship upon our
knees things necessary for this temporal life, and so we do, when in the
Lords prayer, we say, Give us this day our daily bread. Further, the diff^rence
of place and time, is but a difference in circumstances, and alters, not the
nature of worship, and so I may receave upon my knees, whatsoever I may crave
of God in private worship upon my knees; if this kind of reasoning were good.
But it is not the diversity of the time or place where we receave the
benefit, more then the diversity of the benefit it self, that is the ground
of adoration, but Gods excellency, as we said before.

Next, they consider not, that these three things are to be clearly
distinguished, a blessing or sanctifying of the creature, or mean God has
appointed, either for our temporal or spiritual life (of which some are
reckoned by L. page 85. 86.) before the use, the use it self, and thanksgiving
after the use. Blessing before meat, the use of the meat in enjoying it be
receaving, eating, drinking, and thanksgiving after, blessing before the
reading preaching or hearing of the word, the act it self of reading, hearing,
preaching, and thanksgiving to God after, blessing before the receaving of the
sacrament^ll. elements, the receaving and participation it self, and
thanksgiving after.

They ask, The pretense of humility and reverence.
if humility and reverence be not requisite in the act of receaving the
sacramental elements. I answer, Yes, in all religious exercises, at the
hearing of the word, reading of the word, etc. But it follows not, that there
should be humiliation upon our knees because humility of mind is required, nor
adoration, because reverence is required. Is there no reverence nor humility,
but in kneeling before dead and senseless creatures? There is a damnable
humility, plausible to willworshippers and idolaters, condemned, Coloss. 2. 23.
Peter was censured, when he refused, that Christ should wash his feet. It is
Christ's honor to command, obedience upon our part is true humility. Humility
is an habit, adoration is an act. The act of humility is immanent, whereby a
man rests content, and well pleased with his own estate and rank, and does
not conceat greater worth in himself, then there is, specially in comparison
with God. But adoration is a transient act, whereby a man goes out of
himself, as it were, to direct some homage, and worship to God. Such like
reverence is a common adjunct to all sorts of worship, preaching, praying,
praising, adoring, but is not a distinct kind of worship, Of the institution
of the supper. p. 63.
as is adoration. The pretense of reverence cannot be a sufficient reason for
altering the ordinance of Christ and the opinion of reverence, has often been
the dame and nour^e of manifold superstitions, says Doctor Morto^n^^

To concludes that because we must use reverent gesture in receaving the holy
communion, therefore we must kneel in the act of receaving, is to condemn our
own Church, and other reformed Churches of want of reverence. Unless ye will
say, sitting is reverent for some, to take in passing for others, but kneeling
for Scotland. So may the Monks conclude, says Doctour^ Ames, we must have
garments, therefore we must in one order have black, in another white, in a
third gray, and so forth. If any judicious Reader will review all their reasons
or pretenses for kneeling, he shall find, they infer a duty to kneel, and
consequently an indirect taxing of Christ, and his Apostles, and all others in
ancient time, or in reformed Churches, who have not kneeled. And if there were
no more, this alone may let them see the weakness of their reasoning.

Seeing kneeling in the act of receaving the sacramental element is idolatry,
and cannot be used but idolatrously, it follows, that kneeling in the act of
receaving brought not in a^tolatrie or bread worship, as some divines
construing charitably, some old Writers, or mistaking counterfeit works for
genuing, have imagined. We may observe other ushers to have prepared the way
for bread worship by kneeling. After that the virgin times of the first age or
prime primitive, that is the apostolical times were past, changes entered.
They were not content to sit, but at some time, and more frequently stood. They
left off distribution and breaking of bread with other, and received out of the
minister or deacons hand. Other words were substitute in place of Christ's
words. In process of time, the women might not receave the bread with their
naked hand, but in a clean linen cloth or napkin. And in many places the
cups had pipes, whereby they sucked the wine out of the cup. At length the
Communicants were not suffered to receave with their hands, but in at their
mouther. And this proceeded from a sup^rstitious reverencing of the signs,
which ended at last in bread worship, says Vossius, Theses theolog. page 476.
Et san^ consuetudo altera ing^r^ntli panem in os, circa annum sexc^nt simum
demum ^^pisse videtur, neque id aliunde quam a superstitiosa veneration
signorum, quae in (...) tandem evasit. Add also the corrupting of the doctrine
with the opinion of the real presence, and worshipping of images, Of the Lords
supper. 1. part. page 40.
which entered both about one time. After the worshipping of images, which
Master Moulins calls the elder sister, followed breadworship.

An advertisement to the Communicants.
WE are all bound to maintain the purity and integrity of Gods ordinances,
which we had in possession since the reformation. And therefore cannot
communicate, where the gesture is changed, and distributing of the elements by
the communicants is wanting. No man will be so careless of his leg or arm,
as to suffer them to be cut off, but will venture himself for their
preservation, or preservation of the least joint of his fingers, howbeit they
be not such noble parts of the body, as the head and the heart, without which
the body can not subsist. Far less ought we to tolerate such a horrible
stumbling block, as kneeling in the act of receaving the sacramental elements,
eating, and drinking. Whosoever countenanceth such communions, is accessorie to
that deformation and mutilation. For if none would communicate with the
ringleaders and introducers, they would be forced to desist, had desisted long
ago for shame, and had returned to our former practice. The kneeler is the
thief, but the communicant is the recetter.

Some think, they may, if they have liberty to sit themselves, and to reach to
the nearest. But they should not look to their own personal privilege, but
to the liberty of the whole Church and congregation, where they are members. If
some citisens would give way to the enemy, upon condition they enjoyed their
own liberty, would they not be counted traitors and betrayers of the city.
Next, that liberty shall be permitted only for a time, till others be drawn in
after them, and then they shall be deprived of that liberty.

But ye will say, shall I separate from a Church. I answer, when a congregation
is divided, that part which does not communicate is a part of that Church, as
well as that which communicates, and both makes up but one congregation or
Church, howbeit they be divided in that particular act. As both the parts of
the house make up but one house, notwithstanding there be a rift in the wall.
Next, the part which communicates not, adhereth to the reformed Church of
Scotland, of which every particular congregation is but a part. Now, the most
part, if not the two parts of the congregations have admitted no alteration.
And as for the number of kneelers, it is very small in comparison.

Yet it is hard, say ye, to want the benefit and comfort of the sacrament. But
what comfort or benefit can y^e find, if ye be accessorie to the introduction
of such alterations, and settling of such a stumbling block in the congregation.
When we cannot communicate but by committing a sin, our forbearing is no
contempt, and the Lord who has promised to be a little sanctuary to his
people, when they were to be scattered among the heathen, Ezech. 11. 16. will
supply our want. Doctor Featlie says, The great sacrilege of the Church of
Rome, page 206.
That neither the only, nor principal thing to be regarded in the sacrament
is our benefit, but Gods glory, and the testification of our obedience to his
ordinance. Non potest autem videri sacramenta contempsisse, cui non licet eaita
percipere; ut sunt a Domino constituta, and a^sit ut ullos necessitatis casus
imaginemur in quibus liceat ordinationem Domini viol^re. That is, We cannot
seem to have contemned the sacraments, who a^e not permitted to partake of
them, as they are appointed by the Lord. Confess. c. 4.
Far be it from us to imagine any causes of necessity, by which we may
violate the Lords ordinance, says Beza. This answer may serve, if the case
were so hard, that they could not have the occasion of the right and pure
administration of the sacraments else where. But, praised be GOD, as yet they
may have it not far from the doors.

Nota. The 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. lines in the 33. page, are not Master Moulines
words, but the authors.
OF FESTIVAL DAYS.
IN the explication of the first head of the first book of discipline penned
anno 1560, Festival days aboli^^ed by our Church.
the first year of universal reformation, it was thought good, that the
feasts of Christmas, Circumcision, Epiphanie, with the feasts of Apostles,
Martyrs, and Virgin Marie, be utterly abolished, because they are neither
commanded nor warranted by the Scripture, and that the obstinate maintainers of
those and the like abominations be punished by the civil magistrate. Here utter
abolition is craved, and not a reformation of abuses only, and that because
observation of such feasts have no warrant from the word. In the general
assembly holden at Edinburgh, anno 1566. the later confession of Helvetia was
approved, but with special exception against the same five days, which are
now urged upon us. It was not then the popish observation only, with the popish
opinion of worship and merit, but simpliciter all observation, that was
disallowed by them. In the assembly holden anno 1575, complaint was made
against the ministers and readers beside Aberdeene, because they assembled the
people to prayer and preaching upon certain festival days. Ye see not only
prophanitie, but preaching and prayer of purpose upon festival days were
judged rebukable. It was ordained likewise, that complaint be made to the
Regent, upon the town of Dunfreis, for urging and convoying a reader to the
Church with tabret and whisle, to read prayers all the holy days of
Christmas, upon the refusal of their own reader. Item, an article was formed
to be presented to the Regent, craving that all days heretofore kept holy
in time of papistrie beside the Lords day, be abolished, and that a civ^ll
penalty be inflicted upon the observers. In the assembly holden in April,
anno 1577. it was ordained, that the visitour with the advice of the synodall
assem^ly, shall admonish ministers, preaching or ministering the communion at
Easter or Christmas, or other like superstitious times, or readers reading, to
desist, under the pain of deprivation. Ye see reading, preaching, and
ministering the communion at th^s^ times was forbidden, and not only cessation
from work, and excess of banketting, playing, etc. In the ninth head of the
first book of discipline, we have this reason set down against E^ster
communion, Your honour^ ar^ not ^gnor ant how superstit^ously the people run to
that action it Pasche, even as if the time gave virtue to the sacrament, and
(...) the rest of the whol^ year, they are careless and negligent as if it
^ppertained not to them, but at that time only. And for this reason other
times were appointed by that book for that holy action. In the general
assembly holden anno 1590. King James praised God, that he was b^rne to be a
king in the sincerest Church of the world, sincerer then the Church of England,
for their ^ervice was an (...) ^asse in English, sincerer ^hen Geneva it self;
That is Easter and Ch^ist^^s.
(...) they observed Pasch and Yoole, and what w^rrant, (...) for that? In the
assembly holden anno 15^6. when the covenant was renewed, superst^t^on and
idolatry bre^^ing forth in keeping of festival days, setting out of
b^nefires, and singing of carrols, are reckoned among the corruptions, which
were to be amended. In the parliament holden anno 1592. we have acts to this
purpose. The pulpits have founded from time to time against all show of
observing these days. But in the pretended and null-assembly holden at Perth,
anno 1618. it was concluded by a number, not having power of voice, or broken
with threats or allurements, that every minister shall make commemoration of
the birth, passion, resurrection, ascension of Christ, and sending down of the
holy Ghost, upon the days appointed for that use, that they make choice of
several and pertinent texts of scriptures, and fraime their doctrine and
exhortations accordingly. This their conclusion was ^^tified by act of
counsel, and proclamation was (...), upon the 26. of October following,
comma^ding cessation from all kind of labor or (...) these five days,
appointed to be dedicate (...), to the effect the subjects may the better at
end the exercises, which are to be kept in the Churches at these times.

REASONS AGAINST THE FESTIVAL DAYS.
WE shall consider these days, first as they are called holy, next as they are
called festival.

Our first reason.
GOd only has power to sanctify a day, The first rea^^^^ against festival
day^s.
and (...) it holy, that is to separate it from a common ^se ^o holy exercises.
Zaneh^tom. 4. col. 655. Willet Synop. p. 501. Kuchili^us in Catechismo.
Perkins. Galat. 4.
Zanchius affirms, that it is proper to God to choose any person, or any
thing to consecrate and sanctify it to himself. Willets, that it belongs
only to the Creator, to sanctify the creature. Perkinse, Kuchlinus, and
others, say the like. Master Cowper, pretended bishop of Galloway, confessed no
King, no church could make an holy day. The like was acknowledged by Master
Galloway, in one of his Christmas sermons. But so it is, that God has
permitted six days to man for the work of his calling, and selected the
seventh to himself, to be spent in his service. Seeing therefore God has
given liberty to man to work six days, and counts them common and
profane, no man ought to be compelled to keep them holy, but when God himself
makes exception, as he did by the yoke of some anniversarie days under the
law, or calls us to a present humiliation or thanksgiving. The civil
magistrate may command cessation from work for a politic end, as
weapon-showing, exercise of arms, defense of a city or sort of the country,
but that is not to enjoyne a holy day, nor yet a mere idle day, but that
oeconomicall and private work give place to public and politic. Paraeus in
epist ad Romano cap. 14. dub. 4. Tametsi recte quidem sacra quotidiana
concionum and precum public instituuntur, tamen omnes ad ea adstringere durum
esset.

The Doctor says, some days were made holy, not only because they were
dedicated to the worship of God, but because a special worship was appointed
by God, and appropriated to them, as the feast of the passover, or whi^sunday.
Other times were holy only by reason of the use or divine worship performed on
them, and not for mystery or solemn worship appropriated to them. He says,
our divines mean only, that it is only proper to God, to make days holy after
the first manner, but not after the second, which is false, as may appear by
their description of sanctifying a day, which is generally to set it apart to
an holy use, and not to a mystical only. Next, by such an answer men make holy
days like the Lords day.

His comparison with the temple of Jerusalem, and the synagogues and Christian
churches will not help him, unless the synagogues and Christian churches
answer in holiness to the sabbath and the Lords day, as he says, the temple
did to the anniversarie feasts, which, I trust, he will not maintain. And
this same comprison of time and place shall clear and confirm our argument.
For as no man can sanctify a place, or make it holy but God, that is, set it
so apart from all worldly uses, that it shall be a profaning of it to
entertain any worldly purpose or ^riste in it, or carry a vessel through it,
and to be bound to holy exercises in it, otherwise it cannot be said to be
sanctified, and set apart to God, if it stand up like an idol, so no man can
sanctify a day, that is, set it so apart to God, that when it recurreth
weekly, monthly, or yearly, we must not use worldly, but must use holy
exercises. But the first is true, none but God can appoint such a place, and
under the new testament he has appointed no such place. Christian churches or
houses are builded for the commodity of Gods people to defend them from the
injury of the weather, to serve them to sit in commodiously, when they are
conveened to serve God, which use is civil, and is common to houses builded
for civil meetings. The congregation may permit the use of their church to a
civil meeting, without prejudice to their own liberty to meet when they have
occasion. Nex^, the congregation is not bound to meet in that house, but may
forsake it, and take them to another. But if it were sanctified and set apart
to God, they should be bound to use it. Our churches then are dedicate to the
communalty of the faithfully, w^thin such a precinct for the uses foresaid, as
a stateh^^^e or judgment hall may be dedicate to a city, but they are not
sanctified and made holy to God. Our prayers are not more holy or better heard
in this or that temple, then at home, Whittakers opera. page ^^.
says Whittaker in his answer to Dur^us, but that God is more moved, when the
faithful meet together to pray. Impertinently does the Doctor allege the
hours appointed for preaching in the week, or prayers morning and evening.
For these are not hours sanctified, or consecrated to Gods service, but the
most convenient times men find in their wisdom, when most may resort to
hearing of sermons and prayers, which may and ought to be changed, when
occasions offer a more convenient time. So time is designed occasionally, not
dedicat or sanctified. Time is made to serve Gods people, and not Gods people
made to serve the time, or to serve God, because it is a holy time.

After I had finished this work of reexamination, there came to my hands some
unsound tractats upon the sabbath. Whereupon I thought good to insert in this
place, as the most pertinent, this short disconrse following,

OF THE SABBATH.
THe light of nature leads a man, What changeable, what unchangeable in the
4. precept.
acknowledging that there is a God, and to be worshipped, to acknowledge also,
that tim^s should be set a part for his worship, and not only that, but also
competent and sufficient times. But nature cannot lead us without further
direction, to setle upon one of the seven days, more then upon one of eight,
ten or twelve. The Lord set down one in the circle of seven to be observed
perpetually, and universally by all that were to worship him. In his wisdom
he could best discern what time might be spared. In respect of this
perpetuity, and universality this determination participateth of the nature of
a law moral. For this cause it was placed in the decalogue among the precepts
purely moral, and participated with them of the same prerogatives. It was
delivered by God himself, written in tables of stone, and preserved in the
arc as the rest were. The determination of such a seventh day in particular,
was made also by the Lord. Both the determinations are divine positive, the
first unchangeable, the second changeable, but yet only by divine authority.
The ten precepts of the decalogue, are called ten words, Deuteronomy. 4. 13. that is,
as one expounds, ten sentences, or as Vossius adds, Soultentiae
praecipientes, preceptive sentences. And yet there are fourteen sentences for
precepts in the decalogue. How then are there but ten words, he answers,
there are ten chief, and principal, the rest are secundarie, and like
appendicles. Theses Theolog. page 528.
Primum istud in confesso est, quam^is quatuiorde^im inveniantur sentent^^ in
decalogo, quibus aliquid praecipiatur, tamen dec^m esse duntaxat primarias and
principes: Caeteras secundarias; and altarum quasi appendices. Vnde and Moses
december verba and Graci (...) appellarunt. In the fourth commandment, there are
three preceptive sentences. The first is the principal. Some reason after this
manner. The Lord says not, Remember thou, keep holy the seventh day, but
Remember thou, keep holy the sabbath day, and in the end, he sanctified the
sabbath day, he says not that seventh day from the creation, howbeit it was
so for the time. But that seventh was to be changed, and the sabbath was to be
fixed upon another seventh day. But to come nearer to the purpose, that this
commandment requires not directly the seventh day from the creation, but the
seventh day in general, appears by the reason, which enforces not
necessarly the seventh day from the creation, that we should rest the same day
that the Lord rested, but that we should rest from our works the seventh day,
as he rested from his. Which seventh, as under the law he appointed to be
saturday, so under the Gospel, sunday, the substance of the commandment
remaining. See Master Cartwrights Catechism. page, 110.
But to come yet nearer. The Lord might have created the world in six hours,
as easily as in six days. He might have done it in a moment, or have taken
eight ten or twelve days. The Lord would do neither the one, nor the other,
but conformed himself to that space of time, which in his wisdom he thought
sufficient for man to do all manner of works of his own. This pattern does
not concern his peculiar people of the Jews only, but both Jew and Gentile,
and not for a time only, but to the end of the world, as if the Lord would
reason after this manner with mankind, What needed me to have spent six days
in creating the world, for I might have done it in one? or wherefore stinted I
my self at six, I might have taken ten? you may easily then consider wherefore
I have done it. I did it, that thou may do the like: Do all thy works and
business in six days, and rest the seventh. The imitation lies in this then,
not so much that we rest upon such a seventh day, as upon a seventh. There is
equity in it indeed, that seeing the Lord has granted us six days to work,
we should rest the seventh, but the force of the reason lies chiefly in this,
that the Lord purposly took six days, and rested the seventh, to be a pattern
to men, howbeit with all in setting down that pattern, he considered that
equity.

That the precept concerning the sabbath, concerned not the Jews only, but
all mankind, appears also by this, that it was given to Adam in the
beginning, Genesis 2. 2, 3. Whereas some would have here an anticip^tion, and the
words to be referred to the time, when the Lord rained Manna, and forbad his
people to gather upon the seventh day, Exodus 16. as if the sabbath had never
been institute or observed before. This were a strange anticipation, to make
mention of the blessing, and sanctifying the seventh day, without so much as an
inckling of the proper time, which is assigned by them, which fell not forth
till 2453 years or thereabout, after the weak of the creation. Next, the
words are knit together by the same copulative with the present history, He
ended his work on the seventh day, and herested on the seventh day, and he
blessed the seventh day, and he sanctified it. The blessing and sanctifying
then were not destinate to be done 2453 years or thereabout afterward, but
presently when he had ended all his work of creation, he blessed and
sanctified, that is, by blessing sanctified, that is, separate to a holy use,
as the minister blesses when he separateth bread and wine from a common to an
holy use at the Lords suppe^. Or, he blessed and sanctified, that is, praised
it, and sanctified. For the original word signifies also praising or
rejoicing, as Gomarus himself brings exemple of praising, out of Psalm. ^8
27. And Philo Judaeus expresses it by praising* Every days, works had the
own commendation, but now looking upon the whole frame, the order and harmony
of it, he rejoiced, and pra^sed it, and sanctified that day. After he had
perfited the work in six days, DE opificio (...) undi in fol. page ^5.
he added honor to the seventh day following, (...), says Philo ^udaeus, that
is, Which when he had praised or commended, incontinent he deinzed to call it
holy, as Gelenius translateth. Further, there is no mention of blessing the
seventh day, Exodus 16. Gomarus alleges, that twice as much Manna fell on the
sixth day, as upon any other day, there is no warrant for it, but only that
they were commanded to gather twice as much that day. Suppose his conjectute
were true, that were a blessing of the sixth day, and not of the seventh. But as
I have said, there is no mention of blessing in that place. But so it is, that
when he blessed, he sanctified* And seeing we read not that he blessed it,
when he ceased from raining Manna, but when he had ended the work of creation,
it follows that then he sanctified. Consider again, that in Exodus 16.
mention is made of the sabbath, as a time of rest appointed before, verse. 23.
To morrow is the rest of the holy sabbath unto the Lord. Verse. 25. To day is a
sabbath unto the Lord. Verse. 26. But on the seventh day which is the sabbath.
They had neglected, or were forced to neglect that day in Egypt, where they
were not suffered to rest on that day, and therefore he puts them in mind
of it, and exacteth the observation of it, which was now neglected of other
nations. Consider again, that soon after when the decalogue was promulgate
upon mount Sinai, the reason given for the observation of the sabbath, was not,
that the Lord rained Manna six days, and desisted the seventh, which concerned
only the Jews, but that he created all in six days, and rested the seventh,
which concerned all mankind. Were it not ridiculous to imagine, that God spent
six days in creating the world, and rested the seventh, only for the Jews,
to whom he was to intimate the sabbath 2453. years after.

But ye will say, what needed Adam a sabbath day in the state o^ innocence? I
answer, because the dressing of the gard^n was committed to him, and he was to
live an animal life, which would draw with it some distraction. Therefore the
Lord would have a day appointed, wherein he might be wholly sequestrat from
other affairs. Further, howbeit Adam was in the state of innocence, yet his
state was mutable. Whereas it is alleged, that there was no positive precept
given to Adam in paradise, but the eating of the forbidden tree, I answer, none
merely positive, but that. But this is not merely positive, but determinative,
of the indefinit time required by the law of nature, which urges a time for
sequestration. Some think, that Adam fell the same day that he was created,
and therefore that the sabbath was sanctified after his fall. But the imposing
of the names upon the creatures, the precept concerning the forbidden tree, the
tentation of Adam and Eve, etc. move others to think otherwise. Lyd at
agrees not, either with too short time, or yet three years, which were too
long, but with those who allege eight month wanting a week, that he might be
the more sensible of his fall and defection, after he had for a certain space
enjoyed the pleasures of that estate. But suppose Adam fell upon the sixth day,
yet the sanctification of the sabbath after, was for all mankind, and not the
Jews only.

But yet we have no mention made, The sabbath observed before Moses time.
that the Patriarchs observed it. What then? It is sufficient, that it was
instituted, howbeit the observation had been neglected. But we must judge
more charitably of the holy Patriarchs, that they were observant of the
institution received by tradition from Adam. They received the law of
sacrifices and other positive laws, by revelation, by oracle, and by divine
inspiration, page 45.
says Doctor Francis White in his treatise of the sabbath. Is it likely then,
they observed not a set day, or wanted direction what day to observe, or that
the Lord would have set any other day for ordinary. Some gather the
observation from Noah's sending forth the dove the seventh day after her
return, and again the seventh day. That it is likely, Noah was taken up with
holy exercises, every seventh day he sent forth the dove, and that he sent it
forth rather then, then any other time, because he was craving and expecting
good success. But I will not stand upon this. Junius approves the opinion of
the Hebrew Doctors, who all agree, that there passed seven days between the
going of the people out of Egypt, and the drowning of the Egyptians in the red
sea, and therefore there were seven days appointed for the feast of the
passover. He confirms their opinion with his own reckoning in his annot.
upon Exodus 12. Upon Deuteronomy. 5. he notes, that is was the sabbath, that day
Pharaohs host was drowned, and the people of Israel sang that song of triumph,
Exodus 15. The Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 4. proves, that
there is a sabbatisme me, or keeping of a sabbath yet remaining for the people
of God, and all believers, whereinto the incredulous were not to enter, and to
this purpose cites a passage out of the psalms. There the incredulous are
threatened to be excluded from rest, which was to come: For there were two rests
already past in David's time, the one beginning at the rest of God from his
works, which were finished from the foundation of the world, and the other,
when Josue brought the people into the land of Canaan. The Apostles enumeration
had not been sufficient, if the sabbath day had not been observed from the
beginning: for he makes not mention of another sabbatisme past before David's
time, but two, whereinto man entered. There was no other sabbath then in David's
time, beside that rest in Canaan, except that which was from the beginning, and
consequently the sabbath observed in his time, was all one with that which was
observed from the beginning. The rest of the sabbath is called Gods rest or
sabbath, because God was the instituter of it, gave exemple himself to man,
and appointed it for his own worship, Levit. 23. 1. and 28. 2. Jesa. 56. 4.
Ezech. 20. 20. Exodus 16. 23. If the words of the Apostle were taken only for
Gods own proper rest or sabbath, the Apostles reasoning had not been
pertinent: for David makes mention of a rest, whereinto men might enter, and
were exhorted to enter in, but men cannot be said to enter in Gods own proper
rest. The sabbatisme which is to come, is called Gods rest, and yet men are
said to enter in it. Further, if the first rest were so called only, because it
was Gods own peculiar rest, it would fol^ow, the thy sabbath enjoined to man
had been omitted, and the Apostles induction had been unsufficient. (...)
epist. ad (...) Hebr. ^. 4. v. ^
Requies s^b^ati dicitur ^ ei, tum for maliter, quia in die septimo qui^ vit
Peus a creatione, tum exempla^^ter and efficienter, qui^ quies hominum in
sabbato, and cultus sabbati institutus est a D^o ad exemplar quietis Dei in
sabbato, says Cornelius a Lapide, a professor in Lovaine. And a little
before, after he has opened up the three rest^, the rest of the sabbath
enjoined to man, the rest of the people of God in the land of Canaan, and the
eternal rest in heaven, he infers, that the rest of the sabbath was in use
before the law of Moses, even from the beginning of the world, or else the
Apostles reasoning cannot hold. Hinc satis clare elicitur and evincitur,
sabbati cultum and requiem in us^ f^isse apud homines ante le^em Mosis, ab
origin (...) licet id neget Abulensis in c. 23. Levit. 4. 3.) ut s^^i e^diem
septimum homines colerent, eoque a laboribus qui^s^r^nt, in memoriam and
gratiarum actionem creationis, (...) sui quam totius mundi, quam Deus complevit
die septimo: alioqui enim vim non haberet discursus and argumentum Pauli, ut
patet exdictis.

Howbeit scripture be sufficient for confirmation of this truth, I will add
for superaboundance some footsteps of the first institution, which were found
among the Gentiles. Whence came the name of Septimane weeks to be received
among the Ethnicles of old. Not from the Jews, for they abhorred their
customs, and derided their sabbaths. Not from Astrologians, for distinction of
days by weeks was more ancient, then the imposing of the names of the planets
upon the days of the week. Or Ptolem^^ his time, who wrote about the year of
our Lord 140 as Rivetus proves by the testimony of Georgius Syncellus, and
Philoponus. The ancient Greek Poets cited by them for the name of week, I
omit. De eme^^at temp. lib. 1.
I only add the testimony of Scalig^r. (...) (...) ex diebus dicitur
septiman^, res omibus, quidem orientis populis, ab ultima usque antiquita^e
us^ata, nobis autem Enrop eis vix tandem post Christian^smum. recepta. He
says, from the upmost antiquity his systeme of days in a week, was in use
among all the oriental nations. But that was the part of the world, which was
first planted, and where the holy Patriarchs lived. Whereas, he says, this
colection or distinction of days in weeks, was not received in Europe till
Christiani (...). entered, testimonies of Ethnic Poets, alleged by ^^vetus,
make good, that the name of weeks was more ancient, even among the Latins. I
add also that place in Genes. 29. 27. where Laban says to Jacob, Fulfill her
week. Whither he meant a week of days, or as others interpret, a week of
years, it is all one. For seven years was never called a week of years, but
where seven days was called a week of day^s. Whence then could this so
ancient a circuit, or circle of days come, but from the Patriarchs, who
observed that circle, because of the seventh-dayes-sabbath, or from the first
week of the creation it self.

We have not only the traces of weeks among the ancient Ethniks, Dissertatio
^e origin sabbathi.
but also of the seventh day in special. I pretermit the testimonies cited by
Rivetus out of Homer, Linus, and Callimachus; who make mention of the perfiting
of the work of creation the seventh day. I content me with the testimonies
alleged for observation, in some sort, of the seventh day, by Casaubon,
commencing upon that place of Suetoni^^^, Lib. 3. 32.
Diogenes grammaticus disputare sabbutis Rhodi solitus, vententem, ut se extra
ordinem audiret, non admiserat! ac per servalu^ suum in septim^^ diem
dis^ulerat. Where he brings in Lucian, making mention of resting days
granted every seventh day to children who were at school: Vul^atius
Gallicanus; that soldiers exercised themselves upon the seventh day in
archerie and arms: Dampridius, that Alexander Severus went up to the Capitol
upon the seventh day, when he was in Rome, and frequented the temples: In this
same place Suetonius reports of Diogenes the Grammarian, that if any were
desirous o^heare declamation or discourse, he differred them to the seventh
day. Eusebius. de prepar. evangel. l. 13. c. 7.
Eusebius says, That alm^st all, as well ph^losophers as Poets, understood,
that the seventh day was more sacred then other days. Phil^ Jud^eus (...)
cited says, It was an holy day not of one (...) region only, (...), De vita
Mosis, l. 2.
but of all. And in another place he s^ith, Our law admonishes all of duty,
(...), Grecians, the inhabitants of the ^les, and the continent, (...) the
oriental people, the Entrop^cans, and the (...) even the whole habitable world
to the uttermost coasts: for who does not honor that holy day returning every
week. Buxtorsius tells us, Buxtors. synag. Iudaica, c. 11. p. 287.
that the Jews at this day think, Christians and others shall be phnished,
because they keep not their sabbath. And this I believe, they think not of
their other holy days.

I will close this point concerning the first, institution of the sabbath with
pointing at the testimonies both of ancients and neotericks. Adversus Iudaeos,
c. ^
Tertullian reports, that the Jews hold that the Lord sanctified the seventh
day from the beginning, and that thereupon when the law was given, the Lord
said, Rem^mber. Gen (...) ardus in his chronology affirms, that the Hebrew
Doctors taught so. Peter Martyr cites Rabbi Agn^^, Broughtoun in his concent
alleges Rambam and Aben-Ezra. In Genesis 2.
Philo Judaeus his consent ye had a little before. Cyprian de Spiritu sancto.
Chrysostom hom. 10. in Genes. 2. Epiphanius contra heresin Anoet^ haeres. 51.
The doretus (...) est in Genesin. Augustine epist. 86. ad Casulannm. Waleus in
his dissertatio de sabbatho, cites Luther, Calvine, Zwinglius, Beza, P.
Martyr, Bullinger, Zanchius, Vrsinus, Gualtor, Aretius, Bertramus Mercerus,
Antoniu^ Faius Juntus, Paraeus, Alstedius. Rivetus in his dissertatio de
origaine sabbathi, adds other Neoterikes. Dan^ws, Ho^pinian^s, Chimnitius,
Gerardus, Marloratus, with some others, and popish writers, Eugubinus,
Gen^brardus, Cornelius a Lapide, and Emanuel Sa. A diligent reader may easily
find more, affirming that the sabbath was instituted at the beginning.

Seeing the sabbath was observed from the beginning, it was not instituted in
the wilderness, but only renewed to the people of God, and enjoined to them
with solemnity, both because of their own neglect, or forced profanation in
Egypt, as also, because it was neglected among other nations, who observed it
not, or not in the right manner, but rather profaned then sanctified it. The
question arises, whether it was then only moral, or partly moral, partly
ceremonial. But the question should be stated other ways. For there is a
difference between these two questions, whether the sabbath of the Jews was
partly moral, partly ceremonial, or whether the fourth precept, as it
stands in the decalogue, was partly moral, partly ceremonial. That the
Jewish sabbath was partly moral, partly ceremonial, is the commun and
received opinion, which, for mine own part, I would be loath to contradict,
even taking ceremonial for typical and profigurative of our (...) purchased
forus by Christ. But it follows not, that the fourth precept, as it stands
in the decalogue, is partly moral, partly ceremonial in that scene, that is
typical and prefigurative. There is nothing in the (...) precept, as it was
promulgat upon mount Sinai, ranked among the rest of the moral precepts;
placed in the midst, and written with Gods own finger in ^ibles of stone, that
sounds any way to typical ceremony. At other times when the ceremonies of
the law were intimated, then were typical and ceremonial precep^s delivered.
It is true, when the fourth precept was promulgated, it was accommodated to the
state of man after his fall. ^or strangers within our gates must cease that day
from all manner of works, which might give offense to Gods people, which
needed not to be enjoined in the state of innocence, or, if mankind had
continued in the bosom of the Church, and had not made defection falling in a
second fall. But that specification of persons bound to (...) work, was not a
ceremony, but a needful (...) in respect of the time. The reason in the
precept is moral, and the end of the cessation and rest is moral, to wit, to
sanctify, and keep holy the sabbath day. To sanctify is taken in a general
notion; and without reference to ceremonial exercises, or legal more then
evangelicall. The leg^ll offices were commanded by other laws, which were
positive. But White to prove that the word sanctify is taken in a particular
notion, page 47.
alleges Deuteronomy. 5. 12. Remember to sanctify the sabbath day, as the Lord thy
God ^ath commanded thee. This makes nothing to the purpose; for the word
sanctify may be still taken in a general notion, to sanctify the sabbath, as
the Lord commanded before at the deliverie of the law. Suppo^e the word were to
be taken in a particular notion in that place, Moses applying it as an
interpreter and expounder to that present time, it follows not, that it was
so taken at the promulgation and engraving in ^ables of stone, for at that time
there was no sacrifices appo^^ed for the sabbath, but afterward, Numb. 28. and
s^^^ing on the shewbread, Levit. 24. But these things were ceremonial,
belonged only to the priests, and not to all and every one of the people, and
were commanded afterward. So was the precept of kindly fire, which was but
temporal, and that the sabbath be observed as a memorial of their deliverie
out of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 5. 15. which says Master Ainsworth, seems to have fallen
forth upon the sabbath day. To be a sign^, that the Lord did sanctify them,
was also set down afterward, as one of the ends of the observation, Exodus 31.
but yet that was not to be signum obsig^^ns, a sealing ligne or sacrament, but
only a declarative sig^^ or indicant, or document, that God was the santifier
of his people, or an argument, as others call it, or a public note and sign
of their profession, to distinguish between the observers of the sabbath, as a
holy and sanctified people from others. But this may be common to Jews and
Christians. The mutabilatie of the seventh day from the creation, makes it not
ceremonial; for a thing may be mutable, and not ceremonial. To appoint the
seventh day to be observed and sanctified, is not a ceremony, unless the
word ceremony be abused, and taken more largely, then for a thing significant
or typical. It is properly but a politic order, determining a time for the
worship of God, To be a memorial of the creation, and Gods rest the seventh
day followed indeed upon the observation of that day, but was not the only nor
principal end of the institution; for then that should have been the chief
or only exercise on that day, to contemplate and meditate upon the creatures.
God propounds his work of creation, and resting the seventh day, not as the
only subject to be mused upon, but as an example for the observation of a
seventh day sabbath. De diebu^ ^estis. cap. 4.
Howbeit of the setting of that seventh day from the creation, the prerogative
it had to be the day of Gods rest from the work of creation, and therefore
made choice of, yet perse and direct, of it self and directly, as Suarez
speaks, it was not appointed for commemoration of such a work, but to
worship God for himself, for his own majesty and excellency. To end this
point, we must not confound precepts, concerning ob^ervancies and ceremonies,
with moral. The ceremonials are only appendicles, and have their own positive
laws for their ground. If because there be some ceremonial precepts
concerning the sabbath, delivered afterward or apart from the promulgation of
the decalogu^, the fourth precept shall be holden, partly moral, partly
ceremonial: by that reason other precepts also of the decalogue, shall be
partly moral, partly ceremonial, for both the ceremonial and judicial law,
says Master Dow, have in them something, which is juris moralis, and so far
forth are contained under the moral precepts. page 7. De festis, c. 1. number. 12.
Swarez likewise says, Nihilominus tamen in illis ceremoniis seu observant i^s
sunt quaedum rations generales, que secundum se pertinent ad moralem rationam
vir^utum, u^ de se abitr^hunt a particulari significatione and ritu veteris
legis. In a word, there is nothing ceremonial in the fourth precept, no
positive worship, either legal or evangelicall, enjoined, but only
sanctification, in general without determination either of the one or other,
De fest^s, c, 2.
no type or signification of things to come expressed, yea, or intended, says
Swarez, but only the institution it self renewed with accommodation to the
state of man after his fall, of which I made mention a little before. All the
determination, which is added over the natural and moral obligation, to se
apart a time to holy exercises, is divine positive, not ceremonial or
typical: for divine postive is more general, and comprehends also other
laws imposed by God for order and policy in his Church.

Howbeit we (...) distinguish betwixt in the fourth pre^ept concerning the
sabbath, Differences betwixt the sabbath and anniversarie feasts.
and the sabbath, as it was observed by the people of God upon the imposition
of more precepts concerning ceremonies and observances, yet even in their
observation we may observe some marks, whereby it might be discerned from
their anniversarie feasts, and to be ordained pr^marly for a moral use. The
sabbath was observed every where throughout the land, and abroad, where they
remained, in the wilderness, in the places of their captivity and dispersion.
The ceremonial feasts on (...) I^rusalem, whither Jews and prose^i^s resorted
from all countries, as at the Pentecost when the firle tongues were sent down,
and whereat the Apostle Paul hastened to be present. Next, the ceremonial
feasts had some s^crifices and ceremonies appropriate unto them, which might
not be used at other times. The sabbath had only the doubling of the daily
sacrifice at the appointed place, beside the ordinary exercises throughout the
land. Thirdly, the sabbaths of anniversarie feasts were transfe^red to the
ordinary or weekly sabbath, if it was to follow immediately, because the dead
corpse and meat prepared specially of herbs, See Cas^ub* exercit. page 482.
Scaliger de (...).
could not be preserved without spilling or putrefying specially in those hot
countries. Non facimus inqu^^^, duo contin a sabbatha propter olera and prop^et
mortuos. (...) restrains this custom to the store month T^^ri. But the
ordinary or weekly sabbath was not drawn to the sabbaths of these
anniversarie feasts. Fourthly* at the anniversarie feasts they might not fast,
they were days of joy and festivity which ^orreth not with mourning of
f^sting. See Nehem. 8. 10. Exodus 12. 14. Number. 29. 15. And therefore these days
were called Chaggim, which is derived from a word, signifying wheeling about,
leaping or dancing. The most solemn day of these feasts was called jom tob,
Exortat. page
a good or merry day. The ordinary sabbath day was not called jom tob. See
Casaubonus, nor yet Chag. They were not forbidden to f^st, yet they might fast.
That injunction, Exodus 16. 23. was a permission, not a command, or for
preparation only, not for eating the day following. Yea, they not only might
fast, but did it usually, at lest to the twelft hour, as Hooker proves by
testimonies out of Josephus, Justinus, Suctonius, Balsam upon the 66. Canon,
Epist. 86. ad Casulanum.
called the Apostles, says, We fast not upon the sabbath, (...), lest we
should seem to imitate the Jews. Augustine says, God spoke nothing
concerning dining or fasting upon the sabbath, when he sanctified the seventh
day, nor afterward, when he gave precepts concerning it to his people. Of
these differences the reader may find more in Altar Damascenum, page 667,
668, 669.

The Jewish sabbath which was the seventh day from the creation, The saturday
sabbath changed.
was abolished at the resurrection of Christ, because it had types and
ceremonies annexed to it, which were shadows of things to come. The ground
ceasing, the observation of that day ceased also; for the shadows flee away
when the body comes in place. Yea further, I will yield, that the abrogation
was meant by the Apostle, Coloss. 2. 17. and under the name of sabbath there,
is to be meant only the weekly sabbath, which is more then White craveth. Not
that I think, they answer sufficiently to those, who will have the word to be
applied to the first and last day of anniversary feasts, which were also called
sabbaths. But because I think these to be comprehended under the name of
feasts, whereof these sabbaths were the principal, and most solemn days. So
that here is a perfect division of all their solemn days, to wit, that they
were either feasts, to wit, anniversarie days, or new moons, which returned
monthly, or the sabbath, which returned weekly. I so think the rather,
because we have the like division, 1 Chronicles. 23. 31. where the Levits office is
set down, to offer burnt sacrifices unto the Lord, in the sabbaths, in the new
moons, and on the set feasts. And again, in Esaias 1. 13, 14. we have the
like. As for that, that the word Sabbath is in the plural number, it crosses
not this sense: for so is the weekly sabbath usually expressed by the Greek
translaters of the old testament; and in the new testament also, Matthew. 12. 1,
5, 10, 11, 12. Matthew. 2^. 1. Mark. 1. 12. Mark. 2. 23, 24. Mark 3. 2, 4. Luke
4. 31. Luke 6. 9. Luke 13. 10. Act. 13. 14. Act. 16. 13. In these places the
word is taken either for one sabbath day only, or for more. And so it may be
taken in this place, Coloss. 2. and translated either sabbath, or as the late
english translation has, sabbath days. The sabbath day is expressed in the
plural number for the frequent and often returning. By the way observe, that
the old sabbath was not reckoned among the Jewish festival days. Addenda
prolegomenis in libro^ de emendatione temporu^.
S^atiger says, Manifesto sabbata distinguuntur (to wit Esaias 1. 13, 14.) a
magnis diebus. The sabbaths are ^early d^stinguished from the great days,
which were all one with Chaggim. The Jewish sabbath then, seeing it shadowed
things to come, behoved to be abolished. Suppose it had not been a shadow,
yet even as it was but a circumstantiall point of the fourth precept, which is
moral positive, it might have been changed for a greater reason, then was the
occasion of the choice of the former. For the resurrection of Christ, and
beginning of his triumph, after he had ended his course of humiliation, was a
greater reason for making choice of the first day of the week, then resting
from the work of creation was for the seventh day before. The first respect of
necessity required abolition; The (...) congruity.

The first day of the week succeeded in the room of the last day of the
week, The Lords day observed in and from the Apostles times.
and has been observed in the Christian Church from her infancy to this day,
without any change or contradiction. The Apostles were conveened together that
day, when the holy Ghost descended upon them, Act. 2. When Paul had stayed at
Troas seven days, upon the first day of the week, being the seventh day of
his abode, the disciples conveened together to break-bread, and Paul preached
and conferred with them till break of day, Act. 20. 7. 11. The original has,
upon one of the sabbath, but sabbath is put for week, because from the sabbath
as the principal day, they numbered the rest of the days of the week to the
next sabbath in order, first, second, third, fourth, etc. of the sabbath, and
distinguished them not by the names of the planets. As when the pharisie said,
I fast twice in the sabbath, that is, twice in the week, Luke 18. 12. When
Jesus was risen early the first day of the sabbath, that is, of the week, Mark
16. 9. And Levit 23. 15. seven sabbaths shall be complete, that is, seven
weeks. Likewise one, according to the form of speech familiar to the
Hebrews, is taken for first. The evening and morning were one day, that is,
the first day. This place cannot be tr^^slated one of the sabbaths: for the
Apostle stayed but seven days, in which there was but one sabbath day. Nor yet
is it likely, that the Christians did assemble upon the Jewish sabbath to their
exercises. Howbeit the Apostle went in to their synagogue, Act. 13. upon their
sabbath, that was not for the observation of their sabbath, but because he
could not find the Jews assembled together at any other time or place, that
he might have occasion to win them, as ye may see at that time he found
occasion to deliver a word of exhortation. We have the first day of the week
expressed with the like phrase, 1 Corin. 16. 2. where the Corinthians are
directed to lay aside some thing for the poor the first day of the sabbath,
that is, of the week, or every first day of the week. page 211. 212.
Now although this text of S. Paul makes no express mention of Church
assemblies this day, yet because it was the custom of Christians: And likewise
it is a thing conv^nient to give alms upon the church-dayes, it cannot w^ll
he gainsaid, but that, if in Corinth and Galatia, the first day of ev^ry week
was appointed to be a day for alms, and charitable contributions the same was
also the Christians weekly holy day for their religious assemblies, says
White, and to this purpose cites Chrysostom, in 1 Corin. hom. 43. where he
shows, that the time was fit for collections, because that day they had
received many great benefits, and the first of the sabbath, he interprets
the Lords day. So do the translations of the Bible expound both the former and
this place of the first day of the week, the Belgike, the French, the Italian,
the Spanish, the late English, Beza's and Tremellius out of the Syriack. With
frivolous cavill^tion do some few to their great discredit preasse to another
sense, which is to the full overthrown by Wal^e^s and Amesius. This first day
of the week, Revel. 1. 10. is called, not the day of the Lord, as sometime in
the scripture, the time of some heavy judgment is called the day of the Lord,
or because the Lord revealed to him upon a day these great mysteries, for that
day had been uncertain, the sense ca^to logical, as if John should have
said, I was ravished in the spirit that day I was ravished in the spirit. But
John makes mention of this day as a thing known before to the Churches, to
design the time, when he saw th^se visions. And he calls it not the day of
the Lord, but the Lords day, or the dominicall day, and so it has ever been
called in the Christian Church since the days of the Apostles. Justi^u^
c^ll^th it Apoc. 2. Diem solis, Sunday, because the apology was directed to an
ethnic, and in his dialogue with Trypho, the first day of the week, because
Trypho was a Jew. It were superfluous to cite testimonies to prove that in
every age this day has been called the Lord day, and observed by Christians
in every age.

Notwithstanding it be clear and evident, that the Lords day was observed in
the Apostles times, it is questioned whither it was instituted by Christ, or by
the Apostles, or if by the Apostles, whither by them as ordinary pastors, or
as extraordinary office-bearers, assisted with the infallible direction of the
spirit. Discourse page ^3.
Master Daw, It concerns us little to know, whither it was delivered by the
Apostles themselves, or their next after comers. Those who come after are
equalled by him with the Apostles, who were assisted extraordinarly in laying
the foundation wherein the Church was builded, and setting down the government
and unchangeable policy of the Church. Either every Church had power to hallow
a day like the Lords day, or else the Church universal. If every national
Church, then they might have differed, and hallowed sundry days. If the
Church universal, that could not be brought to pass but in the
representative, an oecumenicall council. None such could be had for 300 years
after Christ. But so the hallowing of such a day had been suspended for 300
years. If the Church may institute such a day, it may abrogate it also, and
change at pleasure. If the Church, or ordinary pastors may institute such a
day, they may make laws binding the conscience. For we are bound in
conscience to observe the Lords day, even out of the case of scandal and
contempt, in secret as well as in public, with internal worship as well as
external, or else we sin, howbeit the Church cannot take notice of it, or
judge upon it. If there be no such day for the Lord, then we deny to him that
which the very law of nature grants to him, for the law of nature requires
such a day. Seeing no ordinary pastors may do it, it follows, that if the
Apostles did it, page 43.
they did it not by virtue of their pastoral power and office, which was
common to them with their successors, as Master Dow speaks, but by that
power which was properly apostolical, and that it cannot be called an
ordinance of the Church, as Master Dow alleges it may. Even Bellarmine
distinguishes between traditions divine, De verbo Dei non script. cap 3.
apostolical, and ecclesiastical, and confounds not apostolical with
ecclesiastical. The apostolical constitutions, may be also called divine,
says he, because they were not instituted without the assistance of the
spirit, and divine may be called apostolical, not that they were instituted by
the Apostles, sed quod ab eis primum ecclesi^ traditae sunt, cum ipsi seorsim
eas a Christo accepissont, that is, that by them they were first delivered to
the Church, after they had first received them apart from Christ himself. The
observation of the Lords day is not like the Papists unwritten verities, for it
is extant in the scripture, but the question is about the precept. We confess
practice, say they, but where is precept? I answer, their practice was a
pattern to us, and has the force of a precept. Rivetue himself in his
exercitations upon Genesis, ^ page ^2.
answers, In such things we need no express precept, if we have practice and
example, namely of such as we know to be the first institutours of good order,
by virtue of a special calling, such as were the Apostles, but chiefly where
the practice is repeated, for then it is inculcat, if there be no necessary
reason craving a change. Respondeo in talibus non opus esse praec^pto expresso,
si habeamus exemplum, praesertim eorum quos scimus (...) in ecclesia fuisse, ex
speciali vocatione primos institutores, quales fuerunt Apostoli. In talibus
enim exemplum and praxis vim aliquam habet pracepti, praesertim ubi praxis illa
repetitur, tum enim incul^atur, si nulla ratio necessaria mutationem requirat.
Add also, that the observation was uniforme in all the Churches, and constant,
which presupposes a precept, an ordinance, or institution. For what likelihood
is there, that one began, and the rest every one after other followed the
example of others that went before in practice, and that this way the
observation crept in by exemple, and did grow to a custom. The places above
cited make mention of the first day of the week, and the Lords day not as then
begun, but as known and observed before, even at the Pentecost, before the
holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles. And yet Rivetus infers a precept out
of 1 Corin. 16. where the Corinthians are directed every first day of the
week, to lay aside some thing for the poor, where, howbeit the chief
intention of the Apostle is to give direction for the help of the poor, yet
because he will have it to be done the first day of the week, it follows
that he wills also, that they should dedicate the Lords day to the solemn
assembling of the Church, for he that intends the end, intends also the
midst, Vbi etsi prima intentio Tauli sit de collecta statuere, tamen quia vult
eam primo di^ hebdomadis fieri, inde sequitur voluisse etiam ut diem Dominicam
solemni ecclesiae congregationl dedicarent. Qui enim vu^t finem, vult etiam
media, si nihil in eis sit illegitimum, aut verbo Dei prohibitum. Yet his words
would be somewhat corrected; for the Apostle enjoyneth them not to observe
that day, as if they had never observed it before, but maket^ mention of it, as
a thing known, and as Chrysostom observed, would move them to be the more
free-hearted, because of the benefits which they had received that day. He
enjoyneth them no new thing, but concernidg the collection for the Saints, as
he had given order to the Churches of Galatia. Yet this direction implies a
direction to continue in the observation of that day; for in directing them to
do a little, far more would he have them to perform greater duties.
Bellarmine gives some rul^s to try genuine apostolical traditions, which, if
ye will admit, howbeit they cannot be justly applied to their unwr^tten
verities, yet very well to the observation of the Lords day. De verbo Dei non
ser^pto, p^o, c. 9.
When the universal Church observes any thing, that none might appo^nt but
God, and yet nowhere is it found written, it behooves to aver, that it was
delivered by Christ and his Ap^stles. Anot^e^ rule, What the universal Church
has observed at all ^^mes before, justly we may believe, that it was in (...)
Apostles, howbeit it be of ^uch a quality, as (...) i^stituted by the Church.
To this purp^se^^ quoteth Aug^stine lib. 4. contra Donatist as cap. 23 These
are the words, That which the universal Church (...), and has not been
instituted by Councels, but ever mainta^ned, is to be beleev^d in all (...)
reason, not to have been ordained by other power, then the aposto^ique
authori^^. Quod universate^ eccle^^a nec conci^iis institu^^^, sed semp^r
^^tentum, non nisi authoritate ap^st^ica tra^ditu^ certissime creditur. But
seeing the ordinances of the Apostles were of two sorts. Some were temporary,
and to endure only for a time, as abstinence from blood, and strangled, which
was enjoined only for avoiding the offense of the weak Jews: others were to
be observed constantly. Of this sort was the observation of the Lords day.
Experience has proved the perpetual observation of it hitherto, and no reason
can be given, wherefore it should be changed hereafter, as I shall show. It
were superfluous to cite the testimonies of divines, referring the institution
of this day to the Apostles. Walaeus has quoted a number, dissertat. page 165.
After he has laid down his reasons, consenting with them in judgment, he
concludes that the first day of the week was substituted to the sabbath by
the Apostles, not only by an ordinary power, Dissert. page 172.
such as all pastors have to order rites merely indifferent in their Churches,
but by a singular power, as by such as had inspection over the whole Church,
and to whom, as to extraordinary office-bearers, was concredit to be
faithful, not only to deliver certain precepts of faith and manners, but
also of comely order in the Church, Vt quis dies in septimana ex vi and anal
gia quarti praecepti esset servandus, ne diss^nsio aut confusio ex eo inter
ecclesias oriretur, omnibus ubique Christianis constaret; as that it might be
known to all Christians, what day in the week is to be observed by virtue
and analogy of the fourth precept, least dissension or confusion should arise
there about (...) the Churches. He cites other divines, concluding likewise
that the Apostles being guided by the holy Ghost, substituted the Lords day in
place of the Jewish (...) bath. But others refer the institution to Christ
himself, which is more likely: for after his resurrection he appeared sundry
times, taught the Apostles things pertaining to the kingdom of God, that is,
the instruction, and government of his Church, and gave them commandments,
Act. 1. 23. These commandments, and instructions, they delivered after to the
Churches, and set them down in their canonical writes. Next, Christ himself
appeared, the day of his resurrection five times. At the third appearance, he
appeared to the two disciples going to Emaus, at which time he celebrated the
holy supper according to the judgment of great divines. At the fifth
appearance, he appeared to all the disciples, save Thomas, who were conveened
together before. Then he gave them commission to go and teach all nations, and
in conferring his spirit he breathed upon them, John 20. Mark. 16. Eight days
after, that is, the eighth day after (as Luke 2. 21. when eight days were
accomplished for the circumcision of the child, that is, when the child was
circumcised upon the eight day) Christ appeared again, and Thomas was present,
at which time he cured his unbelief. It would appear, their meeting was not
frequent at other times, and that Christ appeared purposly at that time. And
therefore it is likely, that every eight day after ordinarily they conveened,
and Christ appeared unto them, wherein that great divine Junius is confident.
Die ipso resurrectionis, and octavo quoque die, Praelect. in Genes. cap. 2.
usque dum in coelos ascendit, apparuit disc^pulis, and in conventum eorum
venit. At last upon the Pentecost, which fell upon the eight day, that is, the
first day of the week that year, Christ sent down the holy Ghost in the
likeness of fiery tongues upon the Apostles conveened together. There is no
special time noted for any of Christ's apparitions, but the first and eighth
day, which seems to be done of purpose. Therefore Cyrillus lib. 12. in (...).
8. wills us to observe, that the Evangelist is no^ content with a simple
narration, but adds carefully, after eight days, and all being gathered
together in one place. The Lords day could not have been observed so long as
Christ remained upon the earth without his direction. And this appears to be
one of the commandments, which he gave them. Eusebius ascribes the
institution of this day to Christ, Orat. de laudib. Constantini.
advancing Christ above all the great pote^tats of the Gentiles, who could not
prescrive to all the inhabitants of the earth to conveene every week, and
observe the Lords day, as Christ did. Athan^sius cited by White, page 78.
(...), The Lord has changed ^r translated it (meaning the sabbath) into the
Lords day. The word (...) may as well import, that it was so called, because
the Lord was the author and institutour of it, as because it was instituted
for the honor and worship of our Lord. As the Lords prayer is called (...),
the Lords prayer, because the Lord was the author of it. Zanchius is of
opinion, that when the Lord blessed the seventh day, the son of God spent
that whole day in instructing Adam and Eva, De operi^. Dei; part. 3. ^. 1. c.
(...). 539.
exercising them in the worship of God, and admonishing them to teach their
posterity to do the like: for it beloved Adam to understand the
sanctification of that day, which the Lord had blessed and sanctified. We have
far greater reason to think, being certain that Christ was here on earth,
appearing to his disciples at sundry times from the day of his resurrection,
till the day of his ascension, and instructing them in things belonging to his
Church, that he instructed them in this point also. Yea, ye see, he
conveened with them, and in a manner observed it also.

Whither Christ himself instituted the observation of this day, or the
Apostles by the inspiration of the Spirit, the authority is divine: Syntag.
lib. 1. cap. 47.
For howsoever Bellarmine distinguishes traditions in divine and apostolical,
the distinction is but imaginary, says Junius in his answer; and Bellarmine
himself acknowledges, that the apostolical traditions in respect of the
assistance of the spirit, may be called also divine, howbeit they were not
delivered immediately by Christ himself. Tratitiones vere apostolice sunt
divinae, says Polanus. Beza in his great annotations upon Apocal. 1. 10.
calls it, Apostolicam and vere divinam traditionem, Atradition truly divine,
howbeit Apostolical. In Genes. cap. 2, 3.
Cornelius a Lapide joyneth both together, Christ and his Apostles. Vnde a
Christo and Apostolis festum a sabbato in dominicum est translatum.

Some, The Lords day substitute to the old sabbath.
says Dow, ground the institution of the Lords day upon the fourth
commandment, some upon the sanctification of the seventh day at the creation,
other seek for authority out of the new Testament; but all these three agree
in one. For the fourth commandment was but a renovation of the first
institution after the creation. The substance of the commandment is to observe
a seventh day, the renewing the appointment of that seventh day of the first
week, was a circumstantiall point, and therefore it was changeable, like as
for some types and ceremonies annexed to it, it behoved to be changed. The
institution of the Lords day, was but a substitution of another day to that
which was, the substance remaining, to wit, that the seventh day of a week be
sanctified. For, as I observed before, the force of Gods example alleged in
the fourth commandment, lies in this chiefly, that God purposly took six
days to create the world, whereas he might have done it in six hours, and
rested upon the seventh; not in this, that he created in those six days, and
rested upon that seventh day, which followed immediately after: for the Lord
says, for in six days, not, for in those six days. God made choice of that
seventh day at that time to sanctify it, to be a memorial of his rest from
the work of creation that seventh day. When Christ rose from the dead, and a
new creation, as it were, of a new world was begun, there was greater reason
to sanctify that day, howbeit there had been no types and ceremonies annexed
to the former, far more seeing it behoved to be abolished. The seventh day
in the precept is to be considered materially, as it were, or formally. As it
is considered formally, and in general, it is of the substance of the command,
but consider it materially, as the seventh from the creation, it is not of the
substance of the commandment. The seventh day may be considered both the
ways: S^arez de diebus festis cap. 1. nu. 15.
Septimu^ autem dies intelligi potest, vel ille qui est septimus d^es a
creatione numerando a primo die creationis, que dici potest velu^imaterialis
numeratio, vel potest dici septimus, quasi generat^m, seu formaliter ille, qui
est ultimus in septenario numero dierum, sicut Aristoteles dixit ultimam
unitatem esse formam numeri. The institution then of the Lords day, is nothing
else but a substitution of another seventh day to the former seventh day,
considered materially. These are the common phrases of divines; that the old
sabbath was changed into the first day of the week, that the glory and
excellency of the old sabbath was translated into that day, that that day
succeeded or was substitute to the old sabbath. What can these phrases import,
but that vis praecepti the force of the precept yet remains, and only the
material numbering for great respects was changed.

Philo^ Judaeus in his book de opificio mundi in the place above cited, The
perpet^ity of a seventh day.
upon occasion of the sabbath discourses at large upon the mysteries of the
sacred septenarie, as he calls it, or number of feven. Peter Martyr says,
that God delights in the number of seven, and has closed up great and
wonderful works, within the compass of the number of seven. Scaliger says,
that the number of seven days is instituted by a divine power, because it is
so commodious for all the course of the year, called Solar, ^^non. I^ ^^g. p.
198.
and has into it some divine thing. Divinitus igitur institutus est numerus
dierum septenarius, qui ad omnem civilis anni Solaris rationem commodissimus
est, and ut dixi nescio qui (...) habet. But in the institution of the sabbath,
God had not an eye to the mysteries, or hid virtue which is in the number of
seven, but to the ability of man. The sabbath was made for man, and not man
for the sabbath.

Our reason the^ for the perpetuity of a sevenths day sabbath to be sanctified,
that this order cannot be changed, that it is of the substance of the fourth
commandment, are these. First, if by virtue of the fourth precept of the
decalogue, we be not bound to sanctify one day of seven, then we have no
divine precept for any certain circle, or circuit of days for the
sanctification of a certain day: for no where in scripture have we any precept
for any other revolution of days to observe one of them. Without a certain and
set systeme of days there would arise great confusion and division in the
Church of God, some judging one of ten, others perhaps one of twenty, or thirty
suffi^ient, etc. It behoved the Lord therefore by his supreme authority to
s^int the time, to exeeme all Scruples out of men's minds, and to prevent all
confusion and disorder. No humane authority could have bound men's conscience
to the observation of it. The Lord no where has done it, but in the fourth
precept. Next, the reason in the precept concerns us all, for as I have said
before, the Lord took six days to creat the world, no more, no fewer, and
rested the seventh to be a pattern to man, many hundred years before the Jews
became a nation, and in that precept, which was a renewing of the institution,
commands us to follow that pattern. Thirdly, the proportion between the six
days for man to do his own business, and the seventh to be dedicated to
God, is so just, that it cannot be altered without prejudice; for to give man
but five, were an heavy burden, to give him seven, or eight, or more, the time
set apart for God would not be sufficient. Unless we will think God exacted
more then was sufficient, when he required the seventh. But we must acknowledge
that God is good, and we profess equity in his precept, in that he has given
us six days, and taken but the seventh to himself. And who was so wise, as to
find out this proportion without prejudice either to God or man. 1. 2. quaest.
100. art. 1^
Aquinas distinguishes moral precepts in three ranks: The first are such as
natural reason does yield to incontinent: The second are of such as need the
more subtle consideration of the wiser sort, considering sundry circumstances:
A third sort are of such as need divine instruction to help man's reason to
judge, and condescend. These of the first rank are absolut^ de lege natura,
simply or absolutely of the law of nature, the rest are attained unto by humane
discipline and instruction as these of the second rank, or ^v^ne inse^uctio^
as these of the third. And to this rank may this proportion be referred. But
we are content to urge it only as divine positive, but unchangeable, as the
rest of the moral precepts are. So that the fourth precept is partly divine
natural, that God must have a time set for his worship, partly divine
positive, that he must have one whole day of seven. Fourthly, Christ or the
Apostles would not vary from this circle, when they changed the seventh day
from the last to the first day of the week, but kept themselves within that
circle, which they might and would have done, if the fourth precept had been
given only to the Jews, or the circuit had been ceremonial, and had relation
only to the Jewish sabbath. And this is an argument by the way, that this
systeme of seven, or circuit of the week, was set from the beginning. The
reason of the institution of the Lords day, says Bellarmine, De cultu sanct.
lib. 3. c. 11.
was, that it might succeed to the sabbath, for divine law required, that one
day in the week should be dedicated to divine worship. Nam jus divinum
requirebat, ut unus dies hebdomadae dedicaretur cultui divino. And seeing it
was not convenient that the old sabbath should be still observed, it was
changed into the Lords day. For the perpetuity of one of seven, the testimonies
of many divines may be alleged. Homil. 10. in genesis 2.
Chrysestome, Jam hinc ab ^nitio doctrinam hanc nobis insinuat Deus, erudiens
in c^ culo hebdomadae diem unum integrum segregandum and seponendum in
spiritualem opera^ionem. Theodoretus, Septem d ebus circulum omnem dierum
conclusit. Beza in Apocal. quaest. in Genesis
1. 10. Quartum praeceptum de septimo quoque die sanctificando, quo ad cultum
De^ a^^^net esse leg^^ moral^ and immotae. P. Martyr in his common places, that
it is stable and firm, that one day in the week be dedicated to God.
Zanchius upon the fourth precept, that it is moral, so far as it commands
us to consecrate one day of seven to Gods external worship. Junius says, it
is natural that the seventh day be consecrated to God. Praelecti in Genes.
cap. 2. Suarez acknowledges, De festis c. 4. number. 9.
that the dedication of the seventh day, howbeit he calls it an
ecclesiastical precept, cannot be changed by the ordinary, or ordinat as he
calls it, power of the Church. Because some ecclesiastical precepts are so
near and like to divine institutions, so conform to the law of nature, fenced
with so many reasons of honesty and religion, so ancient, and strengthened by
universal custom, that simply, or by the ordinate power of the Church; they
cannot be abrogated. Among which precepts, he ranketh that of the dedication of
the seventh day. And therefore he infers that by the absolute power of the
Church and the Popes, it may be abrogated, tamen practice and moralit^^ dici
posse aliquo modo immutabile, licet ecclesiasticum sit, that is, it may be said
in some sort to be morally, and for practice unchangeable; Which is as much as
to say, with little honesty or credit can it be put in practice. Such shifts
are sophists driven unto, when they would advance the authority of the Church
too high, as if the Church only in imitation of God had dedicated one of
seven, and had not direction from God. Always ye see he acknowledges, that
to observe holy one of the seven days, is conform to the law of nature.

This seventh day, The Lords day unchangeable.
to wit, the Lords day, cannot ^e changed as the old seventh day, which was the
last of the week. It is not only unfit, and unconvenient, but it cannot be
changed. Not because of the nature of the day, for it differs not in nature
from another day, more then the former sabbath. If the former sabbath had been
holier in nature then other days, it could not have been changed. But the
reason of the immutabilitie of the Lords day is, that it was set down by
divine authority, and therefore cannot be abrogated by humane authority of
princes, pastors, or prelates. We must not look for Christ till his coming
again, nor for any to arise hereafter equal in power and authority to the
Apostles. Next, the consideration taken in making choice of this day, cannot
serye for another day. Christ is not to suffer death, and rise again at any
other time. A weightier consideration to make a new change, will never fall
forth, then the resurrection of Christ. And therefore nowbeit the Church had
instituted it, it cannot be changed. De festis c. 4. number. 10.
At vero ecclesiasticum praeceptum ^ititur mysterio resurrectionis Chr^sti ^am
fa^ lo, quod ut sic, immutabile est: Nec enim potest C^ristus non resurrexisse,
nec potest non vivere glories postquam resurrexit, says Suarez. Seeing Christ's
resurrection fell forth that day, it can never be true that Christ rose not
that day. Therefore for the dedication of such day, to wit, the Lords day,
Suarez says, Number. 10, 11.
the reasons are perpetual and unchangeable, which have so fixed the
determination, that this precept of the Church cannot reasonably be abrogated,
and that the holy Ghost, which governs the Church, will not suffer such a
change to be made against reason and the utilitie of the Church. But if it be
of divine institution, and not the Churches, it cannot be changed, but by the
like divine institution. For what ever be the considerations in making choice
of the day, the determination, or as they call it, taxatio diei, depends
chiefly upon the will of the institutour. Of the divine institution I have
treated a little before. I refer the Reader for more to Willets his Synopsis,
Perkins cases of conscience, Fulke against the Rhemist, Apoc. 1. 10. and other
worthy Divines.

The places alleged Romans 14. All diffe^ence of days not abrogated.
and Galat. 4. makes not against all difference of days, but the ceremonial,
or dead judaicall. The weaker Jews; Romans 14. thought the holy days commanded
by God in the old law, were still holier then other days. The Apostle wills
such to be borne with, till they come to the fuller knowledge of their
Christian liberty. The Galathians had been converted from paganism, had
begun in the spirit, but were now by the persuasion of the false apostles, like
to end in the flesh, beginning to observe the days, months, and years, which
the Jews observed of old: Days, that is, their weekly sabbaths; Months, that
is, their new moons; Years, that is, their yearly days, or anniversarie
feasts; or times and years, that is, Statuta tempora annorum, the appointed
times of the years. For by the same reason, that months may be taken for new
moons, years may be taken for yearly days. I see no likelihood, that they
observed the seventh or fifty year. This exposition agrees with the division
of the Jewish solemnities, whereof I made mention before. The observation of
such days, is taxed here, as were in some respect, of the quality of the new
moons and yearly feasts. Now these were the sabbaths. This ceremonial
difference was abrogated, but the moral use of a set holy day was not taken
away. For (...) the same time the Lords day was observed, and by the Galathians
in particular, as ye may see 1 Corin. 16. 1. where the Apostle makes mention
of the Churches of Galatia. Now to set a day is not a shadowing ceremony more
then to design a place for the congregation to meet in, but a matter belonging
to order. But there was more required to this day. For it was not instituted
only for order and policy, that the people might know what days to conveene
to public, exercises, howbeit it was one respect. Times may be appointed for
preaching and prayer on the week days by any particular Church. But there is
more required here, a day to be obseved holy by the universal Church, not only
for public worship, but also for private, not only for external, but also for
internal, which could not be done but by divine authority, which is supreme,
and only able to bind the conscience to internal as well as external, to
private as well as to public worship, as I have said before.

The last point which I am to touch, The manner of observation.
is concerning the strictness of the observation: Whither we be bound to as
strict observation of the Lords day, as the Jews were of their sabbath. The
superstitious observation of the Jews we are not bound unto. For they
observed that day more precisely, then God required. They found fault with
Christ healing of the sick man upon the sabbath, and the sick man's carrying
home of his bed. They have had, and have many foolish observations, as not to
pull to an herb on the sabbath, nor to eat an aple which they pluck upon that
day, nor claw with their nails in public, nor catch a flea unless it bite.
Let us then see, what God has forbidden them. They were bidden ^ake that which
they had to bake upon the sixth day, and sees that they had to sees, Exodus 16.
23. and forbidden to kindle a fire upon the seventh day. But that which was
baken and seethed upon the sixth day, a part of it was not reserved to the
seventh day, but that which remained over unbaken and unsodden. The text
imports no further, for if it had been baken or sodden, they would perhaps
have attributed the not putrefying upon the seventh day to the baking or
seething. It was food that might be eaten without baking, like comfites or
fruit. It seems then this injunction was given only during the time the
manna rained. If this direction had been to be observed afterward, they might
not have eaten any thing which was baken two days before. Is it likely that
Christ and others bidden to the Pharisees house upon the sabbath day, had no
meat dressed for them by baking of seething. The kindling of fire was
forbidden, not simply, but for baking or seething the manna, as some think,
and therefore endured only so long as the manna lasted, howbeit the most
superstitious sort of the Jews in later times observed it. It is noted of the
Essens, Drusius de tribus sectis, lib. 4.
a strict sect of the Jews, as singular in them, that they kindled no fire
upon the sabbath day. They were commanded, Exodus 16. 29. to abide every man in
his place, and not to go out of their tents, at lest out of the camp. This
was but temporary. Afterward they might take journey upon the sabbath to the
Prophets or synagogues, 2 King. 4. 23. Levit 23. 3. Yea, if they were not to
journey for that, the Scribes prescrived to them 2000 cubits, that is a mile or
thereabouts, out of a town or city, which was called the
sabbath-dayes-journey. But afterward they became more superstitious, not taking
up the Lords intent, in that place of Exodus, as the Jew that would not be
drawn out of the jackes, wherein he had fallen upon the sabbath day. So
howbeit the Jews should be superstitious now in not kindling fire, that is no
warrant that the direction was not ^^^oratie. Some think, this prohibition
served only during the workmanship of the tabernacle. But let it be granted,
that both the one direction and the other were to endure during the policy of
the Jews, I deny that they were forbidden by virtue of the fourth precept of
the decalogue. They would and might have kindled fire notwithstanding of the
fourth precept. Their rest upon the sabbath was ceremonial and figurative. And
because ceremonial and figurative, therefore, says Bellarmine, page 31.
and Dow after him, with others, it behoved to be more strict, exact, and
rigid. For the more exact the figure is, the better it represents and
signifies. So granting, that dressing and preparing of meat by fire were not a
temporary precept during the manna, yet it depended upon the ceremonial rest
and typical state of Gods people under the law. They abstained from the
burial of the dead upon the sabbathday, 2 Maccab. 12. 39. because if any
touched the dead, or entered into the house where the dead lay, or touched a
grave, was unclean seven days, Numb. 19. 14. 16. and consequently they might
not enter into the tabernacle. Here a duty forbidden for legal uncleanness,
which binds not us. The profanation of the sabbath was a capital crime,
Exodus 31. 14. but this law binds not us. The works depending upon the
ceremonial rest, or any particular ceremony binds not us, but only the
works inhibited in the fourth precept, wherein the ceremonial and iudicall
precepts are not included, but only annexed to them, as peculiar unto that
people, which was under the tutorie, and paedagogie of the law. Aquinas says,
that the ceremonial and judicial precepts are not contained in the decalogue.
Secunda, secundae qu^^st. 122. art. 1. a^^ secundum.
Ad secundum dicendum, quod judicialia praecepta sunt determinationes moralium
praeceptorum, prout ordinantur ad proximum; sicut and ceremonialia sunt quaedam
determinationes praceptorum moralium, prout ordinatur ad Deum. unde neutra
praecepta continentur in daecalogo. If then these works were not forbidden by
virtue of the fourth precept, we are not bound to for bear them. If our
observation of the Lords day praefigure that blessed and glorious life which we
expect, as some do hold, then our rest should be also as exact and rigid,
because figurative. Dominicus dies, D^civie. De lib. 22. c. 30.
qui Christi resurrectione s^^xat^^e, ^, ^e ernam requiem spiritus and corporis
praefigurat, says Augustine. But we will not build strictness of rest upon
such a weak ground. It may be fill drawn to resemble heavenly and spiritual
things, but that is not any end of the institution. It is not ^^pu^destinatu^,
instituted for any shadow or signification, though ^t may befitly applied unto
such an use, Synops. page 500.
says Willet. Our rest upon the Christian sabbath is only subservient to the
sanctifying of the day. The strictness required of old by the virtue of the
fourth precept, is required of us. As Whit makes sunday an holy day only by
the ordinance of the Church, page 109. 150. so the particular form and
circumstances of resting are prescribed unto us, says he, by the Church, page
135. meaning the Church governors, the prelates. So does Bellarmine allow such
works, as shall be permitted by the prelates, De (...) sanc^. c. 10.
or have been used by long custom. Tertiopera concessa a pralatis. Quarto
opera quae ex consuetudine sunt licita. Our holy fathers the prelates, paternes
and patrons of the profanation of the Lords day, usurp dispensation with Gods
moral precepts. The very light of nature leads a man to acknowledge, that
what time is set apart as holy, it should not be profaned with worldly
business or exercises, howbeit this light has been detained in
unrighteousness among the Gentiles, who would not spend the time as they ought
to have done, or were ignorant, and thought their games and plays were a
hononring of their gods. I need not to reekon particular works, this general
ingraft in man's mind by nature, that a holy day should be spent in holy
exercises, will direct every one in the particulars. This or that will be an
impediment to the spiritual exercises, whereunto I am bound this day. In hoc
pracepto est aliquid, quod est morale, ut vacare, id est, intendere Deo,
orando, colendo, meditando, quae sunt in dictamine legis natura. Et ista hodie
in lege Christiana magis manent in virtute, quam in lege veteri. Ex statutis
synodalibus dioecesis Lingonensis anno 1404. Here ye see in the statutes of
that diocie it is acknowledged moral in the fourth precept to pray, worship,
meditate, that nature diteth this much, and that these duties remain more in
strength under the Gospel, then under the old law. This statute with the rest
was approved by a Cardinal, Ludovicus de Barro. In a council holden at
Mascone 588, the people is exhorted to spend the Lords day in hymns and
praises, prayers and tears. Sunt oculi manusque vestrae toto illo die ad Deum
expanse: Let your eyes be bent, and hands spread toward God all that day. They
require also spiritual exercises, in the night it self. In the synods holden
in France, by the Popes legates Galo and Simon, it was ordained under the pain
of excommunication, that none grind at watermills, or any other mills, from
saturday at evening till the Lords day at evening. Cardinal Galo and Simon
were sent legates to France about the year 1812. In a synod holden in Ange^^s
1282. the like ordinance was made against grinding at milles, notwithstanding
of the abuse for a long time before, for that sins are the more heinous, the
longer miserable fouls are bound to them, cumali qua praescriptio contra
praecepta decalogi locum sibi vindieare non possit. Seeing no prescription can
take place against the precepts of the decalogue. Ye see they ground their
ordinance upon the fourth precept, and conclude ex vi quart^ praecepti, that
Christians may not grind at milles that day, from evening to evening. They
inhibited also cutting or shaving of beards that day, or any other exercise of
barbar ^ra^t, under the pain of excommunication, but in case of imminent
peril of death or grievous disease. This strictness then required of us,
admits not lawful and honest games, shooting, bowling, wrestling, etc.
farrelesse unhonest and unlawful, w^i^h ought at no time to be suffered. For
honest games and passe-times, howbeit honest, may be impediment to spiritual
exercises, and distract the mind as much as the lawful works of our calling.
Refreshment by meat and thank was allowed by God himself, when he provided
for the seventh day, and by Christ himself, who being invited, went to the
pharisees house upon the sabbath to dinner. Aman may recreate himself with the
free air of his garden or the fields, if family duties or the like hinder him
not, providing he spend the time in holy exercises, or holy conference with
some other. But games and pass-(...) cannot consist with such holy exercises.
Works of piety, as to travel to the places of public worship; or charity,
as to visit the sick, and of necessity, as to preserve the life of man and
beast in danger, are lawful. The Jews suffered themselves rather to be^
killed, then take arms upon the sabbath day, (...) after better advice, they
resolved to fight if any invaded them, 1 Maccab. 2. 41. The Hebrew Doctors
have a saying, Periculum animae impellit sabbatum, the peril of the life
drives away the sabbath. Yet we should pray to be free of those necessities.
Christ foretelling his disciples, Matthew. 24. 20. the destruction of Jerusalem,
bids them, and in their name, other disciples, who were to follow after,
pray, that their flight might not be in winter nor on the sabbath day:
wherefore not on the sabbath day, but because it would be an hinderance of
their holy and spiritual exercises upon that day. Now the destruction of
Jerusalem fell not forth till forty years after Christ's ascension. But so it
is, the Jewish sabbath was one of the dead ceremonies, which obliged not to
necessary obedience after the passion of Christ. Christ meant then of the
Christian sabbath.

I have exceeded far the bounds I set to my self, and therefore I am forced
to end this discourse.

THE DEFINITION OF A Festival day.
Judicious Piscator defines thus a festival day, Gala^. 4. 10.
^^stum proprie loquendo est publica and folennis ceremonia mandata a Deo, ut
certo anni tempore, cum singulari letitia obeatur, ad gratias agendum. Deo pro
certo aliquo beneficio in populum suum collato. that is, A feast or festival
day is a public or solemn ceremony, commanded by God to be executed at a
certain time of the year, with singular gladness, to give God thanks for
some certain benefit bestowed on his people. Hooker the master of ceremonies,
Policy 5. book sect. ^2.
makes festival solemnity to be nothing else, but the divine mixture, as it
were, of these three elements, praises set forth with cheerful alacrity of
mind, delight expressed by charitable largeness more then common bounty, and
sequestration from ordinary works.

The sabbath under the law was never called jom tob, The Lords day not a
festival.
a good, that is, a merry day, as were the solemn anniversarie feasts. Other
days also, which were not solemn feasts, were so called, as days of
banketing and feasting. Drusius in his annotations upon Ester 9. cites Elias
Thesbite to this purpose. Master Aiusworth in his annotations upon Exodus 16.
cites the Chaldee paraphrase, speaking of the sabbaths and good days, that
is, the solemn feasts as distinct things. Puxtorsius also in abbreviaturis. So
the Lords day succeeding to the old sabbath, should not be ranked among the
festival days or feasts, as the word is taken in our common language. The
definitions agree not to the Lords day. It is not an anniversarie, but a weekly
day. It is not instituted for the commemoration of a particular benefit, but
for the worship of God at large, as the moral law requires, and as the old
sabbath did. For howbeit that day, was made choice of, which was the day of
Christ's resurrection, yet it was not instituted only for the commemoration of
that particular benefit, but for the worship of God in general. It has no
peculiar service of epistles, gospels, collects, or sermons and homil^es for
Christ's resurrection. The Church invented afterward a feast or festival day,
to wit, Easter, for that purpose, which is called the feast of the
resurrection. S^^rez having reckoned the many prerogatives of the Lords day, as
that Christ rose that day, the holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles, etc. he
wills us to observe, that howbeit all these prerogatives might have been
considered in the determination of the day, yet the day of it self, and
directly was not instituted for the peculiar commemoration of these ^^rkes of
God, but to worship God for himself and his own exellencie. De festis c. 4.
Nihilominus per se ac direct non referri vel istitui hunc diem ad peculiaerem
commemorationem illorum operum Dei, sed ad Deumipsum propter se colendum, and
propter suam excellentiam and majestatem. It we had no days but festival for
some particular benefits, we should have no day for the worship of God in
general. The Lords day therefore may justly be called the schoole-day of
Christians, as Petrus Ramus calls it. Thirdly, as the sabbath of old was
distinguished from the yearly feast, which were called good, that is, merry
days, so is the Lords day from the yearly feasts, invented afterward by men.
Upon the anniversarie feasts called good days, they might not fast as ye have
heard before. Mirth and mourning could not stand together. But upon the sabbath
they might lawfully fast. Epist. 86. ad Casulanum.
Ne quando sanctifica^it De is diem septimum, quia in illo requievit ab omnibus
operibus suis, aliquid de jejunio vel prandio expressit, nec cum postea populo
Hebra^ de ipsius dici observatione mandavit, aliquid de alimentis sumendis vel
non sumendis locutus, says August^ne. that is, God enjoined nothing concerning
fasting or eating, either the first time that he sanctified the seventh day, or
afterward when he gave the manna. The Lords day succeeding in the room of the
old sabbath, as it stands in the decalogue, is of the same quality. We may
lawfully fast upon the Lords day, which were absurd to dee upon our
anniversarie feast days. It is true, that in the ancient Church it was thought
a heinous thing to fast upon the Lords day. So did they also forbid to pray
kneeling that day, to signify their joy for Christ's resurrection. This use of
signification or testification was the fountain of much superstition, and
brought in a heap of ceremonies, some of which the Papists themselves were
^shamed of long since. The same ceremony of not kneeling in time of prayer
upon the Lords day, De cultu^ sanctorum cap. 11.
is worn out of use nigh 500 years since, says Bellarmine. If the reason of
the institution had been solid, it should become us no less then them to
pray standing upon the Lords day. But the ground was naught. The like may be
said of not fasting upon the Lords day. Some reason they had indeed not to fast
upon this day, when the Manichees and Priscillianists fasted; for the Manichees
fasted ordinarily upon the Lords day, lest they should seem to rejoice for the
resurrection of Christ, which they be^eeved not. The Priscillianists fasted
likewise ordinarily upon the Lords day, and the nativitie day. But when there
are no known Manichees, nor Priscillianists, there is not the like reason for
not fasting. But the extremities should be avoided. To think it unlawful to
fast that day, or unlawful to dine and break our fast, are both without
warrant, and superstitious. But to fast upon occasion, or in time of any
imminent judgment, is lawful. When Paul continued preaching upon the sabbath
till midnight at Troas, before the tasted any thing, or the rest were refreshed
with meat, this conceat of not fasting upon the Lords day, had not entered in
the Church. Was Paul a Manichaean, says Hierome, because he and those who
were with him fasted on the Lords day. Di^ 76. c. 11.
His words are extant in Gratians decree, Atqui utinam omni tempore jejunare
possimus; quod in Actibus Apostolorum diebus Pentecostes, and die dominico
Apostolum Paictum, and cum eo credentes fecisse legimus. Non tamen Manicheae
haereseos accusandit sunt. If any had resolved to fast seven days or more, he
might have fasted upon the Lords day included, as ye may see in Balsamo and
Zonaras upon the constitutions falsely called apostolical, and Augustine epist.
86. ad Casulanum. Whitaker defending the occasional fas^s of our Church,
tells Duraeus, that the respects the ancients had, concern not us. C^erum
to^^ ^1. p. 227.
Etsi illis temporibus die dominica jejunare nefas fuit, propter haerelices and
Judaeos, qui Christi resurrectionem impugnabant, jam dudum tamen illa offensio
nullum in ecclesia locum habet, ut plane nugatorum sit quod tu de nostris in
Anglia and Scotia^ (...) calumniaris, quasi eo spectent, ut his cuniculis
resur^^cti^^^ fidem evertamus. In a pronounciall synod holden at Dort anno 1574
it was ordained, that there be three sermons on the Lords day, Tom. 3. l. 29
cap. 6. number. 6
when a fast is to be kept on ^. It is to observe a day, to say, the morn is
the Lo^ds day, therefore it is unlawful to fast, Theolog polemica, p. 509
says Chamter. Alstedius, Jejunandum etiam die dominica, si necessitas
flagitet. What need I multiply testimonies, that is sufficient, which Augustine
says What days we ought to fast, and what not, I find it not defined by any
precept given by our Lord, or any of the Apostles. Quibus diebus non oporteat
jejunare, and quibus oporteat praecepto Domini vel Apostolorum non havenio
definitum, epist. 86. But if the Lords day were a festival day, it should
follow, that we should not not fast on it at all.

Now we proceed in our reasons against festival days.

THE II. REASON.
NOne appointed holy festivities under the laws when the times were more
ceremonious, but God himself.

The days of Purim were called simply the days of Purim, The days of Purim
not the holy days of Purim. They were not called Chaggim^ No peculiar
sacrifice was appointed, nor any holy convocation of the people enjoined. The
ordinance required but feasting and joy, and sending of portions to other. The
rest mentioned Esther 9. was only from their enemies. So much work as might
stand with a feasting day was not forbidden. Suppose they had rested altogether
from work, that would only prove an idle day, but not an holy day. Our Doctor
therefore has no warrant to say, page 18.
that they were made holy days by Mordecay. Afterward, it (...) true, when the
Jews become more superstitious, they read the book of Esthe^, after the reading
whereof they sp^nt the rest of the day in revelling and riotousnesse. Next
these days were instituted by Mordecai, and therefore were called Mordecai's
days, 2 Maccahab. last chap. verse. 37. Sixtus Senensis says, Biblioth li. p.
20.
he is thought to be the penman of the book of Esther, he was one of the 120.
of which the great synagogue consisted, of which number were Zachary, Daniel,
Ezra, De sacram. page 206.
and Malachie. Whitaker thinks Mordecai did this, God inspiring him, or
perhaps by the advice or warrant of some Prophet, and doubts not, but it was
done by divine authority. Many things might have been done then by their
direction, the like whereof we have not now. Thirdly, it appears Esther 9.
28. that this custom was to be observed as long as the feasts appointed by
the Lord himself. Holy days of ecclesiastical constitution are not of such a
nature as Doctor Fulk acknowledges. Fourthly, it was not done without consent
of the people of the Jews themselves, Against the Rhem. Apoc. 1. 10. Contr. 3.
l. 4. cap. 17. (...). 5.
as Junius observes. The Jews took upon them and their seed to keep these
two days, Esther 9. 27. Howbeit they were not religious, but politic days, 3
part. decre. ^i did. 3. c. 2. De ^etal. titulo de Faeriis cap. Conquestus.
Mordecai would not impose them without their consent. The equity of this is
seen in the Canon law, where bishops are forbidden to appoint any particular
festival days within their diocies without consent of the people. And there
is good reason, seeing they are to be withdrawn from their calling, I put now
the case they had power to make a holy or festival day. Lastly, can any prince
or state make the like ordinance for the posterity, to feast, and send
portions and gifts one to other, or were it seemly to command feasting in a
Christian commonwealth, howbeit allowed, and in a manner commanded to the
Jews. Alstedii polemic. p. 399.
Alstedius denies that the Christian Church can imitate the Jews in the like.

The memorial days of the dedication mentioned, The days of dedication.
Joh. 10. 22. serve as little for their purpose, for first, they are not
called, either 1 Macchab. 4. or here; the feast of dedication, howbeit the
English translatours without warrant have translated the word dedication so,
which the Rhemists retain without such a supplement. If any supplement were
needful, it may be translated the days of dedication, as the former were
called the days of Purim. And so they are called 1 Maccab. 4. 59. and in the
testimony cited by Junius out of the Talmud. Joh. 10. If ye will call them
the feast of dedication, because of their bodily feasting, yet unless there
was holy convocations to divine service upon them, and cessation from work,
they cannot be made a president for holy festivities composed of Hookers three
elements, nor a^e they anniversarie holy days added to those the Lord himself
appointed. There was offering of sacrifices, singing and playing upon
instruments at the time of dedication of the altar eight days, but not
enjoined at the yearly memorial. Thirdly, Judas Maccabaeus and his brethren,
had the consent and assistance of the whole congregation of Israel to this
ordinance, 1 Macc. b. 4. 59. which is wanting to our festival days, But
Junius cites a testimony out of the Talmud, bearing, that the wise men for
the time instituted eight days of dedication, in memory, that a little
quantity of oil, which was found in the temple scarce sufficient to enterta^ne
the lamps one day, vet sufficed eight days, till new oil was pressed out of
the olives. By the wise men are meant the Pharisees. (...) in Marc. 2. 18.
Nam sapientes and Pharisaei synomina sunt, says Drusius. We are not to
imitate the inventions of Pharisees, or of such corrupt times as those of the
Maccabces. There was no yearly remembrance by solemnity of feast, not so much
as of one for the dedication of the whole temple, either the first under
Solomon, or the second under Zorobabel, nor for restoring of the temple by
Ezekias, after it was profaned by Ahaz and Vrias, or by Josias after it was
polluted by Manasses and Amon. But now there was an annual memory appointed
for renewing of the altar only, and other decayed places of the temple. As for
Christ's conference in the porch of the temple in the days of dedication, it
proves not that he honored that feast, as they call it, with his presence.
Only the circumstance of the time is pointed at, when that conference was, as
the days of the shewbread, Act. 20. and of the fast, Act. 27. are mentioned,
to note a circumstance of time, but not that Paul observed them. Christ came up
to the feast of the tabernacles before, and stayed in Jerusalem. In the mean
time the days of dedication fell forth, De emendat. temp.
as Scaliger has observed. So Christ came not up to Jerusalem for this feast,
and went away in the time of it immediately after this conference. Further,
Christ and his Apostles took occasion of frequent meetings to thrust their
sickles in thick harvests.

In a word the days instituted to Gods people, beside such as God himself
appointed, were either appointed by extraordinary warrant, or were not holy
days, or were the inventions of the pharisees, and corrupter times.

THE III. REASON.
NEither Christ nor his Apostles appointed festival days to be observed by
Christians, The third reason against. festival days.
but rather inhibited the observation of them, and changed only the old
sabbath to the first day of the week. The anniversarie solemnities were not
changed but abrogated, because ceremonial.

We find not the Apostles or Christian Churches in their time observed any
festival or anniversarie days. The Apostles observed no festival days.
Bellar. de cultu sanctor. cap. 13.
That pentecost mentioned 1 Corin. 16. and Act. 20. was the Jews Pentecost.
Bellarmine himself dare not affirm, that it was the Christians. The Apostle
having occasion to treat upon this subject, condemns observation of days,
Gal. 4. Coloss. 2. Suppose, which is more likely, that the Galatians embraced
the observation of the Jewish days, Whitak. cont. 1. quest. 6. cap. 12.
Galate potius Judaizabant quam astrologicas regidas servabant. Yet the Apostle
reasons against all observation of such like days as judaizing. As if he had
said, the observation of ceremonial days, months and years, was convenient
for Gods people under the law for their instruction, and to shadow things to
come, because of their nonage, and was a pedagogicall and rudimentarie
instruction, which beseems not the state of a Christian Church, and clear
light of the Gospel. These days were all ceremonial, yea, the very days of
Purim, and the days of dedication. Doctor Mortoun says, Defense of the
ceremonies. page 64.
were of a ceremonial ^a^re. To celebrate the memory of any particular act of
Christ at a set time in the year with cessation from work, sermons, gospels,
epistles, collect, and hymns belonging thereto, with mirth and gladne^e,
without admitting of a fast at any time, is not to observe a day morally, but
ceremonially. Not to fast when such a day of the year or week returns, but
to hold it festival, is to observe a day, as to fast yearly upon another day.
No doubt the Galatians observed not these days with the Jewish worship of
sacrifices and oblations, or as shadows of things to come, for then they had
denied Christ. Neither is it likely, that they neglected the Jewish Easter and
Pentecost, but yet the Apostle calls it a returning to the Jewish rudiments,
that is, Iudaizing. He instructs the Corinthians, how they shall observe
Easter, to wit, all the year long with the unleavened bread of sincerity and
truth, not after the Judicial manner. If there had been other festival
days, which might have been observed by Christians, the Apostle having so
fair occasion, would have directed them to the observation of them, and not
spoken so generally. Chamieraom. 3. l. 19. c. 6. embraces a more general
exposition, that the Apostle condemns both Jewish and Ethnic observation of
days. Decanone lib. 9. cap. 21. number. 15.
Non est verisimile Apostol um adeo incaut^ locutum, ut generaliter
observationem damnare videtetur, si aliquam excipiebat, says Chamierus. Or is
it likely, that the days appointed by God himself being abol^shed, the
Apostles would have brought in other in their room. Is it reason then, that
others should bring them in. Zanchius confesses, That it is more agreeable to
the first institution and writings of the Apostles, that one day of the week
only be san ctified. ^om^. col. 671.
Magis consentaneum est cum prima institutione and cum scriptis Apostolicis ut
unus tantum dies in septimana sanctificetur. There was but one day observed in
the Apostles times, and called the Lords day. If other days had been
dedicated to Christ, they should all have been the Lords days. Beatus
Rhenanus in his annotations upon Tertullian, De corona militis, observes, that
in the primitive times, the word Lord was more familiar and frequent in the
mouths of Christians, then the name of Christ. So it was as much as to say,
Christ's day. The Lords day then was Christ's day, and Christ had no other days,
of nativitie, passion, etc.

Eusebius treading unknown footsteps, as himself confesses in the beginning
of his story, fills up his book with some old fables. Among the rest he
makes mention of an epistle of Polycrates bishop of Ephesus, to Victor bishop
of Rome, ^5. c. 24, 25.
wherein he reports, that he and his predecessors, even upward to John the
Evangelise, celebrated Easter upon the fourteenth day of the moon. That
epistle may be marked for a counterfite, for it bears, that John was a
priest, and bare in his forehead the petalum, that is, the golden plate like
that of the high priests. The Doctor calls such gay tales Rhetorical
flowers. page 53. Elench. trihaeresi^ c. 2^.
But says Scaliger, Neutrum concedet, qui sciverit nullum Christi Apostol um
sacerdotem fuisse and nulli praeterquam summo sacerdoti petalum gestare
licuisse. Augustine, who lived in the fifth age after the Apostles, could not
resolve upon the original of our five festival days, but floated between
two opinions, and not one of them sure. For they were neither instituted by the
Apostles, nor by general Council. Socrates in his history comes nearer to
the point, lib. 5. c. 21.
I am of opinion (says ^e) that as many other things crept in of custom in
sundry places, so the feast of Easter to have prevailed among all people of a
certain private custom and observation, in so much that not one of the
Apostles has any where prescrived so much as one rule of it to any man. A
little after, They that keep Easter the fourteenth day of the month, bring
forth John the Apostle for their Author. Such as inhabit Rome and the west
parts of the world, allege Peter and Paul for themselves, that they should
leave such a tradition: yet there is none of them that can show in writing any
testimony of theirs for confirmation and proof of that custom. It has been
an old refuge, when any country or province could not find the beginning of
their customs, to father them upon the Apostles. A notable exemple whereof we
had in this same I Will, when there was hot contention about the forms of shaven
crowns. Hier^^^ himself says, Epist. ad Luci^^um.
Vnaquaeque provincia pracept a majerum leges Apostolicas arbitretur. Let every
province esteem the traditions or precepts of their forefathers to be
Apostolical laws. It will rather follow, that the Apostles observed not, nor
appointed Easter to be observed at all. For the Apostle being directed
infallibly by the spirit, had agreed upon the day as well as upon the thing it
self, and not left occasion of contention to the Christian world. Chamier.
com. 3. l. 19. cap. 7. n. 37.
Quae aliter atque aliter observabantur non possunt ab Apostolis esse
instituta, quorum ab eodem spiritu eruditorum non potuit non esse individuus
consensus. Neque unquam piis fuit persuasum ab Iohanne institutum pascha decima
qua ta Luna, a I etro autem post eam, quomodo jactabant veteres. It is well
said in the preface to the harmony of confessions, that the old contention
about the celebrating of Easter tossed very hotly the space of two hundred
years or thereabout, betwixt the Greeks and the Latins, was long since of us
thought worthy of laughter. Whitaker wondereth at their frivolous contentions,
Whitak. de scriptura quaest. 6. c. 9. Tom. 3. l. 19. c. 7. number. 9.
and he says, there was no necessity to observe it any day. Chamierus says,
Si institutum fuisset ab Apostolus eodem ubique modo fuisset institutum and
observatum, quod falsum esse jam olim observavit, Socrates. Seeing they have no
sooting for the Apostles appointing of the observation of Easter, far less
will they be able to prove the Christians pentecost, and other festivities that
came in after, as of Christ's nativitie, ascension, etc. to have been
instituted by the Apostles. Justinius questions Clemens constitutions, some
sermons ascrived to Cyprian, all suppositious works are the most ancient
proofs they allege for them.

THE IIII. REASON.
IF it had been the will of God, The fourth reason against festival days.
that the several acts of Christ should have been celebrated with several
solemnities, the holy Ghost would have made known the day of his nativitie,
circumcision, presentation to the temple, baptism, transfiguration, and the
like. For it is kindly, say they, to remember opus diei in die suo, the notable
work of a day in the own day. Bellarmine says, that Christ's acts did
consecrat the days and times wherein they were wrought. Hooker says, that the
wondrous works of God did advance the days and times wherein they were
wrought. There is not a day in the year, wherein some wondrous work of God
has not been wrought. All the days of the year, Epist. 4.
says Leo, are full of Christ's miracles. If Christ's actions advance and
consecrate the days where on they were wrought, they ought to have been made
known, lest we keep holy such days as were never consecrated or advan^ed. But
it is confessed, that the day of Christ's nativitie, and consequently of the
rest depending thereupon, as of his circumcision, presentation, baptism, have
been hid from mortal men. And therefore the day of Christ's nativitie was
observed diversely of old, by some in one month, by some in another. The 25. of
December was grounded upon an erroneous conceat, that Zachary the father of
John the Baptist was high priest, which error is yet fostered by observing
that day. Ye see then, as God hid the body of Moses for avoiding of
idolatry, so has he the day of Christ's nativitie for avoiding superstition.
And this is sufficient to declare the will of God concerning other notable
acts, which were known, to wit, that not the act, but divine institution
makes a day holy. Gods resting upon the seventh day made it not holy, but his
sanctifying of it, and instituting it to be observed as holy. Ratio
convenientiae non fuisset sufficiens, nisi praecessisset mandatum divinum.
Rivetus in Decalogum, page 167. Christ's actions did no more consecrate the
times, wherein they were wrought, then his body did the manger, or the cross
by touch. And suppose this might have been, it would not follow that all
mangers and crosses are consecrated, no more would it follow that every 25. day
of December should be consecrated and made holy, because that whereon he was
borne (I put the case it were true) was consecrated. Verum etiam non est, dies
illos fuisse consecratos per actiones aut passiones, quae talibus diebus
acciderunt. Idenim si verum esset nullus fuisset dies, qui aliqua Christi
action non esset nobilitatus and consecratus, Rivetus in Decalogum, page 204.
As for remembering of Christ's nativitie no man denies but it is needful, and
so it is, wheresoever the Gospel is preached. But we deny that the memory of
it must be celebrated with the solemnity of a festival holy day, with
cessation from work, with feasting or forbearance of fasting, and a proper
service.

THE V. REASON.
SUppose the observing of holy days had at the first been a matter
indifferent, The fifth reason against festival day.
yet seeing they have been abused and polluted with superstition, they ought
to be abolished. Upon this ground Z^nch^ us infers, Tom. 4. col. 678.
Non ma e igitur f'cerunt, qui omnia pro^er diem dom nicum aboleverunt. They
have therefore not done am^sse, who have abolished all other holy days but the
Lords day. If Ezekias fact in breaking the brazen s^rpent belandable, by which
he confirms that pule, then their fact is laudable also. But sure it is, that
in former ages holy days have not only been abused with profane and
licentious revelling and surfeiting, but also polluted with the opinion of
worship, merit, necessity, and a judaicall conceat, that the devil is not so
bold to tempt men on these days as at other times. And therefore, says
Zanchius, Col. 679.
Magicians observe holy days to exercise their mag^call feats with the greater
efficacy. The Lords day it self may be abused, but because the observation
is necessary in respect of divine institution, it cannot be removed for the
abuses of men. But the festival days were not appointed by God. Col. 678.
The number, the abuses, the will-worships of feasts so increased, that there
is nothing so unsavourie to God, so pernicious to men, as to sanctify such and
so many days, faith the same Zanchius. Holy days devised for the honor of
Christ, ^resh (...) 2. ^art. page 84.
drew on holy days to saints. Easter brought on a superst^tions lent to attend
upon it, made baptism wait for her moon, conformed our Lords supper unto the
Jewish passover in unleavened bread. It was the first aple of contention
among. Christians, the first weapon wherewith the bishop of Rome played his
pr^ses against other Churches; and after flew so many Britons with, by Austin
the Monk, says Doctor Ames. Even in Chrysostomes time, the people would
forbear to communicate at other times. But at Easter they would communicate,
howbeit they had committed recently some heinous sin, Homil. 61. 2d populu^n
Antioche^um:
whereupon he exclameth, O consuetudinem! o presumptionem! O custom! O
presumption! Because people ran superstitiously to that holy action at
Easter, as if the time gave virtue to the sacrament, and were careles^e the
rest of the year, our reformers appointed other times free of superstition, as
ye may see in the first book of discipline. page 58, 59.

Therefore seeing the observation of festival days is not commanded by God,
and it cannot be denied, but it has been much abused, it ought not to be
continued, far less introduced where it has been disused, suppose it might
be now used without these abuses, because it may degener after the same manner
as before. But what if it be not, nor cannot be free of abuse and superstition.

They say, they esteem them not holier then other days, or place any worship
of God in the observation of them, but only keep them for order and policy,
that the people may be assembled to religious exercises, and instructed in the
mysteries of religion. But that is false, howbeit an old shift. The Papists
themselves confess, that one day is not holier then another in the own
nature, no not the Lords day, but in respect of the use and end. And in this
respect our Formalists esteem their festival days holier then other days,
call them holy days, and maintain, as ye have heard before, that they may be
observed as holy days. If the observing of a day holy for the honor of a
saint be a worshipping of the saint, the observing of a day to the honor of
Christ cannot be without opinion of worship. If the observing of the Lords day
as a festival, as it is in their account, be worship, the observing of their
holy days is worship. Whereas they allege, that it is not worship, because
they hold not the like necessity in observing the one as the other, it will
not help them. For that does not alter the nature of worship, but makes the
one necessary, because God instituted it, the other arbitrarie and voluntary,
and consequently will worship. The same matter, form, and end is in both, but
God institute^h the one, and therefore lawful, the other is instituted at the
pleasure of man, so it is worship, but a vicious worship. Further, some other
Formalists have of late maintained the mutabilitie of the Lords day it self.
What our Doctor will do now, let any man judge who knows him to be
temporiz^r and a sceptike. Master Dow, p. 58. says, as other holy days, it
goes paripassu in their canons and ancient statutes, which require the same
observances under the same penalty. They are not only holy days but also
mystical, howbeit the Doctor denies it. For else he must disclaim his
ancien^s, who call them so. Are they not appointed for the solemnitle of some
mystery of religion? Do they not carry the names of Christ's nativitie,
passion, ascension? etc. Are they not ordered according to the known or
supposed times, when such things fell forth? If it were for order and policy,
they were observed, that the people may assemble and be instructed, wherefore
is there but one day between the passion and the resurrection, forty betwixt
the resurrection and ascension, and then again, but ten betwixt the ascension
and whitsontide. Wherefore follow we the course of the moon in our moveable
feasts, and observe not a certain day in the month, as we do for other. If
we observed days only for order and policy, then we would not stick to
days, as we do, for the commemoration of Christ's nativitie; passion, page 18.
23.
ascension, etc. The Doctor says, we do not observe festival days as the
Jews did, which were holy, not only for the use whereunto they were appointed
to serve as circumstances, but by reason also of their mystik signification,
and of the worship appropriated to them, which might not be performed at
another time. But that will not save the ma^ter. For a day is called mystike,
not only for shadowing things to come, but also for the mysteries solemnly
remembered. And as for appropriation, do we not appropriat to the day of
Christ's nativitie a peculiar kind of service, of epistles, gospels, collects,
hymns, homilies belonging to Christ's nativitie, and think it absurd to
perform the like service upon another day, with the like solemnity of
cessation from work, and sup^rstitious forbearing of fasting. We think it
likewise absurd to perform upon the nativitie day that peculiar service which
belongs to easter. Yea, page 25.
the Doctor says, the commemoration appointed to be made upon the five
days, must not be omitted on these days. If it be absurd to celebrate
another day after the same manner with the same service, and no other service
will serve on these days; is there not a peculiar service appropriated to our
festival days, as of old among the Jews? page 23. 18.
That shift is of no weight, that a minister may preach, or we may meditate
upon Christ's passion another day, then the nativitie. For that is not to
celebrate with solemnity. To use another day with the like solemnity in the
place of it, or both, would be thought very absurd. The Jews themselves
without the service appropriated to their feasts, might remember these same
benefits and mysteries upon other days, but not with the like solemnity and
peculiar service. And so the solemnity is tied to the time. To observed days
after this manner is not like the appointing of hours, for preaching or
prayers on week days or times for the communion, according to the policy and
order set down by every particular congregation, we tie not our selves to
them, not any peculiar service to any of them. We use time then only as a
circumstance, and for order, and not as a sacred time, let be as a holy
festivitie. We observe days after the same manner that the Jews did, howbeit
not the same days, nor with the same kind of worship. The change of the
circumstance, the day and manner of wotship, does not free us of Judaizing. Non
sublata sed mutata est significatio dierum, says Bellarmine. and so it is with
the Formalists. We do not say that the anniversarie revolution made the
Jewish festivals ceremonial, for in the revolution of time there was no
mystery, but the tying of such a peculiar service to the time of anniversarie
resolution with such solomnitie. To perform the same duty in substance upon
the moral sabbath, as occasion served, had not been ceremonial.

What then, they say, ought not Christ's inestimable benefits and notable acts
to be remembered? I answer, Yes, and so they are, for where the gospel is
preached, his acts are published. Christ is set forth crucified by the
preaching of the word, every communion day, his passion and death is and will
be remembered to his coming again. De eucharist. l. 3. c. 9.
The Eucharist, says Bellarmine, est memoriale omnium miraculorum and quasi
compendium vitae, passionis, and resurrectionis Domini. In the written word,
sermons, prayers, creeds, catechismes, his nativitie, passion, ascension, etc.
are remembered. It follows not, they should be remembered, therefore their
memory should be celebrated severally with the solemnity of a festival day.
For the Lord has appointed an holy day, which we call the Lords day, and may
call Christ's day, as I said before, for publishing all Christ's acts and
benefits. Pope Alexander the 3. gave this reason, wherefore the Roman Church
does not observe an holy day to the Trinity, to wit, because glory to the
Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost, and other like things
belonging to the praise of the Trinity, are published daily. Decretal. l. 2.
tit. 9. cap.
Ecclesia Romana in usu non habet, quod in aliquo tempore hujusmodi celebrat
specialiter festivitatem, cum singulis diebus, gloria patri and filio and
spiritui sancto, and catera similia dicantur ad laudem pertinentia trinitatis.
The Popes ground must be this. Whatsoever is treated on or remembered in the
ordinary divine service, needs not a special holy day to celebrat the
memory of the same. I assume. The nativity, passion, resurrection, ascension
of Christ, and sending down the holy Ghost, are not only remembered in private,
but also in public, and in the ordinary service, specially on the Lords day.
Council. Constantinop. 6. Can. 8.
If all be true that is affirmed by a council holden at Constantinopl^, that
Christ was borne on this day, the star shined to the wisemen on it, Christ
fed 5000. persons with five loaves and two fishes on it, that he was baptized,
rose and sent down the holy Ghost on it, the light was treated on it, and
which Pope Le^ affirms, that the Lords day is consecrated with so many
mysteries dispensed on it, that whatsoever notable thing was done on earth, was
done to the honor of this day, it appears that the Lord would have us to
observe only this day, as holy and sanctified by himself for the proclaiming of
all his worthy acts, and not to presume to institute holy festivities upon our
own heads. There is no danger but the memory of Christ's nativitie, etc. will
be preserved to the end of the world without observing such solemnities, and
making holy days which lies not in the power of man. This pretext of
remembering and putting in mind, has been a cloak to bring in crosses,
images, surplices, and other popish garments, with much other superstition, and
among the rest these memorial days.

THE JVDGEMENT OF Foreign Divines.
I Pass by the Petrobrusians, The judgment of foreign Divines.
the Waldenses, and Wicleffs followers, and come to later times. Luther in his
book de bonis operibus, set forth anno 1520. wished, that there were no
festival days among Christians, but the Lords day only were observed. And in
his book to the nobility of Germany he says, Consul^^ nesse ut o^nia festa
aboleantur, solo die dominico retent^. That is, It were expedient that all
feasts were abolis^ed, the Lords day only being retained. Farellus and Vi^et
r^n^^ed all holy days out of the Church of Geneva, as Calvine epist. 118.
testifies. The same decree, which banished Farellus and Calvine out of Geneva,
brought in other holy days. In a national synod holden at Dort anno 1578. of
the Belgic, Almaine and French Churches, we have these words. Optandum for^t
nostros sex diebus laborare, and diem solum Dominicum celebrare. That is, It
were to be wished, that our country people labored six days, and celebrated
only the Lords day. So ye may see festival days are rather tolerated by
them, because of the wilfulness of the magistrates and people then commended
or allowed. Among the articles agreed upon and concluded concerning
ecclesiastical policy in the Palatina^, anno 1602. we have this following.
Omnes Feri^ per annum and festi dies tollendi e medio. All the festival days
through the year are to be abolished. Ye see where they find the
opportunity, they abolished them. Bucer, howbeit not one of the precisest
reformers, upon Matthew 2. has these words, as I find him cited by Amesius in
his fresh suit, page 360. I would to God, that ev^ry holy day whatsoever,
beside the Lords day were abolished. That zeal which brought them first in, was
without all warrant or example of the Scripture, and only followed natural
reason, to drive out the holy days of the pagans, as it were to drive out one
nail with another. Those holy days have been defiled with so gross
superstitions, that I marvel if there be any Christian who does not shake at
their very names.

Seeing then festival days have no warrant, we ought not to hear the sermons
delivered on these days of purpose for the day: for that is the chief element
of a festival day to use a peculiar kind of service proper to it. And without
divine service, it were but an idle day, not a holy day. The word of God is
good of it self, but may be abused to charming, and to foster superstition,
whereof we should keep our selves free, that we be not guilty of the
profanation of the name of God. Our preachers went to rebuke the people when
they con^eened more frequently to the Church npon any festival day, falling
upon an ordinary day of teaching, howbeit neither time nor text was changed.
But how far have both. preachers and professors, degenered without
appearance of amendment. At the beginning of the late novations they were skar,
but now many have digested that scruple.

OF CONFIRMATION.
OUr act, The act examined.
it is true, alleges that the Papists have made of the trial of young
children their education, and how they are catechized, a sacrament of
confirmation, as if no such thing were aimed at but the said trial, yet in
respect that by that act the pretended bishop shall cause them to be presented
before him, that he may bless them with prayer for the increase of their
knowledge and continuance of his heavenly grace with every one of them, and we
know that they dare, and will take upon them the rest of the rites used in the
English Church, laying of hands, etc. we reason, as before, against
confirmation, as it is used in the English Church. Yet two things I perceave in
the act as it stands. The one is, that the bishop is not ^ound to try by
himself every one that is to be presented before him, but only to try, whither
the minister has been remiss in catechizing, and yet he must upon the report
of others bless them with prayer, for the increase of knowledge, and
continuance of grace. Next, that he must bless who has not a calling to
bless, that he must bless as if he were the pastor of all the souls within
the diocie old and young, which charge that null and pretended assembly could
not give him, seeing it has been acknowledged before in free assemblies to
have no warrant in the word of God, and has been suppressed by our Church as
a damnable office. Therefore his blessing is but a profanation with his
fingers. But what language is this, to say, that the bishop shall bless them
with prayer, for to bless is one thing, and to pray another. For prayer
seeks of God good things for us, but to bless is in Gods name to assure us,
that the blessing of God is upon us, and shall accompany us. But let us come
to their pattern.

That which now the Papists make the sacrament of confirmation, The original
of the act of the sacrament of confirmation.
was of old a part of the solemnity of baptism. After the person was
baptized, they laid on hands, that is prayed for increase and continuance of
grace to the baptized, as we do now, but without laying on of hands, because
it was a rite indifferent without any use, but to design the person for whom
the prayer was made, and afterward abused to make up another sacrament.
Afterward entered a superstitious device, to strike Chrisme, that is, oil of
olives tempered with balm, in manner of a cross upon the forehead of the
baptized. This anointing in the form of a cross was called signation, or
consignation, because of the sign of the cross made upon the forehead. This
unction or consignation, and imposition of hands, became in the minds of
superstitious men so necessary, that without them they thought they had not
gotten their perfect christendom, that the sign of the oily cross perfited
baptism, and conferred the spirit of God upon the baptized. T^^s consignation
and imposition of hands at the closure of baptism was called confirmation,
like as the giving of the cup to the communicants, after they have received the
bread, Cassand. Liturg. p. 218.
was called also confirm^tion, as Cassander has observed, but the (...)
controued only with the first. The bishops arrogated to themselves the unction
or consignation, and imposition of hands to advance their estate. They do that
part which consummateth baptism, which makes a fall and pe^fite Christian.
But when it was found, that the bishop could not be present at every baptism,
the priest was permitted after baptism to anoint the baptized in the top of
the head with holy Chrisme, but he must not cross the forehead. That must be
reserved to the bishops leisure. Then they were presented to the bishop to be
confirmed, and get their perfect Christendom by rit^s, Chemier. tom 4. l. 4.
cap. 11. Spalato l 5. c. 5. Hooker. l. 5. p. 353.
which were appendicles, and c^remonie of bapt^sme before. The English at their
rude reformation reserved imposition of hands to the bishop, and gave their
priest power to make the sign of the cross upon the forehead of the baptized,
but without chrisme. Howbeit there be no greater antiquity for the crossing
without it then with it, they call notwithstanding the bishops imposition of
hands only confirmation, and not their priests crossing of the forehead. And
yet when the priest crosses, he says, We receave this child into the
congregation of Christ's flock, in token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed
to confess the faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight under his
banner against sin, the world, and the devil, and to continue Christ's
faithful soldier, unto his life's end. Which words agree according to their
doctrine better with confirmation* For do they not say, Hooker l. 5. p. 354.
Hockwells ser^ron of confirmation.
that in baptism infants (...) admitted to live in Gods family, but in
conf(...) they are rabled to fight in the army of God. That in baptism they
believe the remission of sin unto justification, in confirmation they are
emboldened to make open professon of this belief unto salvation. And this is
just the doctrine of the Papists. So they have parted the rits of confirmation,
or else they must acknowledge that they have two-confirmations, which is as
absurd. But let us come to the last, and that which they call confirmation or
laying on of hands.

It is true in their articles set forth, anno 1562. they deny confirmation to
be a sacrament, The Forma^ists hold confirmation to be a sacrament. De
politera. l. 3. c. 16.
and acknowledge that it flowed from a naughty imitation of the Apostles. But
Doctor Rainolds in the conference holden at Hampton court, alleged, that that
article was contradicted by the rubric of confirmation in the book of Common
prayer, as Parker has well observed. In that rubrik it is said, That
confirmation is ministered unto them that are baptized, that by imposition of
hands and prayer they may receave strength and defense against all tentations
to sin, and the assaults of the world and the devil. Bellarmine makes
imposition of hands and prayer but one sensible sign in confirmation, howbeit
the Papists have no right imposition of hands. Master Hutton says, that
imposition of hands is one of the external means by which the holy Ghost is
given, Parkerus de politeia l. 3. c. 16. l. 12.
and howbeit that prayer has the chief force, yet imposition of hands has
some also, otherwise (says he) what needed Peter and John to have traveled
to Samaria, they might have prayed in Jerusalem for the holy Ghost to the
Samaritans Downame likewise says, that grace is conferred to the baptized for
confirmation by imposition of hands. Defense l. 3. c. 4. l. 6.
In the prayer after the laying on of hands we have these words, We make our
humble supplication unto the for these children, upon whom after the example of
the Apostles we have laid our hands, to certify them by this sign of thy
favor and gracious goodness toward them. Ye see then, they make imposition
of hands a certifying sign of Gods favor, and a mean, whereby grace and
strength against tentations and assaults is conferred. Is it not then made a
sacrament and derogatorie from baptism and the Lords supper, as if by baptism
we were not certified of Gods favor, and entered not to Gods army as well as
his family. Our Christian valor and courage to resist the devil, and profess
the truth, is a fruit of that regeneration and sanctification, which is sealed
to us in baptism. Let him be a athema, who says, that baptism is given to
the remission of sins, and not also to the help of grace, Concilium
Melevitan^m. Ordinary imposition of hands a gesture of prayer.
Is not the Lords supper a confirmation of our faith and often cel brated for
that end.

Because the example of the Apostles is alleged, we answer, that imposition
of hands mentioned, Act. 8. was extraordinary. The Apostles by imposition of
hands might confer the gifts of tongues, prophesying, healing, which Philip
the Evangelist had not, and therefore Peter and John were sent to Samaria for
that end. For they had need of some to prophecy, and to have the Gospel in
these times confirmed to them by such wonders. The effects of this imposition
of hands were sensible to these that were present. And therefore Simon Magus
would have bought with money that gift which the Apostles had. Strength against
tentations is a grace invisible, and given only to the faithful, whereas the
gifts of tongues, prophesying, healing, might have been given to the
unregenerat. The bishop of Spalato says, De rep. l. 5. c. 5. nun. 33.
That the imposition of the Apostles hands was but temporary, and for a
sensible effect, which was to cease, and that it was not a stable and constant
sacrament of the Church, nor was it properly sacramental. The confession of
Wittenberg has the like saying, cap. 11.
Of a temporal and personal fact of the Apostles, a general and perpetual
sacrament cann^t be ordained in the Christian Church without the special
command of God. And so says Suarez also in 3. tom. 3. disput. 33. sect. 4.
Their laying on of hands then in imitation of this extraordinary example of
the Apostles is apish.

As for that imposition of hands mentioned, Ordinary imposition of hands 2
^esture of ^rayer.
Heb. 6. 1. I will let pass the different interpretation of Divines, who
think, some that it was that extraordinary, whereof we have made last
mention, others that it is that which was used in ordination of ministers. I
will give; that it was an ordinary laying on of hands upon the faithful. But
as it is joined with baptism in that place, so it seems to be that
imposition of hands, which was used in the end of baptism, when the minister
prayed for persons baptized, that the Lord would increase and continue his
graces with them. The Apostle there opponeth the doctrine of the beginning,
that is the catatheticall doctrine of repentance from dead works, faith,
resurrection from the dead, and eternal judgment, to the doctrine of
perfection. The converted Jews and Gentiles behooved to be catechized in these
grounds sufficiently, and tried before they could be baptized, and have hands
laid upon them. These were called Catechument, till the time of their baptism.
Others apply it to the children of the faithful, and think that when they
come to age, and were fit for the communion, they were after trial in the
grounds of religion admitted with imposition of hands into the society of
communicants, in ecclesiam adultorum, as Paraeus calls them. But we find
that imposition of hands was used after, as a ceremony in the end of baptism,
even in the baptizing of infants; Yet this laying on of hands upon the
baptized, was, as Augustine says, gestus orantis, the behavior of him that
prayed for, or blessed any particular person, a gesture used both under the old
and new testament. As ye may see, when Jacob blessed the sons of Joseph,
Genes. 48. when Moses laid hands upon Josua, Number. 27, Such as had power, laid
hands on these that were to be admitted to an office in the Church, Acts 6. 1 Timothy 4. The teachers and prophets at Antioch upon Paul and Barnabus, when they
were separated for the work to which the Lord called them, Act. 13. Yea, the
elders who were admitted to be Counselors in the great Synedrion, and the
Rabbis who were promoved to their degree of Doctourship were admitted and
promoved with imposition of hands. So it was used in actions both civil and
religious, and in religious it served to be an indicant sign of the particular
person whom they were to pray for, or bless. For when they were to bless or
pray for more, they lifted up their hands, Levit. 9. 22. Luke 24. 10. See also
Drusius. If it was only the gesture of him that prayed according to the form
of the Jews, In pen^ate uc Fin. p. 370.
and did neither signify nor seal the grace which was prayed for, it could not
be a sacrament. De confirm. cap. 7.
Bellarmine acknowledges, that the imposition of hands at the receaving of
penitents, which was called Impositio manuum reconciliatoria, was not a
consecration imprinting a character, but a ceremony furthering prayer, or a
prayer upon the person. If it was no more at there-entrie, it was nothing else
in the entry.

Seeing imposition of hands was but the gesture of him that prayed, Imposition
of hands used as a sacrament.
it might have been either used or omitted, which our Doctor, page 98.
confesses. And should be omitted, say we, seeing it has been so abused, as
to make it a sacrament without precept or institution, and without a promise.
Farther, seeing it is but a gesture of prayer, (...) 2 de baptism. c. 16.
it may be re-iterat if it were in use. Manus autem impositio, non sicut
baptismus, repeti non potest, quid enim est aliud quam oration super hominem,
says Augustine. In the Catechism before confirmation it is said, That there
are but two sacraments generally necessary to salvation. What then? Estius in
l. 4. did 7.
So will the Papists confess, that confirmation is not necessary to
salvation, otherwise, they would minister it to the baptized at the point of
death. The English book ordains, that the child shall be brought to the
bishop by one that shall be his godfather, or that every child may have a
witness of his confirmation. This the Papists observe in their confirmation.
Thus also is a token, that of old, that which is now called Confirmation, was
but an appendicle or closure of baptism, from which being afterward separated,
it must not want the godfathers it had, when it was the appendicle of
baptism. In the prayer before the laying on of hands, they pray that the
child may be strengthened with the holy Ghost the Comforter. The Papists say,
the Comforter promised by Christ, was bestowed in the sacrament of
confirmation. The Papists say, that in confirmation they receave the sevenfold
grace of the holy spirit, wisdom, counsel, strength, knowledge,
understansting, godliness, fear. They crave the like in the prayer before the
laying on of hands.

But what suppose confirm (...) sacrament, The bishop not the proper minister
of confirmation.
may not every pastor minister it. It appertains to the captain, say they
to take up the roll of the soldiers, and furnish them with armor, the
shephard should mark his own heep, etc. As if every minister were not a
captain in the Lords army, and a sheep-hard feeding the flock concreded unto
him. In lib. 4. did. 7. number. 17.
Bonaventure confesses such similies force not, but institution only makes
necessity. Our first reason then against them is the want of institution, or
exemple in scripture, that bishops had this charge, and not presbyters. We now
suppone only, not grant, that there were such office bearers in the Church.
Peter and John were sent to Samaria, not only to lay on hands, but to advance
the work begunnely Philip. Durandus says, it is not clear, whither they laid
on (...) as bishops, In lib. 4. did. ^. Quaest* Quaest. 101.
or as presbyters. Augustine, (...) is the author of that book, entitled,
Quest veteris and novi testamenti* says, they did it as priests. But the truth
is, they did it neither as bishops, or priests, and therefore neither the one
nor the other succeeded unto them in it. For it was extraordinary, and
extraordinary effects followed it. The second reason, bishops and presbyters,
as themselves confess, are equal in the power of order. If the power be
equal, who can hinder them to put it in execution. Has Christ given them a
power which they may not exercise. In 3. tom. 3. disp. 36. sect. 1. Synt. part.
1. disp. 25.
Suarez the Jesuit says, If presbyters have sufficient power by virtue of
their ordination to minister this sacrament, it were no reason that they should
be wholly hindered. What God has instituted, the Church cannot inhibit, De rep.
l. 5. c. 12. number. 23.
says Tilenus. If presbyters had not had that power by virtue of their
ordination, neither Pope nor bishop might give them commission or license to
do it, Amach. l. 3. (...) quaestionum lib. 11.
says Spalato. But so it is, that by dispensation of license from the Pope,
the Papists grant, they may. Our third reason, presbyters may impose hands in
ordination of ministers, therefore they ^ay also in confirmation. Did 45. c. 6.
So reasons Armachanus. Our fourth reason, they may celebrate and minister
the Lords supper, therefore they may do this also. So reasons the author of
that epistle, ad Rusticum Narbonensem. Our opposits are forced to confess,
that this is not proper to bishops by virtue of their office, but reserved to
them for the dignity of it. Adversus Luciferianos.
Hierome says, that this was reserved to them not by necessity of any law,
but for the honor of their priesthood. Yet not in all places, but multis in
locis. The author of that epistle to Rusticus says, it was the custom in the
orient, in Illyricum, in Italy, in Africa, and in all places in the Apostles
time, Decretal. l. 1. (...)
that presbyters did confirm. In the decretals it is said, that simple priests
at Constantinople according to the custom did minister the sacrament of
confirmation. Turrianus reports, that the Grecians reprove the Latins,
because they inhibit the priests to anoint the foreheads with chrisme, as ye
may see in Suarez. The bishop of Spalato complains, De rep. l. 5. c. 12. n.
24.
that bishops are so rigid, that they will not permit the parish priests to
confirm, the rather because they come seldom to visit their parishes, and
thinks, howbeit they refuse, the priests may, as for himself he might have
suffered the priests in his diocie confirm, Suarez in 3. to n. 3. disp. 36.
sect. 1*
but he gave them not that liberty, because he saw no necessity of such a
ceremony, and that it was not worthy the name of a sacrament. If there were
any moment in it, should the bishops honor, or lordly bishoping bee-preferred
to the utilitie of it for the people. Hierome says, Adversus Luciferianos;
If the holy Ghost should come down only at the prayer of the bishop, these
were to be lamented, who in prisons or castles, or far places being baptized
by priests and deacons, die before the bishop visit them. If it were a matter
of moment, Institut. l. 4; c. 19. sect. 9.
says Master Calvin, wherefore do bishops suffer so many half Christians in
their diocies. They betray by a tacit confession, that it is not a matter of
such moment, Beda in ps; 26.
as they pretend. Beda is plain, that confirmation, as also many other things
was not permitted to priests, Notae (...) disp^ ^aboritrr. p. 28.
for the arrog^ncie of bishops. ^althasav Lydius says, It was untolerable
superstit on that the priest might anoint the breast and the shoulder, but it
behoved all to abstain from the forehead, except only the bishop. Seeing this
subject is already treated upon at large in another work, and both the
sacrament it self, and the bishop who callengeth it as proper to himself are
bastards, I will in fast longer upon this point.

In their book of comm^^ prayer it is required, that these who are to be
confirmed be able to answer the qu^stions of a little catecat^^me, The
pretense of catechizing young children.
that with their own mouth and consent they may ^atifie and confirm openly
before the church, what the godfathers and godmothers promise in their name,
and promise to endeavor to observe and keep such things, as by their own
confession they have assented unto. Is not this plain mocking of God, to
require public profession before the Church of children, who cannot give a
serious confession of their faith, howbeit they can utter some few words of a
short catechism like parrets. They require that they be of a perfect age, but
that is not observed, or else by perfect age they mean only years of
discretion, as they call them in the same place, that is, when they come to the
use of reason, that they can discern somewhat between good and evil: or as
Hackwell interprets, when reason begins to break up. Is this a fit time
for public profession of their faith, or to make them capable and fit for the
Communion, whereof notwithstanding they do not partake many years after.
Eucerus in his censure, Di polit. l. 3. c. 16. sect. 11.
censureth sharply this pretext of catechizing. M. Parker tells us, that for
all this, they confirm them sometime in their own houses, and not openly,
sometime in a Church distant many miles from the Church whereof they are
members, sometimes in the same church, but without their advise or consent. It
is not then either public profession of their faith, or fitness for the
Communion, that they are so careful of, not their understanding of the
quuestions of a short catechism, but to show their grandour, and what
pre-eminence they have over other men's flocks, in making of half whole, and
perfect Christians. Parents must bring their children many miles to them, to
be confirmed or bishopped, as if the holy Ghost could breath no where but upon
their fingers. (...) with the words of Tindall.

After that bishops had left off preaching, Obedience page ^52.
then falned they this dumb ceremony of confirmation, to have somewhat at the
least whereby they might reign over their diocie. They reserved also to
themselves the christing of bells, and conjuring or hallowing of Churches and
Churchyards, of altars and superaltars, hallowing of chalices, and whatsoever
is of honor and profit: which confirmations, and other conjurations also they
have now committed to their suffragians, because they themselves have no leisure
to minister such things for their lusts and pleasures, and abundance of all
things, and for the cumbrance that they have in the Kings matters and bu^n^sse
of the realm. One keeps the privy seal, another the great seal, the third
is a confessor, that is a privi^ traitor, and a s^cret Judas. He is president
of the prin^e his counsel, he is an ambassador, another is of the privy
counsel. Woe is unto the Realms where they are of the counsel. As profitable
are they verily unto the Realms with their counsel, as the woulfes unto the
sheep, or the foxes unto the geese.

OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF the sacraments in private places.
IN the book of common order set down before the psalms in meeter, The
judgment of our church, concerning ad.
it is said, that the sacraments are not ordained of God to be used in private
corners, as charmers and sorcerers use to do, Ministration of the sacrament in
private places.
but left to the congregation, and necessarily annexed to Gods word, as seals
of the same. In the assembly holden at Edinburgh in October anno 1581. it was
ordained, that the sacraments be not ministered in private houses, but solemnly,
according to the good order hitherto observed. But in the late pretended
assembly holden at Perth, anno 1618. it was ordained, that the minister shall
not refuse to baptize infants in private houses, when great need compels the
parents to crave it, but the great need is not specified, and therefore left to
the judgment of every corrupt minister, who shall be willing to pleasure his
parishoner upon pretense of any alleged necessity, as a rainie day, or the
saving of some charges, as a dinner, etc. Such like the minister must not
refuse to administrat the communion in a private house beside him, that for
infirmity is unable to resort to the church to receave it, or if the sick
person that shall declare upon his conscience to the minister, that he
thinks his sickness deadly. It is required only, that there be three or
four of good religion and conversation present to communicate with him. But,
which shakes all loose, these must be free of all impediments. What if they
be not free? What suppose there were forty, let be four, if it be not
celebrated in the congregation, it is but a private communion.

Tilemus, Reasons against povat administration. Ti^^ insy^ag de ha^^^ part
(...).
when he was found and orthedox, laid down this for a ground, A sacrament is a
public action, to be performed publicly by public ministers, neither can
any necessity or sufficient cause be alleged, wherefore a sacred and public
action should pass in a private because Gods ordi^ (...) should be (...) us a
supreme law, and greatest necessity, which we ought to obey rather then
foster the ignorance and infirmity of the people. He had been disputing
before against the administration of baptism by laymen and woman, but
concludes in end against administration also in a private place, and requires,
that all sacraments be administered, not only by public and lawful
office-bearers, page 110.
but also publicly. How can the Doctor then allege, that Tilenus words were
perverted? That the sacraments are actions of public nature, and therefore
ought to be celebrated publicly in the congregation, appears by these
reasons: 1. The sacraments are appointed not only to be signs and seals of
invisible graces, but also to be testimonies of our piety toward God, and
badges of our profession distinguishing true Churches; from false. All
sacraments are kinds of protestation of our faith, Part 3. quest. 7 artic 5.
says Quinae. Secret corners are not fit places for such protestations. 2.
Visible communion in the holy things of God, is the end of our union and
consociation with a particular Church. Because we cannot attain to a visible
communion in the holy things of God, immediately with the whole Church militant,
we enjoy it mediatly by our communion in a particular congregation. Therefore
the sacraments which are the holy things of God, ought to be administrated in
common. 3. All other actions which concerned the whole Church, were done with
consent and presence of the Church, as elections, ordinations,
excommunications. By the same reason ought the sacraments to be administered in
public, for the interest that all have in them, and the benefit and fruit may
redound to all. 4. The sacraments ought to be preserved from contempt,
neglect, and corruptions. Heretics take occasions to corrupt the pure
administration of the sacraments, when they are administered in private houses.
The public is the less regarded when people may have them in private, as they
think they have need, nor yet are they so reverently used, as when celebrated
in the public assembly. 5. It breeds opinion of extreme danger of
salvation, if any die without baptism, or the Lords supper. We will have
occasion to touch these reasons, when we descend to baptism and the Lords
supper in particular.

The Doctor in his answers uses often the distinction of ordinary and
extraordinary, The distinction of ordinary and extraordinary frivolous.
that ordinary they should be administered in public, but extraordinarly and in
case of necessity they may be administered in private, which is a begging of
the question; for the reasons are directed against administration in private, in
whatsoever case, and there is no necessity to violate the common order, unles
it were the danger of men's salvation, for want of such a middle or mean, which
is a gross and damnable opinion engendered and entertained by the
administration in private.

He wresteth also that place in Matthew, Where two or three are gathered, etc.
where Christ promised to be in the midst of two or three conveened in his
name, as if three or four conveened to the administration of baptism or the
Lords supper, were a sufficient number to make up a lawful assembly. But this
speech of Christ in the precise terms cannot be extented to the sacrament. For
then where two only are conveened, the communion may be administrated. The
Priest then may celebrate mass, having none to bear him company, but the
clerk to say Amen. Christ speaks not there, as Master Cartwright has
already answered, of the public administering of the word and sacraments, but
of the proceeding in the Church discipline against offenses, and of that part
which was done privately by two or three, and promises, that not only the
proceeding of the Church should be ratified, but also that the admonition given
by two or three, whereof he spoke before, with invocation of the name of God,
should not be in vain, but have the own effect, either for the conversion of
the offender; or to make him inexcusable. Or by two or three is meant only a
few number, where a greater number cannot be had to make up a senate, with power
to execute the censures of the Church, or a few but sufficient number, where a
greater may not be had to make a visible Church. But where a sufficient number
may be had, and of these a Church already constituted, two or three apart
cannot bind and loose. And what they may do, other two or three may undo, or
do the like, whereupon would follow great confusion. We reason against two or
three conveening in a private place to minister the holy things of God, where
there is already constituted a Church, and a number consociate to that end, of
which society these two or three are but members.

We mean not that the sacraments may not be administrated at no time in a
private place, but only in a private meeting of some few; for the congregation
is not tied to, and some time has not the liberty of material Churches, but
is forced to retire to woods, caves, private houses, but their the
administration is public, because in sight and presence of the congregation.

Baptism is that initiatorie sacrament, Against private baptism. Epist. 185.
wher^by we enter into the bosom of some visible congregation, or is Calvine
says, it is a sacred or solemn introduction into the Church of God, a
testimony of our heavenly burgesship, into which these are written, whom he
has adopted to himself. By baptism we became members of some society joined
together, to make up one visible Church, as it were one body. Baptism
therefore should be celebrated in the presence of that visible Church whereof
we are to be members. The minister then, and the parents have not the only
interest in this business, but the congregation also, and principally, because
of their right to receave, or refuse, their concurrence to assist the minister
in prayer to God for the infant, their testimony of his entry, and receaving,
and the benefit they may reap to themselves, by remembering their own
baptism, and the promises made to God, when they were baptized. The baptized
must have communion with them in the holy things of God afterward. And
therefore good reason, they enter in with their approbation, and acceptance. If
a member may not be cut off by excommunication without their consent, 1 Corin.
5. none ought to be received without their consent, and after this manner of
entry. Nature teaches men, says Bucer, that when any socieitie or
corporation is to accept of one to be of their number, Censura c. 9. Reasons.
Id sacere cum collegae frequentiores convenerint, ut ita quasi ab omnibus illi
in collegium recipiantur, and singuli offic a collegarum eis deferant, ad eaque
se^^ita public astringant; to do it when the fellows have conveened in a
frequent number, that so they may be received, as it were of all into the
company, and every one may show the duty of fellows unto them, and bind
themselves to the same after the same manner publicly. This promiscuous
meeting of sundry out of sundry quarters and parishes to the morning and
evening prayers in Edinburgh, is not that body or society whereof the bapti^ed
is to be a member, nor yet are these times appointed for the meeting of that
society to that end. Was it not then a superstitious or foolish conceat in
many of the ancients who delayed baptism, to the end of their life, or till
they were overtaken with dangerous diseases, that being purged from all the
sins of their former life, they might fly straightway to heaven. These were
called Cliniei q. d. lecticularii.

When we maintain baptism in public assemblies, we mean where there is a
visible Church constituted, and an order established. Therefore the exemples of
the Eunuch, the jaylour, Cornelius, etc. make nothing for baptism in private
and apart, where there is a visible Church constituted.

The defense and practice of baptism in private, Private baptism has bred the
necessity of baptism.
has bred an opinion of an absolute necessity of baptism, as if the infant
could not be saved without it, and does ^ill foster the fame damnable opinion.
Neither cast any other necessity be p^tended. For there is no precept
requiring baptism, when it cannot be had orderly. It is not the neglect, but
the contempt which makes not the infants but the parents guilty. It is not
contempt or neglect, when the ordinary times of public meetings appointed
for such ends are not neglected and co^^^ned. In the ancient Church, Easter and
Pentecost eves were appointed to be the solemn times of baptism. Whereby it
came to pass, that many died without baptism, as Socrates reports. Lib. 5.
^ 21.
But that order, which was not commendable, is worn out of use many hundred
years since. We have now weekly ordinary assemblies for the purpose, and yet
these are neglected and contemned, specially by the wealthier sort, and the
times of evening prayers are preferred before the times appointed for preaching
in the morning, or upon the Lords day, whereunto they were restrained by the
first book of discipline.

Whereas the sacraments should be celebrated with reverence, Baptism
profaned by private administration.
and we see how solemn the baptism of John was, and of Christ at Jordan; this
baptism in private is irreligiously, and unreverently ministered, and the
public scarce attended unto; for upon the opinion of the necessity of
baptism in private, has followed the defense of baptism by women, baptism by
a pagan, baptism with pudle water, baptism by supposition. For if the infant
recover health, they baptism again in public, if they doubt it was baptized
after the right manner in private, saying, It thou be not baptized N. I baptize
thee in the name of the Father, etc. But what if the child was already
baptized after the right manner, is not this public baptising rebaptization.
I know our Formalists do not defend baptism by laymen or women to be lawfully
ministered by such persons, yet they esteem it valide and effectual, if the
right form and manner was in substance observed, as ye may see in our
Doctors grounds. Proceedings page 105.
That which our worthy divines have condemned as nullin it self, they account
as valide, which no man would do, that were not infected with the opinion of
absolute necessity of baptism to the salvation of the infant. For necessitas
precepti, the precept to baptize cannot drive them to this absurdity, seeing
none are commanded or have warrant to baptize but pastors or ministers. It is
necessitas medii then, that drives them to such courses. The English service
book permits, in private baptism to omit the doctrine concerning the
institution and use of baptism, and also to spare the Lords prayer, if the
time will not suffer. That book supposes likewise, that some things
essential to this sacrament may be omitted in the private ministration,
through fear or haste in such extremity. Is this reverent using of the holy
things of God, or is it sure work, that forces them to fly to a conditional
baptism.

The case of baptism and circumcision is not alike, The case of baptism and,
circumcision different.
for the Lord appointed a precise time for circumcision, to wit the eight day,
which in no cas^ they might prevent, suppose the infant should die in the mean
time. It might have been delayed, if there were some urgent occasion to
hinder, as in the wilderness for many years, because they behoved to be in
readiness to remove according to the moving of the cloudy rollar. But Moses
had no urgent occasion, therefore the Lord chastised him, and Sephora
circumcised the child Moses being sick. Her example was not imitated by the
Jews themselves after, and the Church of God was yet in families. When
synagogues were erected, and places for the public service of God,
circumcision was ministered only in public, as some think, and so it is an
this day in the synagogues, Bueanus lec. 46. Zepperus de sacram. page 251.
Chamier. tom. 4. lib. 5. c. 14. Barrad. tom. 1. l. 9. c. 2.
where a synagogue is to be had. Others hold that the Lord committed not the
act or office of circumcision to the priests or Levits, but that the infants
were circumcised at home, the family and neighbors being conveened, because
present remedy was to be provided for curing of the wound. Barraillus the
Jesuit says, that circumcision required not either a peculiar place, Suar. in
3. partem. tom. 3. disp. 29. sect. 2.
or a peculiar minister. Suarez says, that at this day, he that is called the
circumciseth, circumciseth indifferently in the house or the synagogue. But it
is not so in baptism, as it cannot be ministered, but by a lawful minister, so
likewise only in the public assembly. The make of circumcision was permanent,
and by it the circumcised might be easily discerned whither they were
counterfite professors or not. But it is not so in baptism The paschall lamb
was eaten only in families, and small societies conveened in some chamber on
parlour, and might not be eaten in public assemblies. But who dare affirm,
that the Lords supper howbeit it be the sacrament answerable to it, must be
celebrated after the same manner. Different is the case between the sacraments
of the old law which belonged to one nation, and the sacraments under the
Gospel belonging to the whole Christian world.

The Lords supper is the sacred banquet of the whole Church assembled together,
Reasons against private communion. Decad. 5. ferm. 9.
says. Bullinger in his Decades, and therefore, says he, the Apostle
requires the Corinthian^ to assemble together to partake of this supper, 1
Corin. 1^. 32. It is a finew of public assemblies, a hadge of our profession,
a band of love, and representation of (...) communion and fellowship, which is
and ought to be among the members of the congregation. It is not a part, or
two, or three, but the whole body of the congregation which is compared to one
bread, when the Apostle says, We that are many are one bread, and one body,
for we are partakers before bread, Corin. 10. 17. Because it is not possible to
us to celebrat a sacramental union with the whole Church militant, the Lord
has appointed us to keep a sacramental communion with some particular
congregation or visible Church. The Doctor borrows an absurd answer from
Bellarmine and the Rhemists, page 117. 118.
that were have sacramental communion with the whole militant Church, howbeit
it be not so visible, as with any one particular Church, and his reason is,
because we are partakers of the same sacrament. I reply with Master (...)
answer to the Rhemists, On 1 Corin. 11.. 14.
Although all the faithful, even those, that never received the sacrament, by
faith communicate with Christ's body, yet do they alone communicate
sacramentally which have their communion sealed by the outward action of eating
of one sacramental bread. And that the Apostle means of these, that in one
congregation or Church eat together, and not of the communion of us with those,
that receave the sacrament in another Church, it is evident, for that he
places the seal of this communion in eating all of one bread, and of one
table: Whereas they that communicate in another congregation, communicate not
of one table or bread with them, that are so removed, no more then they that
celebrated the passover in diverse houses, were partakers of one lamb or kid.
It is the same sacrament in spece or kind, but not in number. We communicate
in one fruit or effect, because we all receave the same Christ, but that is a
spiritual, not a sacramental communion, Tom. 4. l. 7. c. 13. number. 33.
says Chamier. For it was never heard, says he, that these in Jerusalem
communicate sacramentally with those in Alexandria. Otherwise what needed the
bishop of Rome to send the eucharist to other bishops when they come to Rome.
The Lords supper then should not be celebrated, but in the assembly of the
faith for united together in one body of a Church. A company conveened apart
from the rest to communicate with the sick person is not unied by themselves
into the body of a Church, far less three of four, asttake, the English
service book means to be a number sufficient, seeing they allow the
communion to be ministered to three or four in the Church, and in the time of
plague, sweat, or such other like contagious sicknesses, the minister may
communicate with the person diseased alone. Ergo coena Domini non est privata,
Dead. 5. sermon. 9.
sed publica nulli privatim danda. Et quoniam non est publicus vel generallis
catus, quando quatuor aut quinque cum agro communicant, nihil dicunt quia not
apud agros coenam instrui p^sse, si alis quoque simul coenent says Bullinger.
That is, Seeing it is not a public or general meeting, when three or four
communicate with the sick, they say nothing to purpose who say, that the
supper may be celebrated beside the sick, if others also communicate. Suppose
a company of the faithful in a family be called a Church, Romans 16. 7. because
the whole family consisting of Christians, and frequently exercised in
religious exercises, resembles in some sort a Church, and may be called
ecelesiola, as it were, a little Church. Yet it is not that Church which has
the power and right to use the sacraments and censures, for then every family
in a Christian commonwealth might celebrate the sacraments at home. So howbeit
the name be communicated for the greater commendation of such a family, yet the
definition does not agree. And yet that place may be applied to the Church,
which used to conveene in Aquila and Priscilla's house In that same chapter
Gaius is called the host of the whole Church. See Parcus in Romans 16. 7. 1
Corin. 16. 19. Philemon. 2. The names also given to this sacrament, may teach
us, that t^ should be celebrated in the public assembly. The name synaxis
imports a ga^^ering or assembling together. Casaubon says, synaxis and
synagogue are all one, because derived from one word. Liturgy signifies a
public service or ministry; both the names import the celebritie of the
assembly, and the solemnity of the administration before the assembly.

The elements were sent to the absents in time, or immediately after the action
in Justinus Martyrs time. The prete^^ded necessity of private communions.
Which was the first abuse we read of. After followed reservation of the
eucharist for the use of the sick, which was a greater abuse, and carrying of
it home to their houses. The opinion of the necessity of private communious did
grow to such an hight, that the eucharist was given not only to aged persons
departing this life for their Viaticum, to be their voyage victual, as they
call it, but also to infants and babes, and this endured for the space of 600.
years. The Papists themselves are ashamed of it, and expressly inhibit it. Yea
of old, in some parts, it was the practice, to use Master Perkins words, to
cram the eucharist into the mouth of them that were deceased, or to lay it upon
the breast; and bury it with the corpse. Such horrible prophanations arose from
the opinion of necessity engendered upon these reservations, and giving of the
eucharist to the sick. The continuation of the like customs does foster and
entertain the same opinion of necessity. The ignorant are fostered in
superstition, as if the grace of God were tied to the sacrament, and no comfort
could be had by there receaving of it in former times, but they must have it
now for their voyage victual, whereby they may be enabled to attain to life
eternal without fainting in the way. Polyander after he has concluded, that
the Lords supper should not be celebrated in private, either for sickness of
any person, or other case of necessity whatsoever, grants that not long
after the Apostles times, for condescending to the weakness of some, this
custom prevailed to send to the sick the elements of bread and wine in the
time of administration. Miscellan page 166.
Sed hoc medium atque adm^niculum, quod infirmioribus juvandis ac consolandis
ex zelo irregulari absque Christi mandato patres exhibuerunt, paulatim in eam
transiit idololatriam, ^nt aliqui non minus administrationi sacra coena, quam
baptismi, salutemex opere operato tribuerint. That is, The help and nemedie
they used out of irregular zeal without Christ's precept, for the comfort and
help of the weaker, ended at last into such idolatry, that they ascrived no
less their salvation to the administration of the holy supper, then of
baptism, and that by virtue of the work wrought or deed done. Therefore he
advises us to beware, that we foster not men in a superstitious opinion, by
private or domestic administration of the Lords supper. Epist 361.
Calvin says, Difficillimum est hic cavere, ne alios superstitio, alios
ambitio and vana^ostentatio ad petendum solliciter. That is, It is very hard
to be avoided, that superstition stir not up some, ambition and ostentation
others to crave it. Bullinger says, Decad 5. sermon. 9.
If we be contentious in the defense of this viaticum, there will be bred
again, that which we have seen received in some ages before, a relying npon
the very receaving it self of the sacrament, as if for it we were acceptable
to God, and departing out of this world, did fly straightway to heaven, and
without it were carried straightway to hell. And many (...) errors will spring
up. Tilenus says, in his syntagma, Disp. 61. these. 36.
Whatsoever necessity be pretended, hardly cast any sufficient cause be
rendered, wherefore the public action should pass in a private. Because he
ord^nance of God is supreme necessity, which we must obey rather then faster
the infirmity of man. Illa enim infirmorum levamenta, ex ^^ordinem olim
adhibita infirmitatem publicam totius ecclesia magis foverunt and auxerunt quam
privatam agrotan ium sanarunt. That is, The ease tendered by the cont non order
upon the infirm, d^d rather cherish and augment the public disease of the
whole Church, then heal the private disease of the sick. As for the pretended
necessity of comfort to the sick, that same answer may be given, that the
English service book gives, when none can be had to communicate with the
sick, or for extremity of sickness, or other just impediment he cannot
communicate. The carat shall instruct him, that if he do truly repent him of
his sins, and st^edfastly believe, that Jesus Christ has suffered death upon
the cross for him, and shed his blood for his redemption, earnestly remembering
the ben sits he has thereby, and giving him hearty thanks therefore, he does
eat and drink the body and blood of our Savior Christ profitably to his
souls health, although he does not receave the sacrament with his mouth. May
not the like b^e said to the sick in body, but ignorant or superstitious in
mind, when the sacrament may not be celebrated at their bedside without
breach of Gods ordinance. The Rhemists do acknowledge, On Job. 6. 1. 8.
that they do eat the flesh, and drink the blood of Christ, which join in
heart and desire with the part (...) of the sacrament. A man may die a martyr
before he receave either baptism, or the Lords supper. How many Catechumeni
have died before they were baptized. The comfort and benefit we receave at any
public communion, is not restrained to the present time, but serves at all
times for our use. We were but once baptized, yet the comfort and benefit
endures all our life long. Our spiritual communion with Christ, and to eat
his flesh, and drink his blood by faith, is ever so necessary, that otherwise
we cannot be safe, but so is not the participation of the Lords supper. Only
we must beware of neglect and contempt of the public administration. The
godly know in their agony, they never want shall, R^eti Cathol. C^thodo. tom.
2. page 198.
which is chief and only necessary, where in they so acquiesce, that they
will not without the Lords institution, trouble the comeliness and order of the
Church for their own private satisfaction. Norunt pij in agone nun qua^ijs
d^esse, quod praecipuum est and so^um necessarium, in quo ita acquiescunt ut
extra Dom ni institutionem, nolunt ecclesia ordinem and decorum turbare, ut
sibi privatim satisfaciant.

This pretended necessity grounded upon superstitious conceats, Private
communion has bred neglect and irreverence Ricti cathol. orthod. tom. 2. p.
199.
has drawn on a neglect of the public communion, because in time of their
need they look for it in private. Ab ista manducatione clinica, cui quisque in
papatufidit, ortho est in plerisque communicandi contemptus, cum prospera
valetudine fruuntur ad quod semel tantum in anno ex ecclesiae sua praescripto
obligantur. The whole congregation has interest in the celebration, and is
bound to see it performed reverently and religiously, which they cannot see
done, when it is administered in private. Nor can the private administration be
performed with such reverence as is requisite. We read not that at any time it
was the custom in the ancient church to celebrate at the bedside of the sick,
but only to carry the eucharist to him, which notwithstanding was
superstitious. The synod holden at Laodicea, cap. 58. ordained, Ne fierent in
domibus oblationes ab episcopis aut presbyteris. And Justinian Novell constit.
57. has the like. Not that I think the place of it self disgraceth the
action, but the paucitie of the communicants. If the congregation were
assembled in a barn, or any like capacious place through want of a church, the
action might be celebrated with no less grace. The sick man's chamber is not
a fit meeting place for the congregation, says Rive^is. Suppose it were, such
assemblies could not but breed or foster the opinion of necessity. Beside the
paucitie, the pains of the patient might enforce sundry disorders. De
eucharist. lib. 4. cap. 23.
Bellarmine alleges, in defense of depriving the communicants of the cup,
howbeit more comfort might be had by participating both the bread and the
wine, that there is less ill, that men want some good thing not necessary,
then that the sacrament be exposed to the hazard of irreverence. For it could
not be, but the blood of Christ would be often split. That which he alleges
against the Lords institution, we may far more justly allege against this
private communion, which the Lord never ordained, that the reverent usage of the
sacrament is to be preferred before the good, or rather preposterous pleasing
of the sick, and feeding their ignorance and superstition.

FINIS.
Errata.
BLot out p. 11. last line, not. p. 12 l. 15. when 81. l. 27. that. 99. l. 11.
not 122. l. lest. p. 56 lin. l. the fourth part. read p. 14. l. 4. canon. 17.
22. more. l. 23. mere 20. 28. Pauli. 23. l. 24. that thursday. 27. l. 25.
Hospinian. 29. l. 26. then. 30. last line notable. 3. l. l. 29. Encrarits. 39.
l. 2 sic. l. 25. eat ve all of this. 45. l. 14 great. l. 25. Montanus. l. 26.
members. 47. l. 4. and l. 8. sic. 54. l. 30. simplici^er. 57 l. last,
Israelitarum, 60. l. 18. decree. l. 19. successates. 6. l. 18 popu^^ 6. ^. l.
13. of. 65. l. 18. excuses. 67. l. 24. Cracouieni. 6^ l. als. 68. l. 4. als.
69. l. 15. apertae. 74. l. 19. to stand. 76. l. 13. stantes and commorantes.
77. l. 30. Zonaras. 79. l. 14. praetermitted. 80. l. 24. quod ^. 9. l. 12 to
these words. 98. l. 1. causes. l. 13 whither. 99. l. 11 if ye will bear. 122.
l. 3. bewray. 128. l. 30. Christ. Desire, stort ejaculations. 135. d. l. 19.
genuine. 154 l. 7. commenting. 157. l. 20. kindling fire. 158 l. 1.
mutabilitie. 159 l. 7. rationem. 160. l. 27. were not bidden fast. 164. l. 26.
(...) 10. logical. 165. lin. 2. apolo. l. 19. whereon. 168. l. 5. makein. 190.
l. 29. ^^gatorum. 202. l. 20 salve, 205. l. 23. ye observe. 217. l. 22.
concredite. 220 lin. 30. questions. 22^ lin. 12 suffraganes. 226 l. 4. become.

Lesser escapes I remit to the correction of the understanding reader.

A PASSAGE OF MASTER WILLIAM Cowper, peetended bishop of Gallaway his sermon,
delivered before the states anno 1606. at which time he was minister at Perth.
On 2 Corin. 6. 3, 4.
(...). The Apostle wrote this epistle in his own name, and in the name of
Timothy his brother, as ye may penceave by the first verse of this epistle.
And now in both their names he directs the exhortation. Preachers are
workers together, brethren, and fellow laborers. Here a worthy Apostle
claims no superior style to Timothy an Evangelist, alb^it justly he might,
h^e b^ing an Apostle, the other an Evangelist, both which were temporary and
extraordinary callings in the Church of God, but the one, namely the office of
an Apostle more excellent then the other office of an Evangelist. This may
serve to make these men ashamed, who being partakers of one office of
pastorship with the rest of their brethren, will be separated from them by
slately sitles. Order is good, I grant, but away with such order, as has bred
that I omane Hierarchy, the tyranny of the Antichrist. Always here our
chief lesson is that ministers should work together. They should not work one
against another. We are the servants of one Lord, we have all one city to
build, we are fortifiers of the wall of one Jerusalem, what part of the wall
we stand and into, that is no matter, the work and the waze is one to us all.
Union among brethren is ay the forerunn^r of blessing, division again brings
on the fall; for a kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. In the
primitive church S. Luke says, The multitude of believers were of one heart.
There upon followed a flourishing estate of the church, notwithstanding the
powers of the world were enemies to them. Great things are always performed by
union, yea suppese of mean instruments. There is non, says Job, can restrain
the influence of the Pleiades, it is but a constellation of the seven stars,
which we commonly call the seven sisters; yet do they bring with them the
spring of the year. Thus a nature her self advances her greatest works by
unin. A material building is made up by the uniting of stones and timb^r
before disjoined, and and the fall thereof is procured again by their renting
and sundring one from another. I exhort you therefore brethren, in the name of
the Lord, that as one man our hearts may be joined together to do the work
of the Lord, and this devision threatening a fearful decay of Christ his
kingdom in the midst of us, may be eshewed.

Where if it be objected to me, where is the blame or cause of division? For I
know that as Solomon says, every man's way seems good in his own eyes. I
answer, I have not a deligh to make a sport of the nakedness of my father, and
I desire not to be cursed with Chaent. If the division were not so evident that
the most simpley perveaveth it, I could willingly also misknow it, but since
the evil is manifest, the cause of the evil is also easily espied: for look
what part of the wall is gagged from the o^^^ation, where upen the building
stands, and from that policy we received from our fathers, let th^^ be drawn
in to the rest again, then shall arise a happy union, that may assure us of a
continuance and increase of Gods work in the midst of us.

FINIS.

