APHORISMS OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION: OR, A VERY COMPENDIOUS abridgement of M. I.
CALVIN'S Institutions, set forth in short sentences methodically by M. I.
PISCATOR: And now Englished according to the Authors third and last edition, By
H. Holland.

Be not carried about with diverse and strange doctrines: for it is a good thing
that the heart be established with grace, etc.

Heb. 13.9. AN CHO RA SPEI



AT LONDON, Imprinted by Richard Field and Robert Dexter, and are to be sold in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Brazen serpent. 1596.

^O THE REVE^END FATHER, THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Mr. D Goodman, Deane of
Westminster, grace and peace by Jesus Christ.
WE see (right worshipful) that a great number (blessed be God for our happy
peace, and this sweet me so long continued) have at^ed some knowledge of God
by (...) preaching of the Gospel: yet (...) few I fear, have truly learned ^d
known Christ: Ephe. 4.19.20.
for the words John are, He that sins, 1. John. 3.6.
has neither seen nor known him. And Gregory says truly; Gregor. Pastoral.
cur. 1. pars. cap. 2.
Viuendo conculcant, quae non opere sed meditatione didicerunt. Look what
knowledge is attained by bare speculation, without experience of faith, and
practice of life, it is but a dim light soon quenched. Light is good, and
the first step to life, darkness is evil and dangerous, and the way that
leads unto death, and yet most men love darkness more then light, John.
3.19.
because their deeds are evil. Wherefore to help forwards this kind of men,
which do but sip and taste but little of holy religion, I have spent some hours
to translate this little treatise, which will give the willing mind in a very
small time a synopsis or short view of the whole body of Gods holy truth,
Three times published in ^tin.
the pure worship and service of God. It has done ^uch good, no doubt in
Latin, and ^rust it shall by Gods blessing and ^oodnesse, profit some in
English.

The same reasons which moved the author to commend this book that good, old,
and reverend father (...) Beza (his age, his place and cal^g, his special love
and affection ^wards him) were motives also vn^me (right worshipful) to
recommend the same unto you: for your Christian care, and fatherly love and
^ction toward me, I find to be ^h, not in words but in deeds, that ^ay and
must nothing doubt of ^^r favorable acceptance. Next (...) the gift (the book
I mean) it is (...) same: for the outward coat and ^lours are only changed,
but the ^staunce and matter is the same. and as for my love toward you, I can
no way testify it as I would, but unto God only in prayer for you: The Lord
God continue your good health, and grant you the good comfortes of his holy
spirit, the peace which passes all understanding in this life, and an
everlasting rest in the kingdom of glory, by and through Jesus Christ our
alone Savior and redeemer. Amen. The year of Christ. 1596. Maij. 18.

Your worships ever to use in the Lord Christ. Henr. Holland.

To the Reader.
THou have here (Christian Reader) an abridgement or short view of Mr. Caluins
Institutions, a work so much commended for many years, and so embraced and
published in all reformed Churches and in all languages Latin, French, Dutch,
English etc. as no one work of any ^te writer has had the like acceptance
and ^nerall approbation. Master Caluins Institutions read in open schools, as
Pet. Lumbard, by the Schooleme^.
The learned professors and readers in open schools have yearly read ^er, and
commended this work unto their ^ditories, as the School men in the blind ^e
have done the Mr. of Sentences, and others of late years Phil. Melancth Common
^laces. Philip. Mel. by Pezellius.
It was not the authors meaning, nor ^y desire to make any man negligent, in
per^sing the great work it self, but rather to excite and help slow wits to
search into the fountain, whence these small branches are derived. Let this
little book be therefore unto thee, but as a methodicall index, to help and
confirm memory.

The world is full of books, but few good: The light is great, I wish it may
be greater, for light is good and darkness evil. It is granted of all men that
the essential difference between man and beast is reason, the light of
nature; but between man and man the special difference is Religion: between
true Religion and the false, the light of God, Gods holy written truth. The
Turkish Paganism has an Alcoron: the Papacy is grounded upon the traditions
of me^, the natural man the servant of sin will hearken, believe and follow
the poor light of blind reason, blind sense, and what is more dangerous, Iam.
1.13.14.
his most blind and corrupt concupiscence the mother of all sin: So let the
servant of Christ, harke^, believe and obey the holy Gospel of Jesus Christ.
If me^ will not hear, they cannot learn: if they will not learn, Romans 10.14.
they ca^ not know, if they will not know, they can not believe: if they do not
believe, they ca^ not love: if they do not love, they can not trust: if they do
not trust, they have no sound fear: if there be no sound fear, they be not
humbled: if they be not humbled, they can not worship God: if they be not true
worshippers, they can not be saved.

Concerning my translation, I have not followed the authors words, but I
trust I have his meaning in plain and best known terms. I remenber the
vvitty Poet which taught in me youth: Non verbum verbo curabis reddere fidus
Horat. art Poetic.

Interpres --


Again, for my boldness and liberty sometimes in omission, sometimes in
addition of words and some few sentences: I have the author himself for
example, as may appear to the Epistle following. There is nothing ^teriall
pretermitted. I amplified no where so much as in the doctrine of the Lords
Sup^^^ (and there not much) for the better understanding of ignorant people,
which so much in most places profane the same.

I know that Gregory says right well and ^oly, ars artium est regimen
animaru^, Gregor. Pastor. cur. 1. p.
the ^uernement and care of souls is the best art (...) faculty on earth:
and again, Praeconis officium suscipit quisquis ad sacerdotiu^ accedit, vt ante
aduentum iudicis, qui terribiliter sequitur, ipse scilicet clamando gradiatur:
that every Minister of Christ as a crier must go on before, and that the
dreadful judge of all the world follows after: 2. Cor. 2.16.
who then is sufficient for these things? True it is, that the preaching of the
Gospel must be our greatest care. I spend therefore but some hours for my
refreshing, as it were on this manner. I trust to offend none justly, my hope
is to do good to some, and my desire is to many. The Lord Christ school us,
and prepare us for his kingdom.

Thine in Christ Jesus, Henry Holland.

THis copy past from my ragged hand after the first writing to the press
immediately: for the whole work had not above six whole days. The worke-men
were wearied with the hand, and the have might have caused many errors.
Wherefore I must desire thee, good Reader, friendly to correct these few saults
which have escaped.

Errata.
Page 1. marginall note or, for, as. page 1. Aphoris. 3. of years and
judgment. page 22. Aphoris. 3. commends for commands. page 39. Aphoris. 2.
supply as if they had read. page 42. Aphoris. 11. put out stirring. page 48.
Aphoris. 17. which came of, for which came not of Abrah. page 56. first line,
the last, for and at the last. page 69. Aphoris. 9. read by faith imputed unto
us. page 115. Aphoris. 5.7.8. in for into. page 125. Aphoris. 6. of for and.
page 144. Aphoris. 16. were for we. page 172. se and 8. panem Domini and panem
Dominum transposed. page 181. Aphor. 14. put out that.

THE AVTHORS PREface to Master Beza.
I Suppose you can remember (right reverend) what moved our friend Caspar
Oleuian, a man of blessed memory to publish his abridgement of that great
work, of that right worthy man of God Master Calvin, I mean his
Institutions: to wit, partly to help the Ministers of the Gospel through
Germany to teach Christ soundly: for he thought the prolixitie of that volume
debarred a great number from reading it: S^lo^ H^rbone^sis.
partly also and principally for the benefit of our school he gave a summarie
exposition thereof, handling every three months or quarter, one book or part
of the whole, so that he finished and perfected yearly the Sum of Christian
Religion. Oleuians Epitome.
And I trust the Lord gave a blessing unto that his work, and that many have
profited thereby, which vouchsafed the reading of the same, and as for my
scholars, which have heard his readings, I am well assured they have profited
much thereby. But when as he was taken by death from us in the midst of his
labors and translated to the celestial school; the necessi^ie of this place
so requiring and duty binding me, and as the brethren (which the^ were to
provide for this school) desired: I did succeed Oleuian in this work: and so
anon after his death I began to expound the abridgement of Caluins Institution
unto ^ine auditorie, and in one half year ^ace (for sooner I could not well
do it) I ^inished the same.

And when my Scholars desired for their furthera^ce in Divinity, that I would
take the pains to appoint the^ some Logical disputations: I soon granted
their request: and therefore to proceed in some lawful and good course, for
their more speedy and better profit I did reduce every point of Christian
doctrine, so soon as I finished any place in the Institution, into some few
Aphorisms, and the same I propounded unto them for disputation. And this was
the first cause of writing these Aphorisms: In collecting them I have used
Christian liberty, I have not followed the very words of the author (for
that could not well be done, the authors style being full and large, and
Aphorisms requiring brevity) and I added some thing in the sentences, which
is not in that abridgment: yet the work agrees well, as I think, and as the
brethren judge, with the authors doctrine, and specially with the holy
Scriptures.

Theses.
Again, I rather call these sentences, Aphorisms, then (as they be called
usually) theames, or questions, for the word thesis carries some sign of
doubtfulnesse with it, as may be seen with Aristotle in his Topickes, where
disputers are said aliquid (...) to set down some thing, which they do not
avouch to be true: for the Logitian, says Aristotle in those books, must not
affirm any thing as truth, but this belongs to him only which can bring
proof by demonstratiue conclusions: but such as dispute Logically, are ready
to defend their position as true, or at least wise as probable. And some time
the word thesis with Aristotle signifies some absurd opinion: carried about
under the name of some famous Philosopher. But these sentences contained in
these Aphorisms are neither absurd (but to such wits as be not enlightened and
sanctified by Gods spirit) nor such as any Christian may lawfully doubt off.
Here some man will ask; wherefore then are they propounded to be disputed
upon, ^d so to be called in question? I answer, ^beit we dispute of them, yet
we doubt not of the truth of them: for that is not the and wherefore we propose
them in disputation: but that our auditorie may the better see and know the
truth of them, and to ^e more assured of the same, by hearing ^ll objections of
heretics, and all scru^les that may stick in their minds an^wered and
resolved by the word of God: and so both the ignorant receive better
instruction, and the weaker confirmation in the heavenly truth. But some will
say; what need was there these Aphorisms should be published, seeing they were
written for the special and proper use of thine auditorie? I have herein also
followed M. Oleuian that most faithful Minister and servant of Christ: for
his desire was that his abridgments might not only benefit such as heard him
here, but strangers also of other countries. If he thought his abridgement
should please many because of brevity, much more may I expect the like favor,
for that I am herein more compendious then he. For these short Aphorisms
contain the chief points of Christian Religion barely propounded, (...).
much like a withered body, or certain iointes and bones without skin, flesh
or synewes, such as Anatomistes reserve for demonstration sake. So here we have
taken away the fulness and glory of that style, as the skin and flesh thereof:
but the sentences, which appertain to any one place of Christian doctrine, (as
things which most concern the perfection of a body) ^e like bare and naked
bones knit and ^inted one with an other. But some will (...), that this is but
dry and bare stuff in ^ede, without any sap or grace in it. I an^r and grant
these bones be but bare, (...) are they bones, that is, firm and solid ^ngs
indeed, which neither want good ^ewes, nor juice and marow of heauen^ doctrine
in them. Such as desire a more ^pious style, let them either read that
a^dgement, or the authors great work ^selfe. For my drift was not in this
labor, to withdraw any man from the au^urs work: but rather to give an easy
^roduction thereunto, and to win, and (...) excite such as favor holy
Religion, the ^re to embrace that work. For I trust, ^at he which
understands the chief ^ounds of Gods truth, set forth and con^ned in these
Aphorisms (if he be ca^ed with a true zeal to learn and re^iue the knowledge
of Gods heavenly ^eritie) shall the rather desire to see these ^oints in the
author himself, where they ^re more fully disputed and handled.

Now it remains most worthy and reverend Beza, that I show what moved me to
commend and dedicate these Aphorisms unto you. First this have I done to
gain this little work the more grace and favor among men, as being approved
by a man which has, and yet does best merit of the Church of our age and
time. And herin also I thought it best to follow M. Oleuian, who in like manner
sought protection and grace for his work under your name. Wherefore having
thus both one drift and scope, to instruct soundly (such youth as desire the
knowledge of holy Scriptures,) in the principles of Christian Religion, as
shortly as may be, it was my desire also to send unto you, and so to commend
unto the Church of God this little work, under your most worthy name so much
commended (as Oleuian speaks) and so much accounted among all the faithful.

Next, my good will was to give some public testimony of my dutifulness
toward you, and so to confirm my Scholars by my example, in that reverend
opinion which they have already conceived of your self, and of your writings,
and to ^et their love and zeal to know the same. ^or albeit your name be long
since very ^etious and great, and for good cause, with them which favor the
truth in most syn^tie, so as here my commendation is ^edlesse: yet this I trust
shall ad some con^matio^ of that reverend opinion which ^ese have conceived of
you.

And lastly I desired also hereby to re^ite your love testified toward me by
(...) many approved testimonies as you have written loving letters unto me: for
^t reverend mention of me in your last ^itings, but specially in your most
paine^ and learned annotations upon the new ^estament: for albeit I think not
my self ^erefore happy, for that any mortal man ^inks so reverently of me,
commending ^y poor labors to the Church of Christ: ^or I have learned of the
Apostle, that ^rayse to be found and true, which shal^e given of God to every
man in the last ^ay: yet it can not be but comfortable to any good man, to have
the commendation, of any one who is well known and most highly and worthily
commended for wisdom and piety. Now I pray the Lord God, and Father of our
Jesus Christ bless our labors and godly desires: that all students in the
Scriptures, may by such helps daily profit in the knowledge of the heavenly
truth: that whatsoever they have well and rightly learned, they may also
profitably and soundly teach the people of God, to the glory of Gods name and
their own everlasting salvation in Christ Jesus. Amen.

A Table of the common places handled in this book.
Chap. 1 Of the knowledge of God. Page 1 Chap. 2 Of the holy Scripture. Page 3
Chap. 3 Of God. Page 12 Chap. 4 Of the Angels. Page 13 Chap. 5 Of the
integrity of our first nature, where is entreated of the Image of God, and of
free will. Page 20 Chap. 6 Of Gods providence. Page 21 Chap. 7 Of Sin. Page
24 Chap. 8 Of the Law of God. Page 32 Chap. 9 Of the likeness and difference
of the old and new Testament. Page 39 Chap. 10 Of the person and office of
Christ. Page 51 Chap. 11 Of Faith. Page 56 Chap. 12 Of Repentance: where also
is entreated of the life of a Christian, and of bearing the Cross. Page 59
Chap. 13 Of Justification. Page 66 Chap. 14 Of Christian liberty. Page 85
Chap. 15 Of Offenses. Page 94 Chap. 16 Of Prayer. Page 26 Chap. 17 Of
Predestination. Page 106 Chap. 18 Of the Resurrection, and of life everlasting.
Page 100 Chap. 19 Of the Church. Page 114 Chap. 20 Of the Ministers of the
Church. Page 118 Chap. 21 Of Church discipline and government. Page 123 Chap.
22 Of Vows. Page 127 Chap. 23 Of the Sacraments. Page 130 Chap. 24 Of
Baptism. Page 137 Chap. 25 Of the Baptism of infants. Page 146 Chap. 26 Of
the Lords Supper. Page 151 Chap. 27 Of the Popish Mass. Page 173 Chap. 28 Of
the Civil Magistrate. Page 182
CHAP. 1. Of the knowledge of God.
An Aphorism is a short sentence selected and set apart, or a definition,
distinction, etc.
I. APHORISM.
WE know God either as Act. 14.15 16.17. and chap. 17.24.25, etc. Romans 1.19.20
creator, or as John. 17.3.
redeemer.

II.
The knowledge of God as (...) creator, is double: The one natural, the other
attained.

III.
The natural knowledge of God as he (...) ^eator, is that which naturally
appea^ in such as be of years of judgment, ^uch Romans 1.18.19 and chap. 2
14.15.
without instruction are persuaded (...) God is, or some divine essence, eter^
most mighty, most wise, most bles^ ^aker and governor of the world, and ^ll
things therein: and therefore that this ^d must be religiously worshipped.

IIII.
That such knowledge of God is naturally ingraffed in the minds of men, may
appear, partly for that barbarous nations exercise some religious ceremonies:
partly also for that the profane contemners of God are otherwhiles smitten
with a most great fear when God shows some signs of his majesty: as in
thunders and lightnings.

V.
The knowledge of God as he is creator is attained, both by humane or
Philosophical speculation and consideration of the Romans 1.20
works of God: and by divine instruction, Genesis 1. Job. 38.39.40 41. Psalm.
19.104. Prou. 8.22. etc.
by the very written word of God.

VI.
The natural knowledge of God, and that also which is attained by man's
industry, yield some seed of Religion: but the same is so corrupted partly by
ignorance, partly by malice, that of it self it can breed in us but only Romans
1.21.22.23. Act. 17.22. etc. 1. Cor. 12.^.
superstition and false Religion.

VII.
And for the knowledge of God as he is creator, attained by the word of God,
the same is either naked and bare, or joined with some affection of piety.

VIII.
This last degree of knowledge excels all the rest: yet it suffices not for
the true worship of God, and man's true feli^e, but is sufficient only (as the
former degrees) to make a man Romans 1.20.
inexcusable. We must have also by the Psalm. 19. by confer. v. 8. and the v.
following with the precedent.
word, the knowledge of God as redeemer, and the same ^ked and knit with the
faith and assurance (...) Gods children. And this is that which ^worthily
called a true John, 17.3
and a saving knowledge of God, whereby God as he is both creator and redeemer
is acknowledged (...) rightly worshipped: and whereby also (...) become blessed.

CHAP. II. Of the holy Scripture.
I. APHORISM.
THe holy Scripture is that which holy 2. Tim. 3.16. 1. Pet. 1.21.
men specially the Ibid.
Prophets and Romans 1.2. 2. Pet. 1.19.
A^ostles, 2. Pet. 3.15.16.
moved by the inspiration of the ^oly Ghost, have written to Romans 15 4. 1. Tim.
4.19.16. 2. Tim. 3.15.16.17. John. 5 39. and Chap. 20.31.
teach the people of God the pure worship of God, and what is man's true
happiness. Sometimes it is called Gods written word, and the sacred
Scriptures: and sometimes without an epithet, the Scriptures, and in the
singular number, the Scripture: sometimes in Latin Biblia, of the Greek word in
the plural number (...), books: but this name other nations also use in the
singular number, Bible.

II.
The holy Scripture is divided into the books of the old and of the new
Testament, or covenant: for that it was written partly before, partly after
the incarnation of Christ: The first part is called, books or writings
Prophetical, the second Apostolical.

III.
In the old Testament are numbered 24. books yet so as we count the story of
Samuel, of the Kings, and of the Chronicles, and the 12. small Prophets, to
have but one several book in every story: as may appear in this table
following.

^. Genesis, or the 1. book of Moses. ^. Exodus, or the 2. book of Moses. ^.
Leuiticus, or the 3. book of Moses. ^. Numeri, or the 4. book of Moses. ^.
Deuteron. or the 5. book of Moses. ^. Joshua. ^. Judges. ^. Ruth. ^. Samuels 2.
books, commonly called 1. and 2. of Kings. ^. Kings 2. books, called also 3.
and 4. of Kings. ^. Chronicles 2. books. ^. Ezra. ^. Nehemia. ^. Hester. ^.
Job. ^. The book of Psalms. ^. The Proverbs of Solomon. ^. Ecclesiastes or
the Preacher. ^. Canticles, or Song of Solomon. ^. Esayah. ^. Jeremy: ad here
his Lamentations. ^. Ezechiell. ^. Daniell.
24. The small Prophets. 12.
1. Hosea. 2. Joel. 3. Amos. 4. Obadaiah. 5. Jonas. 6. Michah. 7. Nahum. 8.
Habacuc. 9. Zephaniah. 10. Haggai. 11. Zachariah. 12. Malachi.
The books of the new Testament are 27. which are these:
1. The Gospel according to S. Matthew. 2. The Gospel according to S. Mark. 3.
The Gospel according to S. Luke. 4. The Gospel according to S. John. 5. The
Acts of the Apostles. 6. Paul's Epistle to the Romans. 7. Epistle 1. to the
Corinthians. 8. Epistle 2. to the Corinthians. 9. Epistle to the Galathians.
10. Epistle to the Ephesians. 11. Epistle to the Philippians. 12. Epistle to
the Colossians. 13. 1. Epistle to the Thessalonians. 14. 2. Epistle to the
Thessalonians. 15. 1. Epistle to Timothy. 16. 2. Epistle to Timothy. 17.
Epistle to Titus. 18. Epistle to Philemon. 19. Epistle to the Hebrews. 20. The
Epistle of S. James. 21. 1. Epistle of S. Peter. 22. 2. Epistle of S. Peter.
23. 1. Epistle of S. John. 24. 2. Epistle of S. John. 25. 3. Epistle of S.
John. 26. Epistle of Jude. 27. The Revelation of S. John.
IIII.
This Scripture, or the word of God ^^ntained in this Scripture, is the 2. Pet.
1.19
rule ^th of faith and life, for all the true worshippers of God: because God
is the 2. Tim. 3.16. 2. Pet. 1.21.
au^our of it, who cannot lie, and has authority to command all men: and
therefore ancient writers call them, ^ookes canonical, or Canonical
Scrip^ures. Unto this volume also are usually annexed certain other books
which are ^alled Apocrypha, that is, books kept hid (...) secret: for that we
must not bring these (...) light when we are to confirm any doctrine
concerning faith or Gods worship by divine testimonies.

V.
And as for the absolute authority of this Scripture, it consists in those
very words wherein it was first written, for that the same words were spoken 2.
Tim. 3.16. 2. Pet. 1.21.
by the holy Ghost unto these holy writers: and they arc Hebrew in the old, and
Greek in the new Testament. The translations or interpretations of other
languages have their credit and authority, as they be found to agree with the
first fountains whence they are derived.

VI.
And albeit this Scripture ought to be received of all me^, for that it came by
the inspiration of Gods spirit, and is of credit sufficient of it self: yet
before the same be sealed in our hearts by the Es. 39.21. John. 14 26. and
15.26. and ^6.13. Rom 8.16. 1. Ioh. 2 27. and. chap. 5.6.
holy Ghost, we cannot have any certain knowledge of the power thereof; that so
we may with full assurance trust thereunto.

VII.
And yet we find certain proofs (as ^ans reason can conceive) good for the
confirmation of the Scripture unto us, as these following; the majesty of that
heavenly doctrine, the simplicity, purity and excellency of the style: the
consent also of all parts, the admiration whereunto it calls us, the
antiquity of the books, so many and so wonderful miracles, the admirable
complement of all Prophecies, the divine preservation of these books against
the fury of the enemies, the con^ of the Church, the blood of Martyrs, and
lastly the common state and condition (...) those men which first writ the
same.

VIII.
And albeit the consent of the Church be ^great argument to commend the
autho^ie of the Scripture unto us, yet the Po^sh assertion is false, that the
authority of ^he Scripture does ha^g upon the judgment of the Church: as if we
could not believe ^he Scripture, or as if the Scripture were ^ot to be trusted,
if the judgment of the Church did not move us thereunto, by testifying that
these are the holy Scriptures, and commanding us to reverence them as the
truth.

IX.
Neither yet do we here despise the judgment of the Church, when we ascribe
not thereunto that which is due unto God, which is to assure us of the truth of
this celestial doctrine. We must I grant highly esteem of the testimony of
the true Church. For the Church (as a Notary) keeps the holy Scriptures: and
discerns the true Scriptures of God from the false: as the goldfiner tries
and discerns gold from copper by his touchstone, and as a skillful man can
teach us to know good coin, which the ignorant knows not. Again, the true
Church (as a common crier) does publish the Scriptures: and lastly does rightly
interpret the same.

X.
Forasmuch as the only Hebrew text in the old Testament, and the Greek in the
new is authe^ticall, and has absolute authority: the Council of Trent
consequently must err, where it gives caution, to ^ld the Latin old vulgar
edition as authentical, in all public readings, dispu^ations, sermons and
expositions: and that no man be so bold or presume to reject it under any
color.

XI.
And seeing the Scripture is given to instruct us, concerning Gods worship and
^r salvation, those fantastical wits must ^re, which laying aside the
Scripture fly unto revelations.

XII.
And whereas the scope of God in the scripture, is to teach men concerning his
holy worship and man's true happiness; it follows then that it is so absolute
and perfect, that it contains all things needful ^or this end and purpose.
For otherwise we should say that God himself does not at^ine that which he
purposed, and this to speak, is against the omnipote^cy of God.

XIII.
If the doctrine of the scripture be: 1. Tim. 3.16.17. and Psa. 19.7.8.9.
perfect, comprizing all points which necessarily concern Gods pure worship
and our salvation: then it follows that the Papists err, which thrust upon us
their unwritten verities; traditions, I say, which neither Prophets nor
Apostles have ever written.

XIIII.
And for that the doctrine of the Scripture is undoubtedly 2. Pet. 1.19
true: for that it came by the Ibid. 21. 2. Tim. 3.16.
inspiration of the holy Ghost: that must of necessity be erroneous which is
contrary unto it: as some few traditions are, which the Papists thrust upon
the Church, as the very word of God it self.

CHAP. III. Of God.
I. APHORISM.
GOd is a John. 4 24.
spirit, most Deuteronomy. 6.4. Exo. 3.14.15.
pure, Psalm. 139.7 etc. Es. 66.1. Ier. 23.23 24 1. Kings. 8.27.
infinite, Romans 1.20 and 23. 1. Tim. 1.17. Psalm. 102.25. etc. Reu. 1.8.
eternal, Psalm. 102 27.28. Mal. 3.6. Es. 46.10. Romans 11.29.
immutable: Genesis 17.1. and c. 35.11. Exodus 15. Job. 38.39. Psalm. 91.1.2.
almighty, most Psalm. ^ 1.104.24.147.5. 1. Sam. 16 8. Heb. 4.13. Romans 11.33.34.
and 16.27. ^im 1.17. h i k l Exodus 34.6. and 7.
wise, Psalm. 5.13. and 34.9.51.20. and ^st v. 54 8.9.
good, Ion. 4.2.
loving, Ion. 4.2.
merciful, Gene. 18.23.25. Deuteronomy. 32.4. Job. 34.10. ^2 and 36. chap. Psalm. 11.
last v. 34.16.17. Prou 8.8. Es. 45.11. Ierem. 12.1. ^m. 1^8.
just, Leu. 19.2. Josh. 24.19. 1. Sam. 2.2. Psalm. 99 3. Es. 6.3.
holy, Psa. ^^. Heb. 6.17.18. Tit. 1.2.
true and of most free Romans 9.15, etc. Math. 20.15.
and absolute authority: and is Math. 28.^9.
Father, Son and holy spirit: creator of heaven and Genesis 1.1.
earth and of all things which are contained in them: the Luke 1.68, etc.
redeemer and Ephe. 2.10.
sanctifier of all his elect.

II.
These three the Father, Son, and holy Ghost are three distinct Heb. 1.3.
persons: and every person very John. 1.1. Act. 5.3. and 4.
God: yet not three Gods, ^t they are that Deuteronomy. 6.4.
one very God, which in (...) Scripture is called Jehovah the Lord.

III.
These three persons differ, and are distinguished, for that the Father is of
none: the Son is of the John. 1.14
Father by an incomprehensible and inspeakable Psalm. 2.7. Prou. 8.24. and 25.
generation: Ibid. Romans 8.9.
(...) holy Ghost is of the John. 15.26
Father and of the son by an incomprehensible and in^kable John. 15.26 1.
John. 5.7.
proceeding.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Angels.
I. APHORISM.
THe Angels are Psalm. 104.4.
spiritual Heb. 1.7. and last Ephesians. 6.12. Heb. 1.7. Coloss. 1.16.
creatures, which Heb. 1. v. last 1. K. 22.20. etc
minister unto God the creator.

II.
Of the Angels, some are good, some are evil.

III.
The good Angels are they which have stood and continued in their perfection,
wherein they were created, and have received their Math. 18.10. and 22.30.
confirmation: and therefore are ever ready Psalm. 103.20.21.
to glorify God in all obedience: for which cause they did appear in certain
winged pictures (which are called Exodus 25.18. etc. 1. king 6.23. and 29.
Cherubins and Es. 6.2.
Seraphins) formed like men to the people Exo. 25.18
of Israel, and to the Prophets Es. 6.
Esaias and Ezech. 1.
Ezechiell, to signify their cheerfulness and readiness for the execution
of Gods decrees.

IIII.
The Lord uses their ministry and service, both to make relation of his will
unto Number. 22.32.33.
men, specially the Genesis 19.13 Judge. 13.3.4.5. Dan. 8.16.9.21. Luke. 1.13, and
26. c. 2.10. Math. 1.20. c. 2.13. and 19.20. c. 28.5. Act. 1.10. Revel. 1.1.
godly, (and hence it is they have their name): and to govern Col. 1.16. Ephe.
1.22.
the world, in as much as they Psalm. 34.8.91.11. Gene. 14.19. and 16. c. 32.1.
1. King. 19.5.2. King. 6.17. etc. 19.35. Dan, 3.25. and 6.23.
protect the faithful against all dangerous events, the snares also and
assaults of their enemies, (which are evil men and Angels,) punishing Genesis 19
2. King. 19.35. Act. 12.23.
the wicked, and 2. Sam. 25.15.16.
chastening ^e godly: and for this cause are they cal^d Ephe. 1.21. Col. 1.16.
thrones, dominions, principalities, ^owers and might.

V.
The good Angels are exceeding many, but the number is not expressed in
Scripture.

VI.
When the good Angels were to deli^r any message from God unto me^, they
^peared in the likeness of Genesis 18.2. and 4. c. 19. 2. Heb. 13.2. Judge. 13.6.
etc. Mar. 16.5 Luke. 24.4. Act. 1.10.
young men, ^y beautiful in sight, and sometimes ^ning with some excellent
brightness. ^omtimes they have appeared in fiery bo^es, either like men, as in
the vision of Esaias in the Temple: Esaias. 6. Ezech. 1.
or like horses and harrets, as in the translation or transpor^tion 2. King 2.2.
of Elias, and in the protection of Elizeus 2. King 6.
against the Syrians. They ^ue also appeared sometimes when men ^aue seen them
with their eyes Genesis 18. and 19. Luke 1.11. and 28.
waking: and sometimes to men in their Math. 1.20
sleep: and sometimes also when men watched, ^ut yet overtaken with some great
Reu. 1.10.
astonishment of mind. The first kind of these apparitions is called in
Scripture (...), Luke. 1.22 and 24.23. Act. 26.19.
a vision: the 2. and 3. (...), a Act. 10.17 19. and 11.5. and. c. 16 9.
sight. But yet other whiles the Math. 17.9 Act. 10.3.
one is taken for the other.

VII.
And albeit the good Angels be very excellent both for majesty and Math.
28.3. Act. 1.10. Dan. 10.5. and 6.
glory, yet it is great wickedness to Reu. 19.10. and. c. 22.8. and 9 Col.
2.18. Iud. 13.16.
worship them, because they are creatures, and our felow-seruants.

VIII.
The use of this doctrine is; that in dangers we ask of God the protection of
the holy Angels: and that we be assured, that they shall be ready at hand for our
good according to Gods Psalm. 34 8. and 91.11.12.
promise.

IX.
So far of the good Angels. The evil Angels are they which by their
contumacie and disobedience against God, have John. 8.44. Jude. 6. 1. Pet. 2.4.
fallen from that blessed state or perfection wherein they were created: and so
become evil: ever since maliciously inclined to hurt both the glory of God and
the salvation of men.

X.
They be called in Scripture, evil 1. Sam. 16.15. etc.
spirits, Leuit. 17.7
(...), horrible, or terrible, because when they appeared, their very sight did
strike some terror in them which saw the^. And Deuteronomy. 32.17.
(...), destroyers, because they intend nothing more then the destruction of
me^. And these names are found in the old Testament. And in the new, Math. 9.34
etc. 1. Cor. 10.20. 1. Tim. 4.1. James. 2 19. Revel. 9 20.
they are called (...), because of their knowledge to discover things secret:
and unclean Math. 10.1
spirits, because they provoke men unto all kind of filthiness and
uncleanness, being mixed with such unclean me^ to commit abhomi^ations. They are
also called Ephe. 6.12.
principali^ities, powers, princes of the world, the governors of the darkness
of this world, ^pirituall wickednesses, or evil spirits, because they work
mightily in the reprobate.

XI.
The evil Angels also are very Luke. 8.30.
many, but the Scripture speaks not of any certain number.

XII.
Their prince is called in Hebrew Job. 1.6. etc. 2. Zach. 3.1 Luke 10.1^. and
often in the N. Testament.
Satan, that is, an adversary, because he is the very enemy of God and his
children: and Mat. 12.24.
Beelzebub, or 2 King 1.2
Bahal-zebub, that is, the master or prince of flies, either because in Ekron
in times past, that idol drove away flies, or had the form of a fly. In
Greek his name is Mat. 25 4.1 John 8.44. 1. John 3.8.
(...), a devil, that is, a slanderer, because he falsely accuses and charge
God and his children for their words and for their works: Job. 1.9.
and Math. 6 13 Ephe. 6.19. 1. John 3.12.
(...); that is a wicked one, for that he ever goes about mali^iously to
disturb the faithful: and Math. 4.3. 1 Thessalonians 3.5.
(...) the Tempter, because he tempts Gods people, indeuouring to bring them
to sin and so to destruction. He is also called the Ioh. 12 31. etc. 14.30.
and 16.11.
prince of the world, and that great Reu. 12.9.2
Dragon, and the old Serpent. The rest are called his Mat 25 41 ^. Cor. 1.7.
Angels.

XIII.
And albeit Satan and his Angels ba^d themselves against God and his children,
and that the devil oppose himself as much as he can in will and desire: yet
can he not effect any thing, to hurt the faithful, or against the will of God.
For the Lords power curbeth him, and keeps him so safe bound that he
executes only such things as are 1. Kin. 22.20 etc. Job. 1.6. and 2.1. Math.
8.31. and 32.
given him of God in commission. Neither does the Lord permit Satan or his
Angels to destroy Mat. 24.24 Luke. 22.31.32. Io. 10.28.29.33. To. 8.35. etc.
his elect, but only to exercise Math. 4.1. etc. Ephe. 6.12. etc.
them with temptations.

XIIII.
The use of this doctrine of wicked spirits is, that we may be more watchful,
to avoid their snares and practices: and that we may provide our selves of
such armor as may be strong and of good proof, to bear so many and so strong
enemies: and principally that knowing our own ignorance and weakness, we
may cry unto God for strength, and for protection against all their illusions
and assaults: and as for weapons to fight with the devil, they are without
us, as Gods promises and precepts, or within us, as faith and prayer, and
obedience to Gods word.

CHAP. V. Of the first integrity of our nature, wherein is entreated of the
Image of God, and of free will.
I. APHORISM.
FOrasmuch as after the Angels among Gods creatures, man has the next place:
it is requisite that we learn also in what manner he was created of God in the
beginning, that so we may understand how this our deformity came not from God
in the creation, but from some other cause.

II.
Man therefore was created in the beginning after the Image Gene. 1.27
of God; so that he was like the Lord his maker, in that he represented his
majesty in certain excellent graces.

III.
These gifts did appear partly in soul, partly in body. First the soul was
endued with singular Col. 3.10. Genesis 1.23.
wisdom in the mind or understanding, whereby he rightly knew both God his
creator, and the works or creatures of God: next in the will and affection
there was a conformity with the will of God, and this the Apostle calls true
righteousness Ephe. 4.24
and holiness. In the body, there did appear in man's countenance first a
Princely majesty, so as the very (...) beasts took him for their very Lord
or sovereign. Gene. 1.28
Some little sparcle of this appears as yet, for that brute beasts we see will
be tamed and made tractable to serve man, or at least wise not to hurt him.

IIII.
Man's will in that first integrity of nature was free, Genesis 3.18.
so as he could thereby choose either good or evil, and therefore could obey
or disobey God.

CHAP. VI. Of Gods providence.
I. APHORISM.
THe providence of God, is the eternal, most wise, most just, and immutable
Act. 2.23. Act. 4.27.28.
counsel or decree of God, governing or disposing Mat. 10.29 30. Luke 12.6.7.
Exodus 21.1. Deuteronomy. 19.4.5. Prou. 16. last v. Heb. 1.3.
every thing that he has made to his own Prou. 16.4. To. 9.22.23.
glory, and the salvation Romans 8.28 1. Cor. 11.32
of his elect.

II.
It follows therefore that fortune is no cause at all to effect any thing.

III.
And albeit God also by his providence Genesis 37.28 and 45.5 7.8. Ex. 7.6 etc.
8.15. 2. Sam. 12 12.16. etc. 10.11. 1. K. 22.19 2. Chro. 18.18 Job. 1.21. Es.
10.5. Ac. 2.23. etc. 4.27.28.
disposes of the sins of men: yet is he no cause or any author of sin,
because he is not delighted with sin, but rather Psa. 5.5 6.7
abhors it: neither does he sin, nor can he sin. Again for that he
neither commends nor persuades any unto sin: neither does he inspire evil
into sinners, nor constrain them to sin: but Genesis 50.20 Prou. 16.4. Exodus 9
16. Rom 9.17. Romans 8.28.
directs all things to a good end.

IIII.
Men may not therefore excuse their sins by Gods providence: for as for the
wicked, their consciences can Math. 27.4 Genesis 45 3. Gene 42.21.
convince them of their own naughtines, and they sin not unwillingly, but
rather take pleasure 2. Sa 16.22
in sin, and are often carried with full sail 2 Sa 16.13.
thereunto: and have ever an evil Ge 50.2^. Es. 10.7.
intention; But the godly fall into sin being seduced by an evil Iam.
1.13.14.1^.
concupiscence: and when they have sinned, they acknowledge their offense with
Psalm. 51. Mar. 14. v. last.
detestation.

V.
The use or benefit of this doctrine is three fold. First that we may learn
Genesis 45.4. etc. and. c. 50.19.20.21. 2. Sam. 16.17. Job. 1.21.
patience in adversity: for that hereby we know that Amos. 3.6. Es. 45.7. 1.
Cor. 11.32.
God sends not adversity to destroy us, but for our Gen 50.20 Romans 8.28. 1.
Cor. 11.32
good. The second, that in prosperity we may be Genesis 24.27
thankful unto God: for that we see, it is God, who moves men's minds and
actions to wish and to do Genesis 32.6. and 33 4 and 39 4.21. etc.
us good: or at least wise, albeit they do wish us evil, yet they can not
Exodus 3.21 12.35. Genesis 31.24. Nu. 22. and 23.
hurt us, but rather do us good. Again we see it is he which gives a
blessing also to things which have Luke 12.^5 Leuit. 26.26. Es. 3. 1. Hag 1 6.
1 Kin. 19.8.
no life even for our good. The third benefit is, that we may be 1. Sa. 17.35
2. Tim. 4.18.
assured, that God will ever be a father unto us, both to protect us from evil
and to confer upon us all good things.

VI.
We must also so rest upon Gods providence, as that we do not neglect the
means, (if we can have them) but use them with reverence, and in the fear of
God, as instruments serving Gods providence: not that we should trust in them,
but least we Math. 4.7. Act. 27.24.30.31. Gene. 32.
tempt the Lord.

CHAP. VII. Of Sin.
I. APHORISM.
Sin is the John. 3.4.
difference or discrepance between the actio^ or nature of man, and the law of
God. And therefore by the law comes the Rom 3.20 and 7.7.
knowledge of sin, that is by comparing man's life and nature with the law of
God, as when the spots of our faces are known, by considering the face in a
glass.

II.
Sin is either, that first, or that which bred of the first.

III.
The first sin is that fall Gene. 3. Romans 5.
or disobedience of our first parents in Paradise, transgressing Gods
commandment concerning that one forbidden fruit.

IIII.
The sin which bred of the first, is either original or actual.

V.
Original sin is that which is inherent (...) our nature from our first Psalm.
51.7. Ephe. 2.3.
conception: (...) wit, the Romans 5.12.
apostasy of all the natural ^onnes of Adam in his loins, and the corruption
of nature that followed: which the Apostle calls the sin Romans 7.20
which dwells (...) us.

VI.
This corruption does most infect the ^nderstanding and the will.

VII.
The understanding or mind is so dark^ed, that albeit in earthly things, and
things pertaining to civil life, it does discern often very much: 1. Cor.
2.14 John. 1.5.18. c. 6.44. c. 9.39 Math. 16.17. Act. 26.18. Romans 1.21.22 23.
yet in heavenly matters, that is, in those things which co^^erne the pure
worship of God and the everlasting salvation of our souls, it is (...)
altogether blind.

VIII.
The will is so Genesis 6.5. chap 8.21. Romans 8.7.
corrupted, that albeit a man wish well unto himself: yet has he no desire to
those things which concern the worship of God, and his own salvation for
ever: but is most strongly bent to will and desire the contrary.

IX.
Original sin in respect of the corruption of nature, either Romans 6.12
reigns, as appears in most of the unregenerate: or reigns not, but is
resisted: and this resistance is either by the only light of Romans 2.14.
natural reason, as in the unregenerate, which are called continent: or by the
working also of the Romans 8 2.10.11.
holy Ghost, as in the regenerate.

X.
Of original sin, because of natural corruption issues sin actual:
which consists in action, as in thought, word, or deed.

XI.
Actual sin may be distinguished many ways. For first it is a sin either
of commission or omission. A sin of commission is, when any thing is
committed, which is in the law forbidden, as murder, adultery, theft. A sin
of omission is, when any thing is omitted, which in the law is commanded to be
done, as when a man does not give due honor to his parents.

XII.
Secondly, an actual sin is commit^ed or omitted either in soul or spirit
^nely, or both in body 1. Cor. 7.3.5. and 2. Cor. 7.1.
and soul.

XIII.
Thirdly actual sins, some are committed against God, some against the
neighbor, some against our own selves.

XIIII.
Fourthly, actual sin is either a not-voluntarie, or voluntary. The not
voluntary, as evil Mat. 15 19.
thoughts, and Romans 7 7. and 8. Mat. 5.22 28.
lusts which steal upon us against our will. The voluntary is, when the will
is delighted with wicked lusts, or at the least wise favors them. Whereupon
again it follows that a voluntary sin is either a full sin, or a broken. A
full sin, is when a man with John. 8.34.
full purpose, and with all his might rusheth to commit things, whereunto
wicked lusts drive him. A broken sin I call that, when a man is Romans 7.15
etc.
carried by his evil concupisce^ce to consent to do that which he does not
approve. Again a voluntary sin may be distinguished into sin unadvised,
Rash or unadvised.
and deliberate. Sin unadvised is, when the 1. Sam. 25.13.
will does unadvisedly and suddenly consent and give place to evil lusts.
Sin deliberate is, when the will does not hastily consent to evil
affections, but with 2. Sam. 11.
deliberation going before.

XV.
Fifthly, actual sin is either secret or Or open.
known. Again, a secret sin is either unknown to him which commits
Psalm. 19.13
it, and to others also with him: or to 1. Tim. 5.24
others it is secret, but known to himself. A known sin is either known to
him which commits it: or known also to others with him.

XVI.
Sixthly, an actual sin is either Mat. 12.31
remissible or irremissible. Remissible is that which has repentance with it:
irremissible which wants it; and of this kind there is but one, that sin
which is called the blasphemy against the holy Ibid.
Ghost: which is, when a man of deuilish malice does contradict the verity of
the celestial doctrine, against the testimony of Gods spirit, which
conuinceth him in his conscience thereof: and yet further proceeds in a deadly
hatred and persecution of the professors of the truth, and this kind of sin
Christ objected against ^he Pharisees. And John called this sin, a ^nne unto
1. Ioh. 5.16.
death, and warns that we ^ay not for him which commits the same. The
reason whereof Paul renders (...) the Epistle to the Hebrews, in that ^e
says; it is Heb. 6.4.
impossible for such to be ^enued by repentance: for the just judgment of God
is against such, who will not ^e mocked, neither will he suffer Gal. 6.7.
his spirit, which is the spirit of truth, to be charged with a lie.

XVII.
And if we admit the old distinction in this sense, where sin is distinguished
into venial and mortal, it may well be admitted. But not otherwise, as when
they call that venial which meriteth pardon, because it is but small and
light: and that mortal which meriteth death, because it is great. For every
sin of his own nature, even the least, Romans 6.4. last.
meriteth death: and not only temporal death, but even 1. Job. 5.16
eternal. Co^trarily all they obtain pardon which do repent and believe in
Christ, albeit they have committed most grievous sins.

XVIII.
Again a sin pardonable is either the lesser sin, or the greater. And both
are considered or judged either by the principal antecedent working cause,
(which the Greeks call (...),) or by the manner of doing, or by the object or
matter wherein the sin is committed. In respect of the cause, the sin is
the lesser which is committed of ignorance, as Paul's persecution; or of
infirmity as the fall of Peter: but the greater, which is committed against
the conscience, as David's murder and adultery: or of malice, as Semeis
reproachful and railing speeches. In respect of the manner of doing, his sin
is less, which offers adultery by persuasion, as David with Bethshabe, then
his sin, which offers violence, as that uncleanness committed with Dina by
Sichem, Judge. 19.
and with the Levites wife by the men of Gibeah. In respect of the object, the
stealing of a penny is a lesser sin then of an hundred or a thousand crowns.
Again it is a lesser sin to steal a beast, then to steal a man, which
sin they call Stealing either free me^ or slaves and keeping them close in
bonds.
Pla^ium in the Latin tongue. And it is the les^er sin to speak an idle word:
but the greater to speak any blaspemie, or any thing hurtful to our neighbor.

XIX.
It appears by these distinctions, that sins are unequal, contrary to the
Stoiks Paradoxe: and this also may be understood by the Mat. 12.15
inequality of punishments.

XX.
And thus far of the kinds and degrees of sin: The author of sin first
is the Gene. 3.6. etc. Ioh. 8.44. 1. John. 3 8.
devil deceiving our first parents, next after him our first Gene. 3.6.
parents themselves, in that they gave place to the devils lies.

XXI.
The effect or punishment of sin, is Romans 8. v. last.
death both of body and of soul, both temporal and eternal, and all kinds
of Genesis 3.6. etc.
griefs and miseries.

CHAP. VIII. Of the law of God.
I. APHORISM.
THe law of God is a Psalm. 1.2.
doctrine sent from Exo. 20 1.2
God by Exodus 19. John. 1.17. Gal. 3.19.
Moses to the people of Deuteronomy. 6.6. Ps. 147. v. last Deuteronomy. 4 6.7.8
Israel, whereby he testified Psalm. 19.8. Ps. 78.3. and 56
and taught in what manner he would be worshipped of them.

II.
Of Gods laws some Rom 9.4.
are Exodus 20.
moral, some Leuit.
ceremonial, and some are Exo. 21.22
judicial.

III.
The judicials, are laws of the Exodus 2.22 23.
right of contractes, and of penalties for offenders, given for the
preservation of public peace and justice among men, and for the punishment of
the contempt of the laws of God.

IIII.
The ceremonials, are Leuit. 1.2.3.4 6.7.5.
laws concerning the ceremonies which God appointed for his external worship,
and for the instruction of that people, concerning their ^uerlasting salvation
by Christ which was to come.

V.
The morals, are laws Exodus 20.1 Deuteronomy. 5.6.
concerning the manners and duties of every man toward God and toward his
neighbor.

VI.
The moral laws Ibid.
are dispersed in all the books of Moses, but in the Decalogue they are
summarily collected.

VII.
The Decalogue is divided into two Exo. 24.12 and 31.18. and 32.16. and 34.1
Tables: of the which two, the first contains four precepts, concerning our
duties to God, or concerning the Mat. 22.37 Deuteronomy. 6.5.
love of God: the second. Table contains six precepts, concerning our
duties to our neighbor, or how Ibid. 39. Leuit. 19.18.
to love our neighbor.

VIII.
These precepts for the most part have their A trope or figure when part is
understood by the whole, or the whole by the part.
Synecdoche: for in the prohibition of sins, he commands the contrary
virtues, and contrarily in commanding the virtues he does prohibit the
contrary sins: and by one special he understands all of that kind, or the
general, and with the external actions, the internal thoughts and lusts
must be understood.

IX.
Furthermore to attain the right sense and meaning of the Decalogue, these
rules also must be observed. The meaning of every precept must be taken, of the
end and scope for the which that law was given, to wit, the next end: as for
example. The end of the fifth precept is the preservation of civil order, and
society: therefore there are commanded duties of superiors to inferiors, and
of inferiors to superiors, for that without this no civil order can be kept.
Again for diverse respects, the same action may be commended in diverse
laws: for the ends cause actions to differ: as, protection, as it is the
duty of parents toward children, or of Magistrates to subjects, it is
commanded in the fifth law: but as it is an office of Christian fortitude in the
preservation of life, it is contained in the sixth law. So false witness, in
that it hurts the good name of the neighbor, it belongs to the ninth
Commandment; but so far as it tends to hurt his life, it does appertain
^o the sixth precept.

Again: The correlatiues are commaun^ed with their relatiues: for that the one
can ^ot stand without the other: where therefor it is commanded in the fifth
precept that some obey, it is commanded also that ^me do govern: and where
the gouer^ours are commanded to be honored, they ^e commanded also so to live,
as that they (...) worthy of honor. So in the fourth pre^pt, where me^ are
commanded to learn ^e word of God, some also are comman^ed to teach the same.
Again: The second ^able must give place to the first: for we must ^ue the
neighbor for the Lords cause, that (...) for that the Lord commands, and to
his ^orie. Therefore parents and all superi^rs must be honored as is commanded
(...) the seventh precept of the second Table: ^at (as the Apostle speaks)
Ephesians. 6.^
in the Lord, ^at is, in the fear of the Lord, so as the lord be not offended,
when they be ho^red.

But this rule must be understood of the ^orall law: for in these the second
Table ^ust give place to the first, but not in the ceremonial. If therefore the
necessity and life of our neighbor require an omission of a ceremony, we
must rather Ose. 6.6. Mat. 32.4. and chap. 15.3.4.5.6.
omit a ceremony then neglect the life of our brother. Therefore this rule
also must be kept. The ceremonial law must give place to the moral.

X
God gave his law, Psalm. 147.19.20. Deuteronomy. 4.6.7.8
partly thereby (as by a special mark) to put difference between his people
and all other nations and people of the world: partly that he might be
worshipped by them as himself had Deuteronomy. 4.1. etc. and chap. 12.32.
prescribed: and partly to prepare them unto Gal. 3.23.24. Heb. 9. and 10.
the faith of Christ which was to come.

XI.
His preparation was both by instruction, and by charge.

XII.
First, he taught them by ceremonies, which were as visible Prophecies
concerning Christ, He. 9. and 10.
shadowing his sacrifice, whereby he should expiate the sins of all the elect.

XIII.
He urged and charged them, in Col. 2.14. ^om. 3.20.
conuincing them of sin, both by the cere^onies, and by the law moral, but
speci^ly in that by Deu. 27.26 Gal. 3.10.
by threatening his curse against them, he caused them to seek for ^race in
Christ.

XIIII.
Concerning the abrogatio^ of the law, ^hus it is; a law is said to be
abrogate, when ^t is repealed, made void, or abolished: so that the people to
whom it was given, and whom it did bind, are no more bound ^hereby.

XV.
Therefore the moral law, may not be said to be abrogate, because it is a
perpetual rule of justice commanding summarily the Mat. 22.40
love of God and of the neighbor, which are men's duties for ever. Albeit it be
granted also as true, that the faithful are freed by Christ from the Gal. 3.13.
curse, severity or, 1. John. 5. 3 Romans 6.14.
extremity of the law.

XVI.
But as for the ceremonial law, that it is Col. 2.14. Ibid. 17. Ephesians. 14.15.
Gal. 3.25.
abrogate is evident by the scope and use thereof. For it was given to instruct
that ignorant people as a Gal. 3.24
schoolmaster, concerning Christ to come, and to lead them unto him as by the
hand, by shadowing and Heb. 9.10. Col. 2.17.
prefiguring Christ's Priesthood many ways. The John. 1.17
truth then being come, and we finding the lively and Heb. 10.1.
express image of all things needful for salvation in Christ: it follows,
that these legal shadows and figures are abolished, and that the law has
performed and ended that pedagogie.

XVII.
The question is harder concerning the abrogatio^ of the Judicial law. For it
ca^ neither simply be said to be yet in force, seeing the common wealth of the
Jews is abolished: neither yet may we say that it is altogether abrogat, for
that it contains many laws which have a scope and use perpetual. It seems
then that this question may be thus answered. The Christian Magistrate is not
bound to the Judicial laws of Moses in respect of some special circumstances
which did concern the people of Israel: notwithstanding concerning the kinds
of Leuit. 24.1 Deuteronomy. 13.5. and 10.
penalties which the Lord has appointed for the reverend estimation and
observation of the Decalogue, the Christian Magistrates seem to me assuredly,
at this day to be no less bound for the keeping of these laws, then the
Magistrates of the people of Israel were in elder ages.

CHAP. IX. Of the likeness and difference of the old and new Testament.
I. APHORISM.
THe word Testament is here used, to signify the covenant, which God made with
his people.

II.
The cause wherefore this word is used, is for that the Greek interpreters of
the Bible, translated the word Berith (which signifies a covenant) 1. King. 5.
2. Kings. 23. Esaias. 59. Ierem. 31.
(...), a Testament: using the word (as it seems) in general sense, as if
they had (...), a covenant. And for this cause the Apostle Heb. 9.15.16.72.
uses the word Testament in his Epistle to the Hebrews, disputing also from
the proper signification thereof.

III.
And assuredly the free covenant of God, has this common with a Testament,
that it could not be ratified and confirmed but by the Heb. 9.15.16.17.
death of the parties couenanting, that is, by the death of the son of God,
who being very God, together with the Father and the holy Ghost, made that his
covenant of grace with his people.

IIII.
The Legal covenant also was confirmed by the death of Exodus 24.5 6.7.8. Heb.
9.18.19.20.
beasts, albeit this were but ceremonially.

V.
The Lords covenant with his people, is taught in Scripture to be double. The
covenant Legal, or of works; and the covenant Evangelical or of grace.

VI.
The covenant Legal, is that wherein God in elder ages promised the Israelites
all manner of Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.
blessings corporal, and also life Leuit. 18.5. Gal. 3.12. Ma. 19.16.17 Luke.
10.25.26.27.28.
everlasting, under condition of yielding Ibid.
perfect obedience to Gods law by their own Deuteronomy.. 6 5. Luke. 10.27.
strength, and contrarily, he threatened diverse Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 27.
curses, and eternal Gal. 3.10.
death to all such as did break any Ibid.
one Commandment of the law. The ratification and confirmation of this
covenant is described. Exodus 24.

VII.
The Covenant of grace is that, wherein the Lord has promised his free Genesis
12.1.2.3 and chap. 15. etc. 17.
favor and grace forever Iere. 32.40
to all them which believe in Christ: under condition of that Mar. 16 16 John.
3.16. To. 10.9.10.
blessed faith, and true godliness or new obedience joined therewith: yet
neither of both these graces to proceed from their own strength, but to be
the mere gifts of God freely Iere. 31.33 34. Ephe. 2.8. John. 5.25. John.
6.45.
given them.

VIII.
Whereas the old and new Testament are opposed the one to the other: we must
note, that the old Testament is taken two manner of ways: sometimes to
signify the Legal Ierem. 31.35.32. Heb. 8.8.9.13. and chap. 9.15.18.
covenant, sometimes to signify the covenant of grace as it was established
with Abraham and his posterity. But by the new Testament the covenant of grace
only is understood.

IX.
Now if any ask of the likeness and difference of the old and new Testament:
by the name of the old Testament, we must understand that covenant of grace, as
it was confirmed with Gene. 17.
Abraham and all the fathers before the coming of Christ. Therefore in this
comparison of both Testaments, there is no mention to be made of the Legal
covenant.

X.
In substance the self same the old and new Test, or covenant: but the
ministration diverse.
The likeness therefore or agreement of both Testamentes does consist herein,
that both have one and the self same substance: but they differ in that the
ministration is diverse.

XI.
In the substance of the covenant three things are to be considered: The first,
is, what the scope is of the calling of Gods elect: The second, what is the
antecedent The Greeks call it, (...): antecedent or principal cause.
moving cause of the covenant: The third, what the stirring, moving and The
Greeks call this (...), the evident cause.
meritorious cause is.

XII.
The scope of the calling of the fathers and of establishing Gods covenant with
them, was the blessed immortality: The moving cause, Gods free favor and
grace in their vocation. The meritorious cause was, the death of the mediator.

XIII.
That God proposed and promised to the fathers not an earthly, but heavenly
beatitude, may appear by these arguments: Frist, because they were called by
the Rom 1.2. Romans 3.21.
promise of the Gospel, wherein it is evident that men are called unto an
heavenly Ephe. 1.13 2 Thessalonians. 2.14
felicity. Secondly, for that they had the same 1. Cor. 10.3. and 4.
Sacrament with us, the same I say, in signification, that is, seals of the
same grace. Thirdly, for that God vouchsafed to make these holy fathers
partakers of his word, whereby souls are 1. Pet. 1.23
quickened, and men are lift up unto the hope of life everlasting. Fourthly,
for that God promised those fathers that he would be their Leui. 26.12 Math.
22.32.
God, that is, that he would be not only the God of their bodies, but also and
principally the God and Savior of their souls for ever: and therefore he
promised to knit their souls unto himself in righteousness, that he might
make them partakers of life Psalm. 144.15 Psalm. 33.12. Haba. 1.12. Deuteronomy. 33.^9.
everlasting. Fifthly, for that God in his covenant testified, not only that he
was now their God, but also promised that he would be their God for Genesis 17.7.
ever: in which promise assuredly the heavenly felicity and life everlasting
is plainly signified unto us. Sixthly, for that God promised also that he would
be the God of their Ibid.
seed after them, that is, of the posterity of them after their death, for
their sake and for their comfort. Seventhly, for that God Exodus 3.6. Math.
12.32.
professed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob after their death, that he is their God.
Eighthly, because those holy fathers were exercised with many and great Gene.
4.8. Genesis 6.7.8.9. Gene. 12.13. etc. Gene. 26.27. Gene. 28.29. etc.
miseries in this life: whereby it is manifest, that they waited and looked to
receive at Gods hand, not an earthly but an heavenly rest and happiness:
otherwise they should be frustrate of their hope, and so deceived by the
oracles and divine promises of God. Ninthly, for that Paul to the Hebrews
testifies, that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, did by faith Heb. 11.9.1^0
abide in the land of promise as in a strange country, looking for, desiring,
and minding their heritage, and City, and country in heaven. Tenthly, for
that if these fathers had not expected the complement of Gods promises in
heaven, they had bin more blunt and 1. Cor. 15.19.
void of understanding then very blocks: for that they so egerly sought after
these promises, for the which there could be no hope that ever they should be
performed on earth. Eleuenthly, for that those fathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob
Genesis 47.9. Psalm. 39.13.
confessed that they were strangers in the land of Chanaan: and therefore we
must necessarily understand, that the Genesis 15.18
promise made of God unto them concerning that land, may not principally and
properly be understood of that land, or of any earthly happiness to be enjoyed
in that place, but of life everlasting, as signified by type and figure.
Twelfthly, for that those holy fathers would be Gene. 47.29.30. Gene. 50.24.
buried in the land of Chanaan, to retain the seal or Sacrament of eternal
life which God had given the^. Thirtenthly, for it is very apparent, that those
holy fathers in all their Psalm. 119.166. and 174.
desires and purposes set ever before themselves the blessed state of eternal
life. Fourteenthly, for that Jacob being even ready to die, professed that he
expected the salvation of the Lord, that is the Lord had promised, and should
give him: and then could he not Genesis 49.18
look for in this life, because that anon after he died and departed from the
same. Fifteenthly, for that the Prophets testify, that the covenant made with
the fathers was Esa 51.6. Job. 19.25. etc John. 13.15. Esa. 66.22. etc. Da.
12.1. etc.
spiritual, and therefore that life everlasting was promised unto the^ therein.
Sixteenthly, because Christ promising eternal life to his Disciples, says
they should Math. 8.11
rest with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Seuenteenthly, for that Peter Act. 3.25.
promising that Eua^gelicall benediction, that is, remission of sins and life
everlasting, to the faithful Jews of his time, he made them herein equal to
their fathers. Eightenthly. For that Christ in his Mat. 27.52
resurrection raised up many of the Saints with him unto life everlasting: and
therefore, because there is one and the like reason of all the elect, the rest
also shall be advanced in due time unto the kingdom of haeuen. Nineteenthly, for
that those holy fathers had the self same spirit of 2. Cor. 4.13 Gene. 15.6.
Hebr. 11.
faith we have, therefore they were as well as we regenerate unto the hope of
eternal life.

XIIII.
Again it may appear by the premises, that the covenant, whereby the fathers
were reconciled unto God, rested not upon any of their merits, but only on
the free Ios. last. 2.3
mercy of God which called them to his grace and favor: again it is manifest
that they received and knew Heb. 11.4. John. 8.56. Dan. 9.17.
Christ a mediator by faith, for by him they were received to co^mun with God,
and made partakers of his holy promises.

XV.
Thus far we have showed the likeness and agreement of both Testaments: now it
follows that we declare also how they differ and disagree.

XVI.
The difference of both Testamentes, consisting in the manner of administration,
has four parts.

XVII.
The first difference is this, that the covenant of grace in the old Testament,
that is, before the coming of Christ, and that glorious appeara^ce of the holy
Ghost, was administered to Genesis 15.18 and chap. 17.7.
Abraham only with his posterity, and of these principally to the people of
the Jews Math. 10.5 6 etc. 15.24. Romans 15.8.
the Israelites. But in the new Testament, that is, after the incarnation of
Christ, and his Ascension into heaven, the same is administered to other Mat.
28.19 Mar. 16.15. Act. 9.15.
nations which came of Abraham's progeny, that is, to the Greeks and Romans 3.29.
Gentiles Romans 1.16.
as Paul speaks.

XVIII.
The second difference is, that the covenant of grace before the coming of
Christ was covertly and darkely administered, by certain Genesis 18.22 etc. 49.10.
Deuteronomy. 18.15. 2. Sam. 7.12. Psalm. 2. and 72. and 45. Esa. 7.14. and chap. 9.6.
and chap. 53. Mich. 5.2.
promises of the Messiah, which then was to come and ratify the covenant, and
by Genesis 15.18. Heb. 10.1. 1. Cor. 2.17. John. 19.36.
types and ceremonies shadowing and prefiguring Christ to come. But when Christ
was come, the dispensation of this covenant was more clear and more
manifested, in the Mat. 28.19 Mar. 16.15. and 16.
preaching of the Gospel, and the seals thereof, Baptism and the Lords
Supper: all which are lively Act. 1.18. Math. 26.28. Mar. 14 14. Luke. 22.20.
1. Cor. 11.25.
testimonies that Christ is already come, and has fully confirmed this holy
covenant.

XIX.
The third difference is, that before Christ's incarnation the covenant of
grace was administered with Gal. 3.24. etc. 4.1.2.3.
less efficacy: but after with Act. 2.17. John. 7.38.39
greater working grace and power of the holy Ghost. For albeit the holy spirit
wrought in the elect under the old Testament, by those divine promises and
ceremonies, but specially by the Psalm. 51.9.
sacrifices, such a measure of the knowledge of God as was sufficient unto
their everlasting salvation, yet he gives his elect under the Gospel a Iere.
3.34. Esa. 11.9. and chap. 54.13. John. 6.45. 1. Cor. 2.10. 1. John. 2.10. and
27.
greater light of knowledge, and so a greater measure of the true love of God.
That one example of Abraham's faith, the father of Romans 4.18. etc. Heb. 11.17.
etc.
all the faithful, can not disprove this assertion concerning the regular and
ordinary administration under the Gospel.

XX.
The fourth difference is for that the administration of the old Testament, was
more Act. 15.15.
burdensome and grievous because of the multitude of rites and ceremonies,
which exceeded in number, charge and labor the ceremonies of our time.

XXI.
And whereas God has now after Christ's Ascension abrogate those sacrifices
and ceremonies of the old Testament, we must not therefore think any change in
him. For he is rightly said to be inconstant and mutable, which changes his
purpose, or does any thing contrary thereunto. But the Lord in abrogating those
sacrifices, and in prescribing another form of worship, has neither altered
his purpose, nor done any thing contrary thereunto. For his scope in the
service and worship prescribed in both Testaments, is to bring his elect to the
knowledge of their salvation in Christ. Neither has he done any thing contrary
unto this: but in his great wisdom he has called and does conduct
continually his elect diverse ways to that end he appointed; as he thought
best both for those elder ages and for these times under the Gospel. Not unlike
a skillful Phisitio^, which cures not a man in his old age with the same
medicines which he used for his youth: for so doing we may not think him
inco^stant for changing his prescriptions. For that he wisely considers the
diversity of temperature which is in old and young: and so respecting this
difference he applies fit remedies, which therefore necessarily, must be
diverse and not the same.

CHAP. X. Of the person and office of Christ.
I. APHORISM.
THe knowledge of Christ consists principally in two things, first to know
what his person is, secondly what his offices are.

II.
Christ, as touching his person, in one and the self same, he is both Romans
9.5. 1. John. 5.20.
God and man. For he is the John. 1.14.
only begotten son of God, which has created of the seed Heb. 2.16. Kuke.
1.35 42
of the Luke 1.31.34.35.
virgin Mary Heb. 10.5. Ioh. 1.3.1.10.4.2. Luke 1.35
for him self, and so Heb. 2.16.
assumed or taken, and personally and unchangeably knit unto himself, the very
body of man, Heb. 10.5. and chap. 2.14.
endued with a reasonable Mat. 26 38 etc. 27 50.
soul: and so without any change in his divine nature, he was made very man in
Heb. 2.^7.
al things like unto us, sin only Heb. 4.15.
excepted.

III.
This personal union of two natures in Christ, is well demo^strated by that
phrase or manner of speaking, (...),
which old writers have called a community of proprieties. And this community
is nothing else but a Synecdoche, whereby we attribute that which is proper to
one nature of Christ, to the very person, having his denomination of the other
nature. As where Paul says, 1. Cor. 2.8.
They crucified the Lord of glory, Act. 20.28.
and again, God has purchased a Church with his own blood: and so when Christ
speaks, John. 3.13.
no man has ascended up to heaven but he which came down from heaven, the
son of man which is in heaven.

IIII.
And sometimes we have an express distinction of both natures, as where Christ
is said, Romans 1.3. and 4.
to be made of the seed of David according to the flesh, and declared mightily
to be the son of God, touching the spirit of sanctification, by the
resurrection from the dead, and where he is said, to Romans 9.5.
come of the fathers as concerning the flesh. So also when he is said, to be,
1. Pet. 3.18
put to death concerning the flesh, but to be quickened in the spirit. And
sometimes this distinction is left to be understood by conference of such
places.

V.
Again, Christ must be such a person as is fit to take upon him the office of
a 1. Tim. 2.5 Heb. 8.6.
mediator: And such was none, but the son of God incarnate: for that he is
allied to both the parts which were to be reconciled, and therefore loving
both, and beloved of both. Again, he must so perform the office of a mediator
between God and us, that by his Heb. 9.15.
death, he reconcile us unto God: and this death being God only he could not
have suffered, and being man only he could not have overcome. Again, he must be
very God, that the propitiatory sacrifice (which was his blood shed for the
elect) might be a ransom and Act. 20.28. 1. John. 1.7.
sufficient price for our sins: again he must be very man to Romans 5.12 etc.
satisfy the justice of God: again a person sanctified of God, that he might
be a holy Heb. 7.26.
Priest, and a holy 1. Pet. 1.19
sacrificer. Again he must be very God, that (after he had by the merit of
his Priesthood reconciled them unto God, and obtained the holy Ghost for them)
he might also him self give them the same holy spirit, to work faith in
them, to receive him, and his merits.

VI.
The office of Christ is three fold: for he is ordained of God to be our
Prophet, Priest and King.

VII.
He executed his Prophetical Deuteronomy. 18.18 Act. 3.22. and chap 7.37.
function, or office of a teacher when he was conversant on earth, in Math 4.17
Esa. 61.1. Luke 4.21.
preaching the Gospel, and revealing John. 1.18.
unto us the secret counsel of God, concerning the great work of our
salvation by him.

VIII.
He exercised the office of his Priesthood, partly when he was on earth, and
partly does still exercise the same in heaven. When he was on earth, he first
offered prayers John 17. Heb. 5.7.
to his father for us, next his Heb 7.27.
own body upon the cross, and did expiate our sins Heb. 9.25 etc. 10.14.
with that his sacrifice. In heaven Heb. 9.24.
he appears before the face of the heavenly father with his sacrifice, once
offered on earth, without Heb. 10.12
intermission praying for us, that the reconciliation we have obtained, may be
as fresh in memory, and never be lost.

IX.
The kingdom of Christ begins in this life, and is called the kingdom of
grace, and it shall be perfected in the life to come, which is called the
kingdom of glory. The kingdom of grace is that spiritual kingdom Ioh.
18.37.
wherein Christ rules the hearts of his elect by his word and spirit. And this
kingdom he administered in the old Testament unto his elect, by Priests and
Prophets, and in the beginning of the new Testament by John Baptist, and
himself with his Disciples: But at the last he solemnly began to erect the
same in the day of Act. 2.
Pentecost, when he sent the holy Ghost to his holy Apostles, that they might
go preach the Gospel to all nations. So then he has ever continued his
kingdom on earth, and shall continue it until he return to judgment, at
which time he shall be ruler in the Psalm. 110.2.
midst of his enemies: whom he plagueth now and then, and destroieth, the
last he cast them down, and make them his Ibid. 1.
footestoole in his most glorious 2. These. 2.8
coming, at which he shall free all his faithful members from all their
afflictions, and carry them with him 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
to heaven, and make them partakers for ever of his heavenly kingdom, which
then shall be the kingdom of glory, when all the Saints shall be translated to
heaven, beautified and adorned in their souls with wisdom and holiness, in
their bodies with great excellency and immortality, to be with Christ, in
inspeakable joys and glory for ever and ever.

CHAP. XI. Of Faith.
I. APHORISM.
NOw for that we are made partakers of Christ's benefits, which we receive by
his death, as the remission of sins and life everlasting by Romans 3 25 Act.
10.43.
faith, it shall be expedient also that we learn what this faith is, how it
breeds, who receive this grace, and what proper marks it has.

II.
This faith then, is a sure and firm John. 17.3. Romans 8.38. 1. John. 3.2.
knowledge of the grace of God, purchased for us by the merits of Christ's
death, and testified by the word of promise: whereby every believer does apply
that promise of grace unto himself Gal. 2.
particularly: assuring him self that the same does no less appertain unto
himself then unto the rest of the faithful.

III.
The holy Mat. 16.17 John. 3.5.6.8 Ephe. 2.8. John. 6.45. Act. 16.14.
Ghost John. 3.3.5.6.7.8. 1. Cor. 4.15. Philem v. 10. 1. Pet. 1.23.
works this faith in the hearts of his John. 6.37. and chap. 8 47. and chap.
10.26. Act. 13.48. Tit. 1.1. 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
elect which are of years by the Romans 1.16. and chap. 10.17. 1. Cor. 3.5. 1.
Pet. 1. and 25.
preaching of the Gospel.

IIII.
From this faith arises that holy Ephe. 3.12
affiance and trust in God whereby the believer rests himself comfortably in
the fatherly Psalm. 32.
favor and grace of God purchased for him by the death of Christ, considering
both the truth Heb. 11.11.
and Romans 4.21 Heb. 11.19.
power of God: from this affiance do stream forth al our spiritual John.
8.56. Romans 14.17. John. 5.25. etc. 6.57. and 63.
joys and comforts, and all our spiritual life, according as by it we taste of
Psalm 30.6. item 31.17. item 36.10. ite^ 80.48.20.
the great grace and favor of God.

V.
Again, from this faith arises, and proceeds the assured hope Romans 5.5.
Romans 8.23.24 25.
of everlasting life, or of the celestial glory, which we shall have with our
Lord Christ in his kingdom.

VI.
Again, from this fountain springs the holy To. 10.14. Romans 8.15.
invocation of God, our most faithful and bountiful Father, and our most
mighty Lord and God.

VII.
Faith also causes us to make a true Romans 10.9 and 10. 2. Cot. 4.13.
profession: and confess with the mouth to the glory of God, that which we
believe with the heart.

VIII.
To be short, hence proceeds the 1. Ioh. 3.3. Gal. 5.6.
true love and reverend fear of Gods children, which causes them with all
endeavor to please, and carefully to avoid what may offend and displease his
holy spirit.

IX.
The grace of Rom 8.38. and 39. John. 10.28. Romans 11.28. Luc. 22.32. 1. Pet 15
and 23. 1. Ioh 2 19, 2. Tim. 2.19. Ps. 1.3. Es 42. 3. Ier. 32 40. Os 2.19. and
20.
perseverance is an inseparable companion of faith: for faith never dies,
albeit sometimes it be, as it were Mark 9.24. Psalm 73.
ouerturned, and as buried with the tempests of temptation.

CHAP. XII. Of Repentance: where also is entreated of the life of a Christian,
and of bearing the cross.
I. APHORISM.
SOmetime by the word Repentance in Greek is signified and understood Mat.
21.29. and chap. 27.3.
some sorowing for any fact or deed done, whether a man be moved thereby to do
well, Math. 4.17. Act. 2.38. To. 2.4. 2. Cor. 7.9.10. 2. Tim. 1 25.
or not moved: sometimes also it signifies (as the best Divines have noted) to
return to a perfect and right understanding, or to wax wise again: we follow
now this later signification.

II.
Repentance then is a Ezec 18.31 Ier. 4.1.3.4.
change of the mind, which is by nature wicked, and renewing of all faculties
of the soul, proceeding from a sincere and religious Ierem. 4.4. Act. 17.30.
2. Cor. 7.10.
fear of God; whereby the mind is carried with an earnest endeavor to do well,
and to please God.

III.
Repentance does consist of two parts: of To. 6.4 5.6 Ephe. 4 22.23.24. Col.
3.5.6.8.9.10. Psalm. 34 15. Esa. 1.16.17.
mortification of the flesh, or of the old man, and in the quickening of the
spirit.

IIII.
Repentance may also be distinguished into ordinary or common, and
extraordinary or special.

V.
The ordinary and common repentance is that, which all men are bound to put in
practice all the days of their life, because of the corruption of nature.

VI.
A special 1. Cor. 5.5. 2. Cor. 12.21.
repentance is that, which raises as it were from death, either the^ which
have fallen shamefully, or in an unbridled licentiousness have given over the^
selves to sin, or have shaken off the yoke of God in some special apostasy.

VII.
In an ordinary repentance it will suffice that we confess our selves unto
Psalm. 31.5.
God: but an extraordinary requires confession, Psalm. 51.
sorrow, and deprecation before the 2. Cor. 2.7. etc 18.21.
congregation, that the Church may be satisfied, and receive again the sinner
which is excommunicate, for any scandale.

VIII.
There is also an extraordinary repentance of some one whole congregation,
when fearing the Lords corrections to approach for some general sins of the
greatest part of the people, they strive by prayer, Joel. 2.1^.
weeping and fasting, to turn away the wrath of God from them. They had also
in this, in times past, in the Church of the Jews, their Ester. 4.3. Ierem.
6.26.
sackloth and ashes.

IX.
The holy Ghost is the cause efficient, Act. 11.18 2. Tim. 2.25.
or the Lord which works in us unfeigned repentance.

X.
The Math. 3.8.
fruit and effect which follows true repentance, is a Christian life: and
this consists in forsaking and Luke. ^.^3
denying our selves, in meditation of the life to come, and in the right use of
all earthly blessings.

XI.
The forsaking of our selves, partly respects men, partly and principally it
respects God.

XII.
The forsaking our selves which respects men, consists partly in Romans
12.10. Philip. 2.3.
reuere^cing them with all Christian modesty, partly in doing 1. Cor. 13.4 etc.
1. Tim. 1.5. 1. John 3.18.
good to them with all sincere affection of heart.

XIII.
That denying of our selves which respects God, frames us with Phil. 4.11.
1. Tim. 6.0.
patience to rest contented with that state and condition of life, which the
Lord shall give us, and specially to the Romans 8.17.
bearing of the cross.

XIIII.
Special motives to bear the cross patiently are these following. 1. Because
this is the good Heb. 12.5.
will and pleasure of our heavenly Father, to exercise his children in this
manner, as it were, to make good trial of them. 2. For that Heb. 5.8. and chap
12 2. 1. Pet. 2.21.
Christ himself was to learn obedience by the things which he suffered, and
we must be made Romans 8.29.
conformable unto him. 3. For that if we be Romans 8.17. 2. Tim. 2.12.
partakers with Christ in his passions, we shall be partakers also with him of
his glorious resurrection. 4. For that it is needful and good for us always
to have some cross, that having experience of our own weakness and frailty,
we may be truly Psalm. 119.71
humbled: that so being humbled, we may learn to call for 2. Cor. 1.9.
strength from God, that so we may have experience of his Romans 5.4.
presence, and that by this experience we may receive 2. Cor 1.10 Romans 5.4.
confirmation of our hope. 5. For that we have need to learn the obedience
Psalm. 119.71
we owe to God, that the rage of our corrupt nature be subdued and bridled, and
that the sins we have committed, may be punished, lest we be 1. Cor. 11.32.
damned with the world. 6. For that when we suffer persecution for
righteousness sake, and specially for defense of the Gospel, we are not only
not miserable, but also blessed and happy, by the Math. 5.10. 1. Pet. 3.14.
testimony of Christ himself. All these reasons, as the matter requires, are
special strong motives unto patience under the cross.

XV.
True patience is not to want either sense Ioh. 16.20. etc. 21.18. (...).
or natural affection, and so to be void of all grief and sorrow: but herein
appears it, when the servant of Christ, is much 2. Cor. 4.8.9
provoked, and yet by Gods fear is so bridled, that he breaks forth into no
rage nor Psalm. 39.
murmuring, but rather rests, (albeit smitten with grief and sorrow,) 2. Cor.
6.10
spiritually comforting himself in the Lord his God: not without meditations
also of Gods justice, equity and clemency in our chastisements, but specially
of the fatherly counsel Romans 8.28. 1. Cor. 11.32.
of God for our salvation, so caring for it on this manner.

XVI.
Now the meditation of the life to come, which is the second part of a
Christian life, is such, that it carries with it a contempt and a lothing of
this Phil. 1.23. 2. Cor. 5.2. Romans 7.24.
present life, according to the measure of illumination and knowledge, which
God has given unto us, both of the Eccle. 1.1.
vanity of this present life by our continual Gene. 47.9
miseries, and of the corruption Romans 7.24.
of our nature by our daily transgressions, and according to the measure of
taste, which the holy Ghost has given us of the glory and Romans 14.17
joys of the life to come.

XVII.
And yet we must not hate this present life, because it is one of Gods Exo.
20.12
blessings, and ordained of God for our salvation: partly for that herein the
Lord gives us a Psalm. 34.9.
taste of his goodness by manifold blessings, partly for that by many
temptations he prepares us for the Tim 4.8. 2. These. 1.67. Act. 14.22.
crown of the celestial glory.

XVIII.
The last point is, that the right use of earthly blessings (which is the third
part of Christian life) consists herein. First, that we use this 1. Cor. 7.29
30.31.
world as if we used it not: using and receiving the blessings of God for the
sustentation and Psalm. 104.15
refreshing of our bodies, but with sobriety Romans 13.14
and 1. Tim. 4.3 4.5.
thanks giving. Next, that we bear patiently and Phil. 4.12.
thankefully the penury and wants of earthly things: and that we ever think
of this, that we must render Luke. 16.2. Romans 14.10. and 12. 2. Cor. 5.10.
an account unto God, of the dispensation or charge committed unto us, and
therefore that we use the good blessings of God temperatly, modestly, soberly,
distributing to the necessity of our poor brethren liberally: and lastly that
we contain and keep our selves 1. Pet. 4.15 1. Cor. 7.17. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11
within the limits of our calling.

CHAP. XIII. Of Justification.
I. APHORISM.
IF the question be how a man is justified before God: To justify does
signify as much as to Prou. 17.15 Deuteronomy 25.1. Romans 8.33.34. etc. 5.18.
acquit, discharge or absolve in Latin, so far as that word signifies the
action of a judge. A man is said therefore to be justified before God, which is
accounted just in Gods Judgment, and accepted before God for his
righteousness.

II.
A man is said to be justified by his works, when in his life there is found
such purity and holiness, which may merit before the throne of God the
commendation of justice: or that can, with the perfection of his works answer
and satisfy the judgment and justice of God.

III.
A man is said to be justified by faith, which renouncing the righteousness of
his works does apprehend by faith the righteousness of Christ, that is, the
righteousness which is purchased by the death of Christ; and this man Gal.
3.27. Apoc. 7.14.
clothed with this robe of Christ does appear not as a sinner, but as a
righteous man in the sight of God.

IIII.
We say with the Apostle Romans 3.28. Gal. 2.16.
Paul that a man is justified before God, not by works but by faith only.

V.
Justification and regeneration go ever Romans 6.^. and 8.
together, but yet must be distinguished. For regeneration in this life only
is Romans 7.
begun, and by degrees increases, till it be perfected in the life to come:
but we are not justified in part, but perfectly: for this quieteth our
consciences, Romans 5.1.
and gives us that peace which passes understanding.

VI.
S. Paul does well express this difference between justification and
regeneration. For speaking of his inherent righteousness or integrity, which
he had in regeneration, he cries out bitterly: o wretched Romans 7.2^
man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death! But turning him
self to the righteousness of Christ imputed unto him (which is grounded upon
the mere mercy of God, and given us in our justification) he rejoices Romans
8.33.34.35. etc.
greatly, and with full trust and affiance triumphs over life and death,
reproaches and wantes, sword and all crosses of this present life.

VII.
When we say we are justified by faith: our meaning is that we are pronounced
just in Gods sight, for that by faith the Lord does Romans 5.19.
impute unto us for righteousness, Heb. 2.9.
the obedience of Christ, which he performed for us, unto his father, Gal.
2.13. Esa. 55.
in tasting death for us, and so in paying the Romans 4.3. etc. Gal. 3.6.
punishment we did owe for the breach of the law.

VIII.
When we say we are justified by faith only, we do not exclude the Romans 3.24
and chap. 5.21 Ep. 1.5.6.7.8.
grace and mercy of God in our justification: nor the Romans 3.25. etc. 5.9. and
c. 8.33.34.
merit of Christ's death, which is imputed unto us for righteousness: but we
exclude Romans 3.28. and chap. 11.12.^.32. Gal. 2.18.
works only.

IX.
For assuredly, the justice of faith and works are so opposite, that they can
not be coupled together: but admit the one, ye must necessarily reiecte th
other. And hence it is that Paul does account the righteousness of the Law
and this righteousness of faith as contraries, Phil. 3.9.
renouncing that righteousness by the law, and resting in that righteousness
which is by faith in Jesus Christ, or given us of God by faith. Again, he
shows that this was the cause of the Romans 10.3.
ruin of the Jews, that seeking to stablish their own righteousness, they
would not submit themselves to the righteousness of God. This he teaches also
when he says, that our rejoicing can not be Romans 3.27.
excluded by the law, but by faith: and again; when the reward is given Romans
4.4. and 5.
for works, that is of due debt, but that righteousness is imputed to faith,
is of grace.

X.
Again Paul does not exclude from justification those works only, which the
unregenerate work out of grace literally, and by strength of their own free
will: for surely Abraham was regenerate, when he did those works for the which
he had Romans 4.2.
praise of men, but was not justified with God.

XI.
To be short, the Scripture teaches that our justification is on this manner,
first the Lord God of his mere Tim. 3.5. Ephe. 1.5.6.7
grace and goodness does embrace a sinner; finding nothing to move him to
mercy, but misery; for he sees him Ephe. 2.1.
destitute and void of all good works: he is moved Ephe. 1.9.
of himself to do him good, and to give this sinner some taste and feeling Romans
5.5.
of his goodness: that Phil. 3.8.
distrusting his own strength and works he may repose all his trust and hope
for salvation in the only mercy Ephe. 1.7.
of God in Christ Jesus, which God has revealed in his holy word.

XII.
Again that a man is justified by faith only, is very clear by other places of
the Apostle: as where he disputes that there is Romans 4.2.3.4.
no righteousness by faith, but that which is by grace: where he Romans 3.21. and
28. Gal. 2.16.
denies righteousness to the works of the law: to works (I say) not only
ceremonial but also moral: as may plainly appear by these sentences which he
uses for confirmation of his purpose: as, the Gal. 3.12.
man that shall do these things, shall live in them: and Ibid. 10.
cursed is every man, that continues not in all things which are written in
the book of the law to do them: and by these conclusions: righteousness is
not by the law, for by the law comes the Romans 3.20
knowledge of sin. The law Romans 4.15
causes wrath, Ergo not righteousness.

XIII.
We grant with Paul that no faith justifies but that which works by Gal.
5.6.
love: but we utterly deny that faith has power to justify, or that faith and
love do justify, because faith is effectual, or working by love.

XIIII.
The form of our justification is the free remission Romans 4.6.7.8. Luke.
18.13. and 14. Act. 13.38. and 39.
of sins: for like as the wrath of God is upon all so long as they continue
in sin: so whom the Lord shall receive to grace, them he is said to justify,
that is, of sinners to make them righteous, and this he does by pardoning and
discharging them from their sins. For if we consider them whom God received
to his grace by their works, they shall be found Romans 9. 1. John. 1.8.
sinners as yet, which notwithstanding are and must be acquitted and freed from
their sins.

XV.
Again thus; the form of our justification is this: God does remove our sins
from us and imputes them unto Christ, and again imputes the righteousness of
Christ unto us: consider this demonstration for thy better understanding.

God imputing unto Christ the 1. Guiltiness. Of the believer, cause of his
death. 2. Disobedience. 3. Corruption. God imputing unto the believer the
benefits of the 1. Passion. Of Christ, cause of his life. 2. Righteousness. 3.
Holiness.

XVI.
The cause which moves Gods mercy in our justification is the Romans 3.24 25.
Ephe. 1.7. 1. John. 2.1. and 2.
satisfaction and merit of Christ, that is, his Romans 5.19 Phil. 2.8.
obedience unto his father in his Heb. 2.9.
death for us: and this obedience is Romans 4.6.
imputed unto us for righteousness, that is, is accounted ours, as if we had
performed the same our selves.

XVII.
And to the end that this obedience and righteousness of Christ might be
imputed unto us: it was necessary first that he should yield perfect obedience
to the law of God himself, living thereafter in all holiness of life. And to
perform this, it was necessary also, that he should be sanctified and without
sin from his beginning, and first conceptio^ in his mothers womb: for if he
had not been a holy Heb. 7.26.
Priest, and a 1. Pet. 1.19
holy sacrificer, he could not have pleased God: and so could not have pacified
him for us. And yet further I ad, that this our high Priest, and mediator, must
be very Act. 20.28 1. John. 1.7.
God, that the obedience of his death might be of price sufficient for our
sins, and meet to give us an everlasting righteousness.

XVIII.
The doctrine of our free justification, shall then be comfortable and pleasant
unto us: when we shall present our selves as guilty before the heavenly judge,
and shall prostrate our selves, and strip our selves as naked in his presence,
full of fear and care, to be discharged from our sins, considering the Esa.
33.14.
perfection of Gods justice and the Job. 4.17.18.19.
imperfection of our righteousness, yea the huge Psalm. 19.13 Job. 15.16.
number and greatness of our sins. For thus come we at the last, well prepared
and ready to receive the grace of Christ, when we shall be truly cast down and
humbled with the lively touch and feeling of our misery and wants. But
contrarily, such as either Luke 18.11 12.13.14.
swell in the conceit of their own righteousness, or be drunk in the
delights of their own sins, they live in a secure contempt of Gods judgment,
and shut up against themselves the gates of Gods mercy.

XIX.
Furthermore, if we admit not this doctrine of free justification: we shall rob
God of his full Romans 3.19 and 25. 1. Cor. 1.30. and 31. Ephe. 1.12. and 14. and
chap. 2 v. 8.8.9.
glory, and our poor consciences, of sound peace Rom 5.1. etc. 8.35. Ephe.
3.12.
and rest before his tribunal seat of justice: both which notwithstanding
must be had, and granted.

XX.
And we must further note that the whole course of our justification is by
grace, and for our better understanding in this point, consider of four sorts
of men. The first is of them which are neither inwardly nor outwardly called:
the second sort is of those contemners, whom they commonly call Epicures, which
have an outward but not an inward calling: the third sort is of hypocrites,
which desire some commendation of justice by some show of external works, but
specially by the ceremonies which appertain to Gods worship: these also have
their outward, but not their inward calling: the fourth sort of men, are they
which have both an outward and inward calling, whom Gods spirit does
regenerate by the Gospel: and like these are none of the three former kinds.

XXI.
That the first kind have no righteousness, but be mere unjust and impious
before God, having also no strength to do that which is good, and to believe
the promise of grace, is very manifest every where in Scripture: as when all the
sons of Adam are described in these words: that they have Iere. 17.9.
wicked and rebellious hearts, that all the Gene. 6.3. and chap. 8.21.
imaginations of their heart are only evil continually, that their Psalm. 94.11
thoughts are vain, that they have no Psalm. 36.1.
fear of God before their eyes, that not one of them does Psalm. 14.2.
understand or seek after God. Again that when God does enlighten us with his
knowledge, he raises us from John. 5.25.
death to life, and makes us new Ephe. 2.10
creatures: that we be deadly and Romans 5.6.7.8.
professed enemies unto God before he receive us to grace in our justification:
that we have not loved 1. Ioh. 4.10
him before he loved us: that we be not purged from our uncleanness by the
blood of Christ, till the 1. Cor. 6.11
holy Ghost work our inward sanctification: that then we begin to pass from
death to life, when through Christ we receive Phil. 1.29.
grace to believe.

XXII.
Now for the second and third kind, that they have no justice to stand before
God, may appear also manifestly, for that the uncleanness of their own
consciences is proof sufficient that they be not as yet regenerate by the holy
Ghost, and this also bewrays their want of faith. Whereby it appears that
they be not as yet reconciled unto God, nor justified before him, for that this
grace none can attain unto, but by faith.

XXIII.
The hypocrites challenge some justice, because of their glorious works and
obedience to the ceremonies, but they are so far from pleasing God herein,
that they highly displease him, because with unclean hearts they profane his
holy worship. For works can not Hag. 2.12.13.14.15. Esa. 1.11.12.13.14.15.
Prou. 15.8.
purchase grace with God for any person: but contrarily, works please God,
after that the person first has found favor and grace with God. And for this
cause Moses writes, that the Lord respected Gene. 4.4.
Abell and his of^fring: in which words he teaches that Abels oblation did
therefore please God, because Abels person pleased him: and that pleased him by
faith, without which (...) it is imopssible to please God, Heb. 11.6.
for that thereby men's hearts are Act. 15.9.
purified. For which cause also Paul says to the Hebrews that Abel Heb. 11.4.
offered unto God a better sacrifice then Cain: for that Cain was an hypocrite,
and so without faith.

XXIIII.
Lastly for the fourth kind, albeit man regenerate by Gods grace have some 1.
Cor. 4 4.
righteousness of works: yet the same is not such, nor so perfect, as that it
can stand before the judgment seat of God: because all their good works are
Rom 7.14. etc. Phil. 3.13.14
imperfect, and Esa. 64 6.
polluted with corruptions, and their sins following do Eze. 18.24.
bury all the remembrance of their former righteousness and good life.

XXV.
By the premises we now see that not only the beginning of our justification
is by grace, so as a sinner freed from damnation obtains righteousness, and
that freely by the pardon of his sins, as appears in the three first sorts
of men: but also our proceeding therein, so as our justification is ever free
and by grace: which thing well appears in the fourth kind of men which are
both, regenerate by Gods spirit, and justified by a lively faith in Christ.
And thus God imputed unto Abraham, the father of the faithful, his faith for
righteousness, when as he had Gene. 15.6
lived for many years in great holiness of life. This says Habacuk also;
Habac. 2.4.
The just shall live by faith: and David; Psalm. 32.1.
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, speaking of the godly which
live a holy unspotted and blameless life before men. Again Paul says that
the 2. Cor. 5.20
embassage concerning our free reconciliation with God must be continued among
the faithful. And Christ is a 1. John. 2.1.
continual mediator, reconciling us with his father, and the efficacy or
virtue of his death to Ibid. 2.
expiate the sins of the faithful never dies, nor waxes old.

XXVI.
And whereas the Schoolmen also say, that good works have no such virtue in
them, to be sufficient unto justification: but that their merit and virtue to
justify is by grace: we must learn that there is no grace to work our
justification, but that only which moves God in Christ to embrace us, and to
justify us by the merits of his obedience and satisfaction for us.

XXVII.
For God accepts not our works, but so far as we please him, having put on
by faith the righteousness of Christ, that is, which Christ purchased by his
death for us, as is Aphor. 23.
before showed. Neither can works justify in part before God: for God
admits no righteousness of works, but that Deuteronomy. 27.26 Leuit. 18.5.
full and perfect obedience to his law.

XXVIII.
When they glory of works of supererogation, whereby they say full
satisfaction is made for trespasses and sins committed: how can they answer
that saying of Christ? Luke 16.10
When ye have done all these things which are commanded you, say we are
unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our duty to do.

XXIX.
To be short concerning works, take heed of two things: first put no trust in
them, next ascribe no glory to them.

XXX.
The Scriptures drive us from all confidence in them, teaching us that all our
righteousness, Esa. 64.6.
smells in the sight of God as filthy clouts, and only provoke Gods wrath
against us. Now take away this confidence of works, all glorying must fall to
the ground: for who will ascribe any commendation of justice unto works, if
confidence in them cause him to tremble in the sight of God?

XXXI.
Moreover if we consider all the causes of our salvation, we shall find the
grace of God to shine bright in every one of them, excluding the righteousness
of our works. For the author of our salvation is God, the Father, Son and
holy Ghost. The Father first, in that Tit. 3.5.
of his mere John. 3.16. 1. John. 4.9. and 10.
grace and free love, he sent his son unto us, to redeem us from the
dominion of the devil. Next the Son, in that of his free love Romans 5.7.8 1.
John. 3.26.
toward us, he became Romans 5.19. Phil 2.8.
obedient to his father unto the death of the cross, and so has satisfied
Romans 3.25. 1. John. 2.2.
the justice of God for us. Lastly the holy Ghost, in that he gives us Ephe.
2.8. and chap. 1.^3
faith, whereby we apprehend the justice which Christ has purchased for us by
his death. The end also, the Apostle says, is the Romans 3.25.
manifestation of Gods justice, and the praise of his Ephe. 1.12
goodness.

XXXII.
And whereas the Saints commend otherwhiles their innocence and integrity
before God: this they do not to the end, to trust in the justice of their
works in Gods judgment, and to rest their consciences as upon a good
foundation: but either to testify the goodness of their Psalm. 7 9. Psalm.
18.21.
cause against their adversaries, or to comfort themselves concerning their
adoption, 2. King 20.3 1. Tim. 4.7.8.
by the fruits of their faith and calling: for that they rest on the only
favor of God in Jesus Christ.

XXXIII.
Again, whereas the Scripture says, that the good works and obedience of the
faithful do cause the Lord to rain down many blessings upon them: we must
understand, that good works are so far causes of Gods blessings upon us, as
the Lord by his former graces, takes occasion, to give us more graces: where
note, that they be not meritorious causes, but motives only for special
graces of Gods spirit going before: for whom the Lord will glorify, them
first he Ephe. 5.26.27.
sanctifies: that their corruption and wickedness may not hinder their
glorification. In a word (as Augustine has well spoken) God crowns the
works of his own hand in us.

XXXIIII.
Again, that our works do not merit the grace of God, may yet further
appear by these reasons following. First for that they are full of Esa. 64.6.
corruption: next for that they are duties we Luke 17.10.
owe unto God: thirdly for that they are not ours, that is, such as come from
the strength of our free will, but the effects Romans 8.10. Ephe. 2.10.
and fruits of Gods grace in us.

XXXV.
And whereas good works please God and have a 2. Tim 4.8.
reward, it is not for any merit, but for that Gods Esa. 55.1.
goodness does accept of them and reward them, of his mere grace and mercy in
Jesus Christ.

XXXVI.
Surely no Christian doubts, but that we must hold fast, the grounds of
Christian Religion, and this is a fundamental point or ground of Christian
doctrine, that Christ is given 1. Cer. 1.30 and c. 3.11.
us for our righteousness, or justification: if this doctrine stand, the
justice of our merits and works, being a flat contrary, can not stand.

XXXVII.
There are two opinions of Popery which are most opposite to that great ground
of Christian verity. The first is, that there are some moral virtues or works
which make men acceptable before God, before they be grafted into Christ: the
second that Christ has merited for us, the first grace: that is, an occasion
of meriting with God: and that then it is our parts, to take the occasion when
it is offered.

XXXVIII.
To conclude, we must very circumspectly see to this, that we build wisely upon
on that foundation: for that doctrine is sound concerning good works, which is
derived from the doctrine This is the method which Paul uses, in a manner, in
all his Epistles, as to Romans Gal. Ephesians. Phil. Col. etc.
of faith, following the same as the effect does the cause. For to this end are
we justified by faith in Christ, that we may show our selves thankful unto
God for so inspeakable a benefit, by our continual endeavor and care to serve
God in all good works, and in all holiness and righteousness of life.

CHAP. XIIII. Of Christian liberty.
I. APHORISM.
BEcause that Christians, and the faithful under the Gospel, are freed Romans
6.14.
from the law: it follows now that we consider, how far this Christian
liberty is extended, and wherein it consists, least any do wickedly abuse
Gal. 5.13.
the same against the glory of God, his own salvation, and the salvation of
his brethren.

II.
Christian liberty has three parts: to wit, our freedom and discharge from
the Or conde^natio^ of the law.
justification of the law, from the dominion of sin, and from the ceremonies
of the law.

III.
The first part of Christian liberty is this, that the consciences of the
faithful, are freed and discharged, from the Gal. 3.13. and c. 5.1.
justification of the law, that is, from the necessity of perfect obedience to
the attaining of the legal justice, and so consequently from that care and
trembling, because of the heavy curse and wrath of God, which follows the
breach of the law.

IIII.
But no man may therefore conclude, that the law is not necessary for the
faithful: for, they are ever Romans 7.12.
taught, admonished, and moved thereby unto every good work: albeit, it can not
charge their consciences, before the tribunal seat of God.

V.
The second part of Christian liberty is, that Christians are freed from the
kingdom John 8.34 36. Romans 6.14. etc 7. 22. and chap. 8. 2. 1. John. 5.3.
and dominion of that sin and corruption which dwells in them, so that
henceforth they do no more hate nor fly from the law of God, but are delighted
therein, because of Gods holy spirit which dwells in them.

VI.
This blessed freedom, yields two benefits: the first is a holy trust and
affiance in God, that their Malach. 3.17.
obedience, having many wants, yet is acceptable unto God: the second benefit,
is a cheerfulness in performing our duties unto God, and this follows the
former immediately, as the effect the cause: and these two points are very
pertinent to Gods holy worship.

VII.
The third part of Christian liberty is, that the consciences of the
faithful, are discharged and freed from the Gal. 3.25. and c. 5. 13. Ephesians
2.14.15. Colos. 2.14. and 16.
ceremonies of the law: that is, from the necessity and burden of the
observation of the legal ceremonies: as the eating of certain meats, the
observation of certain feasts, and the like. Which things in their own
nature are but things indifferent, Romans 14.
so that it is little pertinent to godliness, simply whether they be used, or
not used. I ad simply for that in some respect, and for some circu^sta^ce the
use of such things might be profitable, as shall after appear in place
convenient.

VIII.
The knowledge of the doctrine of Christian liberty is necessary also for the
faithful, as for peace of consciences, so to avoid superstitions.

IX.
But here notwithstanding, observe, that the free use of external and
indifferent things, is not Romans 14. v. 14. and 22.
granted them which as yet know not the doctrine, nor be assuredly persuaded of
the truth thereof: but are carried with some superstitious opinion, which
causes them to doubt of the use of them.

X.
The end and use therefore of this doctrine is, that we may use the blessings
of God, without any scruple of conscience, for that end, for the which they are
ordained and given of God for us, but ever moderating our selves in the use of
these things, for the Romans 14.13 15.19.20.21. and chap. 15. 2 1. Cor. 10.23.
edificatio^ of our brethren.

XI.
Wherefore seeing the Romans 24.5.
peace of consciences is the true and natural end of Christian liberty; it
follows that they do greatly abuse the same, which use it either to satisfy
their own carnal 1. Cor. 6.12
lusts, or without regard of circumstances of time, and place, or any way Romans
14.3. and 10.
in contempt of their weak brethren.

XII.
For albeit we must otherwhiles Gal. 2. v. 3. 4 5.
defend our liberty, in the use of things indifferent, before men, to repress
the malice of some froward adversaries, yet we must have a special care of
weak Romans 14.1. and 13. and 20 and 21. Act. 16.3. Romans 15.1.2. 1. Cor. 8.9.
and 13. etc. 9. 22.
brethren, that we give no offense to them.

XIII.
For the right use of Christian liberty is, to give place to the ignorance and
infirmity of weak brethren, and not to any Gal. 2. v. 3.4.5. Mat. 1.5.14.
Pharisaicall sowrenesse, or rudeness of hypocrites.

XIIII.
We must here take heed of that hypocrisy wherein a great number in this
liberty, regard not the edification of brethren, but provide only for their
Gal. 2.1^. etc.
own peace.

XV.
And here keep this rule. Do not offend God, for thy neighbors sake. Under
this general rule are contained two special: the first is this: look what we
are bound to do, (that is, what God has commanded) we must not leave Mat.
15.10 etc. John. 6.51. etc. Act. 5.28.29.
undone for fear of any offense or danger that may ensue the same. The second
is this: we must neither Romans 3.8. Gene. 12.10. and chap. 26.7. Exodus 1.19.
Ios. 2.4.5.6. 1. Sam. 21.24.
purpose nor do any thing which God does not permit.

XVI.
There is also another general rule, that love (toward man) give place to
the purity of faith: as if a man be bound to do any thing against his
conscience, or else the brother will be offended: let the brother be Luke 14.26
offended, rather then do any thing against conscience: for as this liberty is
under charity, so charity under faith.

XVII.
Again, another consequent of this liberty is this: the consciences of the
faithful are exempt and freed from the 1. Cor. 3.21 and chap. 7.23.
dominion and power of all men: and this is, that Christ may not leese that
praise and thanks giving which is due to his bountifulness and goodness, and
that our consciences may not be deprived of the fruit of his liberality.

XVIII.
Neither must we deem this liberty of co^scie^ces in not being subject unto
man, to be but a matter of small moment, for that it cost Ibid. and 1. Pet.
1.18. and 19. Gal. 5.1.
Christ so great a price, even the price of his own most precious blood.

XIX.
The better to understand this doctrine, we must note the difference between
the spiritual, and civil government of men: for by that spiritual regiment,
the conscience is instructed to serve and worship God: but by the civil
government, a man is taught to perform the duties of humanity and civility,
which must be observed and kept among men.

XX.
We must advisedly regard and see that these two regimentes be not confounded:
least that any infer or conclude a civil liberty against politic
government, by this spiritual liberty which Christ has purchased for us.

XXI.
Again, in constitutions and laws concerning spiritual government, we must
carefully discern between orders lawfully and unlawfully established. For
constitutions and orders lawful are consonant to the word of God, but the
unlawful are contrary to the same.

XXII.
And whereas Paul Romans 13.
commands to obey the Magistrate for conscience sake: he does not therein
bind consciences to laws politic: but this he means only, that we must
obey the Magistrate so far and so long as he commands things lawful and
honest, for that God also commands us such obedience, and we can not with
good conscience neglect any of his decrees. Therefore the Apostle does not here
make the conscience subject to any laws of men, but unto the law of God,
commanding us to obey the laws of men so far forth as they do not repugne
the holy laws of God.

XXIII.
This may yet be understood, if we note what the conscience is. The conscience
is a Romans 2.15.
feeling of Gods judgment concerning our actions: an eye witness which
discerns and can truly testify of all our works, and this the very
signification of the word can teach us.

XXIIII.
Of the premises we may learn, that conscience does properly respect God, so
that a good conscience is nothing else, but the testimony of our heart 1. Pet.
3.21
before God, of the sincerity of our heart.

XXV.
In deed we say that a good conscience sometimes respects Act. 24.16.
men, and that is in respect of the fruits or effects thereof in the duties of
love.

XXVI.
By the former definition of the conscience, we may also learn what law
binds the conscience: namely that law which binds a man simply without
respect or consideration of men.

XXVII.
Finally the law of God, which comma^deth in the use of indifferent things to
regard the edification of our neighbor, although it bind the outward 1. Cor.
10.28. Romans 14.22.
work, yet binds it not the conscience, 1. Cor. 10.28.
so as if a man might not with a good conscience use those things, but only in
that case of edifying our neighbor, that is, our weak brother.

CHAP. XV. Of Offenses.
I. APHORISM.
AN offense is a word or deed, whereby the neighbor is offended, that is, made
Romans 14.15 Math. 15.12. John. 6.61.
sad or grieved, as with any thing impiously or unjustly spoken or done, or
when a man by any thing as well spoken, or done (which yet is not well spoken
or done) is 1. Cor. 8.10
moved to commit sin.

II.
A scandale is either given or taken.

III.
That is called an offense Math. 18.6.7. etc.
given, the fault whereof comes from the doer himself: or an offense given
is a wicked word or deed, contrary to the love of God and our neighbor: and
therefore this evil of it self grieueth and makes sad the godly, and seduceth
the weak brethren.

IIII.
That is called an offense Mat. 15.12
taken, when any thing not wickedly, or untimely spoken or done, through malice
or sinister affection of mind, is wrested to an occasion of offense. Or, an
offense taken is a word or deed, of it self not wicked, but taken as wicked,
either maliciously or ignorantly.

V.
Lastly, there seems also to be a third Romans 14.
mixed offense, that is partly given, partly taken: as when a man uses
Christian liberty out of season, not regarding time and place convenient. But
yet this kind of offense, is more near and liker an offense given, then taken.
And this may be called the offense of the weak; or an offense of infirmity,
as the other which is taken may be called an offense Pharisaicall: for that
none thereby, but bitter spirits, and Pharisaicall ears are offended.

VI.
We must take Romans 14.1.13.21. 1. Cor. 8.13. Math. 18.6.7
heed that we offend not the weak: howsoever proud wits be Mat. 15.14 Act
5.28.29. Gal. 2.3.4.5.
offended.

CHAP. XVI. Of Prayer.
I. APHORISM.
PRayer is a John. 4.24.
holy meditation of things pertaining to Gods glory and our salvation: and an
earnest Luke. 18.1. etc.
desire of the same, with supplication, proceeding from an holy affiance, which
(as sons and Heb. 10.22
daughters) the faithful have in God: whereunto also thanksgiving unto God
for benefits received, is usually annexed.

II.
Our present Psalm. 50.51.
necessity which we feel, ought not only to be a motive unto prayer: but
also Gods Ibid.
commandment, and Ibid. John. 16 24. Mat. 7 7. and chap. 18. 19.
promise to hear us.

III.
We ought then to beg in prayer not only for those things which concern our
own happiness: but also that God would give grace that by this service and
Math. 4.10.
worship we may truly honor him.

IIII.
Against all distrust which may hinder us in prayer: we must oppose Gods holy
promises, whereby he has testified, that he will hear Psalm. 50.15. Math. 7.7.
our prayer.

V.
There be four rules of prayer. The Dan. 9.3.4.5. etc.
first that we come to prayer with a mind Mat. 14.23
emptied of other cares, and endued with a due reverence of the majesty of
God, not daring to beg any thing which God himself does not permit: the
second, that we pray with a true sense e. Luke 18. v. 13.
and feeling of our wants, and with an earnest desire to obtain: the third
that in prayer we put off all e. Luke 18. v. 13.
opinion of our own justice or worthiness, and contrarily, that in all
humility, and free Dan. 9. Psalm. 51.
confession of our sins, we fly to Gods mercy, entreating the free pardon
and forgiveness of our sins: the fourth and last rule is, that prayer proceed
from faith Romans 10.14 James. 1 6. Heb. 10.22. Dan. 9.17. Psalm. 51.9.
and assurance of Gods grace in Christ: assuredly trusting that our prayer
shall be heard.

VI.
The Lord himself has given us a Math. 6.9. etc.
prescript form of prayer, which therefore is called the Lords Prayer. This
consists of a Preface, narration, confirmation and conclusion.

VII.
The Preface is in these words, Our Father which art in heaven. Wherein we
profess our faith, or affiance and trust we have, as children, in God our
heavenly Father, who has by grace adopted us in that his beloved and only
begotten Son our Lord Jesus Christ. Here also to lift up our minds to God, we
make me^tio^ of the seat of Gods majesty, that is of heaven, where he gives
his blessed Angels the fruition of his presence, and shall give us in his good
time appointed.

VIII.
The narration contains six petitions: the first three, do in special manner
concern Gods glory: the other three, respect our own benefit and good.

IX.
In the first petition (Hallowed be thy name) we are commanded and taught to
ask that, which in the third Commandment we are commanded to do: that is,
that we neither think nor speak of God, but with great reverence: and so in
like manner of his word, and of his works.

X.
In the second petition: Let thy kingdom come, we beg first, that God by the
grace of his holy spirit, would repress the corrupt affections of our nature,
and form all our senses to the obedience of his will: next that he would curb
and bridle the wicked which fight against his kingdom, and that he would
gather unto himself his elect, and preserve his Churches: that he would cast
down the enemies of his Church, and cut them short in all their attempts and
desires: and lastly, that in his good time, he would make us partakers of his
glory and heavenly bliss.

XI.
The third petition is, Thy will be done in earth as it is heaven. This
petition is added to the former, for declaration sake to help our ignorance:
for then and there God reigns in the world, where men submit themselves, to
be ruled by his holy will revealed in his word. We ask here therefore that the
holy spirit would rule our hearts, and teach us, that we may learn to love
that which God loves, and to hate that which he hates: that so we may yield
unto him a cheerful and willing obedience as his blessed Angels do in heaven.

XII.
The fourth petition is, Give us this day our daily bread: In this petition we
commend our bodies to Gods providence, desiring, that he would feed, chearish
and preserve them. And this petition, the Lord has set before the other two
following, (which concern not earthly and corporal blessings, but spiritual
and heavenly) to help our dullness, and weakness, that so by degrees he might
lift up our minds to seek after those greater blessings. And here we be
willed to ask of God our bread, that is, such as it shall please our heavenly
father to give us, for the sustentation of our life: where we see this petition
is as necessary for the rich as for the poor. Lastly, these words, this day,
or every day, and this Epithet daily serve to moderate our affections and
desires in these transitory blessings.

XIII.
The fifth petition, Forgive us our debtes, as we also forgive our debtors: by
the word debtes he means our sins, for that we owe the punishment of them
unto God and this Christ himself has borne for us, in his death upon the
cross, and so has obtained the pardon of sins for us. We beg that the
heavenly father would impute unto us that satisfaction and obedience of Christ
and work in us a sense and a feeling of this imputation, that so we may
sweetly rest in his fatherly favor in Christ, and in his love purchased for us
in and by the sufferings of Christ. To this petition is annexed an argument
drawn from the like example: that is, the example of our remission in
pardoning our neighbor his trespasses: The reason of which example does not
consist in the merit of our work, but in the promise of Christ, saying. For
Math. 6.14.15.
if ye forgive men their offenses, your heavenly father will also forgive you.
But if ye do not forgive men their trespasses, no more will your father
forgive you your trespasses. By which words it does manifestly appear, that
they only can be assured of the pardon of sins, that are assured and know in
their consciences, that they have pardoned their neighbors. The reason whereof
is this, it can not be, that any man pardon from his heart his brother, Gods
love is cause of our love, and our love but a sign and effect of his love.
unless he first love him: now he can not love his brother, which first does
not love God; and no man can love God, which is not persuaded in his heart, that
God of his mere grace has pardoned him all his sins by and through Jesus
Christ. And again he that is assured of this, he can not, but love God, and
his neighbor in and for the Lord: from which love, it can not be, but the
pardoning of all offenses must proceed. Lastly this argument is also noted
with these words as and also, (...). Forgive us, as we also forgive. (...).
Math. 6.12. and Luke. 12. For even we, etc. Wherefore this word also is not
well omitted: for we say commonly, as we forgive them that trespass, etc. for,
as we also forgive, etc.

XIIII.
The sixth and last petition is: And lead us not into temptation, but deliver
us from evil. Where we pray for the assistance of the holy spirit to overcome
the temptations of the devil, which is here called that evil or wicked
spirit, (...).
for that by his temptations (for which cause he is called the tempter Math.
4.3.) he troubles and vexes us.

XV.
And thus far of the six petitions, contained in the narration, the
confirmation follows in these words: For thine is the kingdom, and the
power, and the glory for ages, or for ever, in which words we show wherefore
we have both such boldness to ask, and trust to obtain: to wit, for that God
will be glorified by having his kingdom and reigning in us: and for that also he
can effect what he will in heaven and earth.

XVI.
The conclusion is contained in one word, namely the word Amen, which is here a
word of wishing, signifying as much as, truth, So be it, or, Let this be a
truth. Wherefore we desire that whatsoever we have prayed for at Gods hands in
the six petitions, the same may be true, and effected by him. And yet there is
no inconueniencie to say that Amen here, is a word of asseueration: for that by
faith we be assured, that God has granted our requests.

XVII.
As for the place of prayer: God in times past had appointed first his Exodus
26. and 40.
Tabernacle, then after that Salomons 1. King. 8. 2. Chron. 7. Act. 8.27. Luke.
18.10. Dan. 6.10.
Temple: but Christ has John. 4.21.
abolished this ceremony of that holy place, and Paul 1. Tim. 2.8.
bids us pray in every place. And so Christ Math. 6.6.
commands us to pray in our secret chambers: and himself went up to the
Mat. 14.23.
mountain alone to pray. And Christ also does approve a public place of
common prayer, when he says: Where two or Mat. 18.20.
three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.

XVIII.
There is no certain time in the new Teme^t appointed for prayer: yet is it
profitable that every man appoint himself some Dan 6.10. Psalm. 55.18. Act. 10.9.
ordinary and special hour for prayer, as in vprising, before and after
meats, and when we go to rest, so that this observation of ours be void of
superstition, and then specially are we bound to apply our selves to prayer,
when we see our selves, or our brethren in any Psalm. 50.15. Joel. 2. Ierem.
6.26. Est 4.3. and 16.
dangers or in any special wants: again, we are also bound to render thanks
humbly unto God, when we have received any special benefit at his hands.
Exodus 15. Jude. 5. Psalm. 9.30.34. etc.


XIX.
Moreover the lifting up the voice in prayer, or singing, or gesture of the
body (as Ephe. 3.14
kneeling, 1. Cor. 11.
covering the face, the 1. Tim. 2.8.
lifting up of hands and eyes John. 11.41
toward heaven) do not simply commend any man's prayer, but so far these
things please God, as they proceed from the true Luke. 18.11 and 13.
affections of the heart.

XX.
Again, we must take heed that we prescribe not or appoint any certain Mat.
20.21. Jude. 7.19.
circumstances unto God: for we must give him 2. Sam. 15.26.
leave to grant and perform our requests in what manner, time, and place it
pleases him.

XXI.
Lastly, this also is to be noted, that we Luke. 18.1 etc. Luke. 11.8.
persevere in prayer: and that we consider not of the hearing of our prayers by
our sense or feeling, but by our faith. For albeit we do not always feel that
God does give us that we have asked: yet we must be assured that he does give
and will give, that which is good for our salvation.

CHAP. XVII. Of Predestination.
I. APHORISM.
PRedestination we call the Ephe. 1.4. 2. Tim. 1.9.
eternal decree of God, wherein he determined with himself what he would have
done with Romans 9.20.21.22. and 23.
every man: as concerning their eternal salvation or damnation.

II.
This predestination has two special branches. The first is called election:
the other reprobation, by a metonymie of the effect (that is, a change of a
word properly signifying an effect, to signify the cause) for election and
reprobation are properly referred to man: who being created, is fallen and
corrupted with sin: but metonymically the very decree of election and
reprobation is so Ephe. 1.4.
called.

III.
Therefore we say with the Scripture, that God in his eternal and 2 Timothy 2. v.
19. Esa. 46.9. Malach. 3.6. 1 Thessalonians. 5.9.
immutable counsel has once decreed, whom in time to come he will Romans 9.23.
advance to glory: and whom on the contrary he shall Act. 1.25. John. 17.12.
1. Pet. 2.8. Jude v. 4.
give over to condemnation.

IIII.
This purpose we avouch was founded on the Ephe. 1.5. Romans 8.29. Mat. 11.25.26.
Romans 9.18.
mere pleasure of God.

V.
Moreover, whom God has predestinate to salvation, them also has he decreed
to make partakers of the means by which men come to salvation: which means
are their Ephe. 1.
reco^ciliation by Christ, their Romans 8.
effectual calling, and Ibid.
justification. And contrarily whom he has predestinate to destruction, them
also has he decreed, not to make partakers of those means which tend to
salvation, but to leave Psalm. 81.13
them to themselves, or to deliver them to Esa. 29.10. Romans 11.8.
Satan that both by his and their own natural instigation they may purchase
to themselves damnation.

VI.
The end or scope of predestination is is the glory Prou. 16.4.
of God: that is, the glory of his Ephe. 1.6. and 12. Romans 9.23.
grace, and mercy, manifested in the salvation of the elect, and of his Romans
9.25.26.
justice in the death of his son our mediator: the glory also of his Romans
9.17 and 22.
power and Romans 9.22.
justice in the damnation of reprobates, yea of his justice, both Romans 11.33
secret in their reiection, and also Romans 1.18
manifest in punishing them, for their sins: finally the glory of his most
free Romans 9.15 8.20.21.
power, both in the condemnation of the reprobate, and in the glorification of
his elect.

VII.
The infallible testimony of our election is our Romans 8.30. 1. Tim. 1.1.
effectual calling, when as the holy spirit, by the preaching Romans 10.17
of the Gospel, does work faith in Christ, in the hearts of his elect, that
thereby they may be Romans 8.30. Ephe. 1.7.
justified, working also some beginning of new 2. Tim. 2.19
obedience, that they may be sanctified, that so in time they may be fully Romans
8.30.
glorified.

VIII.
And as the Lord 2. Tim. 2.19
seals and marketh his elect, by their vocation, justification, and
sanctification, so by excluding the reprobate either from the knowledge of his
truth or from the sanctification of his spirit, as it were by certain notes
he shows what judgment remains for them.

IX.
Neither yet may any rashly define or pronounce, that he is in the number of
the reprobate, if the signs of election as yet appear not in him, for some
are called, Math. 20.3 etc.
later then others, yea the Luke 23.40 etc.
thief on the cross was not before the end of his life called: wherefore we
may despair of none unless manifest signs be showed, that he has sinned to
death: that is, against the holy 1. Ioh. 5.16
spirit, neither yet may any securely sin in hope of mercy, but ever
remember to Heb. 3.7.
day, if ye hear his voice harden not your hearts: for God is not mocked. Gal
6.7.


X.
There be two notable fruits of this doctrine, the one that we may with humble
adoration, acknowledge how much we are bound to God, that has vouchsafed to
choose us, so unworthy, out of the Romans 11.35
company of the damned, and to advance us to the state of heavenly glory. The
other, that we may with good Romans 8.31. etc. 2. Tim. 2.19.
assurance rest our selves on the unchangeable purpose of God touching our
salvation and therefore be fully persuaded and assured thereof in Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the resurrection, and of life everlasting.
I. APHORISM.
ALbeit the doctrine of the resurrection seem incredible in man's reason: yet
we that are Christians must believe it and receive it: that is, we must believe
that the bodies of the dead shall be restored to their first state, and their
souls shall reenter them again, so they shall live and rise again at the
last day.

II.
This faith of ours is grounded on the Dan. 12.2. Ioh. 5.29. etc
testimonies of the word of God, who is almighty and can not lie.

III.
But of them that shall rise again, the estate shall be very unlike. For the
godly shall rise to Dan. 12.2.
life and glory everlasting, but the ungodly to shame and John. 5.29.
death everlasting.

IIII.
This glorious and blessed resurrection of the godly depends upon the
resurrection of 1. Cor. 15.12. etc. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14
Christ, as of their head to whom they as members must be conformed.

V.
Christ then the head of the godly, shall in the resurrection make our bodies
Phil. 5.21. 1. Cor. 15.35 etc.
like to his glorious body.

VI.
Again, Christ shall raise the dead at his glorious 1. These. 4.16.
coming to judgment with the shout of an Archangell and sound of a trumpet.

VII.
The dead being raised, then in a moment as in the twinkling of an eye, the
living shall be 1 Thessalonians. 4.16 and. 17. 1. Cor. 15.52 and 53.
changed, so that their bodies shall be made incorruptible.

VIII.
Then straight ways all the godly shall be 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
caught up into the air to meet the Lord and so shall Ibid. Math. 25.34. and
46.
ever be with the Lord and with him enjoy everlasting happiness.

IX.
On the contrary, the ungodly shall together with the devils be thrust down
into Math. 25.41. and 46.
hell into the Reave. 20.15 and chap. 21. 8
lake that ever burns with fire and brimstone and there shall be tormented.

X.
Again, eternal life consists chiefly in the full feeling of Gods love, and
in the communion of his nature according to these sayings, Psalm. 17.15.
I shall be (says David) satisfied with thine Image: again, Psalm. 16.18
in thy presence is the fullness of joy and pleasures at thy right hand for
evermore. And Peter affirms 2. Pet. 1.4.
that the faithful are to this end called that they may be partakers of the
divine nature, that is, of the graces of God, his wisdom, righteousness,
holiness and glory.

XI.
And albeit the blessed there, shall want nothing pertinent to perfect
felicity, because God shall be 1. Cor. 15.28.
all in all, yet of that heavenly glory, wherewith they shall be beautified there
shall be certain 1. Cor. 15.41. and 42.
degrees as there were also 1. Cor. 12.4
degrees of their gifts in this life, and as there shall be Mat. 10.15 and chap.
11 20. etc.
degrees of torments amongst the damned. And above others excelling, and most
shining, shall be the glory of the teachers of the word, that have faithfully
instructed the Church, and so brought many to righteousness, as Dan. 12.3.
Daniell speaks.

XII.
This doctrine as it may justly terrify the ungodly; so to the godly in all
miseries, and even in death, it is 1 Thessalonians. 4. verse. last.
most comfortable, as they that know, and by the grace of God steadfastly trust,
that their soul by death John. 11.25
passes into life, and by the Angels is Luke 16.22.
carried into Abraham's bosom, that is, into heaven, and so to Phil. 1.23.
Christ, and their bodies, although they rot and be eaten of worms, yet shall
in due time rise again, and be clothed with everlasting glory.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Church.
I. APHORISM.
THe Church is a Mat 26.28. John. 17.20.
multitude of men Ephe. 1.13 To. 10.14.15.
effectually Romans 8.30.
called by the preaching of the Romans 1.7. 1. Cor. 1.2.
Gospel, and therefore they be such as believe in Christ, and To. 10.9.10.
profess his faith, and Romans 1.7. 1. Cor. 1.2. 1. Cor. 2.2. Ephe. 1.1.
serve God in the faith; accounting in this number with the elect, their Act.
2.39. Gene. 17.7. 1. Cor. 7.14.
children, and the children of hypocrites, which as yet by their age are not
capable of this calling.

II.
The Church is either universal, which commonly the Greeks call Catholic,
or particular.

III.
The universal or Catholic Church is the whole multitude of them, who from
the beginning of the world, have believed in Christ, that now do believe, and
shall believe to the worlds end. Whereof one part now triumphs Ephe. 1. ^.
Co^. ^
in heaven, to wi^^, the faithful that are departed: another part is militant
on the earth, that is, the faithful, that yet live. And this again, is divided
into particular Churches.

IIII.
A Particular Church is a particular Congregation of the faithful, dwelling 1.
Cor. 12. 2. Cor. 1.1. Gal. 1.2. 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. 2 Thessalonians. 1.1.
together in one place, and exercising them selves in Gods worship according to
the direction of his word.

V.
A Particular Church may be distinguished in the old and the new.

VI.
By the old I mean that which was before Christ's incarnation, as the Church
of the Jews, which then did excel as touching the form of outward government.

VII.
I call that the new Church, which began after Christ's coming, especially
after his ascension in heaven, being gathered out of Ephe. 2.13.
diverse nations: and this is called Act. 11.26.
the Christian Church.

VIII.
Where the Church is Romans 2.28.29. etc. 11.7.
distinguished in the invisible and visible, it may not be thought that there
be two Churches of diverse kinds, but one and the same Church in diverse
respects may be said to be visible and invisible.

IX.
And it is called invisible for that it can not be seen with men's eyes: for
that faith, by which the Church has her being in Christ, is placed in the Romans
2.29.
heart, which none but Act. 1.24.
God can see.

X.
But it is said to be visible, for that it has certain marks, which may be
seen, and whereby we may conclude assuredly that there is a Church and people
of God: albeit 1. Ioh. 2.19. Math. 13.3. andd. Item 43. etc.
hypocrites be mingled with them, who profess the same faith, and yet believe
not in Jesus Christ.

XI.
These marks are the Ephe. 2.20. Act. 2.24.
pure preaching of the word, and lawful administration of the 1. Cor. 1.13. 1.
Cor. 12.20. and 23. Mat. last v. 19 and 20. Mat. last. v. 15. and 16.
Sacraments.

XII.
For albeit in the Church of God, holy Mat. 18.15.16.17. 1. Cor. 5.5.
discipline be also required: yet if here the governors of the Churches be
slack in their duties,
the Church is not presently to be thought no Church, as long as the two former
marks remain.

XIII.
And yet further I ad, there may creep in some corruption, both in Cor. 3.12.
doctrine and in the administration of the 1. Cor. 11.12.
Sacraments: and yet it shall not cease to be a Church, as long as the 1. Cor.
3.11.
foundation is retained, which is Christ, or salvation by Christ alone.

XIIII.
It is the duty of every godly man, to Heb. 10.25 1. Cor. 11.20
join himself to such a congregation, or society, as he sees to have those
marks and (as Psalm. 43.
much as lies in him) to profess himself a member thereof, and to keep in
holy communion and fellowship with it.

XV.
It is called the holy Church, partly because it is washed and 1. John. 1.7
Ephesians. 5.25.26
purged by the blood of Christ: partly because it is sanctified by his Romans
8.1. Ephesians. 5.26.27 Psalm. 15.
holy spirit and by Gods grace has a Ephe. 4.13.
growth in sanctification, until at length it be fully perfected, which shall be
when this life is Phil. 3.12. and chap. 1.6.
ended.

CHAP. XX. Of the Ministers of the Church.
I. APHORISM.
ALbeit God alone inlighteneth and rules the hearts of his elect: yet because
it pleases him herein to use the 1. Cor. 3.5. 2. Cor. 5.20.
Ministry of men it is our parts with 1. Cor. 4.1. Gal. 4.15.
reverence to embrace those things, which by his servant he teaches us for
our good instruction and comfort.

II.
The servants of God or Ministers, are some continuing and as ordinary, some
but for a time and as extraordinary.

III.
In the old Testament the continuing and ordinary Ministers of the Church were
Patriarchs, Priests and Levites: the temporal and extraordinary the Prophets.

IIII.
In the new Testament, the perpetual and ordinary are Ephe. 4.11.
Pastors and Ephe. 4.11.
Teachers: the temporal and extraordinary were the Ephe. 4.11.
Apostles, Ephe. 4.11.
Prophets and Ephe. 4.11.
Evangelists.

V.
God revealed himself to the Patriarchs, as Gene. 3.
Adam, Ge. 6.7.8.9
Noah, Genesis 12.13.15.17.18.21.22.
Abraham, Genesis 25.11 and 22. etc. 26.2.3.4.5.
Isaac, Genesis 28.31.32.35.
Jacob, Gene. 37.
Joseph, by apparitions, visions, and dreams, and so governed their families.

VI.
He prescribed certain laws by Moses, for the Priests and In Leuit.
Levites, that so they might by them govern the Church of Israel.

VII.
But as for the Prophets he raised them up Es. 6. Ierem. 1. Ezech. 2. etc.
extraordinarily, to Esa. 1. etc.
instruct and to Esa. 2.
excite the people, and the Priests, if they erred or were negligent in their
duties: these did also foreshewe what Esa. 3.29. etc.
punishments should fall upon Gods people for their negligence, and what Esa.
13. etc.
evils should come upon their enemies for their destruction: but principally
they comforted the faithful with Prophecies of Christ's coming: and therefore
they preach often of his Esa. 7.14.
conception, Esa. 9.6. Mich. 5.2.
nativity, Esa. 53.
passion, death, resurrection, and everlasting Esa. 11.59.61. etc.
kingdom.

VIII.
And thus far of the Ministers of the old Testament: now touching the
Ministers of the new Testament. The Lord in the beginning of his kingdom
raised up Mat. 28.19
Apostles, Act. 11.27.
Prophets, Act. 8.5. etc
Evangelists, and when the Churches were founded and planted by them, he
ordained that Pastors and Ephe. 4.11.
Teachers should succeed and continue for ever.

IX.
The Apostles were Mat. 4.18. etc. Ioh. 1.37. etc. Act 9. and 22.
immediately called of Christ, and sent into the whole Mat. 16.15 Act. 9, 15.
Romans 15.15.20.
world, that so they might set up the kingdom of God in all places.

X.
He raised up also at this time Prophets, who had special 1. Cor. 14.29. etc.
revelation and gifts for the interpretation of holy Scriptures: and these did
sometimes foreshew by the spirit, any matter of weight which should come,
either on the Act. 11.28.
Church, or to any Act. 21.10.
one of the faithful.

XI.
Again, the Apostles had the Evangelists for their Act. 16.1.
companions, whom they took with them to supply their absence in preaching of
the Gospel, and in Tit. 1.5.
establishing the Churches: and such were 2. Tim. 4.11.
Luke, 2. Tim 4.5.
Timothy and 2. Cor. 8.23
Titus.

XII.
Then followed Pastors, and Teachers which the Church can never want.

XIII.
And thus far of Churches offices, which did consist in the Ministry of the
word: There be two other ordinary also, which ought to remain ever in this
Romans 12.8
Church: Church-gouernement, and the care of the poor.

XIIII.
Church 1. Cor. 12.28.
Governors are chosen men set over the people, for 1. Cor. 5.
correction of manners, assistantes with the Bishops and Pastors.

XV.
The care of the poor, partly belongs to the Deacons Act. 6.3. 1. Tim. 3.8.
etc.
or Collectors that distribute the alms, partly to them which visit the sick,
and such in Paul's time were certain 1. Tim. 5.9.
ancient and honest widows.

XVI.
And thus far of the duties of Church officers, now as touching their calling
these four points are to be observed: first what kind of persons are to be
called, secondly how, thirdly by whom, lastly with what rite or ceremony they
must be ordained.

XVII.
As concerning the first, I say that Bishops and Pastors, and Teachers, are to
be chosen that are of sound 1. Tim. 3.2. etc.
doctrine, and 1. Tim. 3.2. etc.
holy life, fit and 1. Tim. 3.2. etc.
able to teach. The 1. Tim. 3.8. etc.
governors also must be furnished with good gifts, wisdom, and judgment, to
discharge their duties.

XVIII.
Secondly, in this election and ordinance of the Ministers of Christ, men must
proceed in a religious fear, and testify the same before, by Act. 15.23.
Act. 13.2.3.
fasting and prayer.

XIX.
Thirdly, they must be men approved and known of the Act. 1.15. etc. Act. 6.2.
etc.
governors for knowledge and learning, and which have a good name in the Church
among the faithful for life and conversation.

XX.
Fourthly, they were ordained in times past by the Apostles and their
successors, with Act. 13.3. 1. Tim. 4.14. 2. Tim. 1.6. 1. Tim. 5.22.
imposition or laying on of hands: which rite for comeliness and order sake
may well be observed in these days, so that we put no opinion of necessity or
of worship therein.

CHAP. XXI. Of Church discipline and government.
I. APHORISM.
Ecclesiastical ce^sure or Church discipline is a 2. Tim. 3.16 Mat. 18.15. 2.
Cor. 2.6. 2 Thessalonians. 3.15
brotherly Mat. 18.15 1. Cor. 5.11. 2 Thessalonians. 3.15
correction according to Gods word, whereby the faithful are stirred up to do
their duties, and so they further the salvation one of another.

II.
This discipline is either common or proper: common, whereunto all ought to be
subject: proper, which pertains to the Ministers of the Church only.

III.
The common discipline does respect, Mat. 18.15 16.17.
three degrees in private or secret sins. The first is, that he that has
sinned be admonished, and reproved privately of him, to whom alone that sin
was known: the second, that if he despise his correction, then he must be
rebuked and admonished before one or two witnesses: the third that if he
contemn their admonition also, he must be admonished by the Church, that is,
the 1. Tim. 4.14 1. Tim. 5.17. 1. Cor. 12.28. Romans 12.8.
governors and judges, which are appointed by the Church.

IIII.
But if sins be open and manifest, then there is no need to proceed by those
degrees: for the governors must not 1. Tim. 5.20 1. Cor. 5.
delay to proceed in the censure and correction of such sinners.

V.
For the correction of light sins Mat. 18.15 1. Tim. 5 20.
reproof only may suffice, but 1. Cor. 5.5. and 13
grievous sins and great offenses and contempt or Mat. 18.17.
contumacie against the censures and admonitions ecclesiastical, must be
punished with excommunication.

VI.
Excommunication is the 1. Cor. 5.4.
judgment or decree of the 2. Cor. 2.6.
Church, whereby any 1. Cor. 5.11
member of the same Church, for offending the Church by some Ibid. 1. and 11
grievous sin, or great Mat. 18.17.
contempt, is given over to Ibid. 1. Cor. 5.4.
Satan, (according to the charge of Ibid. 5.
Christ) that is, he is effectually Ibid. 4. Math. 18.18. John. 20.23.
declared to be under the power and dominion of the devil, and to have no
right or interest in the kingdom of the Church of Christ: and therefore this
man is kept also from the communion Mat. 18.17 1. Cor. 5.11. and 13.
of the Lords Supper, until 2. Cor. 2.6.7.8.
he give a probable signification and testimony of his repentance.

VII.
But yet these religious and wise governors must temper the severity of
excommunication with the spirit of Gal. 6.1.
meekness, least 2. Cor. 2.7.
this man be swallowed up with over much heaviness.

VIII.
The end which the Church in these censures and excommunications, principally
respects are three. The first, that they which live an unclean and wicked
life, should not be numbered among Christians, to the dishonor and 1. Cor. 5.1.
Romans 2.24.
profanation of the name of God. The second, least the godly should be 1. Cor.
5.6.
corrupted by the continual conversation of the wicked. The third, that the
excommunicate being confounded and 2. The. 3.14
ashamed may so 1. Cor. 5.5.
repent and be saved.

IX.
We must not converse 2. The. 3.14 2. Cor. 5 9.11
with an excommunicate person but in private and domestical duties, least we
chearish and increase his contempt by any familiarity: but so soon as he
gives any probable testimony of his repentance, he must be received into our
society and communion 2. Cor. 2.6. etc.
of the Church again.

X.
And thus far of the common discipline: The discipline proper to the
Ministers of the Church, is contained in certain Canons, which the ancient
Bishops did prescribe for themselves and their order: of which sort are these.
That no Clergy man or Minister, be a hunter, dicer, reueller, or
pot-companion. Item, that no Minister practice usury, or any merchandise: that
none be present at wanton lascivious dances, and the like, etc.

CHAP. XXII. Of Vows.
I. APHORISM.
A Vow is an holy promise made to God.

II.
A vow is either general or special.

III.
A general vow, is that which Christians make in their Baptism, where
renouncing Satan, they give themselves to God to Mat. 28.19.
serve him, that they may obey his holy Commandments, and not fulfill the
wicked lusts of the flesh.

IIII.
A special or particular vow, is that which any man moved with some Genesis
28.20 etc. Iud. 1.30. 1. Sam. 1.11. 2. Sam. 15.8. Act. 18.18. Number. 16.
special reason makes unto God.

V.
In a lawful special vow, four things are required: of which the first is,
that we be Romans 14.23
assured that our vow be Act 23.1^
agreeable to Gods word; 2. Cor. 7.7.
the second, that it be not above the strength which God has given us; the
third, 1. Cor. 7.4.
that it be agreeable to our vocation; the fourth, that we vow with a good
purpose of heart, and for a lawful end.

VI.
The right and lawful ends of vows be four, of which the two former are in
respect of the time past: the other two in respect of time to come.

VII.
The first end of a lawful vow, is to testify a Genesis 28.20
thankfulness to God for benefits received.

VIII.
The second end of a lawful vow, is to chastise and afflict our selves for
some sins committed, that we may be the more fit to entreat God to 1. Cor.
11.31.
remove his wrath from us.

IX.
The third end is, to make us the more wary and heedfull against sin, by 1.
Cor. 6.12 1. Cor. 9.27.
depriving our selves of the use for a time of some special things.

X.
The fourth end is to stir up our selves as it were with a spur to our
duty, binding our selves thereunto by a vow.

XI.
That the Monastical vows, are unlawful and ungodly, it is manifest by four
reasons. First, because the life Monastical is imagined a worship Math. 15.9
of God: secondly, because they vow a Monastical life, without respect of Gods
calling, and without approbation from him: thirdly, because the Monks and
Nuns, bind themselves to many vile and ungodly services: fourthly, because
they promise to God perpetual virginity, when as yet, either they have not
the Mat. 19.11. 1. Cor. 7.7.
gift of continency, or if they have it, be uncertain how long to have it.

XII.
Vows are of this strength and nature, that if they be lawful they Deuteronomy. 23.21
bind, but if they be Iud. 11. Act. 23.21.
unlawful they are void and of none effect.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Sacraments.
I. APHORISM.
SAcraments are Exo. 12.26
ceremonies ordained Deuteronomy. 12.32 1. Cor. 11.23
of God to illustrate and to seal unto his Genesis 17.10.
people the Genesis 17.11. Romans 4.11.
promise of grace, contained in Gods holy Gene. 17.7. Ier. 31.33.34
covenant.

II.
Sacraments do Heb. 9.15.
illustrate the promise of grace, as lively Gal. 3.1.
pictures, in that they represent and typically set before the believers, the
sacrifice of Christ and the efficacy thereof.

III.
But they seal, in that they be divine Psalm. 81.6. Romans 4.1.
testimonies ordained to testify the same thing, which the promise it self
does testify, to wit, that Christ by his Mat. 26.28.
sacrifice has purchased for the believers forgiveness of sins, the grace of
the holy spirit, and life everlasting.

IIII.
Again, the holy Ghost by the Sacraments illustrating the promise of grace
does instruct the faithful in the mystery of salvation, and by sealing it
persuades the truth of the promise and so confirms faith.

V.
Yet they do perform neither of both themselves by any virtue in them, but in
that the holy Ephe. 1.13 14. and chap. 4. v. 30.
spirit works by them, and his working is free, John. 3.8.
so that he works where he will, when he will, and in what measure it
pleases him.

VI.
The Sacraments, some are of the old Testament, some of the new.

VII.
The Sacraments of the old Testament were Gene. 17. Leuit. 12.
Circumcision, Leuit. 14.
purifications, and Leu. 1.3.4.6. etc.
sacrifices, and of these the Exodus 12. 2. Paral. 35.
passover was a special Sacrament.

VIII.
Circu^cisio^ did illustrate the promise of grace under the type of cutting
off, of the foreskin of the flesh: for by the circumcising of the foreskin was
signified, that the sins of the faithful were done away by forgiveness of sins,
or free Romans 4.11.
justification. Circumcision did also seal the promise of grace, by applying
the same to every person, so that the covenant of God was as it were sealed in
every man's Genesis 17.13.
flesh.

IX.
The purifications did illustrate the promise of grace, under the type of
washing, for by them was signified that the sins of the faithful, were
purged by the blood Leu. 14.7.8
of Christ and daily are washed away by the holy Ghost.

X.
The sacrifices did illustrate the promise of grace, as being types of our
Leuit. 1.4. and 4.20. and 16.27.30.
expiatorie sacrifice, for by them was signified that Christ should Heb. 9.26.
and 28. etc. 10.11.12.14.
be slain for an expiatorie sacrifice, that is, to satisfy for all the
sins, of all the elect.

XII.
The pascall lamb be not only shadowed this as a sacrifice generally, but
also foreshewed some peculiar thing of Christ's sacrifice, to wit, that his
John. 19.36
bones should not be broken, and it signified that the souls of the faithful
did banquet and feed 1. Cor. 5.7. and 8.
upon Christ, as it were spiritually, in a sacrifice, that is, they received
hereby some feeling of Gods grace and love, purchased for them, by the
sacrifice of Christ. Again, it represented the holiness, of Christ's
sacrifice, for it was commanded to be an Exodus 12.5.
unspotted lamb.

XII.
But besides this shadowing of Christ's sacrifice, in respect whereof that
ceremony of eating the lamb was a Sacrament, it was also ordained to Exo.
12.27.
praise God, for deliverance out of the bondage of Egypt.

XIII.
And thus much of the Sacraments of the old Testament. The Sacraments of the
new are two, Baptism and the Lords Supper.

XIIII.
Baptism, that Col. 2.11.12.
succeeded in place of Circumcision, does illustrate the promise of grace,
under the type of Act. 22.16.
washing, for as by water the 1. Pet. 3.21.
filthiness of the body is done away; so by the blood 1. John. 1.7
of Christ shed on the Cross, and by faith sprinkled on our hearts, our souls
are purged from sin. But Baptism seals unto us the promise of grace, in
that every one is washed in that water, which is the Sacrament of the blood of
Christ shed on the cross.

XV.
The Supper of the Lord, which came Luke 22.15. etc.
in place of the passover, does illustrate the promise of grace, partly by
representing the passion Luke 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24.
of Christ, by the breaking of the bread, and by pouring forth the wine, the
Luke 22.20.
shedding of his blood: and partly by declaring the efficacy of Christ's
death, by this joyful 1. Cor. 5.8.
ba^quet, for that the souls of the faithful sweetly banquet, and be
comforted in tasting of Gods favor and grace purchased by the death of Christ.
But it seals unto us the promise of grace, in that the bread which is given
to every one of us to be eaten, is the Sacrament of Christ's body crucified for
us, and in that every one of us, does drink of the cup, which is the Sacrament
of the blood of Christ shed upon the cross for us.

XVI.
And the Supper of the Lord, has the nature not only of a Sacrament, but also
of a sacrifice, to wit, of thanksgiving, as also the lamb, which had this
place before it. For as that lamb was appointed to praise God for their
delivery from the bondage of Pharao, so the holy Supper was ordained to 1.
Cor. 11.26.
praise the Lord for our redemption from the power of the devil by the death
of Christ.

XVII.
But as the Sacraments in respect of God, are signs of grace toward his
people; so in respect of us they be Mat. 23.15 Act. 2.41. and chap. 8.36.37.38.
marks of our profession, whereby we openly profess that we desire to be
counted among the people of God, and will worship only the true God, who has
manifested him self to his people, as by the most sure word and doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles, so also by these Sacraments.

XVIII.
Of all these Sacraments, the Scripture usually speaks Genesis 17.10 and 11.
Exodus 12.11. and 27. Act. 22.16. Mat. 26.26. and 28. Mar. 14.22. and 24. Luke.
22.19. and 20. 1. Cor. 10.4.16. 1. Cor. 11.24. and 25.
metonymically, that is, attributing the names or properties of the things
signified to the signs themselves, which thing is done, partly to teach us,
the relation which is between those signs, and things signified, and partly
to signify the truth and certainty of the working of those holy Sacraments,
that the believers should not doubt, but that the things signified, set before
us, are as truly by the working of the holy spirit communicated unto them, as
they certainly feel, that these divine signs and seals (which are named
Sacraments) are by the Minister of the Church given them.

XIX.
The difference of the old and new Sacraments, is not in the things signified,
for they, in both are 1. Cor. 10.2.3 4.
the same, but partly in the manner of signification, and partly in the
evidence of demonstration, for the old signified and figured Christ to come,
but the new signify and show that he is come. Again, the new are more manifest
the^ the old, because they represent a thing done, and clearly preached by the
Gospel.

XX.
They err that any way bind the things signified to the signs,

XXI.
As also they that attribute to the signs power to confer grace, which they
only seal and testify.

XXII.
But the Papists err most shamefully, in that they transform the Lords
Supper into the Mass, teaching that by consecration, that is, by the muttering
of the five words, Hoc enim est corpus meum, for this is my body over the
bread, the same is transubstantiated into, or turned into the substance of the
body of Christ, as they say: and by the offering up of Christ thus created by
the Priest, all their sins, for whom the Mass is celebrated, are purged,
whether they be as yet alive, or eue^ long since dead, and in Purgatory.

XXIII.
Lastly they sin also grievously whiles they adore that fained Christ, as
lying hid under the form of bread.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of Baptism.
I. APHORISM.
Baptism is the first Sacrament of the new Testament or covenant of grace,
wherein according to Christ's Mat. 28.19
institution the Christian is dipped in water or sprinkled with water, by the
Minister of the Church, to represent the shedding of the blood of Christ upon
the Cross, and to testify to him, that the remission of sinsis purchased for
him by the blood of Christ, and to seal his regeneration by the holy Ghost,
which grace is purchased also fot the elect, by the blood of Jesus Christ: and
lastly to seal his communion and fellowship with Christ in the kingdom of
heaven: and so in like manner the Baptized makes public profession, that his
hearts desire is to be one of the people and Church of God.

II.
Whereas we say that Baptism is a Sacrament, we have already showed in the
former Chapter what this word signifies.

III.
We ad that Baptism is a Sacrament of the new Testament, or covenant of grace,
because it was instituted by Christ after his incarnation: first administered
amongst the Jews by John the Baptist, and Christ himself, next among all
nations by the Apostles and their successors.

IIII.
We call Baptism the first Sacrament of the new Testament, in respect of the
second, which is the Lords Supper: for Baptism is the Sacrament of our first
Act. 2.4.1. John. 41.
entrance, and admission into the visible Church of Christ, that we may be of
the number of Gods children and so accounted, and may enjoy their Ibid. v. 42.
privileges. And therefore men unbaptized may not be admitted to the Lords
Supper, like as in times past under the old Testament, the Sacracrament of
their first Mat. 23.15.
entrance into the Church was Circumcision, and none Exodus 13.48
uncircumcised was to eat the passover.

V.
We say that the person to be Baptized ought to be a Mar. 16.16 Act.
8.36.37.38. Act. 2.41. Act. 16.14.15.31.32.33.
Christian: by which name we understand not only men of years, lately
converted to the Christian faith, but also young Act. 16.33. Exodus 12.48.
infants the children of Christian parents: whereby may appear that the speech
of the common people is erroneous, when as desiring Baptism of the Pastor of
the Church for their infants, they say, God has given me a child, I pray you
make it a Christian soul. For Baptism does not make a Christian, but
signifies and marketh us for Christians.

VI.
We add further that Baptism is to be administered by the Minister of the
Church: because Baptism is a part of the Ecclesiastical Mat. 28.19
Ministry, which none may Heb. 5.4.
meddle with but they which are thereunto lawfully called: for to whom Christ
gave commission to Baptize, to them also he gave charge to preach his holy
word: and what God has joined together, Mat. 19.6.
no man may put asunder. Those women therefore sin, which in their fained
cause of necessity do administer this holy Sacrament: yea they sin
dangerously, for baptizing without any commission from God, nay 1. Cor. 14.34.
1. Tim. 2.22.
contrary to his word: and for ascribing to any external thing our everlasting
salvation, which is to be sought only in the death of Christ and in the promise
of grace. The same is to be thought also if any man not called to the Ministry
of the Gospel do Baptize.

VII.
Water only is to be used in Baptism and no other liquor: for that Gods
commandment is of water only, and the practice of the faithful servants of
God, which first ministered the same (as John Baptist, Christ and his Apostles
and their successors) can teach us.

VIII.
And whether the Baptized be dipped in water, and that once or thrice, or have
the water sprinkled or powered upon him, it is a matter indifferent, and ought
to be free in the Church according to the diversity of countries. For although
it be manifest that dipping in the water was used in the John. 3.23. Mat. 3.16.
Act. 8.38.39. Romans 6.4.5. (...).
primitive Church: yet the original Baptizing does signify not only to be
dipped in the water, but also to be wet with water any way.

IX.
Moreover Baptism is given us of God to this end: first for the confirmation
of our own faith to our selves, next for the manifestatio^ of our profession
among me^.

X.
Baptism helps our faith three ways, testifying unto us of three things,
which we receive by faith: for first it is an instruction and symbol
thereunto, of the Act. 2.37. etc. 22.16.
remission of sins, next of our Romans 6.4. Tit. 3.5.
renouation by the holy Ghost, lastly of our union and Gal. 3.28.
communion with Christ.

XI.
First concerning forgiveness of sins, Baptism both teaches and seals the
same in a special manner under the figure and type of washing Act. 22.16 Soph.
5.26. Tit. 3.5.6.
and purging us: for as by water the filthiness of the body is purged and washed
away, So by the blood John. 1.7.
of Christ all the pollutions of the faithful are washed and purged.

XII.
And this confirmation which we have by Baptism concerns the whole life, all,
and every one of the sins of our life: for the blood of Christ, whereof
Baptism is the seal, purges 1. John. 1.7
us from all sin. Therefore so often as we fall, we should call our Baptism
to mind, and thereby arm our selves, that we may ever rest assured of the
free pardon of our sins, for that the blood of Christ is that fotu^aine which
is Zach. 13.1.
opened to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that is, to
all the faithful, to wash them from sin, and from uncleanness.

XIII.
Let no man by this doctrine gather any liberty to sin: for this doctrine is
not taught, but for the consolation of them which be truly humbled, and for
afflicted souls and consciences. Again, Baptism does no less warn us of
our Romans 6.4.
mortification and dying unto sin, then of the remission of our sins by
Christ.

XIIII.
Therefore the second end of our Baptism is our Tit. 3.5.
regeneration: for this Christ promises to work in us by his holy spirit,
and so does indeed: and this grace also he merited for us of his father, by
his death and passion.

XV.
Where we must observe that this renewing of nature is Romans 7.
imperfect in this life: but yet so be we renewed that this sin dwelling in
us, reigns Romans 6.4.
not, nor has dominion over us: but by the grace of Gods spirit is daily more
and more mortified in us.

XVI.
The third benefit by Baptism, is our holy union and communion with Christ:
that we may know, that we are united 1. Cor. 11.15.
and received to fellowship with Christ and knit unto him as the members to the
head: and therefore shall be coheires with him in heaven. For Christ to this end
sanctified Baptism in Math. 3.16.
his own body, that he might have it as common with us, that so it might be as
a most sure band of our union and communion with him. And Paul hereby proves
us to be the sons of God, because that in Baptism we have put Gal. 3.14.
on Christ; that is, because by the seal and testimony of our Baptism, were
are joined unto Christ the only begotten son of God.

XVII.
And thus these three ends of Baptism serve right well for the confirmation of
our faith, and so may minister great comfort unto us. Again, for our
profession, among men, Baptism is a badge of that, for thereby we testify
that our desire is, to be John. 4.1. Act. 2.41.
numbered among Gods people, professing that we consent with all Christians in
one form of the religious worship of one God only, and this profession also
respects the glory of God. And this meaning has Christ, when he commands
to baptize Mat. 28.19. (...).
in the name of the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost: that is, that by
Baptism men may be bound to worship the true God, who is Father, Son and
holy Ghost: and that this phrase is so to be understood, the very words of the
Apostle can teach us. 1. Cor. 1. v. 12.13.14.15.

XVIII.
Now by the premises learn, that they only rightly receive and rightly use
Baptism, which refer it to the ends for the which Christ ordained it, that
is, that they may feel, and by faith receive remission of sins, regeneration
and life everlasting in Christ alone: and so receive Baptism as Gods holy
seal of all these benefits.

XIX.
Therefore those men greatly abuse Baptism, which seek remission of sins in
that external actio^: as if the power of washing away sins were shut up in
the very element, or at the least in the blood of Christ as lying hid therein.

CHAP. XXV. The Baptism of infants.
I. APHORISM.
BEcause the Anabaptists do oppugn the Baptism of infants, as a point
disagreeing with Christ's institution: it is needful to know the reasons,
whereby the Baptism of infants is proved by the scriptures: and next to show
the vanity and weakness of the Anabaptists arguments which they bring to
the contrary.

II.
Now then that the children of the faithful ought to be baptized may be showed
out of Gods word by four special arguments. The first is from the example of
Circumcision, which assuredly had the like Col. 2.11.12.
reason and the same signification that baptism has. For like as by
Circumcision God testified to the people of Israel the Romans 4.11.
remission of sins and Deuteronomy. 30.6. Romans 2.29. Coloss. 2.11.
regeneration: so by Baptism does he promise the very same things unto the
Christians. If therefore their infants then, at Gods Genesis 17.12. Leuit. 12.3.
commandment were Circumcised: it is a good consequent that the children of
the faithful under the Gospel be baptized.

III.
For albeit we have no such charge for the baptising of infants: yet we know
right well the Lords good pleasure herein by the very nature and end of
Baptism: especially seeing Baptism is ordained to succeed in the Col.
2.11.12.
place of Circumcision. Now the charge given to them of old which professed the
Jewish Religion, was, that they should not only be Circumcised them selves,
but also all Exo. 12.48.
the males that did belong unto them. Wherefore in like manner such as profess
Christian Religion, they are bound to bring their infants to be baptized.

IIII.
Again, the children of the faithful are partakers of that, which is
signified by Baptism, that is, the remission of sins, and regeneration, for
they belong to Gods Gene. 17.7 Act. 2.39. 1. Cor. 7.14.
covenant wherein these benefits are promised: with what color then of reason
shall we deny them the seal of the covenant?

V.
And if our infants may not be baptized, then the grace of God by Christ's
coming does less appear unto us then unto the Jews in times past: for that
the faithful Jews were confirmed by the seal of Circumcision concerning the
salvation of their children: wherefore it is against all reason that Christians
should not in like manner by the testimony of Baptism be assured of the
salvation of their infants.

VI.
Lastly the children of the faithful ought to be offered Mat. 19.14
Col. ^ 12.
unto Christ, as they that have communion with him in the kingdom of heaven:
therefore we must give them their Baptism, as the seal of that communion, and
heritage, they have with Christ in heaven.

VII.
For whereas the Anabaptists deny that the baptizing of infantes was used in
the Apostles time: we must know that the old writers say contrary: and the
same may also appear by the Acts of the Apostles (which Luke a companion of
the Astles, as eyewitness of all the things, for the most part, has left
written for the Church of Christ) where it Act. 2.38.39.
is said in the words of Peter to the Jews converted by his Sermon, that they
be baptized for the remission of sins, and that they should receive the gift of
the holy Ghost, for that this promise was made not only unto them, but unto
their children. Where in the word (children) it can not be denied, but that
infants must be understood. Again, this Evangelist records that Paul and
Silas (in whose company he him self also was) baptized Act. 16.15.
Lydia and her house, and the Iayler Ibid v. 33.
with all his household.

VIII.
Next, whereas they say that infants may not be baptized, because they cannot
conceive the doctrine of faith and repentance: The like reason might be made
against the Circumcision of infants. Wherefore it suffices that they are
baptized unto the repentance and faith to come, even as the infants among the
Jews were Circumcised.

IX.
Thirdly, whereas they object that Baptism was given for the remission of
sins: and that infants have not sinned: the assumption is false: for albeit
infants have not sinned, after the like manner of the transgression of Romans
5.14.
Adam, that is actually in their own person: yet they sinned in Ibid. v. 12.
him or in his loins: for that they are 1. Cor. 15.22.
dead in him, and Romans 5.14. and 6.21.
dye daily no less then such as be of years.

X.
Fourthly, whereas they say that Christ has cleansed Ephe. 5.26.
his Church by the washing of water, and that infantes have no need of this
cleansing, because they be not unclean: again, the assumption is false: for
Psalm. 51.7.
David confesses that he was conceived in sin: and for that the infants of
the faithful are members 1. Cor. 7.14
of the Church: i^ follows that they also are purged by the blood of Christ:
and therefore we must grant them the seal thereof which is Baptism.

XI.
Lastly, where they say, that none in the Apostles time was baptized, but he
that made profession of his faith before: that is true only of such as were
Act. 2.41. Act. 8.12. Ibid. v. 37.38.
of years: but that the infants of such as professed the faith, and were
baptized, were also baptized in like manner, we have before plainly proved in
the 7. Aphorism.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Lords Supper.
I. APHORISM.
THe Supper of the Lord, is the second Sacrament of the Mat. 26.28 Mar. 14.24.
Luke. 22.20. 1. Cor. 11.25
new Testament or covenant of grace, wherein by the Mat. 26.26 Mar. 14 22.
Luke. 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24
breaking of bread and pouring of the wine into to the cup, the passion and
shedding of the blood of Christ, is figured, represented, and as it were set
before our eyes, and next by giving, taking, eating and drinking of these
elements, the Mat. 26.28
promise of the John. 6.51.53.54.58.
remission of sins, and life everlasting (purchased by the passion of Christ,
and by his blood shed, and in a word, by that his precious death) and the
promise of their communion 1. Cor. 10.16.17. and c. 12. verse 13.
as members with their head Christ Jesus, is sealed to all the believing and
worthy receivers; whereby it comes to pass, that the faithful sweetly rest in
the favor of God, obtained for them by his sons death: and so feed with 1. Cor.
3.7.8
him spiritually, and daily grow up in a holy communion with Christ.

II.
And that the holy Supper is a Sacrament of the new covenant, it may appear by
the very words of the institution, which the Lord pronounced of the cup saying,
This cup is the new Testament or covenant in my blood, that is, a Sacrament of
the new covenant.

III.
We call the Lords Supper, the second Sacrament of the new Testament, in
respect of Baptism which is the first. For like as in the old Testament, there
were two principal Sacraments, Circumcision and the Passover, so there are
two in the new, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, which directly answer them and
succeed in their places. And as none was admitted to the Passover, but the
Exo. 12.48
Circumcised: so none must be received to the Supper, but the Baptized.

IIII.
The commandment of Christ contained in the institution, is in these words:
Take ye, and eat ye: Take ye, and drink ye, and do this in remembrance of me.

V.
Again, it is manifest by the words of the institution, that Christ used
bread and wine in this Sacrament.

VI.
In the breaking of bread in the Lords Supper, we follow both the Lords Mat.
26.26. Mar. 14.22. Luke. 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24.
commandment, and his Ibid.
example: for the Lord did not only break the bread, and so by breaking it,
did consecrate the same a Sacrament of his body, but also commanded this bread
so blessed and so broken, to be received, and eaten, as the lively symbol and
Sacrament of his precious body broken, that is, crucified for us. And the 1.
Cor. 11.23.
Apostle says, that he received of the Lord which he delivered to the
Corinthians concerning the administration of this Sacrament: and this 1. Cor.
10.16
breaking of bread he both commanded and commended unto them. To be short
then, the breaking of bread, is an essential ceremony in the Lords Supper:
for that this is the principal end thereof to represent, seal and set before
us the passion and breaking of 1. Cor. 11.24.
the body of Christ. The same reason is of the pouring forth of the wine, if we
compare it with the shedding of the blood of Christ.

VII.
The passion of Christ is set before us in this Sacrament in a lively manner,
as by Gal. 3.1.
preaching of the Gospel.

VIII.
We receive Jesus Christ and his holy spirit most comfortably by the word: for
it is Gods holy ordinance and instrument to co^uay his graces into our minds,
hearts, and consciences, and that mighty power to confer and give us the spirit
of grace, the spirit of faith, the spirit of adoption, the spirit of
sanctification, of wisdom. etc.

IX.
But there is difference between the participation of Christ by the one and by
the other, for the Lord first by his word confers grace, but grace and faith
once given, are strengthened and increase daily by the Sacraments.

X.
Again, the Lord by the word, works only by one sense in us, namely the
sense of hearing, whereby comes knowledge and so faith. Romans 10.14.15. And this
sense in deed is now since the corruption of our nature, the sense of learning
and understanding, and so the principal to breed and beget faith in us: but
before the fall of Adam the sight (I take it) was the principal sense to
receive and learn wisdom and understanding in the vewe and consideration of
the works of God. See Bradfords Sermon of the Supper.
The Lord therefore in the Sacrament, has respect to the sight and all other
senses: for in and by the Sacrament the soul does not only hear Christ (as
in the word) but also see Christ, touch Christ, smell and taste, and so feed
upon Christ and all his benefits.

XI.
The principal parts of this Sacrament are, to seal and ratify that promise
of Christ, wherein he assures us that his flesh is John 6.55.
meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed, to feed us unto life
everlasting: and in that he says he is the Ibid. v. 51.
bread of life, whereof who so eats shall live for ever: it is ordained (I
say) to seal that promise, and to this effect to send us unto the cross of
Christ, where that promise was performed and fulfilled in every respect. For
the flesh of Christ was made unto us the bread of life, or that meat which
quickens us, in that it was Ibid.
crucified for us.

XII.
This meat we can not eat, but by John 6.35.
faith, and this drink we can not Ibidem.
drink but by faith.

XIII.
Again, to eat the flesh of Christ by faith, and to drink his blood by
faith, is to receive by faith the promise of God, which testifies that the
flesh of Christ, was crucified for us, and that his blood was shed for us, that
is, for the remission of our sins.

XIIII.
The fruit which follows this spiritual meat and drink, is a spiritual
John. 6.57. 1. Cor. 5.8.
joy in God, and the increase of our 1. Cor. 10.17.
communion with Christ: for this depends upon the confirmation of our faith.

XV.
Again, it is very manifest that the body of Christ, is not eaten with the
Transubstantiation.
mouth, and that his body is not contained Consubstantiation.
in the bread of the holy Supper, for that Act. 3.21.
heaven must contain him unto the day of judgment. Neither may we say that
the body of Christ is every where, that it may be in heaven at one and the
self same time, and here on earth also in the bread of the Lords Supper, for
it ever retains that property of a man's body, which is to be finite, for
Christ was made like unto us in all Heb. 2.17.
things, Heb. 4.15.
sin only excepted.

XVI.
Again, if the body of Christ, and the blood of Christ, were contained under
the forms of bread and wine: the one part must be necessarily severed from the
other, and so Christ must dye again: But Christ dies Romans 6.9.
no more.

XVII.
Now that the bread of the Lords Supper, is not transubstantiated into the body
of Christ, but that the substance of the bread remains after the words of
consecration, it may appear, for that Christ would teach by this bread, as by
a very apt similitude, that his flesh is John. 6.55.
spiritual meat: therefore it must necessarily be very bread, that we may
assuredly conclude, that our souls are as truly fed with Christ crucified for
us, as our bodies are truly fed with that bread, which there is broken for us,
and given us. Again, Christ commanded all the faithful to eat of one 1. Cor.
10.17.
bread: to teach that they all, Ibidem.
are, as one bread, or as one body: therefore it must be very bread, that the
similitude may continue, that like as of many grains or mass one substance is
made, and so one bread, so the faithful being many, having one spirit of faith
to knit them unto Christ, and one spirit of love to knit them, one with
another, are made one Church, as one body in and through their head Jesus
Christ.

XVIII.
And like as neither the water of Baptism is changed, nor that water which
streamed from the Number. 20.10.11.
rock being smitten with Moses rod, was changed into the blood of Christ: and
yet both Sacraments of the same: So in like manner, the wine in the Lords Supper
is not changed into the blood of Christ, whereof notwithstanding it is a
Sacrament, as Christ ordained and appointed.

XIX.
And yet we do not go from the very words of Christ, but desire to give them
their natural sense and meaning.

XX.
The very natural sense of the words of Christ, does depend upon a Metonymie,
or trope, whereby the name of the thing signified, that is the body, is
attributed to the sign which is bread: and so for the cup and blood of Christ
in like manner.

XXI.
This Metonymicall or Sacramental phrase is used every where in Scripture,
where the holy Spirit speaks of Sacraments. For we may not otherwise
understand these places; as where it is said, that circumcision is the Genesis
17.10
covenant of God, and the paschall lamb is Exodus 12.11. and 27.
the Lords Passover in Egypt, and the Leuit. 6.30. etc.
sacrifices of the Law are said to expiate the sins of the people, and that
the rock which gave the^ water to drink in the wilderness was 1. Cor. 10.4
Christ.

XXII.
The holy Spirit usually retains this manner of speaking in all Sacraments for
two causes principally: first to help us against our ignorance, dullness, and
the blindness of our hearts: for if the Lord spoke not on this manner, we would
but only fasten our eyes and our hearts upon the bare signs and ceremonies,
and content our selves (as have hypocrites in all ages) with bare and empty
shadows, without faith, Psalm 50.
fear, repentance, obedience, or any reverence of the holy covenant. Therefore
I say, the Lord first speaks on this wise, to lift up our hearts and souls by
faith to behold, consider, and to feed upon the things signified. The second
cause of the use of this phrase in the Sacraments is, for that the very truth
is so, there is a real presence of the sign and the thing signified to the
believer, for as he does bodily and really participate of the sign, Sacramenta
sunt signa exhibentia non significantia tantu^.
so does he spiritually, and as really receive and feed upon the thing
signified.

XXIII.
And thus speaks Augustine also, lest any think of this, as of some new
inue^tio^. If Sacraments had not a certain similitude of those things, of
which they be Sacraments, Epist. 23. ad Bonifac.
surely they should be no Sacraments: and by reason of this likeness, they
have often the names of the things, (which are signified by them.) Therefore as
the Sacrament of the body of Christ, is after a certain manner, the body of
Christ; the Sacrament of the blood of Christ, the blood of Christ: so the
Sacrament of faith is faith.

Whereas they object that it is not like that when Christ would minister unto
his Apostles, a special comfort in adversity, that then he should speak
darkely and doubtfully: the matter it self shows that this metonymicall
phrase seemed not hard or obscure unto the Apostles: for if they had not
thought that the Lord called the bread his body, because it is a lively and
true sign and Sacrament thereof, out of all question they had been much
troubled and disquieted with so prodigious a matter, which necessarily
follows from the literal sense of the word: and this may yet better appear,
for the same very time they could not well conceive and understand more easy
and common Ioh. 14.5.8 etc. 16. v. 17.
arguments. Therefore (I say) for that they were not troubled with these
words, it is manifest that they understood them metonymically, after the manner
of the Scripture: and the rather for that a little before, they had eaten of
the lamb, which in the same sense was called the passover: for that it was a
symbol of that memorable passover, wherein the Angel Exo. 12.27.
of the Lord smiting all the first borne of the Egyptians, did pass over the
houses of the people of Israel: by which occasion they were brought out of
Egypt, and so freed from that extreme bondage.

XXV.
They spend here wind in vain to object the omnipotency of God, to show that
the body of Christ, may be both in heaven and in the Sacramental bread at one
and the same time. For the question is not here, what God can do, but what he
will do, and what his will and good pleasure is. And his will is, that Christ
be like his brethren in Heb. 2.17.
all things sin only Heb. 4.15.
excepted. Therefore his will is, that he have a true body, that is, a finite
body, and limited in place. Again, albeit God be omnipotent, yet can he not
effect contraries, as that any thing at one time both be, and be not, for that
he can not Tit. 1.2. Heb. 6.18.
lie nor deny 2. Tim. 2 13
himself, for this is against his nature. And these propositions or sentences
are mere contradictorie; Christ's body is a true body: Christ's body is not
a true body, but an infinite.

XXVI.
Neither yet shall this help the adversaries, to say, that unless it be
granted, Christ's body is every where, it will necessarily follow, that it is
severed from the divine nature, which is every where, and whereunto it is
personally united: for although Christ's body be not every where, but contained
in one certain place, yet nevertheless it is ever personally united to the
Deity of the word for the personal union does not make equal the humane
nature with the divine, or change the properties of the divine nature into the
humane: Christ is that word. John. 1.1.
that the humane nature may have the same proprieties with the divine: but is
such an vnio^ as that thereby the humane nature subsisteth in the person of the
word; so that it is as a part thereof, neither has it by it self, or without
the word any subsisting. Therefore well spoke the fathers in the Council of
Chalcedon. The difference of natures in Christ, is not taken away because of
the union (of them:) but rather (by this doctrine of the union of natures) we
learn, that the proprieties of both natures are kept, as concurring and
meeting together into one person or Hypostasis.
substance.

XXVII.
Seeing therefore the body of Christ is finite and taken up from earth to Act.
19.10.11.
heaven, and must be contained there until the Act. 3 21. 1. Cor. 11.26
day of judgment, it follows that it is not in all places, nor in the
Sacramental bread included.

XXVII.
And albeit we say that Christ's body is in heaven, and no where else,
according to the true propriety of a body: yet we tie it not to any certain
place in heaven: but we judge him to be there free, as it beseems and is
convenient for that celestial glory: which to search into, we deem also to be
a vain and bold curiosity.

XXIX.
Whereby it is very manifest that they slander us, which say that we tie the
body of Christ to a certain place in heaven.

XXX.
And whereas yet they say, that albeit Christ's body be in heaven visible, yet
this lets not, but that it may be in the Sacramental bread in an invisible
manner: first they can not prove this by the Scriptures, next they speak flat
contradictories against themselves, when as they say that Christ is in the
bread really, substantially, corporally; if that be so, he must be there also
in a visible manner. For whatsoever humane body is any where substa^tially,
the same is there also visibly. For this visibilitie is a property, which ca^
not be severed from the substance of man's body. For this cause Christ when he
appeared after his resurrection to his Apostles, and desired to Luke
24.36.37.38.39.
prove that his very body was there present substantially, he reasons (if so
I may speak) from the That which may be seen.
visibilitie and That which may be touched and felt.
palpabilitie thereof; and so appealeth to the very senses of his Disciples,
that they might testify the truth of his resurrection.

XXXI.
And whereas yet they make an other exception, that it is unmeet to submit the
nature of a glorious body, to the laws of common nature: that makes nothing to
prove the invisible presence of Christ's body in the Sacramental bread. For
the glory Luke 23 36 etc. Act 7.55.56. and 1.9.10.11.
has not abolished the truth of the body, wherein the visibilitie thereof is
contained. Next this also is to be considered, that in that first Supper of
Christ with his Disciples, that his body was not yet glorified: and there is
none other celebration of the Lords Supper now, then was at that time.

XXXII.
And albeit we deny the body of Christ to be included in the Sacramental
bread: yet we say not that Christ is altogether and in every respect absent
from his holy Sacrament: or that the bread and wine be but bare and empty
signs. For Christ is truly present by the grace of his holy spirit, where two
or three Mat. 18.20.
are gathered togethe in his name: and lifts up also even to heaven unto
himself the hearts of the faithful by the promise of the Gospel: that they
may contemplate there (namely in the heavenly Heb. 9.12.24.
sanctuary) that his sacrifice, which he offered for them upon his Cross, and
by faith feed thereupon unto life everlasting.

XXXIII.
Again, if the body of Christ be not in the Sacramental bread, it follows
also that we must not adore his body there but we must worship and adore him in
heaven, where Col. 3.1.
he sits at the right hand of God the father: whither also in elder ages, in
the celebration of the Lords Supper, the people were invited, when they were
put in mind of the place, with sursum corda, lift up your hearts unto the Lord.

XXXIIII.
Neither must the Lords Supper be a divine action, performed by the Minister
of the Church alone, but the Pastor must declare and lay open with a good
voice, and in a plain manner, what the mystery thereof is, unto the people.

XXXV.
In like manner we must reject private communions, as when this Sacrament is
administered to particular persons ready to dye, without any congregation or
company of the faithful to be partakers with him of that holy communion: for
the Apostle speaking of the celebration of the Supper, says, 1. Cor 11.20.
when ye meet together: again, for that this Sacrament is a special symbol,
of the communion of Saints: and this the Apostle means where he says, for
1. Cor. 10.17.
we that are many are one bread, and one body, because we all are partakers of
one bread.

XXXVI.
The worthiness of the communicants consists in this that they 1. Cor. 11.28.
acknowledge and bewail their own unworthiness, and by faith call upon God,
that he will of his grace and mercy in Jesus Christ make them worthy.

XXXVII.
Yet to speak more distinctly and plainly to the understanding of the
ignorant, to the end they may come prepared and advisedly to the holy
Communion, and for that the abuse of this holy Sacrament, is one cause of all
these judgments which are past and have consumed many, and yet are still
threatened against us: therefore the unworthy receivers which dishonor God,
hurt and hinder their own salvation, and provoke Gods wrath against his Church
and people, they are these which follow.

XXXVIII.
1 In the first place I set all Atheists, me^ without God, without Ephe. 2.12
Psalm. 14.1.
Christ, or any Religion, mere Epicures in the world, therefore ought they to
be without this holy Sacrament: they be unworthy of this holy communion, for
they be not in communion with God and his people.

2 All unclean beasts, dogs, and swine, I mean all in the Church of an
unclean beastly life: such as the Apostle assures us ca^ not enter into the
kingdom of heaven: 1. Cor. 6.9.
fornicators, idolaters, adulterers, wanto^s, buggerers, thieves, covetous,
drunckards, raylers, extortioners; a watchword is added, be not deceived.
These be unworthy our private feasts, how much more to meet with us, our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ in this holy banquet.

Ignorant in the great grounds of Religion. Heb. 6.1.2.3.4 5.
3 All ignorant people (howsoever they may seem harmless, etc.) which ca^ not
discern the Lords body. 1. Cor. 11. v. 29. nor yet desire to discern and
know it: No knowledge, no faith: no faith, no love: no love, no affiance or
trust in God: no trust, no fear: no fear, no humiliation: want these graces,
or any of them, no worship, no access to God. Heb. 11.6. Therefore these be
unworthy receivers.

4 Such as lightly account of the covenant, whatsoever love and zeal they
pretend to the Sacraments: Such as despise the one, are and must be profane
contemners of the other. Psalm. 50.16.

5 Some foolish wits pretend love and great zeal to the word, and yet neglect
and contemn the holy Sacraments: their contempt appears in the breach of the
Lords ordinance, they seldom come to the Lords Supper (as they are bound) to
preach and celebrate with us the blessed co^memoration of the Lords death
until his coming again. 1. Cor. 11.24.25.26.

6 All such as do not hunger for Christ, Psalm. 32.5. Ephe. 1.15. Romans 8.14.15
for they can not feed on Christ: no knowledge of sin, no feeling of sin:
no feeling of sin, no sorrow for sin: no sorrow for sin, no confession of
sin: no confession of sin, no desire of grace: no desire of grace, no
spirit of faith to receive Christ: no spirit of faith, no spirit of
adoption, sanctification, etc.

7 All contentious brethren, for this is a Sacrament of our unity, badge of
love, and a band of union and communion with Christ and all his holy members.
1. Cor. 10.2.16.

John. 1.12.
8 All unbelievers, for all such as want the precious faith, have no hand to
receive Christ: they receive only as Augustine speaks, and as Judas did panem
Dominu^, the bread of the Lord, not, panem Domini, the bread of life, the Lord
Christ.

9 The faithful also in regard of their frailty, weakness, corruptions, and
manifold wants, if they have not duly, truly, and wisely, examined, humbled,
and so prepared themselves to meet Jesus Christ, they be unworthy: and so they
cause many plagues, many afflictions and evils in this life, upon their bodies
and souls, that being judged and chastened here, they may escape the
comdemnation of the world in the life to come. 1. Cor. 11.28.30.31. And thus
far of unworthy receivers.

XXXIX.
That form of administration of the Lords Supper is best, which comes nearest
the simplicity of the first institution, and is furthest from superstition:
wherein albeit, there be some things indifferent, yet the breaking of bread for
the Aphoris. 6.
causes before alleged, may not be counted an indifferent thing.

XL.
And albeit the Lord has not appointed any certain times for the celebration
of the Lords Supper: yet reason so requires that Christians have it in often
use, that they may often remember the passion of Christ: and by this
commemoration confirm their faith and stir up themselves to praise and
magnify the goodness of God in the work of their redemption: and finally to
increase the mutual love, and to testify the same one to another, considering
the band thereof in the unity of the body of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Popish Mass.
I. APHORISM.
THe Papists feign that the Mass is a work, wherein the Mass Priest does
create or make his Christ of bread, by buzzing or mumbling of these five words,
Hoc est enim corpus meum: for this is my body. And then offers him to the
Father as a sacrifice, to expiate the sins of all, quick, and dead, for whom
that Mass is celebrated.

II.
This opinion of profane Papists, is impious and blasphemous. For first this
reproach and disgrace is offered thereby unto Christ: that he is not the only
Heb. 5.6. and 7.24.
Priest of the new Testament.

III.
Again, this doctrine overthrows the merit of Christ's death: as if the sins
of all the faithful were not perfectly expiate by that one Heb. 9.12. and
10.12.14.
sacrifice of Christ's death.

IIII.
Thirdly, the Papists by this assertion, as much as lies in them, do again
crucify Christ: in that they promise the remission of sins by the Mass, and
so set up a new Testament: and in that they say they offer up Christ as an host
or sacrifice unto God. For where there is a Testament, there must needs be the
Heb. 9.16.
death of a testator: and where an host is, it must be slain.

V.
Fourthly, this opinion or assertion does deprive us of the benefit of Christ's
death, that is, the remission of sins: for if sins be pardoned by the
merit of the Mass, then surely are they not pardoned by the merit of the
Mat. 26.28.
death of Christ.

VI.
Fifthly, the Mass does utterly euert and take away the Lords Supper: for it
cannot stand with it. For in the Supper the Lords purpose is to give a blessing
Ioh. 6.32.
unto us: but in the Mass men purpose to offer up satisfaction unto God.
Again, in the Supper the Lord testifies unto us, that we are and must be
daily Ioh. 6.57.
quickened, by the only sacrifice of Christ: but in the Mass they feign, that
Christ's sacrifice cannot profit us, if it be not iterated every day. Thirdly,
the Supper is celebrated by the 1. Cor. 11.18. and 10.17. Mat. 26.27.
whole congregation, but the Mass is celebrated by the Priest only.

VII.
Moreover, the arguments which Papists use for the defense of the Mass, are of
no weight, as these following: Christ said in the institution of the Supper, Do
this: therefore he commanded his Apostles and their successors to offer up or
sacrifice his body unto God. For so this word facere, to do it, (say they) is
used every where in holy Exodus 29. Number. 28.
Scripture, and so it is found also with Apud Vergil. eclog. 3.
profane writers. But I say it is no good consequent, that because that word
is elsewhere so taken, that therefore it is also so used in this place. Next,
that it must have here another signification, it is evident, both by the
coherence osente^ces, and by the Apostle 1. Cor. 11.26.
Paul's expossition, that nothing else is signified, but this, Eat this bread,
and drink ye of this cup. Again those words were not spoken to the Apostles
only, as Ministers of the Church (for Christ himself performed the parts of
a Minister) but as to all the faithful receiving the Sacrament at the hands of
the Lords Minister. Wherefore these words do no less concern those whom
they call lay men, then they do the Priests or Ministers of the Church.

VIII.
Again, if the Supper be to represent Christ's sacrifice and oblation, which
he made upon his Cross: the^ Christ must be offered up in the Sacrament of the
Supper, for how can we otherwise represent in the Supper the oblation of
Christ, but by offering up Christ under the kinds of bread and wine. But this
consequence is false, and so is the reason thereof. For that oblation which
Christ made on the Cross, both may and must be otherwise represented, that is,
by the 1. Cor. 11.24.
breaking of the bread and the pouring out of the wine.

IX.
Again, if the pascall lamb was to be sacrificed then Christ also in the
Eucharist must be sacrificed, for that the paschal lamb was a type of the
Lords Supper: here I answer again, the consequence is false, and the reason
thereof: for of that antecedent this will follow that Christ also must be
sacrificed: for that the lamb was a type of 1. Cor. 5.7.
Christ, not in the Eucharist, but on the Cross: where as John says, that was
finished Ioh. 19.36.
which the lamb prefigured.

X.
Again, they bring a place of Malach. chap. 1. v. 11. from the rising of the
sun, unto the going down of the same, my name is great among the Gentiles,
and in every place incense shall be offered unto my name and a pure offering. But I
answer, that where they infer that the body of Christ is offered up in the
Supper, because it is a clean or pure offering, the argument is false, because
it will not follow from the general to the special affirmatively. And it is
very manifest to any man of understanding, that Malachie here speaks, as the Sea Joel. 2.28. and Act. 2.17.
Prophets, of the spiritual worship of the new Testament, under the shadows
of the ceremonial worship used in the old.

But it is strange that these men dare be bold to bring arguments for the
defense of their Mass in sacrifice out of the Epistle to the Hebrews: for that
the principal doctrine of that Epistle does plainly euert all this Popish
inue^tion of the Mass, out of the 5. chap. v. 1. they have this saying. Heb
5.1. (...).
Every Priest is ordained, that he may offer sacrifices for sins. Therefore
there are also in the new Testament, Priests properly so called, which offer up
sacrifices for sins. For that the Apostle uses a verb of the present tense, I
answer, it is very manifest, in all the Apostles doctrine and speech in that
place, that he speaks of the Priests of the old Testament, and of the
sacrifices which were types of Christ's sacrifice, the only sacrifice
expiatorie for sin. And so the Apostle speaking of Leuitical Priests, in all
the Epistle uses verbes of the present tense, as chap. 7.9.11. The reason of
that phrase is, to set the matter whereof he speaks, more manifestly before
the eyes of men.

XII.
Next they borow out of the 7. chap. the type of Melchi-zedek: and they reason
thus; If Christ did not sacrifice himself in the Supper in an unbloody
sacrifice under, the kinds of bread and wine, then was he never made Priest
after the order of Melchi-zedek: But he was made, etc. as the Apostle
witnesses in that chap. The reason of the consequence is, because Melchi-zedek
offered up unto God bread and wine, I answer, the consequence is false, for
Christ is called a Priest after the order of Melchi-zedek, principally for this
cause, as the Apostle shows, because he is a priest for Heb. 7.3.
ever, as Melchi-zedek there is noted and described, without father, without
mother, without kindred. Again, the reason of their consequence is false, for
that Melchi-zedek did not offer bread and wine unto God, but brought forth Genesis
14.18
bread and wine, for the refection of Abraham and his servants, and that this
is there signified we may well understand both by the Hebrew word Hotzi, and by
the circumstance of that action in that place.

XIII.
Lastly, they have this sentence out of the 9. chap. It is necessary that the
Heb. 9.23.
Exemplaria.
similitudes of heavenly things, should be purified with such things: but the
heavenly things themselves (are purified) with better (...). Hosts, as they
speak.
sacrifices then these. Ergo, with oblations of Masses: because he speaks in
the plural number, hosts. Therefore he speaks not of the bloody sacrifice
of Christ, which was but one. But I answer that the Apostle there still keeps
his plural number, Enallage n. change of number.
taking one number for another, because he continues in the comparison of the
legal sacrifices. And of these chaunges, we have many examples, as Ruth. 1. v.
10. and chapter. 2. v. 20. And that the Apostle there speaks of that one
sacrifice of Christ, may appear by the scope of that whole chap. for that
nothing else is there intended, but to compare the Priesthood of Christ, with
the Leuiticall Priesthood, and to show how far that excels this.

XIIII.
And albeit we utterly deny that the holy Supper of the Lord (which the
Papists have transformed into the monster of the Mass) to be a sacrifice
expiatorie for sin: yet we do willingly confess and profess it to be the
sacrifice Sacrifice of praise and thankes-geuing.
Eucharisticall of the new Testament, for that it was instituted by the Lord
for this end, by this solemn rite to 1. Cor. 11.26.
show and set forth his death, that we might magnify him as our only redeemer
to the glorious praise of his name.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Civil Magistrate.
I. APHORISM.
BBcause some think the civil Magistrate is to be banished out of the Church of
God: and others give him too much power: it is very needful also, that we
know by gods word, whether this order be allowed of God, and how far the civil
Magistrates power reaches.

II.
Both which points the better to know, we must speak of three things in order:
first of the Magistrate, next of the laws, and lastly of the people.

III.
Of the Magistrate we must consider also three things, whether his place and
calling be approved of God, what his office is, and what authority he has.

IIII.
It is manifest by the Scriptures that God approves Magistracy or civil
government: as Psalm. 82. v. 1. God stands in the assembly of Gods, he
judges among Gods. v. 6. I said ye are Gods, and ye are all the children of
the most high. Deuteronomy. 1. v. 17. Moses says, the judgment is Gods. So 2. Chron.
19. v. 6. Iehosaphat says to the Judges, ye execute not the judgments of man,
but of the Lord. Prou. 8. v. 15. Wisdom that is the son of God speaks. By
me kings reign and princes decree justice. Dan. 2. v. 21. God takes away
kingdoms, and sets up kings. Romans 13. v. 1. Paul says. He that resists
power, resists the ordinance of God.

V.
The office of the Magistrate is to be the Deuteronomy. 17.18.19.
keeper of both the Tables of Gods law: and therefore his principal care must
be to set up and to defend the Deuteronomy. 15.5. 2. King. 23. 2. Chron. 29.
pure worship and service of God. Next, to do judgment Ierem. 22.3 Psalm. 82.3
4. Romans 13 3.4. Gene. 9.6.
and justice, that is, to punish the evil, to defend and reward the good.

VI.
Again, if need so require, the Magistrate is bound to defend the subject
with Deuteronomy. 20. Luke. 3.14. Mat. 8.10. Act. 10.4.
arms, and those dominions which are committed to his charge.

VII.
Notwithstanding, when Magistrates punish either their subjects or their
enemies: they ought to have a special care, that they give no place to their
own affections, but respect only the discharge of their duty.

VIII.
The Magistrate may by good right require and demand of his subjects To.
13.6.7.
tributes and customs: and he may use the same, not only for the discharge of
his public services, but also for the 1. Sam. 8.11. etc. Genesis 44.22.23. Dan.
2.41.
honor of his house, and for the preservation of his own state and dignity.

IX.
And thus far of the Magistrate: now for the laws, we must first observe,
that God has three kinds of laws: the law moral, ceremonial and judicial.

X.
The sum of the Moral law is comprised in the Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
Decalogue, consisting in the love of God and the neighbor: and for that it is
an everlasting rule of justice, it must continue ever in force.

XI.
The Ceremonial law was the Gal. 3.14.
pedagogie of the Jews until the coming of Christ: and therefore Christ being
come, it is Col. 2.16. Ephesians. 2.15.
abrogated.

XII.
The Judicial law in as much as it was properly applied to the Jews, binds
not the Christian Magistrate: yet in appointing the Leu. 24.16. Deuteronomy. 13.5.
punishments of grievous sins, it binds no less the Christian Magistrate
at this day, then it bound the Magistrates of the Jews.

XIII.
And thus far of the laws. The third part is of the subjects. The duty of
subjects toward their Magistrates, first is, to esteem of them and Romans 13.7
reverence them as the ministers and messengers or Romans 13.4.
vicegerents of God: next, with readiness of mind, and in all observance to
Ibid. v. 1. and 5. 1. Pet. 2.13.14.
obey them. Lastly, not to intermeddle with public affairs, nor to 1. Pet.
4.15
enterprise any thing without their commission.

XIIII.
They are bound also to obey them that unjustly 1. Pet. 1.18 Ier. 27.12.
and tyrannically rule over them: so long as they command nothing that God
has forbidden, and forbid nothing that God has commanded: for in this case
we must keep that rule of S. Peter: We must obey Act. 4.19. and 5.29.
God more then men, and that rule of Christ, Mat. 22.21.
Give unto Caesar those things which are Caesar's, and unto God those things
which are Gods.

A SVPPLEMENT OR ADDITION, FOR THE CLEARING AND opening of the doctrine of the
Lords Supper.
WHEREAS our Lord Jesus Christ the 6. of John says in express words, that his
flesh is Ioh. 6.55.
meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed. And again, Ibid. v. 53.
Unless ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have
no life in you: For the right understanding of these words and doctrine, which
at the first sight seems so strange, and to the Capernaites (whom Christ then
taught) most repugnant to all reason: and that the same may minister comfort
unto our souls, which is the right end and use of this celestial verity, two
questions principally must be considered. The first is, What kind of meat the
flesh of Christ is? The second, How or in what manner this meat is to be eaten?
The same question may be made also concerning the cup, as What kind of drink
the blood of Christ is? and in what manner must we drink the same? Now then as
concerning the first question: If the flesh of Christ be meat indeed (as is
before showed) it must be either a corporal or spiritual food. Corporal
food is that which nourishes him bodily that feeds thereupon, and this (to
speak after the usual manner and properly) is called meat. Spiritual food,
is that whereby the soul or spirit of him which eats is fed and nourished:
and this is called meat improperly, tropically, metaphorically, because it
has the likeness of meat, properly so called. For like as by natural food so
properly called, the body is nourished and sustained: so by that spiritual
meat the spirit and soul of man is cherished, and as nourished. The same
reason and description may be given of the corporal and spiritual drink. And
now it is certain, that neither the flesh of Christ is a corporal food, nor
his blood corporal drink: for that no bodily substance is fed and preserved
either by the flesh or by the blood of Christ: For, to effect this, the flesh
of Christ must be eaten with the mouth, chewed with the teeth, swallowed up,
digested, and so turned into that nourishing Chilus.
juice in the stomach, whereof blood is engendered, and so derived or sent into
all parts of the body, to be united thereunto, or altered and changed into
the substance thereof, that the body may receive his growth and preservation
thereby. And so in like manner, the blood of Christ, if the body were to be
nourished thereby, must be drunk up with the mouth, swallowed, etc. But these
things are against all reason, and horrible to be spoken. And this was the
very cause, why the Capernaites did so tremble at the speech of Christ,
touching the eating of his flesh, and took it so in evil part, saying; Ioh.
6.52.
How can this man give us his flesh to eat? and again, Ibid. v. 60.
This is an hard saying, who can hear it? For they understood Christ to speak
those words of a bodily food, which were to be taken with the mouth, for the
nourishment of the body. Wherefore seeing that it is manifest by these absurd
consequents, that the flesh of Christ is no meat for the body: it follows,
that it must be a spiritual food, and his blood spiritual drink, whereby
the spirit and soul of man is fed and preserved unto life everlasting, like
as man's body is nourished and kept in this temporal and frail life, by
corporal meat and drink. And this Christ himself seems to have said in
these words. It is Ibid. v. 63.
the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing, the words that I
speak unto you are spirit and life. And whereas the most of the best
interpreters of these times expound these words, of Christ's Deity, as if
the same were understood by the word spirit: so that Christ's meaning (as they
say) is, that the power of quickening does proceed from the Deity of Christ:
so that his flesh has power to quicken us, as it is the flesh of the son of
God crucified for us. This exposition no doubt is sound and good, yet I think
this be the most simple and natural sense, if by the word spirit we understand
the holy Ghost, that the meaning should be thus: my flesh which I said must be
eaten, to attain eternal life, profits nothing to effect this, if ye eat
the same corporally, as you Capernaites understand me: but it is the spirit
which quickneth, that is, the holy Ghost quickneth the hearts of the faithful,
and nourishes them unto life everlasting, by working in them effectually to
believe in me, and so to eat my flesh and to drink my blood spiritually, that
is, by faith, whereby they are well assured that my flesh was crucified for
them, and my blood shed for them for the remission of their sins. The words,
therefore (says he) which I speak unto you, of the necessity of eating my
flesh to attain eternal life: these words I say are spirit and life, that
is, must be understood of the effectual working of the holy Ghost in the hearts
of the elect, to work eternal life in them, even by faith.

Moreover, for the better understanding of this point, in what sense, the flesh
of Christ is, and may truly be said to be our spiritual food: we must
express also in what manner it is made meat for us. And this Christ taught us
in very plain words, in that Sermon, where he says, I am that v. 51.
living bread (that is, the quickening bread, or that bread that gives life)
which came down from heaven: If any man shall eat of this bread, he shall
live for ever, and the bread that I will give, is my flesh, which I will give
for the life of the world. In these last words, which I will give for the life
of the world, Christ shows in what manner his flesh should be food for us,
and that is, in that he will give it unto the death, for our life, that is, to
merit for us life everlasting, offering it as Priest himself, a holy sacrifice
to God his father. And that this is the natural sense of this relative Quam
ego dabo.
which in this place: as if the Lord had said, quatenus came dabo, in that, or
for that I shall give it, it is very manifest by the matter it self, which is
handled in that place. For if we shall not so understand those words, as
tending to declare the former manner of that thing which is here entreated: then
that word must note some division of a general into specials, as if Christ had
two kinds of flesh, of which the one he would give for the life of the world,
the other he would not give. But this interpretation is manifestly false, and
contrary to the articles of our faith whereon we ground the truth of Christ's
incarnation. Therefore that exposition of the relative which in this place is
very true and natural, and used to declare the form and manner of that thing,
which is there proposed or disputed upon. And the very same interpretation is
there of the words of the Lord in the institution of his holy Supper, where, of
that bread broken, he speaks on this wise; This is my body, which is given,
or broken for you, that is, in Quatenus.
as much as, or for that it is broken or given for you. For that holy bread, or
as Paul calls it, that bread of the Lord, is not simply the Sacrament of
the Lords body: that is, does not simply signify and testify that the Lord
has a true body: but signifies and testifies, that the Lords body is broken
or given for us, that is, was offered on the Cross with the feeling of Gods
wrath, to make satisfaction for our sins. And in like manner must we speak
and think of the other words, which the Lord pronounced, of the holy cup or
wine: saying, This is that my blood of the new Testament or covenant, which is
shed for you and for many, for the remission of sins: that is, in as much as,
or for that it is shed, etc. By the premises, it is now manifest, that the
flesh of Christ has in it the nature of meat, not simply but in a certain
respect: that is, in as much as, it was crucified for us. Like as the body is
said to be visible, in respect of the colors thereof.

Now concerning the second question in what manner, we eat the flesh of Christ,
and drink his blood: I answer: Such as the meat and drink is, such must be
the manner of the eating and drinking thereof: but the flesh of Christ is
spiritual meat, and his blood is spiritual drink, as is aforeshewed.
Therefore the flesh of Christ is eaten spiritually or in a spiritual manner,
and his blood is drunk also in the same manner. Now to eat the flesh of
Christ and to drink his blood spiritually, is to eat with the mouth of the
spirit, that is, of the soul, to wit, by faith. Again, to eat the flesh of
Christ by faith, and to drink his blood, is nothing else but to believe in
Christ, or to believe that the flesh of Christ is crucified for thee, and that
his blood is shed for thee, for the remission of thy sins. This Christ
himself shows in the same Sermon, where he propounds two propositions or
sentences signifying one thing: which are these: he that believes v. 47.
in me has eternal life, and v. 54.
he that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood has eternal life. The matter
also, and argument there handled requires this interpretation of the words of
Christ: for if he meant by that phrase of eating his flesh one thing, and by
that of faith another thing: then this consequent would follow, we must have
not one, but two ways to life everlasting: one by eating the flesh of Christ,
the other by faith. But the way to eternal life is but one, which is Christ
alone received by faith, or faith in Christ our Savior, both come to one
effect. And yet the better to understand this point, consider a little what the
nature of faith is. And this is known by his next and proper object, which is
the Gospel, or that testimony which God has given us of his love and grace
for and through Jesus Christ, for faith rests upon the Gospel as the blessed
and infallible testimony of God. And the Gospel testifies of Christ, that
is, of his person and office, and of all his benefits toward us: that is to
say, that Christ is the only begotten son of God, which for our sake and for
our salvation came down from heaven, and was made man of the virgin Marie:
that he lived an holy life according to the law of God, and has brought unto
us from the bosom of his father the counsel of God concerning our salvation:
who being righteous suffered for us that are unrighteous under Pontius Pylate,
was crucified, dead, etc. And like as the Gospel testifies these things unto
us; so the Sacraments also testify the same, for they are seals of the
Gospel, and as it were, a Gospel seen and a Gospel felt. He therefore that
believes these holy testimonies of God, in so doing, he spiritually feeds
upon the body of Christ and spiritually drinks the blood of Christ. And thus
does Augustine, De doctrina Christ. Lib. 2. cap. 16.
expound this place of Christ. Unless (says he) ye eat the flesh of the
son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. He seems to
command a horrible fact, and a thing most detestable: It is a figure
commanding us to communicate with, or to become partakers of the Lords
passion, and to lay up sweetly and comfortably in memory, that his flesh was
crucified and wounded for us: thus says Augustine. After the same manner does
Mr John Calvin, that famous divine of our age, lay open those words of Christ,
in his book of Institutions the 4. book Chap. 17. sect. 5.

FINIS.
R D
DEVS ^^^^T ASTRIS




