A BRIEF TREATISE, Containing a plain and fruitful declaration of the Popes
usurped Primacye, written in Greek above.vij. hundred years sens, by Nilus, an
ancient archbishop of Thessalonia and newly translated into english by Thomas
Gressop student in Oxforde.

Perused and allowed according to the Queen's majesty's injunctions.

Ierem. vi. Thus says the Lord: Go into the streets, consider and make
inquisition for the old way* and if it be the right and good way then go
therein, that ye may find rest for your souls. But they say we will not
walk therein.

To the Reader.
THe land of Egypt which does lie
southeast from England cost
And reckned is one of those lands,
Which Phoebus beams does roast:
Has flowyng in it, one famous floude
That Nilus men do call:
Which once each year does pass his ba^kes
And whelme the country all.
Whose waters cause not bareynnes
As floods do commonly:
But causes the earth al seeds and frustes
To bring forth plentuousely.
To Egypt land, we may compare
The spiritual Egypt well:
Who are all they, within whose hertes
The fylthy Pope does dwell.
These gravely grounds, this Nilus lo,
A bishop of great fame:
Does moist with words of heavenly dew,
To great increase and gain.
Seven hundred years he (Reader) spoke
In Greek and foreyne tongue:
But now he speaks in english eke
By Gressops labor long.
First therefore thank thalmyghty god,
Then take in worth his pain:
That at the least thy good report,
He may deserve to gain.
Finis quod D. I.

To the right worshipful and his especial good friend master T. Beacon the
true mynister and faithful servant of our Savior Christ, Thomas Gressop
wishes the continual favor of God, and peace everlasting, In our redemer
JESUS CHRIST.
WHen I first took in hand this little Treatise, concerning the Popes
usurped primacie: I minded nothing less then to publishe the same, that it
might come into the hands of many I had so little affiance in my self, and so
simple an opinion of mine own doyngs, that I thought them unworthy to be red of
any other. But after that I had received no small courage by your gentle and
friendly exhortations, wherein you willed me to have respect to the commodity
that might ensue to other, which being ignorant of the Greek and Latin tongue,
may attain somewhat herby, both to the increase of knowledge, and also of
judgment in matters of religion: I nothing doubted after long deliberation,
to make that commune to other which at the first, as a private exercise, I
thought to have kept to my self Therefore as the readers hereof, if they receive
any commodity hereby, ought in that behalf to yield all thanks unto you, by
whom to their profit, I have been encouraged to attempt this bold
enterprise: so I in some part to show my self not altogyther ungrateful and
vnmyndful of your exceeding favor and great gentilnesse to me wards: have
thought good to dedicate unto you this my simple endeavor, and first fruit of
my labors, as unto one who after a sort may seem, as in your own right to
challenge this kind of duty at my hand. For unto whom should I offer this
Treatise of the Popes primacy, or whom should I make patron thereof, but one who
has been long exercised in this and the like matters of controuersye, who also
by use and experience is well practiced in defendyng and putting away the
strokes and weapons of such as are ennemies to gods everlasting truth?
Such a one have you declared your self in your books and sermons, not only
in bearing of the darts of wyly Antichrist, and his stout army of arrogant
priests (as Gregory terms Grego. li. 4. Epi. 48.
them) but also in beatynge down that monstrous Hydra, with the mighty
strokes of the spiritual sword, so that both he and all his proud army of
presumptuous prelates, are fayn cowardly to turn their backs, and dare not
once show their faces in open battalt against you. Wherefore I most humbly
beseech you, according to your accustomed gentylnesse, to take in good worth
this my bounden duty, and to receue under your protection, this worthy
archebyshop, who like a stranger, far from his own country, now seeks
entertaynment at your hands.

Which if ye vouchesafe, ye shall perceive this little Nilus, so stoutly
behave himself under your banner, that he shall like a mighty champion strike
of the head of this aniichristian Golyath with his own sword, and like a
valyant conqueror, set it on his own spear, to be seen of the whole host,
of all true english Israelites. So that I doubt not, but all english men that
ernestly profess Christ, shall plainly see, that the lamb and his host, have
given the serpent an overthrow, and have put to flight all his ignorant army,
with their blind capitains. Yea all english men, as I trust, shall perceive,
that he, which fights on our side against the old bawd of Babylon, (...)
and cacolike whore of Rome, is most mighty and strong, yea that he is a
lord valiant in battle: he shall first vanquishe them in this life, with the
mighty breath of his mouth, in the ministers and true preachers and folowers of
his holy word: scatteryng them as the duste from the face of the earth: and
after this life, the terrible judgment of the Lord of hosts shall condemn
them for evermore: when the just shall reign in heaven, in joys that by no
means can be expressed. The high shepeherde and pastor our Lord Jesus Christ,
increase you with all abundant plentye of his grace and plentyfull abundance of
his holy spirit. Fare ye most heartily well in Christ.

From Oxford
To the christen Reader.
THou haste here gentle Reader, in this little book, no small defense of the
Truth, against that blasphemous mouth (mentioned in the Apocalips) which
speaks (...)
presumptuously against the lord god and his chosen people. Here may thou
see, how vaynely and falsely the Pope and his members boast theimselues, of
that which in deed he never had, that is to were, his pretenced primacye and
usurped power over the universal congregation. Here also may thou plainly
perceive, that the Romish bishop has no preeminence given him by gods
holy word, but by the fathers and Emperoures, and that none such as the Pope
most arrogantely, and against all right, now takes on him: but only a
certain prerogative in honor, such as we use of voluntacy accord to give to
our elders. Here may thou behold, the Pope caught and snared in the net
which he lays for other, and overcome with his own arguments, I mean the
general Counselles and old Doctors (which he and his mayn tayners affirm to
be all together on their part.) The author of this Treatise a man of great
antiquity was archbishop of Thessalonia, and successor to the holy apostle
Saint Paul, who first traded the Thessalonians in the Christen faith, and to
the confirmation thereof, wrote an epistle to them, which we have at this
tymered in our churches, as a parcel of holy scripture. This ancient
archybshop lived not long after the days of Charles the great, about whose
time the seventh Synod was held at Nice: whereof the author in this book eft
soones makes mention. He wrote (as we may gather by conjectures) about the
year of our lord. 787. His style and manner of writynge is very plain and easy,
and sauereth much of that reverent antiquity: as the learned in the tongue may
well perceive. This book of his is but brief, yet it conteyneth many grave
sentences and weighty reasons: it has strong arguments and piththy
co^clusions, against that loftye and arrogante authority of the Romish
bishop. All the Popes lymmes may blushe and be abashed, if their faces were not
harder than brass, to say that the bishop of Rome has had that authority and
power, which he now usurps, in quiet possession sens the Apostles time,
sith it is proved by the most ancient doctors and holy fathers, that that
which in deed he had, was given him long after the apostles time, and that
which he now boasts him self of, has been at all times, and in all ages,
denied him by such godly and learned pastors as this Nilus was. Whose book, as
thou see, I have translated into englisshe, to the end that my countrymen,
which are not expert in the toungues, may be ware of them, which to the
mayntenance of the Popes authority, have always in their mouths antiquity,
antiquity: And The Papists antiquity as old as the devil him self
that they may perceive how little verity is joined with the aniquitie they
speak of, the first founder whereof was ancient Sathanas, their great
grandfather, the old forger and father of lies, from whom proceeds all
presumption vanity, and untruth, whom the Pope and his sect, so lively
express in their doings, that a man may behold in their hypocritical faces
replenished with all dissimulation, a perfect pattern and lively image of their
holy father Beelzebub. In translatyng, I have endeavored my self, to speak
plainly that the rude and ignorant might read it, to the increase of their
knowledge in the true religion, and to the auoidyng of such forged reasons, as
the Pope and his accomplices falsely allege for the vpholdynge and maynteynyng
of their tyrannical and beastly kingdom. If I would have studied for fynenesse
of speech, or preferred my private commodity before the profit that may
redounde to manne, I might easyly in less time, more to mine own
furtheraunce, have fynyshed greatter things, and with more favor, yea and
thanks to, at sum men's hands, have abstayned from this payneful and
dangerous enterprise. But I rather choose to have respect to the glory of
Christ, and his holy church, then to mine own ease and estimation. Every
weapon wherewith we may beat down errors and lies must be taken in hand to
the defense of the truth, neither ought we to consider how fine and eloquent it
is, but rather what strength, force and efficacy it has to overthrow the
enemies of gods verity. I beseech thee therefore, (good christian Reder,) to
accept what soever I have done to thy furtherance in the knowledge of gods
eternal truth and most holy religion. And where as my doings may peradventure
seem scarce thank worthy: yet for my travail in thy behalf, suffer me not,
if any thing have escaped in translatyng, in that I minded the good, to mysse
of thy gentle pardon.

Which if thou grant me, I shall not only think my self sufficiently
recompensed for my travail, but also thereby I shall be encoraged to attempt
greater things to thy commodity. Now I protest before god, who knows ye
secrets of al hearts, that in translating hereof I have had respect chiefly to
the commodity of such as for lack of instruction, have been to much deceived
and seduced, by the craftye sophistications and subtle gloses of the Pope and
his impes, who to the stuffyng of their gredy paunche and maintenance of their
beastly idle life, are not ashamed to paint their positions with feigned gloses
and feeble distinctions. But almighty god has and will reuele to his elect their
falsehode and subtilie, to their open shame and confusion. Wherein as all true
christians ought to refuse no pains, but to do ye uttermost of their endeavors:
so I by gods grace, will never cease to do all that I may, either in
translatyng, or otherwise, to the end that all men may perceive, on how weak
a ground, The papi^tes best arguments.
they have gone about by fire and fagotte and all extremity, to compel men to
lay the foundation of their faith. And also how that all that they teach, as
well in this matter, as in other points of religion, contains not one jot
of sound doctrine, if it be tried by the holy scriptures. I speak not this,
that I malice the pope or his adherentes any thing, whose persons, as God
knows, I hate not, although I abhore their detestable and erronius doctrine:
but that I might draw out of that stinckynge puddle of wylful ignorance, as
many as I could. I hate the error, and not the men. Which if they forsake,
I shall gladly yield them all christen love and due reverence. Therefore I little
esteem what any man either of malice or ignorance, shall report of these my
doings: knowing that whatsoever the one says, proceeds of a perverse
judgment: and what so ever the other reports, comes of rashues, rather
then of reason, in iudgyng that which he knows not, Wherefore as I regard not
what they say of me in this behalf, so I submyt both this and all my
doings to the judgment of the true christian reder, whose heart god has
opened to acknowledge and receive the verity of his holy will, besechyng
almighty god of his great goodness and infinite mercy, to bring to the
knowledge of his truth, all those whom the god of this world, yet holds in
captivity: that they can not perceive the power of says, neither know the
Lord aright in his only son Jesus Christ, our alone advocate and true head
of the congregation to whom with the father and the holy ghost be all
honor and glory everlasting. Amen.

LEt rankour not you rule,
O men of Romyshe sect:
Expel the^ poison from your breasts
That does you thus infecte.
Let not that hauty whore
That boasts her self for god:
That rules the realms of Cesars right
With her usurped rod:
Let not this hag I say,
Bewitche your earthly eyes:
That here embraces beastly joy,
And virtue does despise.
Antiquity she says,
Gave her this stately place:
Lo here Antiquity you see
Does her and hers deface.
Lo here does Nilus teach,
A man of ancient time
How much she is to be abhorde,
How much she swelles with crime.
Leave her therefore in time
Forsake her wicked ways:
Let us and you agree in one,
So God shall have his praise.
Finis quod B. G.

Fautes escaped in the printyng.
In the leaf of B. the.xi. page or side the.xxvii. line, for indifferent,
read, much different.

In the same leaf of B. the xvi page, the vii. line: for yet, read, it.

In the leaf of C. the.xii. page, the. xxvi. line, for names, read canons.

A TREATISE OF the Popes primacie by Nilus Archbishop of Thessalonia.
THe adherentes of the Romish church affirm,

First, that S. Peter was made chief of thapostles by Christ him self, and
therefore had the keys of heaven worthily delivered unto him: and that the
church was builded on him, against the which the gates of hell should not
prevail, forasmuch as Christ had prayed for his faith, and had commanded him
both to strengthen his brethren, and also to feed his sheep. They heap
together also much more, whereby they think that the primacie of Peter may be
proved.

Secondarily they hold, that the Pope is Peter's successor, and that he has by
succession all his preeminence, and therefore may do in matters of religion,
all things after like sort and fashion as he might have done.

And therefore they say, that it is impossible for the Pope to fall from the
true faith, for if that should happen, the christen religion and the whole
church which is builded upon him, must needs perisshe. To the prose whereof
they allege a testimony of their own, out of Pope Agathon, which in a
certain Epistle affirms, that the church of Rome was never entangled with
any error, neither has any time swarued from the true way of verity. And
therefore they say, that the Pope has had his supremacy always sense the
Apostles time.















All these things the adherentes of the Romysshe church, allege for the
mayntenaunce of the popes dominion and authority.

Unto the which assertions of theirs, I nothing doubt what to answer, but
before whom I may plead. For if I should make answer before the Latins
themselves, and adherentes of the Romish church, what rightful judgment might
I look for, in submyttyng my self to the judgment of mine enemies? But if I
should plead before our Greeks, then might the Latins have just cause to
complain of me, where as I make the Grecians, judges over them, whom they
think to be their adversaries, in matters Ecclesiastical. What then must we
do? Gods word must not be hid.
verily Gods truth ought not to be buried up in silence everlasting, but
rather we ought to speak, freely, having good confidence, and wishing that
those to whom this Book shall come, desire nothing more than the truth. For
surely such as favor the truth, shall hereby also profit somewhat.

FIRST therefore, concerning the primacy of Peter, after what sort he was
chief of that holy congregation, or what privilege was given or ought unto
him: I think it not now so nedeful to be reasoned of. For be it after such
sort, and so great, yea as it lyketh any man to deuyse: yet never truly shall
it thereby be proved, that the Pope has such right of Peter, where by he may
rule all other bishops, which is our adversaries second position.

For, concerning the Pope, two things must be considered: the one, That he is
Bishop of Rome, by the which title the sacred Synodes term him.

The other, that he would be chief and highest of all bishops. The first
truly he has of Peter, that is to wete, the byshoprike of Rome But the other
his primacie, he has of certain fathers and kings, which for desire of good
order, gave it him many years after thapostles time. And to prove this to be
true, I will bring forth witnesses not two or three, or twice so many, but sire
hundred and thirty, yea and chose holy fathers.

Read the xxviii. Canon of the fourth holy Synod or council of Calcedonia,
where are these words: We following the decrees of the fathers, and waying the
Canon even now rehearsed of the. 150. Bishops gathered together at
Constantinople, called new Rome, in the time of the most holy Emperor
Theodosius, the same also do we ordeyne and decree, concerning the honors
and prerogatives of the said church of Constantinople, or new Rome. For unto
the sea of old Rome, the Fathers gave worthyly the chief honor and primacy,
because that City then ruled all the world, the same cause moved the. 150.
foresaid bishops to give the like honor and preemine^ce to the sea of new
Rome, iudgyng it reasonable, that this City condecorate with the empire, and
senate imperial, and equal in dignity with the old imperial seat, should as
much excel in matters ecclesiastical, seeing that it is the next unto it.
Then what may we learn hereby? Verily nothing else, but that the Superiority
over other churches, was given to the pope, not by the Apostles, The Pope has
not his primacy of the apostles.
but by the fathers, and that for no greater or iuster cause, then that the
city of Rome, at that time had dominion over the whole world. For the Canon
says plainly, That the primacie or superior dygnitie was given to the sea
of Rome by the fathers. So that the pope has therefore the Superiority given
him of the Fathers, because in times paste, the City of Rome had the Empire.
Then he has it not as Peter's successor, neither as given him of the Apostles.

But for the more apparaunt truth, let us read the hundredth new decree of
Justinian to the end, that it may appear, that the truth has witnesses on
every side. We ordeyne, says he, according to the Decrees of the Synodes,
that the most holy Bishop of old Rome, is the chief of all priests, and
that the most blessed bishop of Constantinople, or new Rome, is next unto
him, and above all other: Do you not hear that the Emperor says, That the
primacye of the Pope of Rome, is given him by the Decree of holy Councelles?
If that the Pope do hold his Supremacye only by the Decree of Councelles, I
beseech, you how may it be true, that sum men affirm, that he has it
by succession of Peter. But here some man may lay, The Pop^ Peter's successor.
Ios not the Pope than wholly the successor of Peter? He is truly. But in that
he is a bishop only, and as every bishop that was ordained by him (which
surely were very many) and as every bishop is the successor of the Apostle, of
whom he was made, or in whose place he techeth And after this sort, as well
Peter as other tShapostles, had many successors, which were bishops only and
nothing else. For Peter was both an apostle, and also chief of the Apostles.
But the Pope is no apostle, much less chief of the apostles. for thapostles
did neither make nor ordeyne Apostles, but only pastors and teachers.
Moreover Peter was a Doctoure of all the world, and so were the rest of the
Apostles: for the Lord said to him, as well as to the rest of the Apostles,
Go and preach the Gospel to all nations. The Pope (...) not in this point be
Peter's successor.
But the Pope is only bishop of the City of Rome, and so is he called.

Furthermore Peter made one bishop at Antioche, an another at Alexandria, and an
other in an other place. but the (...) may do nothing like: Besides (...),
Peter may ordeyne the bishop of (...), but the Pope can not so do. (...)
conclude, Math. 16.
It was said to Peter ^^thout condition: What soever thou ^^^dest, shall be
bound, and what so ^^er thou losest, shall be losed in heaven: ^ut when Peter
ordained the bishop (...) Rome, he commanded him to bynd (...) lose that, which
worthily ought to be ^^sed or bound. Beside all this, whatsoe^er Peter taught,
either by preaching ^rityng, it is known undoubtedly to be the doctrine of the
holy ghost: But of the Pope no such thing may be thought. Wherefore the Pope
has not all the prerogatives, gifts, and privileges of Peter by succession:
but those only which every bishop ordained of Peter has, that he may bynd
and lose, baptize and preach, and to be short, bring into the way those that
are seduced, and do other duties belongyng to a mynister.

Thirdly whereas they say, that it is not possible, that the pope should fall
from the truth, that truly passes all the gifts and virtues of Peter him
self, Math. 26. Gala. ^^.
yea although the Pope must n^des have had them all by Succession* For he good
man full sore against h^^ will, erred more then ones. But he (...) I would
feign know, whether the Pope may, or has at any time fallen into the crimes
of lyeng, covetousness, vayneglorye, or other like vices, or whether it be
impossible, that he should offend at all? Let them deny it if they be not
ashamed to lie openly. If then it be manifest, that even he, may sometimes
offend and sin against conscience, in as much as he is a man, verily yt
may happen also, that in matters of Relygion he may be deceived. The truth
whereof Saint Paul witnesses, writing unto Timothe on this wife: 1. Tim. 1.
Having says and a good conscience, which some men not regarding, have made
shypwrecke in matters of Faith.

Behold, here we hear, that he whose conscience is wounded, The Pope may be
sick in faith.
may be sick in faith. Therefore, if the Pope have not always his
conscience free from all offense, and this evil is joined with error in
faith, it follows of necessity, that they lie manyfestly, which say, that
the Pope can not fall from the verity of Christ's relygion. Yea it is a kind
of defection to defyle the conscience with sin, as S. Paul witnesses,
saying: They profess God in word, but in their deeds they deny him. How
then may it be, that the Pope may possyblye deny GOD in work and deed,
and not in word and doctrine.

Certainly Honorius the Pope fell from the sincere doctrine, (...) the Pope
condemned for heresy.
and therefore was condemned by the syxt Synod, as it may euidentely appear
in the.xvi. decree of the said Synod, where it is said: It behooves that they
whom we have already pronounced condemned, and by the common decree have put
out of ye holy prayer books, be also openly proclaimed accursed. Tha^ according
to the laudable custom, the princis being mentioned, it follows forthwith:
Cursed be Theodorus Pharanites the heretic. Cursed be the heretic Sergius:
Cursed be the heretic Kyzius: Cursed be Honorius the heretic: Cursed be the
heretic Pirrhus: accursed be all that favor heretics. But for the more
evident truth, let us bring toorthe an other testimonye out of the oration
of the holy Synod to the Emperor: We remove, says the Synod, from the
lymittes of the church, and worthyly accurse all new and vain sermes, with
their inuenters, such as are, especially, Theodorus Pharanites, Sergius,
Paul, Pirrhus, and Peter, who sometime ruled this church of Constantinople,
and also Cirus the priest of Alexandria, and Honorius bishop of Rome. If that
Honorius bishop of Rome were an heretic, possible it is then, The Pope may be
an heretic.
that the pope may fail in verity of doctrine: neither shall the words of
the Lord be vain and false, although the Pope err, which he spoke of the
church, that the gates of hell should not prevail against it, Math. 16.
for the true doctrine is preserved in other bishops and doctors.

Here also we may plainly see, that it was not said of the sea of Rome, that
the church of God was thereon builded For that were to hard and not indifferent
from the seruilitie and bondage of the Jews, to bind the congregation of God
to Rome. For Christ builded his church himself upon the doctrine and
confession of Peter, The foundation of the church.
and all those that keep and mayntaine the like faith and profession that Peter
did. And where as pope Agathon boasts, Pope Agathon.
that his church never went from the truth, it is no marvel, considering
what face such men have. But let such honest men take it for a warnyng,
that they wrest not the truth of the matter, to their own talk, but rather
let them tempre their tongues to the truth of the matter. And percase Pope
Agathon was moved so to write, either because the state of his matter did so
require, as it happened ofttymes that he so wrote, orels because the church of
Rome in deed has not often departed from the truth. Otherwise, if that without
exception and condition it were symply true: how could that saying be
verified: All are gone astraye, and are become wicked, there is none that does
good, no not one. Beside that, we may well say, Psalm. 13.
that Agathon spoke of the time past, because the church of Rome has not erred
before time, and not of the time to come, as though it were impossible, that it
should ever be deceived. Certainly Agathon wrote that before the.vi. Synod,
neither did he yet understand the things whereof the Synod entreated. Also it
were no marvel if that holy synod, wherein so many holy fathers were
gathered together, should espy and see that, which he being but one man,
could not sufficiently perceive. And that these things are true, it may well be
gathered by an Epistle of Pope Leo, who succeeded next after Agathon, and allowed
the vi. synod. For so says Leo in his epistle, written to the Emperor,
conceruynge the said sinode. Also we hold accursed the authors of the new
heresy, thatis to wite Theodorus bish. of Pharanite, Cirus of Alexandria,
Sergius, Pirrhus, Paul and Peter successors rather tha^ bishops of the church
of Constantinople One Pope condemns in other.
and also Honorius who has not beautified this Apostolic church, with
doctrine left by the apostles, but rather has assayed with profane treason,
to subvert the vnsported and pure faith.

In the fourth place, where as our adversaries say, that the pope is after the
same sort and fashion superior to the Bishop of Constantinople, as the said
Bishop is to the Bishop of Cesaria, or to any other Bishop under him: that
truly as it is manifestelye false, so may it in no wise be suffered: for
certainly the Bishop of Rome is therefore called first, because the Bishop of
Constantinople, in respect to him is second in order and worthynesse. But the
bishop of Constantinople, in respect of the bishop of Cesaria, is not called
first, neither the said bishop, neither any other of these that are under him,
has the second degree or place of dignity, as next unto him. But he is so
first of them that are under him, that as though he were alone, he has none
adjoined to him, that may in any point as second in degree be compared with
him in worthiness. The bishop of Cesarea, is not called second, Psalm. 1^.
in respect of the bishop ^f Constantinople, But first in comparison of them,
that with him at subject to the bishop of Co^sta^tinople, of the which one is
second to him, another third, an other fourth. And that the primacye of the
bishop of Rome is not lose and free, as though it were a monarchye, but united
with others as the dignities of fellows in office, are conjoined together
between them selves: yet may be easily proved. For the xxxvi. Canon of the
foresaid Synod has these words: Renuyng the decrees of the hundred and fifty
holy fathers, who held a counsel in this imperial City preserved of God:
And of the vi hundred and thirty gathered together at Calcedonia, we do ordeyn
and constitute, that the sea of Constantinople, have equal dignity with the
sea of old Rome, and have as much priiledge in matters ecclesiastical, as the
said sea, seeing that it is next unto it, and next to Constantinople, let
the bishop of the great city Alexandria have place, and after him let the
bishop of Jerusalem be placed. If so be that the Pope do therefore challenge to
him dominion over other, because he is first named, and has the first degree
in honor, he must likewise grant the same power to the bishop of
Constantinople (because he is named second) over them that in order follow
him, the bishop of Alexandria, and others. And also to the bishop of
Alexandria, who is named third, authority over the bishop of Antioche, and to
the bishop of Antioche, who is fourth, power over the bishop of Jerusalem, who
has the.v. place in noumber and order. But this were neither just, neither
any thing else but a disturbance of the church of God. And hereby may we
perceive, that the bishop of Rome is not superior to the bishop of
Constantinople, in like sort as the said bishop is to the bishop of Cesarea,
for as much as the bishop of Constantinople ordeyneth both the bish. of
Cesarea, and al other subject to him. But the bishop of Rome ordeyneth
neither the bishop of Constantinople, neither any other Metropolitan. But that
it may more evidently apere, that the Pope has no power over all other
bishops, let us read the.vi. canon of the Nicen counsel, where it is plainly
commanded, that the Bishop of Alexandria, should rule sum churches, the
bishop of Rome other, and other the bishop of Antioche. Neither may any of
them meddle in others proince. This Custom the B. of Rome has broken
Let the old custom take place, which was, that the bishop of Alexandria
should be chief, and have the highest dignity in Egypt, Lybia, and the.v.
cities: because this is a custom with the bishop of Rome also. Likewise at
Antioche, and in other provinces, let the primacie, highness, dignttie and
authority of the churches he maynteyned. Here ye plainly see that the canon
of Nice, commands the old custom to be kept, and al men to be content
therewith: which custom does attribute and preserve to every church his own
worthiness, so that the church of Alexandria should rule some, the church
of Antioche other, that is to say, those, which are in both Syrias. The
church of Rome other, and other the Church of Jerusalem, even those (as the
seventh Cannon of the Synoda appoynteth, which are Phenicia, Palestina, and
Arabia, and to Constantinople, by the.xxviii. Canon of Calcedonia, the churches
of Asia, Pontus, and Thracia. Therefore all Metropolitanes, that are content
with their own churches, keep the decree, the law, and ordinance.

And if any manne not content with his own, desyrethe an nothers, he trewely
ought to be counted a breaker of custom, and of the decrees of holy
Fathers, for as much as the decree of Nice, doothe straightly forbydde it, and
wylleth the old usage herein to be followed. If the Canon had divided the
world, between other Metropolites, and had given nothing unto the
Bishop of Rome, but only have said, That he ought to rule the rest, then
might a man of lykelyhoode have gessed, that he ought all together to rule
all congregations of the whole world, and that all other, as well Bishops as
Metropolitanes are vassalles and subject unto him, even as to the Bishop of
Constantinople, other Bysshoppes of his prouynce, that are his inferiors. Now
seeing that sundry countries are appointed to the Bishop of Rome, other
to the Bishop of Alexandria, and other to the bishop of Constantinople: no
more are they subject to him, then he is to them.

Then our adversaries say, that the Pope has provocation in matters
ecclesiastical, and that therefore he is chief of all other. The same
prouocatione has the bishop of Constantinople, and yet thereby has he neither
authority, neither jurisdiction of other Metropolitans. Therefore neither the
Pope ought to let or hinder the jurisdiction of other Metropolites. And that
it may appear, that I have said truly, that the bishop of Constantinople
has provocation, I will alleged the.ix. canon of the.iiii. Synod or counsel
of Calcedonia. If one clerk have an action against an other, let him not leave
his own bishop, and run to the secular judge, but let the matter be first
debated before his own bishop, or at the least by thaduise of their own
bishop, let them take such a judge as both the parties shall be contented
with. If any do otherwise he shall be in danger of the decree. If any clerk
have an action against his own bishop, or any other, let the matter be
tried before the Synod of the same province. And if any bishop or clerk have
a complaynte against the Metropolitan, let him go to the magistrate of the
diocese, or else to the sea of the chief city Constantinople, and there
let him be judged. So also says the xvii. decree of the said Synod.
Moreover the.xx. and.xxxvi. canon of the.vi. Synod, gives in all points as
much dignity and prerogative to the one as to the other, as much to the sea
of Constantinople as to the sea of Rome, whereby they declare that prouocatio^s
may be made to the bishop of Constantinople.

Then where as our adversaries babble that the Pope may judge all men, The
Papists are full of vanity.
and that no man may judge him: that verily is full of arrogance, vanity, and
untruth, and far dissonant from the modest and equal decrees of the
apostles. For if that Paul did therefore confer his doctrine with the rest
of the apostles, that he might not seem to run in vain, and Peter bare
myldly and patiently, the sharp reprofes of Paul, by what right, or with what
face, may the Pope of Rome, cha^^nge to him self, that be only like a
tyrant, The Pope (...)
should give account to no man of his life and deeds, although he boaste him
self to be Peter's successor? But experience it self shall easyly prove that
to be most untrue. For Honorius as we have showed, was not only judged of
the syxt Synod, but also condemned for his false doctrine, yea and accursed
to: his death and grave nothing auaylynge against that severity of the
counsel. And as for other deeds and matters Civil and Political, besides
his doctrine, in that behalf also he is no less subject then any other
Bishop, for as much as he him self also is termed a Bishop. Many such
Laws and Decrees there are, partly made by the Apostles, and some made by the
holy Councelles. Yea I can allege a place, where the Bishop of Rome is
separately reproned of a Council, as the thyrtenthe Cannon of the syxte
general Council doothe euidentely show, where it is said after this sort:
For as mu^^e as we understand, that in the Church of Rome, in the Decree of
Orders, it is appointed, That who so ever takes the orders of a priest or
Deacon, shall first profess, That they have no copulatione with their wives:
We following the old Canon and constitutions of the Apostles, Prestes marriage
lauful by the old canon and constitutions of the apostles.
will and decree, that the lawful matrimonye of holy men shall be
auaylable, and that their copulation with their wives, shall by no means be
broken, neither that one deprive the other of familiarity in time convenient.
Then the canon making the sentence more plain and manifest, says moreover: If
any man presume contrary to the rules of the apostles to deprive any priest or
deacon, of the contract or fellowship of his laufull wife, let him be deposed.
Likewise if a Priest or Deacon forsake his wife, for relygions sake, let him be
excommunicate: and if he so continue, let him be deposed. The.lv. Canon of
the said Synod witnesses the same. The words ar these: For as much as we
understand, that certain in the city of Rome, contrary to the received
custom of the church, do fast in the Saboths in the time of lent: it seems
good to this holy Synod to bind the church of Rome by all means to the
canon which says: If any clerk be found to fast on the sunday or sabbath
day, one sabbath day only excepted, let him be deposed. If any lay man be
found so doing, let him be excommunicate.

Hereby it plainly appears that the bishop of Rome may and ought to be
judged, as well in controversies of doctrine, as in all other his deeds and
matters, if he commytte any thing against right and equity. The Pope as not
above a bishop.
And that the pope is not above the degree of a Bishop, as some men peruersely
think him to be, it may be plainly proved, by this that we have said. For how
might it be, if he were in dignity above a bishop, that he should be judged
of bishops in the counsel, and be compelled to render unto them an account of
his deeds. It is manyfeste that the fathers when they write unto him, call him
a bishop: truly he is ordained of bishops, which verily might not be so, if
his dignity were more then a bishop. For no man can give that to an other
which first he has not himself. Note the pope breaks order ecclesiastical.
And what else I pray you mean they, that so say, but to break and destroy
the order ecclesiastical. For Dionysius who lived in the apostles time,
deuideth the regimente ecclesiastical, into deacons, priests, and bishops,
neither may we by suspicion gather out of his writings, that there is any
dignity in the church, above a bishop, neither may it be said by any
lykelyhode, that Dionysius either was ignorant, that there was any such
dignity in the church: either that he of set purpose, did dissemble it, seeing
that he professes, that he has written fully of all the Ecclesiastical
regyment. But suppose this to be true (may our adversaries say) yet I pray you
show us with what face ye dare allege the canons of the.vi. Synod, sith that
Synod has made no decree at all, but those wherein the two natures of our
Savior are agreed on against the Monothelites: to that I answer, that
although the canons which I have even now alleged, were not true, neither the
very decrees of the.vi. Synod: ye our purpose, that the Pope is not greater
then other bishops, neither free from the judgment of others, may be
manifestely proved by other things thereof dependynge. For if there be no
dignity above a bishops, then is no bishop greatter than an other, in as much
as he is a bishop. For Dionysius says that all bishops are (...), that is to
say, of one order and dignity. Therefore seeing the Pope is a bishop, he ought
to be like other bishops, and subject to all laws, that other are bound
unto. And truly so many ar the byshoply laws, or laws of bishops, and so
great care had the holy Synodes in making them, whose authority no man
ought to withstand, that to rehearse them all, it would be very hard. Beside
that I may well answer, that that is known to all men, that are but meanly
conversant in matters ecclesiastical, that the foresaid Canons be the decrees
of the sixte Synod, and also that they ought to be reputed and taken of
firm and ratified authority, as they are in deed. For when as neither the.v.
Synod neither the syxte, at the beginning had any regard of these
constitutions, straight after, the.vi. Synod being renewed, fynysshed that
which before was neglected. For as the other did only handle matters of
doctrine, leauyng and omittyng all other matters, so the.vi. Synod being
begun again, or renewed, touched lightly matters of doctrine, and made
co^stitutions only concerning the gouerna^ce of the church, and other matters
ecclesiastical. And that this is the very same universal sinode iterate or
begun again, it appears first by the history of Basilius bishop of Gortines in
Candy who supplied the rome of the Pope in the said sinode. Moreover it is
manifest in that the sinode calls it self alwais universal. And it had not
ben true, so great a company of bishops would have feared to be taken in a
manyfeste lie. Besides that the.vii. holy synod says in the first decree
thereof: We willingly and gladly embrace the godly co^stitutio^s, and we
confirm their steadfast and undefiled authority: as those that the trumpettes
of the holy ghost has ordained, that is to say the apostles and holy
fathers, that have been gathered together in diverse places, for the self same
purpose. For they inspired with the spirit of god decreed those things that
they thought profitable. Whom they accursed we accurse also: whom they have
suspe^ded, we suspend, whom they have deposed we depose: And to be short, when
they by any other means did punyshe, we also do tax in like manner. Saint
Paul who was taken up into the third heaven, 1. Tim. 6.
and to whom those things were reveled, that are not laufull to be spoken of,
cries out that the manners of the holy, ought to be far from all
covetousness, and that they should be content with their own estate and
condition. Therefore seeing that neither the.vi. Synod at the first coming
together, neither the seventh has meddled with the constitutions of the
apostles, and the names of the.vi. universal synodes, but the said sixthe
synod being iterate and renewed has supplied the defecte thereof, it is
manifest, that the.vii. Synod speaks of the canons of the said.vi. counsel.
More over where as the Synod accursethe those that regard not the authority
of the decrees, Is it not a terrible thing, yea is it not enough to move any
stony heart? Besides that the bishop of Rome him self so long as he agreed with
the churches of the east, did so much approve and allow the decrees of this
synod that Adrian the first, writing to Taratius, Pope Adrian pro^^^^ for
Image.
archbishop of Constantinople, with great admiration commends him, because
he did so constantely observe these decrees, Which may appear by the very
words of his epistle, which forth with I will allege. We do perceive, says
he, by the synodall epistle, how earnest your profession is in the right faith,
and how great a zele ye have toward the holy congregations, and the.vi. holy
Synodes, and toward the venerable and sacred Images, which surely is
wonderful, and wrothy great admiration. Wherein it is plainly to be seen,
that in the laudable godly and right canons of the sixte synod, that
worshipful picture is allowed in which the lamb showed by demonstration, with
the finger of the precursor, is lively expressed which being receued of us,
as a figure of grace does represent unto us the true lamb by the law, that is
to wete, Christ him self. Therefore we receauyng the old fygures, signs, and
shadows, as tokens of the truth, and marks given to the church, do
acknowledge the grace and truth, as they that think it to be the fulness of the
law. To the end therefore, that that image may in lively colors he expressed
to all men's eyes, which represents in manhood the lamb that takes away
the sins of the world, that is to say our God, we think good, that from
hensefoorth instede of the old lamb, there be a new erected, in the churches
of God, to the intent that we may consider, the raysynge up of the baseness of
gods word, and he put in mind of that common welthe, wherein he lived in the
flesh, and also be led as it were by the hand, to the contemplation of his
Passion, and most wholesome death, by which the freedom of the world was
purchased. That therefore this cannon was allowed of Pope Adrian, and that it is
the.lxxiii. of the synod, now mentioned, the autenticall books do testify.
But no man can sufficiently marvel at the unsteadfastness and lyghtnesse of
the Popes adherentes, not only for that they now hate and deteste the holy
general counselles, which sommetyme they allowed, but also that the Popes
them selves are at varyaunce one with an other. The Popes ar together by the
ears.
For as we read even now Pope Adrian meruaylousely commendethe these
decrees, but Innocentius or some other rejects them. If any manne will
affirm, that the Pope is not subject to the laws and rules of the Fathers,
he trewelye in no wise is to be suffered. For that were most unworthy, that
the Pope should not esteem the Fathers, by whom he has obtained that
dygnytie of prehemynence, whereof we spoke before.

Moreover, if the Pope contempne decrees, he despises his own authority: for
he himself has made many, and so by the testimonye of Paul, he makes
himself an offender. But we have showed and declared, that he is bound to
give account both of his doctrine, and also of his other governance and
regiment ecclesiastical: so that he is of necessity subject to the
constitutions of the fathers and counsels. Certainly it were not right, that
any man should reverence the Pope as a Father, The Pope is not to be esteemed.
seeing that he himself regards naught so many holy Fathers.

Now the Popes adherentes say, that he is not bishop of any one place, but
that he is symply a Bishop, that is to say, Bishop of all the world. Wherein
truly they speak against the truth. For first we have proved already, that he
is of one degree with other bishops, and as a man would say in one order with
them. Beside that, the synodes when by occasion they make mention of him, as
it oftetymes happens, always they call him Bishop of Rome. So that if he be
bishop of Rome, he is out of doubt a bishop of some determinate place, The Pope
bishop of no place.
unless perhaps any man deny Rome to be a certain place: but per adventure
some man will say, that the Pope, when he writes to other, terms not
himself bishop of Rome: but symply a bishop, whereby he declares him self to
be bishop of no one certain place, but of all the world. To whom we may
answer, that he attempteth to prove matters of most importance with over light
(I will not say triflyng) reasons. Which kind of proof, if we would use, we
might more easily overthrow the Popes dignity, then they establyshe the same.

For where as he names himself by the used name of the common dignity, The
Pope overcome with his own reasons.
a bishop, and not Pope, neither chief of all priests (with the which and
other like titles his adherentes flatter him) it is a taken that the Pope
himself acknowledges his own estate, and testifies the same foorthewith by
his title. But neither we mind to strive with such strong reasons in so
weighty a matter, against the Pope, neither he in vsyng these arguments, does
any more preuayl, The Pope attempteth to make a rope of sa^d
then if he should attempt to wrethe a rope of sand. For if there were so great
force in this kind of reasonyng, then Cyrillus also should have such highness in
honor, yt he should be bishop of all the world, yea that so much the sooner
then the Pope, in that he is oftte^imes not of himself only, but of other
called a bishop, without mention of any place. For we read, Theodosius the
most glorious conqueror, and always most valyant, greteth the bishop
Cirillus, without any mention of the place, whereof he was bishop.

But what shall we say of those which leave out the title of a Bishop, and use
only their own proper names? Shall we say that they are no bishops, or
that they have a greatter dignity then an universal byshoprike? for as much
as the Pope of Rome will be an universal bishop, because the place is not
named whereof he is bishop. There may many such inscriptions and
subscriptions be brought out of books of authority, wherein the name of the
bishop is plainly omitted.

Furthermore our adversaries affirm that ye name of apostolic agrees only to
the Pope, which surely is very untrue. For it is common to other with him as it
appears by the.xi. session of the vi. synod, where we read in this wise:

Constantine the most holy archdeacon, of this holy catholic and apostolic
church: and again, in the subscriptions of the same synod, we read, Peter an
elder, and one that supplieth the rome of the apostolic sea Alexandria, I
George the least of the elders, and one that occupies the place of Theodorus
Theophilactus, an elder and vicegere^t to the apostolic throne of the holy
sea, and city of our god, Jerusalem, have subscribed. And again, look in the
first session of the.vij. synod, which begins in this manner. In the name of
the lord Jesus Christ our true god. etc. wherafter the rehersall of them, that
were sent frone Rome, follows mention of the bishop of Constantinople, in this
sort.

John and Thomas the most holy elders. Monks by profession, and suppliynge
the place of the apostlike seas of the east. This shall ye find in the
beginning of every act in the.vii. synod. Also in the subscriptions ye shall
read: I John by the grace of God an Elder, and assistant to the Patriarch,
substitute of the.iii. apostolic seas, Alexandria, Antioche, and Jerusalem
following the doctrine of the fathers, and tradition of the church, geuynge
final sentence have subscribed. Also I Thomas by the grace of God an elder and
primate of the habitation of the holy father Arsenius, which is in Egypt
beyond Babylon, substitute to the.iii. apostolic thrones, Alexandria,
Antioche, and Jerusalem, following the doctrine of the fathers, and tradition
of the church, geuyng final sentence have subscribed. The like shall ye find
in all their subscriptions.

Here ye may plainly see, The sea of Rome only is not called apostolic.
that not only the sea of Rome, but also the seas of other churches ar called
apostolic. Wherefore if we weigh the matter according to reason, either we shall
equally esteem all those seas and churches, which as we have declared, are
called Apostolic, orels we shall not make so much of Rome, for this title,
seeing that it is not only propre unto that church But what shall we say to
that, where Chrysostom writynge to one, affirms that all the priests of the
new testament sit in Christ's chair like as they of the old testament sat in
the chair of Moses: yea he says, that they have a greater dignity then
thangels and archangels, so that there can be no excellency, in that he
boasts the sea Apostolic, seeing that all bishops sytte in the chair of
Christ, and have a more ample dignity, then thangels themselves.

Again the Popes sect hold, that it perteyneth by right to the Pope only, to
call together general councels, wherein they strive against a manifest truth.
It is a wonder to see, that the Pope is not ashamed to advance him self, and
to lift up his comb in the church, for a matter whereof Kings might boast
them selves. I speak not this, as though I esteemed not the excellency of
Kings. For unto them we owe both honor and obedience. But because the
ecclesiastical dignity, setting at naught all earthly glory and richesse,
should desire and seek for a heavenly preeminence and renoume.

Therefore I will prove, that this right pertayneth rather to kings, then to
bishops. For so has the Acts of the first holy counsel of Nice. To the holy
and great church by the grace of god of Alexandria, and to the learned
brethern which are in Egypt, Lybia, and the five cities, the bishops
assembled, and holdyng a great and holy synod at Nice, sends gretyng. For as
much as unto us that are gathered together out of diverse cities and provinces
by the grace of God, and our most godly prince Constantine. etc. Also in the
third or Ephesine council we read, To the most holy emperors and beloved of
god, Theodosius and Valentinian most mighty and victorius conquerours, the holy
Synod by the grace of god and the authority assembled, in the city Ephesus.
Also in the end of the counsel of Calcedonia, ye shall find in the inscription
of the holy Synod. The holy great and universal Synod assembled, by the grace
of God and the decree of our most holy emperors at Calcedonia in Bythinia to
the most holy and blessed archbysshop of Rome Leo. That therefore it
appertains to the dignity of christen kings to call general councelles it
may sufficiently appear, by the places now alleged. But let us bring
forth that also, where bishop Leo writing to the emperor Theodosius, humbly
desires as a great benefyte, that he would provide a provincial Synod, to
be gathered in Italy. Which truly he would not have craved with such
humility, if he had thought before that it was his own right. The words of
his epistle are these: All our churches and all our priests, most humbly with
tears beseech your clemency, that according to bishop Flauians book, ye
vouchesafe to command a provincial council to be assembled in Italy. If it
move any man that Peter ended his life at Rome, he ought much more to be moved
with that the Son of God suffered at Jerusalem his passion, most holsom to
mankind. But peradventure sum manne will say, that the Fathers did
attribute much unto the Church of Rome, Why the fathers did attribute so
much to the sea of Rome.
I answer they did it not because they thought, that God gave any great
prerogative to that sea: but partelye for the desire of good order (the
strength and profit whereof is great. For by order things both in heaven and
earth are preserved and maynteyned) and partly as desirous to observe gods
commandementes, prevent one an other in giving honor. etc. orels because they
endeavored to imitate thexample of humility, professed by Christ, to his
disciples in washing their fete, and such like no table counsels and wholesome
examples left unto us. S Paul writing to the Corinthians, calls him self
their servant for Christ's sake, yea the Pope in the beginning of all his
letters, calls him self a servant of servants. What marvel is it
then, if the fathers some what debased themselves before him, and grant him
as we have declared, the chief degree in honor.

Last of all, our adversaries say, that no decree may be made in the Church,
without the Popes consent, which in deed they may very well lay against us,
but we shall repaye our adversaries with the same measure. For neither the
Pope, if we believe the canons of the apostles, may constitute any thing in
the Church, without the advice of other. For so says the.xxxiii. Canon of the
Apostles. The bishops of every nation must know who is chief among them,
and count him in manner as their head, neither may they do any new thing
without his consent, let every man handell such matters by him self, as
appertayn and belong to his Diocese, and the places underneath him: neither
may he that is chief among them do any thing without the consent of the
rest. For so shall concord be mayntayned, and god shall be glorified through
our Lord in the holy ghost. If our adversaries say, that the Canons of the
Apostles are not theyrs, neither of authority sufficient, but Apocriphe: we
may lay unto them again the authority of the fathers in the first, third,
fourth, sixthe and seventh synod, which defend the authority of the
Apostles cannons. For the first Synod in the fyfth cannon thereof, makes
mention of two of the apostles cannons, the.xii. and the.xxxii.

Also the same Synod, in the.xv. canon, speaks of the.xv. canon of the
apostles. The third Synod or Ephesine council, writing to Theodosius makes
mention of the.lxxiii. canon of the apostles, wherewith the said synod was
armed agynste Nestorius, and condemned him, like as the fowerth synod with
the same condemned Dioscorus. Moreover the same fourth synod, in the.v. canon
thereof, writes in this wise word for word, of the.xii. xiij.xiiij. and.xv.
Canon of the Apostles. As for such bysshoppes as wander from one city to an
other, and often change their mynistery, it seems good to this Synod, that
they shall be in danger and punysshed, by the Canons of the Apostles.
Furthermore the Decrees of the syxte Synod do show the full number of the
apostles canons. For so has the second Decree of the said Synod. It
seems to this holy Synod, that it were most expedient, that the.lxxxv.
canons in the Apostles name received and allowed by the holy Fathers, and
delivered to us by tradition, should also from hencefoorthe remain fyrme and
steadfast, that they may be wholesome medicines for the soul, and remedies for
diverse dyseases in the Church. The seuenthe Synod in the first Cannon
thereof, rehersynge the laws of the Church, before all other mencioneth the
Cannons made by the Apostles, adioynynge out of Moises, Deuteronomy ^4.
That nothing ought to be added to them, or taken from them.

Shall we therefore condemn as feigned and unprofitable those Cannons that are
so much commended and approved of so many holy fathers? No trewely. But left
this be the sum and chief of all our talk and disputation, that so long
as the Pope does keep the coneuniente order in times paste ordained, so long
as he holds and maynteyneth the verity celestial, and so long as he
cleaves and stycketh fast to Christ, He stycketh fast against him
the high and true Lord and head of the church, I gladly permytte him to be
head of the Church, and chief priest and successoure to Peter, or if he
list, to all the Apostles, all men to obey him, and nothing touching his
honor to be diminished. But if he be fallen from the truth, and will not
return unto it again, ^he pope a ^^probate ^^^son.
he ought but to be reputed as a person condemned and reprobate.

These things have I spoken according to my ability of the Popes primacye,
as that which I judge to be manyfeste and true. If they be otherwise, I
desire to be better enfourmed. For I also pray and sing unto the Lord, ^sal.
119.
that out of the Psalm: Take not from my mouth the word of Truth.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Henry Sutton for Rafe Newbery. Authorized according to
the Queen's majesty's Iniu^ctions.

In the year of our Lord a thousand five hundred and sixty. The.xvi. day of
March.

And are to be sold at his shop in Fletestrete, a little above the Cundite.


