A REPLY UNTO a certain Libell, lately set forth by Fa: Parsons, in the
name of united Priests, entitled, A manifestation of the great folly and bad
spirit, of certain in England, calling themselves seculer Priests.

With an addition of a Table of such uncharitable words and phrases, as by him
are uttered in the said Treatise, as well against our parsons, as our books,
actions, and proceedings.

Pro iustitia agonizare pro anima tua, et vsque ad mortem certa pro iustitia,
et Deus expugnabit pro te inimicos tuos.

Ecclesiast. cap. 4. Noli esse humilis in sapientia tua, ne humiliatus in
stultitiam seducaris.

Ibidem. cap. 13. Justitiae, et innocentiae permissu. Anno Dom. 1603.

The Epistle to the Priests, said to be united with the Archpriest. *
Reverend and my dear brethren, whom with my soul I love, and honor with my
heart, I cannot but be sorry to see you so unjustly abused by the slights and
cunning devises of the Jesuits: and more, to see you, (whom wisdom and
discretion should make perfect and expert in the affairs of our poor
afflicted Church, so applaude their proceedings, that work your bane, or at
the least, by holding your peace, to approve such actions in them, as tend to
the overthrow of your selves. Tell me I beseech you, in your own
understandings, are you not highly abused in bearing the name of these two late
Libells, viz. the Apology, and Manifestation: in both which, not only the
honor of priesthood is impeached, and our whole Clergy disgraced, debased,
and sought to be held in slavery, and subjection to the Jesuits and their
creatures, but also such undutiful actions and practices, as have been
attempted by them, or any other Catholic from the beginning of her Majesty's
reign, until this day, are maintained, defended, excused, or justified:
whereby your lives are engaged, as accessory to all treasons, plots, and
practices done, or attempted against our Sovereign and Country, by such
parsons: in that to approve, defend, or maintain any action, is (as you know)
to make the approuer, defender, and maintainer, accessory thereto: judge then
what cause you have to thank such Masters, for this their good office, in
laying snares to entrappe you withal: and think whether this devise be not a
plot of purpose to bring you into as great obloquy with your Prince, (as
through their own undutiful practices) they have brought themselves, thereby
to turn the sword of persecution upon all (as heretofore) for some particular
men's offenses. Dear brethren, if you regard not the wrongs, and oppressions
done to us your brethren, and nearer unto you in all right of reason, then the
Jesuits are; if you regard not the deiection and oppression of your Clergy,
which they violently seek; if you respect not their actions, and attempts
against your native country, and nearest friends: yet regard your selves,
respect your own lives, have a care to the common, and general good of
altogether, insiduated, and betrayed by them: disclaim from such actions,
wherein you have no part, neither desire (I think) to have. I know your hearts
to be loyal, let them not be stained by a false imputation from a deceitful
Jesuit. Believe me, her Majesty does make difference betwixt practisers in
matters of state, and religion, and therefore suffer not your names to be
brought into question for such odious dealings, by the cunning policies of Fa.
Parsons, inrowling the^ to the approbations of such hateful trecheries. And if
there were n^ difference at all made (as I know there is) yet were it glorious
to die a Cath: priest, in profession of the Cath: faith, without taint, or
imputation of those foul crimes. But some of you happily may be ignorant, how
far you are abused in this kind: vouchsafe but the reading over of this
reply to the latter Libell, and you shall easily perceive more danger to be
couched therein, then you are aware of, and thereby see the better what wrong
is offered you, in publishing the same in your names. If in the perusing hereof
any word may seem ouer-sharpe, which yet I have endeavored to avoid, consider
I beseech you the deformity of some matters unjustly and uncharitably auerred
against us, and that all such sharp words touch only one man, the Author of
these injurious Libels, and Architect of this whole business, and then I hope
you will with more ease yield pardon to such excess: If any other faults
either in style, or defective handling of matters objected occur, bear with
the author, this being his first work, and hudled up in have, without such
helps, as longer time might have affoorded him, yielding him in all things as
favorable a censure as you may: who is ready to protest in the sincerity of a
Catholic priest, that neither malice, anger, passion, nor desire of revenge,
drew him to undertake this work, but only a sincere opinion of justice, and
innocence, so much impugned by Fa: Parsons, in defense whereof he thought
himself bound (as well in respect of the common cause, as his own particular
interest therein) to show his best endeavors.

Your friend and brother VV. C.

The Preface general to Catholics.
COurteous, and beneuolent Catholics, I present here unto you a reply unto a
certain Libell, entitled, A manifestation of the great folly, and bad spirit
of certain in England, calling themselves seculer Priests: which happening
into my hands, I diligently red over, and having without passion perused it,
and with indifferency (as to my self seemed) poysing and considering as well
the matter delivered, with the form and manner of the delivery, as also the
verity thereof, I could not but a little wonder, to see a man so mightily
inueigh against passion, and bitter writing in others, showing so much choler,
passion, yea and impatience, as he does here. And did I not descry the Author
thereof to be one particular Parson, not many priests, (under whose names
falsely, yea and uncharitably it is published, thereby to bring them into
obloquy with their Prince, and state, unto whom the Jesuits practices in state
matters, here defended, are odious) I should much admire to see so palpable
untruths defended, so manifest unjust actions maintained, and such apparent
verities with such boldness denied: but the work proceeding from the party it
does, hammered in the forge it was, I could expect no other, then I found; and
therefore my wonder was the less, and my admiration sooner at an end. For why,
the man is well known to be of such a natural disposition, as that if he once
enter into any course, he will with infinite violence prosecute the same. Upon
which headstrong carriage, and irremouable wilfulnes, many strains (you know)
and ouerstrainings, must needs follow, and many fained inventions, with
concealements of truths, yea and in the end, open impugnations of verities,
the better to justify former proceedings, least happily otherwise, the fault
might seem too light, where it may in no case be endured. Pardon me dear
Catholics, in delivering the truth with such plainenes: let not your
antecedent conceits of Fa: Parsons worthiness, preiudicate your cens^^es in
matters so apparent, and such, as will admit no refuge, for that were to blind
your selves wilfully with affection beyond reason. I remit the judgment of
this my discourse wholly unto your discreet and indifferent censure; if you find
not just cause to condemn the aforesaid Libell, and author thereof, for the
faults above cited, then blame me justly of wrong done, and I will yield to
satisfy at your discretions: if you do find true, this which I have said, give
not over your selves hereafter to be abused with too much credulity in father
Parsons proceedings. And here I must a little crave pardon, if in this my
discourse you find me more plain, and bold with the said Father, then you
would wish, imputing the same to the extremity of matters falsely, and unjustly
by him delivered; and to the desert of his actions, as being in very deed,
the Arch-plotter of all such disgustfull affairs, as have caused all these
troubles, and garboyles from time to time amongst us: which thing enforced me a
little to presume to display and discover him plainly unto himself, and the
world, if happily thereby either he may reduce himself unto better courses,
or otherwise remain loathed, and rejected of all good English Catho: (as he
deserves) whereby he shall be no more able henceforward to deceive (through
undeserved opinion) the best meaning minds: nor plot hereafter against our
Prince and country with the conuivence of any. If herein my desires may either
way take effect, I shall rest satisfied, and think these my first labors
happily bestowed.

Your affectionate servant in Christ to the shedding of his blood. W. C.

An answer to the first chap: concerning our pretended manifest folly, and
apparent bad spirit, in choosing the argument and subject of our former Books.
IT is a world to see the boldness of F. Parsons in all his writings,
concerning these our late garboyles in England, but especially in this his last
railing Treatise, entitled A manifestation of follies, etc. I must needs lay
the work unto his charge, so evidently does it show it self, both in the
manner of style, phrases, particular words, usual in other his writings, as
also diverse things related and excused, which could proceed from no other
forge, then Vulcans.

In this his Treatise, as he immodestly, and most falsely deals against us,
yea and contrary to his own knowledge, and conscience, (as you shall most
evidently perceive by this reply) so also, after his accustomed manner, does he
deal with no small cunning, as well in concealing of truths, sometimes
totally, sometimes in part, as also by covert, and fine coloring, and
fashioning of the falsehoods he delivers in such sugared, and pleasing manner,
as with ease he may deceive the well-meaning mind, especially drawn by
affection toward his habit, and religion, from whence naught else, but verity
and justice should flow. But as this kind of poison is most dangerous, and
infectiue, because tempered with sweet mixtures, and show of compassion,
where indeed naught else but deceit lurketh; so I hope it will be with more
care, and diligence avoided, and rejected of all sorts, when by this our reply,
his cunning deceits shall evidently appear in their proper colors, the poison
being extracted from the honey, and the subtle deceauing untruths, sequestered
from the sugared and smooth sentences, Declaratio motuum.
wherewith they are cloked.

First therefore concerning our first book entitled Declaratio motuum et
turbarum, he says it contains nothing, but a certain intemperate inuectiue
against many good, and worthy men, etc. and is proved by no other reasons,
authorities, or testimonies, but the words of passionate writers, etc. Let
every indifferent man, that understands the Latin tongue, read our
aforesaid discourse, and but indifferently judge thereof, whether it be without
proof, authority, or testimony. First it was published not by one man, but
by diverse, and in the right and name of many, which were men worthy to be
thought sufficient, whose testimonies might pass current in law.

Secondly, the matters related, were matters of fact, and even then in
practice, and too too well known unto all our Country at home, if not to all
the world abroad. For proof whereof, I refer my self to all Cath: in
England, concerning the matter of schism maintained by the Jesuits, and
Archpriest against us, with infinite violence, much infamy for the time, and
innumerable particular wrongs thereupon, not unknown to the meanest Cath: in
England. All which several injuries are touched in that discourse, besides
diverse other particulers, as of intermedling in matters of state, discovered by
their own foolish books, pamphlets, evident practices, letters, and messages,
which I omit as needless to rehearse, referring the Reader to the book it
self.

Thirdly, that book was but a declaration, or setting down of many things in
general to be particulerly proved in time, and place convenient, where
reformation was expected: as I doubt not, but they have found to no great
advantage since; and therefore not to co^taine particular proofs of every
assertion, though for the most part they be evident (as I have said) in
themselves.

Fourthly, I wish the Reader to consider the weakness of this Calumniation,
besides the untruth, and folly thereof by this one Consideration, that the
book was dedicated to his Holiness, in a quarrel which we meant to pursue (as
you see we have done) and therefore not like to contain such injurious, and
manifest false slanders, with an intemperate inuectiue against good men, (as
this good Father affirms) unless we were mad men, and clean deprived of
wit, and common sense. For in so doing, we should have provided whips and
scourges for our selves, and overthrown our cause (though otherwise never so
just, and honest:) when we had come to the tribunal of his holiness. Add to
this, that the book having been presented to his holiness, and perused, and by
us justified still: no condemnation thereof has yet come from thence, but it
passes currantly without imputation of such slanderous falsehoods, and
inuectiues against good men, as this man would make you believe. See by this
what weight his assertions carry, and mark how worthy of credit he will prove
hereafter.

Of the second book, The copies of discourses.
entitled The copies of discourses, etc. he affirms that the first part is
contrary to the second, and so does both answer and confound it self, etc.
And why (forsooth) are they contrary to themselves? Because (says he) in the
former discourses, we stood only upon the Popes own Letters to confirm
those of Cardinal Caietane, assuring them that when any such should come from
his holiness, there should be no more controversy; and yet in the next ensuing
discourses, his holiness breve of approbation being then published, he says
we were much farther of from obeying the Archpriest, then before. This is the
worthy contradiction which answers and confounds all therein written.

Believe me I do stand here at a non plus, doubting whether I should excuse
this poor man, by imputing some strange weakness of brain, or distemperature
in his head of late befallen him, which bereaueth him either totally of his
wit, or partly impayreth his judgment, or wholly depriueth him of his memory:
or whether I should flatly condemn him of overmuch impudency. Feign I would
that some of the former defects in nature might excuse his folly: but I fear
me, that if I should go about so to excuse him, I should not be believed.
Wherefore I must of necessity leave him to himself, as he is, and let the
burden light upon his shoulders, as it may. For having undertaken it, I must
needs open the truth, though to his shame and loss.

You shall therefore understand, that in very deed the first occasion of our
standing out from the Archpriest, was the strange and unusual bringing of him
in upon us by the Jesuits, and the just doubts, and difficulties which we
conceived in his pretended authority, as well concerning the manner, as the
substance thereof: yet were we content, and offered (though to our wrong) to
submit our selves, when by any Apostolical writ we might be assured of his
holiness pleasure that so he had appointed, and would have it so to be. And to
be informed hereof with more speed, we sent two of our brethren to Rome, to
propose our difficulties to his holiness, and expect his resolution.

We will omit here to speak of their good entertainment by Fa: Parsons,
their Iaylor, being else where sufficiently discoursed. In the interim how we
were used at home, you both saw with your eyes, and have heard often related.
Whilst our brethren were in durance in Rome, Fa: Parsons procured this Breve
he speaks of. To the which we all presently without delay (as himself
knows, and in the Apology professes, though with uncharitable
interpretation) submitted our selves, as we had promised: but that there would
be no more controversy, neither could we, neither ever did we promise; for
that was more in the Archpriest, and the Jesuits to hinder or perform, then in
us. All cause of former controversy had been occasioned by them by
intermedling in our affairs, and appointing Superuisors for us, and in
raising, and maintaining the note of schism against us most unjustly, as all
the world now sees. And therefore, although we might promise for our selves,
yet could we not make any such absolute assurance, the greatest stroke thereof
lying in them, and so little hope given us of true performance of sincere peace
indeed.

But to proceed, having thus submitted our selves, a general peace (as we
thought) was concluded by each party, and order taken, that the note of
schism should perpetually be buried in oblivion, and no more urged against
us. This the Archpriest promised, both for himself and the Jesuits, as well at
the atonement, as also to some afterward in particular. But yet so well was
this performed on his, and the Jesuits parts, that within one month, or six
weeks, the same was a fresh set a flote against us, as well in places, where
we conuersed, as in other places also where we never had been. And to
confirm, and concur with these proceedings, the Archpriest sent his
directions into all parts, that none of us should be admitted to the sacrament,
without special acknowledging that we had been Schismatiques. Whereupon we
were indeed refused in sacraments, rejected from the Alter, and accounted as
infamous persons: and Listers Libell was defended, as sound and true doctrine,
which charged us with disobedience, rebellion, and I know not what.

The Archpriest spread Letters against us, made Decrees, refused conference,
commanded us silence, and forbad us to appeal, etc. All these things are not
unknown to Father Parsons, and that by these uncharitable courses, we were
enforced against our wills, to seek for remedy to the Sea Apostolic, by
course of law, and justice: from the which notwithstanding the Archpriest, and
Jesuits sought against all law and order of justice to hinder and forbid us.
How can it then justly be said, that the ensuing discourses, which proceeded
upon this second wrong, were contrary to the first, that proceeded only upon
difficulties of the institution of the Archpriests office: or how do they
show, that we were much further from obeying the Archpriest then before? or do
they not rather show the unjust and yncharitable proceeding of the Jesuits, and
Archp: in reviving after the atonement their old calumniations of schism etc.
against innocent priests, and their obstinate violence in prosecuting the same,
notwithstanding the evidence of the matter, and the resolution of the most
famous University of Paris against them? Where were then this man's wits, or
his honesty, that he could shufle up such contradictions, and gather out of
our due proceedings, such great repugnancie in us from obedience? What way in
the world I beseech you, (if you be of any judgment or capacity) could Catho:
priests rather take in these so great difficulties, and controversies, to show
their duty and obedience to Gods Church, then by seeking humbly unto her
bosom and lap, for evidence and reformation in such doubts and troubles? And
now add to this the effect thereof, clearing us from all note of disobedience
in those proceedings, which may give sufficient testimony of our sincerity,
and of their iugling.

To the other two books, viz. The hope of peace, and Relatio Turbarum to the
Inquisition: The hope of peace.
he says so little, but yet so uncharitably, Relatio turbarum.
as it well discovers more envy, (of which he speaks so much in the
Preface) then either sufficiency, or modesty. For well he might have left the
approbation, or condemnation of the book to the holy Inquisition, unto the
judgment and censure of those worthy persons (whom his holiness has made
presidents, and Judges in such affairs) and not have arrogated the same by
prevention unto himself. But the poor man saw well enough, that the
acceptance thereof was not so ungrateful or hateful unto the wisdom of
those Fathers, (who proceed not ordinarily in such cases after his will, but
maturely, with judgment, justice, and discretion) and that no such censure or
reprehension was likely to come from thence against the book; and therefore
he thought it good to begin betime to play his part, least the Comedy
should die for want of Actors.

For the hope of peace, let them of judgment, that have read it, censure
whether it be nothing but vanity and scurrility, or does not rather open much
bad dealing of the Archpriest, in those Letters. Now let us come to the
discourse of the stirrs begun at Wish: concerning which matters, as he refers
you to the 6. chapter of his Apology, so to countermaunde him therein, we
refer you to our relation, being more large and perspicuous. But (says he) in
the sixth chapter of the Apology, matters are set down plainly, sincerely,
with order and perspicuitie, without amplifications, or exaggerations, as in
our discourse happens. To this we retort the same in effect for our answer:
that in our discourse, howsoever the method misliketh his Mastership, there is
more sincerity, more plain dealing, and perspicuitie used, then in his
Apology, and not so much amplification and exaggeration as the matter it self
required. Who now shall be judge in this, whether this good Fa: or we say
truest? But (says he) we have this with approbation by Letters under the
Priests own hands and testimony: Yea but (say we) this is but good Fa:
Parsons own saying, and to us unknown, howsoever believed. But to control
this vanity, we say that our relation was writ by the Priests themselves that
lived in these garboyles, and are yet alive, and ready to prove, what they
have writ. Yea but (says he) they be of the contrary part, and partial
relaters. And who I pray you (good Fa:) were your informers? were they not of
the other side, and as partial in their own cause, as the other? Besides,
your informations were in fragments from this man, and that man by flying
Letters; in which it is probable men will speak the best for themselves, and
excuse the worst; which others will be advised, how they do in publishing
things to the worlds view, that every man may control as they find occasion.

And it partly appears, that our friends dealt somewhat more faithfully then
this Fa: would have you to think; in that they omit no words, or
circumstance, or action in the adverse part, which might make show of any
excuse for the^: as appears in that this Fa: collecteth some matters thereby
to excuse his friends intentions, even out of the discourse it self, which
might have been either omitted, or otherwise related, if our friends had
studied falsehoods, as he affirms. Furthermore, we have testimonies of those
proceedings by such, as were dealers in the composing of matters there, and
heard both parties; which this good Fa: wants. And for my self, I can say
somewhat in that behalf, both for the proof of that discourse, as also the
detecting of this Gentleman's shufflings in the setting down of matters, (as
ye shall hereafter see) having been my self present, and a dealer with my
poor endeavors to have helped forward, the composing of matters there, by which
both he, and you shall easily see (if you will see) where the truth goes, and
where the discredit will lie.

And now to his first question: That if all had been true, that Fa: Weston had
sought, or accepted the Agencie, how that odious consequence might be inferred:
that, if they had prevailed herein, by the same platform they would have
governed the priest abroad. To this question: because the good Fa: will make
himself ignorant in his own plots, and policies, I will help him forth, to
put him in mind thereof, that you may see a little into their dealings, and
the cunning of their proceedings. First you must understand (as I imagine you
will easily conceive) that no Statist in the world (in which degree the
Jesuits will give place to none) will openly set forth to all men's view, the
last end, and intentions of their workings, or plots: For that were to discover
their drifts to their opposers, and to procure prevention, which no man that
intends a work would willingly find. Suppose then, that the Jesuits should
have had such an intention (as I will easily demonstrate them to have had)
would you think them so simple (being such exact politicians) as to make
known this their drift and intention unto us? Well then means they must find
fittest, and most convenient for the secret compassing of this design, that
their policy might not presently be spied, before the matter were cock sure.

Now let me but ask you in your reasonable settled judgment without
partiality; could there be a better means devised, then first to begin in
that place, where the grauest, and best deserving Priests of our Country were
in durance for Gods cause; by the presence of whom, the very house was a Sion
unto our Country, and a Lantern unto all Catholics abroad? For why; if once
they had settled their government there without check, or control, what Priest
durst to have gainsaid their dominion abroad, but straight way he should have
had his mouth stopped with the voluntary submission of those grave priests, and
designed Martyrs? Which, how great a check it would have been to any
contradiction in that case, and how sufficient a reproof unto the
contradictor, I leave to every indifferent man to judge. And he which is not
willing to conceive hereof, let him but read the annals of the Primitive
Church, and he shall find what authority the actions, and examples of
Confessors in prison carried with the Christians in those days: insomuch that
what was done by them, was held as inviolable, yea heinous to be contradicted
of the Bp: himself, as may well appear by the dissension in Africa, about
the receiving of some lapsed Christians by the Confessors, and examples of
peace delivered them, and the rejecting of the same by S. Cyprian and other
Bishops: whereupon grew great garboyles, both in the Clergy, and Laity, with
parts-taking, and running, and writing to Rome about the matter. But you will
say, that although indeed this had been a probable course, to have attained
unto that scope: yet does it not prove, that the Jesuits had any such
intention, neither is it likely they should go about any such matter, being
indeed odious in the sight of any indifferent man, as also Fa: Parsons here
confesses. To this I answer, that not my words, but their own actions, and
words shall discover their intentions. And by the way I request of you, but
open ears, and indifferent judgments to think, but what you shall see more
then probable, yea evident, and judge accordingly. Let not the conceit of a
religious habit abuse your understanding, where reason conuinceth the
contrary. The habit is not to be blamed if men abuse it, but rather the man
to be condemned, that abuses the habit. We judge all those to be sheep,
which carry vvoll on their backs: yet experience says, that sometimes the fox
clothes himself in the sheepeskinne. Shall we therefore cry out against the
wool, or not rather chasten the fox, which abuset the pelt? If then an
exorbitant religious person be found, condemn not his habit: for that is
innocent; but correct his manners, which proceed not from his clothes, or
profession, but his person: neither let your judgments fall, where experience
is too manifest: for that were but overmuch simplicity, and to give place to
all hypocrisies.

Consider therefore two things, the religion with the habit, and the man
invested in both. The religion, and habit, challenges reverence, but the
person, as he deserves. He is a mad man, I think, which should deem
ambition, to be no ambition, because it is covered with rags: so shall he be
no less foolish, who thinks a man to be no man, because he is a religious
man. No no, they are men, and therefore may err, and erroneous were the
contrary conceit, yea mere foolishnes. Wherefore, I request but
indifferency, to measure their intentions by their manifest actions, and open
words; and then if you find not the spirit of a Monarchy to have reigned
amongst them in these their endeavors, blame me of rash judgment, and no
understanding at all.

First then (as I have manifested unto you) Wisbitch was the fittest place to
assay this enterpise, and to lay the surest foundation of such intentions. Now
would I but feign know, what other intention, then government, and
sovereignty they could have in that practice? You will answer (I dare say)
as this good Father does, that they were requested unto it: yea, and
ouer-pressed too, by the importunity of the rest, living in that place, and
that Fa: Weston unwillingly accepted thereof, yea also refused to be any
Superior, but only a spiritual directer unto the rest, and therefore rejected
all names of superiority. Oh Sir, let me come a little nearer unto you: you
may not run away with this fair smooth tale; there is more in the wind then
so. I pray you good Fa: if dominion were not hereby affected in your fellows,
how chanced it, that your subject Fa: Weston, when he was scarce well warm
in the house, at his first coming thither, had dealing secretly underhand for
suffrages to get the government of the rest? If you will not believe there was
any such matter, let them speak which gave their names, and your subject Ma.
Pond the Collector: let Ma. Wigs ghost come in against you, who perceiving the
drift thereof, after he had given his name, called to see the paper again, and
tare it in pieces, and so overthrew that first practice. What else could this
show, but an affectation of rule and government? But you will say to
cou^termaund this illation, that Fa: Weston being named afterward one of the
three, which should govern the rest, utterly refused it, as a thing against
his institute and order, which argues that he affected no such matter.

Alas, he should have had copartners, which is no small check to
sovereignty, joined with ambition: and therefore refused not the thing, but
the manner of the thing, not suting his humor. Yea, say you, these are but
words: what proof, or judgments have you, to draw you into this conceit?
Marry sir I have his own actions sithence, in the last garboyle, more then
manifesting his former intentions, wherein he not only sought the sovereignty,
but maintained it with such violence, that no man might alter, or move him to
let fall those desperate attempts, begun with the scandal of all the world.
Witness this, a Gentleman or two that came unto him upon their knees,
entreating him with great grief of mind, to respect the general scandal
arising by those proceedings, and to forgo and reject that course; whom he
answered in peremptory manner, wishing them to content themselves, for that it
was gone further, then could be recalled: and that shortly it should be seen
confirmed under hands, and seals. Witness this the directions given by his
Provincial Fa: Garnet, that he should not begin the separation, but suffer his
associats first to begin, that the envy (so it pleased him to say) might not
fall upon him, but his followers. Witness his overmuch have in beginning the
separation himself, contrary to his directions; which showed overmuch desire
of rule. Witness his backwardnes to be drawn to any indifferent composition,
being moved thereunto by such, as dealt about the composing of such stirs;
of which my self can and will witness upon my oath. Witness his resisting of
his own Superior, being commanded by him to surcease: which commandment
he refused to obey, affirming that he was not bound therein to obey him, until
such time, as his own associats began to draw back from him, and mislike
him therein: Let Ma: Mush, and Ma: Dudley testify this point, and the rest
there present. If all these proceedings so evident, do not manifest both his,
and their desire, of ruling their brethren, judge you.

But you will say, that this affectation of rule, if it were affected by him,
was not general over all in the house, but only over some voluntaries, who
chose willingly to submit themselves unto his direction, and not to enforce any
to submit themselves. To this I answer you, that in this lay more subtlety,
and craft, then you will seem to perceive. Here indeed was couched the
chiefest policy, and cunning of their plot, and intention. For although they
made show only of a voluntary retire, leaving the rest to themselves, yet
had they so involued them with calumniations, and slanders, (which is a common
ground of the Jesuits building) that, without manifest note of infamy, they
could not, but submit their necks unto the Jesuits new government; which you
shall easily perceive, if you but consider all circumstances. For before they
had made their separation, they gave out many rumors of heinous offenses,
practiced in that house without specifying any particular person. And when they
burst out into their separation, they published these causes in excuse of their
fact; sct: propter scandala, sieve peccata mortalia, etc. for scandals, and
mortal sins committed, or like to happen amongst the^, they were enforced unto
that separation, and retire of government. Now would I but ask of you this one
question; When such things are spread of a community, or house in general,
and thereuppon a retired life prescribed, and undertaken of some and refused of
others, whom you would judge in your conceit, like to be those disordered
companions, amongst whom such enormities were frequent? I doubt not but you
will presently suppose the refusing part, to be of that bad disposition: for
that loving liberty, they refused to submit themselves to discipline. This I
assure my self you would answer, without scruple; and to confirm this to be
so, even when these things fell out first, it so happened, the general voice
condemning the refusing part upon the foresaid grounds.

Judge now (I beseech you) whether this was not a pretty policy to have
enforced the rest to submit themselves, being drawn within these streights by
this plot: and then had the breach been made, and way to the sequel we speak
of. But you will yet say, that happily such disorders were in the house, yea,
and amongst those men also, as they had not only reason, but were in a sort
constrained unto that separation. To this I answer: first that such a
separation from Communion at the table, and at divine offices upon such
reasons, is not very far from Donatus the Arch-hereticks case, who at the
first upon the like reasons, refused (as he said) to communicate with other
Bishops of Africa.

Secondly, I say, that if such things had been, yet were they bound in
conscience to have concealed them, because they were secret, and unknown
abroad, as I appeal unto all the Catholics of England for proof hereof,
whether any fame of such matters were heard, before the beginning of this
ambitious separation. Thirdly, I answer, that of mine own knowledge, being
present at the ripping up of these matters, general leave was given by the
united part unto the separated, to say what they could, and accuse whom they
could of any such crime, sub pena talionis, and they would admit any competent
or indifferent judge, to have the hearing and censuring of the delinquents; and
they refused to join any such issue with them. Furthermore, my self being
present, and witness unto all this, I went unto Fa: Weston, and asked him, if
he would accuse any man in particular, and he refused: wheruppon I told him,
that he, and the rest of his company, were then bound, to clear them of such
iniust suspicions; which if they would do, either by word before witness, or
under their hands, the refusing part would suffer them, to go forwards with
their course begun, which if they refused to do, being in conscience bound
thereto, (as I told him my opinion was they were) then could not they suffer
them to proceed in that manner, unless they would willingly undergo such
infamy, as thereby redounded unto the^, which none (unless they were cruel
to themselves) would permit. But all was in vain; he refused and rejected all
offers, without regard to my motion.

By this you may see how guilty these poor men were of such crimes imputed
unto them, and how injuriously forsooth the Jesuits were charged with a purpose
and policy, to compass a monarchiall dominion, and government over them. And
yet will the Jesuits go about (as Fa: Weston then did unto me) to defend that
no wrong hereby was done unto any, in that no man was named in particular. A
cunning policy (which yet is common unto the Jesuits) to spread general
suspicions, and infamies abroad; and when they come to the touch, to excuse
themselves by certain generalities. Did they not so in the matter of schism,
first spread the infamy, and then excuse themselves, because no man was named
in particular. Howsoever this shift may seem cunning, yet I am sure no man of
judgment, or reason, will think it very honest.

But says Fa: Parsons, all that should have been in Fa: Weston, was but by way
of direction, not by way of command, or superiority. First, if it were only
so, then would I ask you, why he should so earnestly affect to direct others?
had he not enough to direct himself, but he must needs intrude upon his
brethren? Or must he needs think, that all the rest were either so simple
men, or imperfect persons, as that none of the^ could direct themselves in
spiritual matters, without the help of a Jesuit? What arrogancy is this? If
he object their congregations in Italy, Spain, and else where, unto which
Cardinals, and great men resort: I answer, that there is no necessity, to
infer an insufficiency in those parties, to direct themselves, or others,
but rather a voluntary acceptance of such occasions, to exercise themselves in
those places which they might else where perform, if it pleased them? But for
a Jesuit to challenge that peculiar prerogative unto himself, is not
tolerable. And yet that this was more then arrogating a direction of others,
yea a formal dominion and government over them, is not only manifest, by what
we have here before reheased; but also by the very rules of this affected
institution, or Agencie.

For amongst others, one rule was, that matters of greater weight should be
censured by common Suffrages, but those matters of less moment, by the Agent
himself. And to judge which matters were of great moment, and which of small;
that should be in Ma: Agent to determine. What greater privilege can a
superior have, then to determine of matters, what they be, and how they shall
be ordered? If this be not to give superiority and government, I must confess
my wit is but shallow. For I would but ask you what he might not do by
authority given him by this rule within the compass of that society, or
brotherhood? or what partiality might he not use toward his affected pupils,
and rigor toward his not well affectionated by this rule; since the power was
in him to judge what matters were of moment, or not of moment, and so to draw
within his own managing what delinquents he would, and smother up their crimes
in corners, and bring to public bar what petty matter he list, if the
party delinquent were not of his affectionated? Would any man require more
sovereignty then this, to bring all men under his check and control? Be judges
herein with indifferency I beseech you. But says Fa: Parsons, is it likely
that Fa: Weston, a man of those parts, and looking every day for martyrdom,
and one (as you say) who had been Provincial for the time in England, should
seek so greedily for so poor a preferment, as to be servant and Agent to a
few of his fellow prisoners? I confess there was no reason he should seek it;
but that he did seek it, let the reasons alleged show the truth. And for his
having been Provincial, it more confirms the matter to such, as know the
natures of the Jesuits: who having once been Governors, love not to be
deprived of their sovereignty in no sauce. This by experience is best known
to them that have lived amongst them. Witness all those that lived in the time
of the expulsions of Fa: Alphonso Agazara, Fa: Creswell, Fa: Hieronimo
Fierouante, out of the government of the Roman College, how heavily, and
unwillingly they took their deprivations. Of which number one of them making a
speech at his departure unto the scholars, used these words: Decedendum est,
immo cras decedendum, and burst out so into tears, that he could hardly
proceed in his speech. Witness this Fa: Parsons shufling in Paris, (when he came
out of England from his Prouincialship) to get himself delivered from
subjection, to the Rector of their College there.

Now would I request the indifferent reader, to judge, whether these practices
in Wisbich were ambitious or not; and whether the united Priests had not reason
to stand out, and control such exorbitant and peevish insultations, which were
acted with such a show of hypocrisy on fa: Westons behalf, as it has made me
often to wonder at his follies and puritan ostentations. A hobbyhorse in time
of Christmas, went to his heart forsooth, the public and bitter reprehensio^
whereof, this father will have to be such zeal of virtue. I surely think he
would also have found fault at a May Pole in Whitsontide; if this be not a
right imitation of puritanizme, let the world judge. And yet if you knew as
much as I do; you would scarce excuse it from gross ostentation and
hypocrisy; especially if you understood how frequent such shows of
hobby-horses, and mountebankes etc. are with them in their Colleges in Rome.
Witness this all such as have lived there, especially in Fa: Hieronimo
Fierouante his time. Add to this Fa: Westons eating but one meal a day, so
long as there was hope of his Agencie; but when his hopes were frustrate, he
could find a stomach to eat 3. meals ordinarily in one day, and those sound
ones too. As for Fa: Parsons insulting upon Ma: Bluets speech to Fa: Weston,
concerning the use of Sacraments, and his diverse comments there-vpon; It is but
the superfluity of his own vanity. Ma: Bluets speech was both grave, and
judicial in any reasonable man's judgment. For if the sacrament, and good
counsel of the Confessarins, would not, or could not reform a Priest living
in prison for conscience, and Religion; how should we think that Ma: Westons
Agencie was like to effect it? vvhere-vnto no man could be tied in these times
by force, but of free will, and so might refuse those remedies at his pleasure;
his Agencie having neither power of life nor death, imprisonment, nor chains,
and therefore not to be compared (as wise Ma: Parsons seems he would have it)
with a common wealth or public authority, where justice may be executed in
foro contentioso. But you will yet happily call me to reckoning further for my
first assertion; wherein I affirmed, that the Jesuits intended a general
dominion over all the priests of England, by their attempt at Wisbich, for the
truth of which assertion, although I have already given you sufficient reason,
yet will I further satisfy you herein by observation of that which has
followed since.

You know (I suppose) how the Priests were about a Sodalitie amongst
themselves, which was chiefly intended (as by the rules thereof you may gather)
for the provision of such as came newly, and rawly over: for the disposing of
them abroad to their better security; for the provision of prisoners in
durance; for the better relief to Cath: abroad in matters spiritual; for the
particular good of every priest; and for the checking of some exorbitant, and
unnatural courses, taken by the Jesuits against their Prince and Country: to
abolish such medlings in those affairs, as impertinent to our function, and
vocation, and to strengthen and enable our selves in these matters by a mutual
union: this I say, was the end of our sodalitie, which we imparted unto the
Jesuits, that they should see our sincerity and honesty in those proceedings:
but we were too sincere, and plain, to deal with such crafty crowders; for
they well perceived, that this course would discover much of their iuglings in
matter of state, and also put an everlasting block, or bulwark against their
intended superiority. So that although openly they seemed to like of the
course, (because for shame they durst do none other) yet they thought it high
time to work some cunning means to delude our endeavors. Whereupon they
secretly addressed Ma: Standish, (one that had been most forward for the
association, (but a secret Traitor unto all the rest) unto Rome, and there by
the working of Fa: Parsons, he was brought before the Pope, as having great
affairs, concerning the Clergy of our Country. Wherein an oration furtiue,
unjustly, and untruly, in the names of all the Priests of our Country, he
desired a government, and subordination. Which false office being by him
performed, Fa: Parsons himself busily followed the matter, with many untrue
suggestions unto his holiness, of great discord between the Priests, and
Catholics in England, and we wot not what: for the suppressing and reformation
whereof, some subordination and government was forsooth necessary.

Upon these, and many other such like untrue suggestions, his holiness referred
(as sithence we have learned) the whole disposition of this affair, unto
Cardinal Caietane their Protector. Whereby Fa: Parsons had in effect as much
as he desired, or could have wished. For the Cardinal ever stood at the
Jesuits direction in all matters concerning our affairs, as all the world
knows. Thus was Ma: Blackwell, by the Card: commandment, and through Fa:
Parsons practical devises, invested in his authority; a man wholly prostrated
at the feet of Fa: Garnet, and standing merely at his devotions, and
directions in all matters of moment, as by all his violent courses against us
in their behalf, the world may see.

But to manifest this point more palpably unto you, that you may see, we
speak not of passion or emulation against the Jesuits, but directly, as the
truth is. In the instructions sent unto the Archpriest concerning the execution
of his office, one and the chiefest prouiso, was that he should in all matters
of weight, be advised by the Provincial of the Jesuits Fa: Garnet. Do but
think hereby how matters were like to be managed here, when all the
controversy was only between us the seculer Priests, and the Jesuits, and
not between Priests and Catholics, (as falsely Fa: Parsons suggested) and that
our Archpriest must be taught by the Jesuits Provincial what he shall do in
any matter of moment. Judge indifferently I beseech you, whether this was not a
trick to keep the managing of all matters in their own hands; and hold the
Priests in slavery and subjection unto them. Which because they saw by
experience they could not obtain imediatly to themselves, they devised to
procure it more cunningly by a third person, having a Secular priest in a
corner wholly depending upon them. So that our superior being to be directed
by their superior, all the sovereignty and government, should indeed have
rested in the Jesuits.

Add unto this fa: Garnets own words, delivered before Ma: Mush, and Ma:
Dudley, when they came unto him about the appeasing of the broils in Wisbich,
unto whom showing himself discontented, that they had not co^curred to the
confirming of fa: Westons Agencie, he used these or the like words to this
effect; That he saw no reason why the priests in England, should not as well
be governed by the Jesuits here, as they were, and had been in the Colleges
beyond the Seas.

Now let any man that is not overmuch blinded with affection toward the
Jesuits, (of which sort I know there be many, who will believe nothing that
makes against any of the^) indifferently judge, whether all their endeavors
and intentions from the beginning, were not to attain unto a monarchiall
government over the Clergy of England. And yet this inference seemed strange
unto good Fa: Parsons. Believe me, I think he so much presumes upon his wit,
and policies together, that he thinks he may walk in a Net, and not be
seen. But softly good Fa: other men have eyes as well as your self, and can
discern such gross colors, especially when the sun shines so clearly.
But yet before I proceed any further, I cannot let pass an admirable show of a
detracting spirit in Fa: Parsons, who in the close of his quipping, and carping
against the foresaid discourse of the stirrs raised at Wisbich, is not ashamed
to note certain particular accusations, as whoredom, drunkenness, dycing,
pewter stolen, which Mary the maid found in ones Chamber, etc. spoken of in
the foresaid Relation. Which he so cunningly shuffleth up, and leaves hanging
so suspiciously, as if they were things evident without control, condemning
the parties accused. Whereas in the aforesaid discourse, and place, where they
are delivered, as accusations by his faction, they are so apparently, and
inuincibly confuted, as that I admire much at the man's brazen forehead, that he
durst so palpably lay open his follies, if not his malice.

Touching the pewter stolen, that matter was publicly convinced for a
notorious calumny before Ma: Mush, and Ma: Dudley, with great shame and check
to his Pupil Ma: Pond, who urged the matter against Ma. Potter, and others. So
that S. Paul's sentence brought by himself, may justly be retorted against
him, set. Insipientia eius manifesta erit omnibus. I pray God in place of
insipientia, I may not justly say malitia.

By this time we are come unto the Memorial given up in Rome against the
Jesuits, The Memorial.
by one Fisher, which is printed in the end of the foresaid Discourse of
Wisbich: and at which this honest Father seems much agreeued, taxing the
publishers of it with excommunication, and the Memorial it self as most false
and calumnious by Fishers own deposition, etc. As concerning this Memorial,
all men know that it was generally published here in England by the Jesuits
themselves, at what time they sought for suffrages abroad in their own
behalf against it. Now therefore, if any excommunication or censure depend
thereuppon, not the Printers, but the Jesuits, father Garnet, and others, the
first publishers thereof, are within that compass. For I hope Fa: Parsons is
not so simple a Canonist, or Casuist, but that he knows, that when any report
is famous and already public to the world, he that shall afterward speak or
write thereof, incurreth not the offense of a Detractor, or spreader of
calumnies, nor by consequence any censure of the Church. For if that were so,
then could no Historiographer relate the evil actions of any Ecclesiastical
person, though never so pertinent and necessary to his history. Which is
contrary to the practice of all Writers, both in profane and Ecclesiastical
stories: yea the old Fathers themselves, as S. Jerome, Cassian, S. Bernard, and
others. Secondly, the printing of those things, was but the bare setting down
only of such accusations, as were spread abroad by themselves, without either
gloss or comment upon them, but left indifferent, as themselves published
them, unknown to us certainly, whether any such matter was delivered up against
them, but by their own reports.

Thirdly, that they are printed, as given up by some English residing in
Flaunders, is but their own report here: for I will testify upon my oath,
and so will diverse others also, that they laid the burden thereof upon
certain there resident, as Ma. D. Gifford, Ma. Char. Paget, and others.
Fourthly, that it was also reported here by some of themselves and their
fauorits (of which report I am also an eare-witnes) that Fisher should
confess, that himself not only penned the foresaid Memorial, but also
collected diverse of the accusations. Which report they gave out, when they were
pressed with the injury done to D. Gifford, to lay the matter from him.
Sometimes also they would report, that the instructions were given by some in
England. So various and unconstant they were in their reports at that time, as
unsettled (it seemed) in their opinions thereof.

Now whereas Fa: Parsons says, that by Fishers examination, and deposition, as
also by Letters of the Assistants, and diverse other, the matters were proved
mere slanders and untruths. To the first I answer, that Fisher being
suiiuris, at liberty, (according to this Fa: own report) exhibited this
Memorial into the Court against them as true accusations, but his denials
thereof were at such times as he was imprisoned, where happily for fear of
torture, he might be drawn to say or deny any thing, to procure thereby his
liberty and safety. Add to this Fa: Parsons own words, spoken in the hearing
of diverse scholars in Rome, concerning the said Fishers examination, viz. that
he thought in his conscience the fellow lied in many things. If this be true,
and that Fa: Parsons may not be accounted a liar herein, then judge you
whether the fellow was not drawn to say any thing through persuasions and
fear together, since that in this good fa: opinion, yea and conscience, many of
his depositions were untrue. Besides consider the Fa: sincerity, in that he
is content here to bring his deposition and examination, be it what it shall
be, to be a bulwark, and conuincing testimony in the behalf of himself, and
his fellows innocence. But this is but an ordinary trick with him, and his
accomplices: that every man, be he never so honest, if he once speak against a
Jesuit, must be esteemed a bad man, and a suspected companion; mary if he run
along with them in their courses, let him be never so lewd a varlet, he shall be
reputed for most honest. Witness this, Tomson, Coulson, Tunsteed, and many
others of that rabble which I could name.

Moreover, to confirm a very probable opinion of some iugling with this poor
man, Fisher in his examinations: Fa: Parsons (as himself affirms) put him
into very good apparel, being but in rags before, and gave him money in his
purse, and dismissed him his troubles with great show of kindness, as they can
witness, who were then in Rome. Judge you but what suspicions this kind and
ouer-kind dealing of Fa: Parsons, with this lewd companion (as he often
terms him) may give to the world of bad dealing in his examinations, and
depositions. Seldom I think shall you find a man that will perform such
extraordinary effects of love and kindness toward one, that came about such an
hateful office, as to inform in public and open Court against him: neither
can I yet be induced to think Fa: Parsons charity so superaboundant toward his
enemies, by any former example in his proceedings. But letting Fishers action
pass, and the rather because he is about, as I hear, to speak for himself:
I will come a little nearer unto him, and canuase his other testimonies of the
assistants and other letters. First, what letters the assistants writ
concerning that memorial, I know not, only I had the view of one writ by Ma:
Doctor Bauand, in their behalf, which was sent abroad into the Country
together with the memorial. Which letter did not only free the Jesuits, from
matters imputed unto them in the said memorial, but also concerning those
stirs in Wisbich, and whatsoever in England laid unto their charge. Unto
which general, and free example, many were urged to subscribe; and diverse did
it diversely: some generally freeing the^ of all matters, others excusing
themselves; only as unguilty of the concurring to the foresaid accusations.
But what verity or justice was in the foresaid letters excusatorie, give me
leave a little to search. First, you shall understand, that no one man living
in England, could in conscience write such a general excusing letter, neither
could any generally without exceptions subscribe thereto (as but few generally
did or had done, when the said letters came to my hands. For the most part of
the subscribers used the subscription of the 2. class (as I remember) viz:
Dicti memorialis conscius non fui, nec habeo que accusem: Although some were
drawn by favors, fears, or persuasions, to subscribe generally unto the
letter; which thing, that neither the writer Ma: Doctor Bauand, nor
subscribers in conscience could do, I will manifestly show you. I suppose you
will easily understand this one generality; that no man may justly in
conscience hinder public justice, whereby an innocent party may be oppressed
and unjustly vexed. This then being a just and most true ground, no such
general testimony could be given in the behalf of the Jesuits, to free them
from all such accusations. For what one man in England, could tell whether any
Jesuit in England had wronged any particular person, Priest, or Catholic, or
were faulty in any the foresaid objections or no? If then no one man could be
certain of this; how could any in conscience give so general a testimony in
their behalfes, since thereby he exposes himself at the least to probability of
wronging some innocent or other, that might have just accusations against the
Jesuits, or some of them, in that by the credit of such a general patronizing
example, fortified with testimonies, and subscriptions of priests, the hearing
of a just cause might be deferred, delayed, or denied? And yet who knows not
that an affirmative testimony sufficiently proved, de iure is available to
overthrow, and control 20. negatiues. As for example: if I will say that such
a man has defamed me, and bring 2. or 3. sufficient witnesses, and his own
words, wrytings, or actions, shall they not convince against an hundred, that
shall deny the same in all law and justice in the world? since that a wrong may
be done in the sight, or hearing of 2. or 3. of the which an hundred may
otherwise be ignorant, and yet deem the contrary, either through good
opinion, and conceit of the parties offending (as happened in this case) or
deluded by some other circumstance, seemed probable to them. Seeing then that
this might happen in this affair (as I will show it has) neither could Ma:
Doctor Bauand write such a general letter, to free them from all such
imputations; nor any other subscribe generally thereto. For no man may give
witness in any thing more then he has of knowledge, and is able to depose. But
no one man in England was able to depose, that no such crimes imputed, were in
any Jesuit living in England; because he could not be privy to all, and every
action of theirs, and every one of them: therefore no man in England could so
generally and peremptorily free them from all such matters objected against
them.

Consider now I beseech you, how rash Ma. Doctor Bauand was in writing this
general testimony: as also the other Assistants (of whom Fa: Parsons here
speaks, if they did the like, as this Doctor did) and how unadvised those
Priests were, who generally subscribed without any limitation at all. And this
Position of ours, shall more evidently appear in the examination of the
particular accusations, laid unto their charge; where we shall show you most
evidently, that many things were, and are most true, whatsoever the parties
were, that exhibited, and framed the Memorial against the^. And this I will
perform, not because I am ouer-willing to enter into other men's actions, or to
take the burden of others upon my back: but leaving every man to answer for
his own actions, I will only set down some proofs of certain particulers,
which my self know, and will avouch before any Judge in the world, that all men
may see how this man's hasty posting over these matters, makes more show of
confidence, then there is cause a part rei, and that their actions have been,
and are such, as cannot be justified, either in law, or conscience.

But first concerning the subscriptions unto Doctor Bauands letter: I remember
there were three testimonies of 3. Priests worthy to be heard, which gave no
such glosing praise unto the Jesuits actions, as freeing them from all such
imputations, but manifestly insinuating the contrary. Marie for ought I could
hear, their testimonies were never presented in Rome, or if they were, I see
no reason, why they should not have taken so much effect, as either to be
believed, or farther examined; neither of which followed as I trow. The reason
perhaps was, because two of the aforesaid Priests dealt plainly and charitably
with them in particular letters, after their subscriptions making Fa: Garnet
acquainted with such things, as were amiss both in them, and their followers,
which discontented diverse.

Now to the particulers of the Memorial. The first paragraph cited by fa:
Parsons, is this. They hold no doctrine to be Catholic and sound, that
comes not from themselves, no dispensation available, that is not granted
by them: and (which) is worse, they have beaten into the heads of most, that
the mass is not rightly celebrated by any, but a Jesuit. Because fa: Parsons
says no more unto this point, but only asks a question: whether we believe
this to be true. I will note some things not far unlike unto these, whereby you
may guess the probability of the^. At what time Master John Gerard lived in
the East parts of England, such fame, and singular respect was had of him,
because he was a Jesuit, (for no other parts in this kind could make him
famous, whose talents are known to be far inferior to the most of his time, as
Ma. Oldcorne a Jesuit likewise reported unto a Priest) as that when any case
of difficulty came in question to be resolved in those parts, it was scant
current, until Ma. Gerards sentence had passed in the matter. And sometimes it
happened, that when Ma. Blunt (now a Jesuit, but then a secular Priest only)
had resolved a case; there wanted not such, as would make stand thereat, until
Ma. Gerards opinion was demanded therein. Upon what ground these fantastical
conceits should arise, I know not, unless it were some suggested opinions,
that nothing was current, which had not vigor from a Jesuits determination.
For otherwise I think there be many, who know that there is so great
difference betwixt Ma. Blunt, and Ma. Gerard, in matters of learning, as Ma.
Blunt might well be a Reader in Divinity, where Ma. Gerard were fit to be a
scholar. And as for dispensations granted by any Priest in any case
whatsoever, it has been a common practice amongst the Jesuits, and their
followers, to call such things in question, whether the priests (for example)
had any such authority: yea, sometimes giving suspicious doubts abroad,
whether they have any faculties at all, or not.

This has happened so often, and only toward such, whom they have had some
auersion from; that I suppose few to be ignorant thereof. Witness their
dealing with Ma. Clarke at his first coming over, and some others since the
last stirrs in Rome. Witness also to this point, their drawing of diverse
matters within the compass of particular faculties, and extraordinary
dispensations, which are proper to all pastors in general: As for example, to
give leave to eat white meats in Lent, or at other times, to dispense with
such as have reasonable cause for fasting. Which cases they had drawn unto
themselves, making Priests to seek for their faculties yearly at their hands,
when as in very deed, this faculty belongs unto the Priests, ex ordinaria
potestate, quatenus sunt pastores, and not to the Jesuits, but extraordinarily
only, by way of indulgence, as coadiutors unto us, as happens in all other
exemptions or faculties which they possess.

As touching the third part of the first Paragraffe: that it is beaten into the
heads of diverse, that Mass is not rightly said, but of a Jesuit: sure I am,
and I think all the world knows it to be true, that they have such tricks,
and policies to put some such extraordinary conceits into Catholics heads,
that I see not, but in some part this assertion may be verified. For they have
their men, and followers or precursors in places where they come, who must
suggest it for a strange and extraordinary matter to be present at their
Masses; and that every Cath: that shall come unto any of them to confess, and
communicate, shall have (I know not what) plenatie indulgences for the first
time. Let but the indifferent Reader judge, whether this kind of practice be
not a pretty Jesuitical trick, to suggest such strange conceits of them, and
their administrations of Sacraments, or saying of Masses above others. And
whether they have any such extraordinary indulgences, or no granted unto them,
I know not. But this I am sure, that if there be any such, it sauoureth
somewhat of too much policy, as thereby to draw a greater opinion of men
toward them then to others. Which might give sufficient occasion to suspect
the verity of any such peculier grant unto the^ from the Sea Apostolic. Yet
this must be more then petie-treason, to call any faculty of theyrs into
question, though great reason may move me thereto, which in them to do by
others, must be accounted but a religious care, and providence to avoid
imposture.

I might here also allege the seditious Treatise of Wiseman, called The three
farwells, tending to no other end, but to draw men's conceits wholly to this one
point, that nothing is sufficiently done, which proceeds not from a Jesuit,
or such an one as is governed in all things by them. But because this is more
particulerly entreated of in the late book of Quodlibets, writ by Ma. Watson,
I refer the Reader thither. Now will I leave you to judge, whether we have not
some cause to believe the accusations of Fisher, (if the Memorial was of his
devise) in part to be true, and not so void of ground, or reason as Ma. Parsons
would have you believe. But to proceed yet farther with this confident Fa: in
his own cause. Perhaps he thinks every bare assertion that comes from his
Mastership should be had, as an Oracle with all men, though otherwise never so
absurd and untrue. Howbeit, let us track him in his folly, and see what he can
say to the Accusations following.

No Jesuit goes to visit any in England, The fourth paragraph of the
Memorial.
or trauaileth from one place to another, but he is richly apparelled, and
attended on with a great train of servants, as if he were a Baron or an
Earl. This paragraph also our good Fa: shufleth off with an interrogation,
sct: whether in our conscience this be true? Would you not think by this kind
of confident ostentation in Ma: Parsons; that this imputation were more then
sottish, yea malicious without all ground, or show of ground in the world? Yet
if by some examples I do not manifestly show this, to be grounded upon some
true, and real experience; believe me not in the rest. First I will but
refer you unto all the Priests and Cath: that lived in England in Fa: Hawoods
time of liberty, and knew him, and his manners, and fashions well: and if they
do not assure you that his port, and carriage was more Baronlike, then
priestlike, all the world will condemn them for most partial, and impudent
deniers of the truth. Was he not wont to ride up, and down the Country in his
Coach? had he not both servants, and priests attendants that did hang on his
sleeue in great numbers? did he not indict Counsels, make, and abrogate laws?
was not his pomp such, as the places where he came seemed petie-Courts by his
presence, his train, and followers? See whether here be not one notable
example of excess, at which Fa: Parsons himself was wont to carpe, there
being emulation between them about his superiority, and the others exemption.
Fa: Parsons claimed the Prouincialship, and Fa: Haywood an exemption, being
sent immediately from his holiness.
Again, for present I refer you unto Fa: Garnets pomp, and expenses, of
which I have heard some honest priests (who have been much with him) report
that he cannot spend less then 500. pound by the year. But we will not much
stand upon his pomp or expenses, because being provincial of his order, he
will claim a prelacie, and therefore more honor, and more pomp, although our
times, and case (well considered,) will scant tolerate such excess. But let us
come, I pray you, unto some private men of their order, and his subjects. The
mighty, and extraordinary excess of Ma: John Gerard has been such, and so
notorious, that I suppose few priests (besides other Cath:) to be ignorant
thereof. His apparel at one time has been valued at a higher rate then I
will for shame speak of, which he has had in store, as it has been reported
by such, as were well acquainted therewith; One Gentlewoman gave him a vest:
of needle-worke valued at an 100. marks at one time.
his church stuff was worth no less then 200. marks, and the last time he was
taken, losing but such stuff, as was only portable, I refer me to the
officers, that seized thereon for the value thereof; his horses were many, and
of no small price. My self have known him to have two Geldings in a
Gentleman's stable at 30. pound a Gelding, besides others elsewhere, and horses
of good use.

S. Ambrose in times of necessity would break Chalices, and other precious
vessels of the Church, to relieve the wants of poor Christians, but these men
in the great afflictions, miseries, and wants of afflicted poor Cath: may
possess not only superaboundance of Church stuff, but also great excess of
apparel, horses, jewels; et quid non? Whilst others starve in prison, and
abroad without scruple of conscience, and this quia Dominus opus habet. You
will imagine that the expenses of this man could not be very small; that was
thus richly furnished: and I believe as much, and for experience thereof, I
will set down his expenses, during his imprisonment in the Clincke, well
known to diverse that lived there with him, by which you may guess at the rest.

During his being there in durance (living as a close prisoner in show, though
with more favor, then any other) howsoever the matter happened (which we will
not wrest unto the worst sense, as Ma: Parsons deals with us) he kept a
private Table, continually with great store of dainties, and much resort daily.
Besides, he paid his ordinary commons at the common table, and chamber rent:
let them which have lived in the Clinck, but judge what this would come unto in
the year. But he will say that the company resorting unto him, provided the
meats and wines: Be it so, that we may believe him in this (which is more
credit, then we owe him,) yet the excess was no one jot the less, and
continual. Which I think any man of judgment will imagine, that he might have
(in some good portion at the least) employed better, and with more merit, and
edification. But that you may not think this to have been the uttermost of his
excess, and so excuse him as above; you shall understand that he ordinarily
kept his Geldings in town, and his man, which I suppose to be some round
charge unto him. He also so wrought the matter, that he rode into the Country
at his pleasure, and returned: which I think you will suppose cost his purse
well in bribes to such, as were his Keepers, if to no other. He also maintained
two houses in the town, with servants in them, and not this without great
expenses, I ween. Now if you can spell, put all this together, and judge what
it might cost this Gentleman by the year, whilst he lived in Durance, and by
that guess at his expenses abroad, of the which there want not diverse, who can
sufficiently inform you. Sure I am, that such as lived with him in the
Clincke, were of opinion, that he could not maintain all this, I have spoken
of, under 400. or 500. pounds by the year: See the pomp of a young Baronet at
the least.

I may not omit Ma: Oldcorne, though but a petty Jesuit in this kind; I know
that his apparel is seldom less worth, then 30. or 40 pound. He is always
extraordinarily well provided for horses, and those of the best. An honest
Gentleman, and one whom I think you will judge to be no liar, (besides that he
is not evil affected toward the Jesuits,) told me that he had 8. good
Geldings at one time. I could allege you diverse other examples in particular
of their excess; but I esteem it very needless, to spend time in a matter so
evident to the world. But at all adventures, I wish that every 5. of our
ordinary brethren, had but as much to maintain them yearly, as an ordinary
Jesuit commonly spends by the year. As for their train, few of them are
vnwayted upon, wheresoever they go; which ordinarily is but to places of
account, where their entertainment may be good, and with the best. This is a
thing so usual, that all the Cath: in England of any account, as I suppose, do
both see, and know it well. And such as have heretofore been secular priests,
and were then wont to go on foot sometimes, and visit poor people willingly,
to relieve and comfort them: beco^ming afterward Jesuits, have been so a
cockhorse, that it must be thought no small favor to be worthy of their
presence, and that not without their attendants, and other ceremonies; Witness
this Ma: Bancks, Ma: Blunt, and others now Jesuits.

They never send one Scholar out of England, to the College of Doway, The 5.
paragraph.
to st^^^y there, etc. Nay, they have labored by all means utterly to
dissolve it. After his accustomed manner, he asks us, whether this be true,
and refers us to the President, and books of the College. But by his
leave, whatsoever he may coin out of the College books, and father upon the
President; he must give us leave by the effects to judge the cause, and
intention. We know that they never have been willing to send any unto Doway,
that had any maintenance of his own to live on, but have always persuaded
them to Saint Odemars. And this I can witness to be so. Besides, Doctor Barret
did much complain, that such as had wherewith to maintain themselves, never
came thither, and others who had nothing, were continually sent to him.
Moreover, the opinion of all men of judgment is, and has been from the
beginning; that the first institution of Saint Odemars, would be the ruin, and
overthrow of Doway. And their opinion was grounded upon good, and forcible
reasons: for knowing by experience (as we do know) that in every thing the
Jesuits draw all they can unto themselves; we could not but assure our selves,
that they would hold the like manner of proceeding in this, as the sequel has
made manifest. For since the erecting of this Seminary, what Gentleman's son
has been sent over by any Jesuit in England, but to that house? So that, under
the pretense of a College with pension, they have drawn thither all the prime
youths of our Country, and such as live of themselves. Whereby now it is come
to that pass, that (notwithstanding all their pensions from the King, or
others) there be few English youths there, whose parents do not largely pay
for their educations; neither can any poor youth be admitted thither (for all
the pensions) but he must either have anuall stipend of 20. marks plus minis by
the year, or 40. 50. or 60. pound portion in gross sum. And such will they
foyst into Spain, or Rome, within one year, or thereabouts, to give place to
others. This is so common, and so well known, to all our brethren, and others
also, that I need not to inculcate the same overmuch. And I would set down a
Catalogue of many names, were it not to discover them, to the hurt of
themselves, and their friends.

Now judge you, whether the drawing of able youths, and such, as have to
maintain themselves (and were wont in times past to be an ease unto the
Seminary at Rhemes) from the College of Doway, unto this new Seminary, be not
a means to impouerish and utterly beggar that College. And even so has it
happened, as is manifest, and the last President, Docter Barret, was wont to
lament it. Add unto this the stopping of the College pensions in Docter
Barrets time. Consider also the bringing in of a Jesuit Confessarins over all
the house: which was the first practice of their entrance into the government
of the Roman College. Behold their putting down of the Lectures ever usually
read with great credit, and applause in that College: Mark but the turning
out of the house of all the Docters, Readers, and Seniors, the chief pillars,
and countenance of that house. What can any man think this tends unto else,
but to intrude themselves into the government thereof, and utterly to dissolve
it, as they have already not only beggerd it, but disgraced, and
discountenaunced it? Besides, as now it is, who knows not that it wholly
stands at their devotion, and that the President dare not creake, but as they
would have him to pipe, unless he will not only lose his place, but also
depart with reproach, infamy, and disgrace? Into which extremities Doctor
Barret was brought by them (as all the world knows) and had so departed unto
his Canonrie at Rhemes, if he had lived: howsoever this good fellow in his
Apology, labors to make him their friend, and favorite at his death. The
contrary whereof, those that were at his last end, best know, when he cried
they had burst his back, and that he could no longer bear, and this not long
before he died.

The seventh paragraph is, The 7.
that women also are induced by them to become Nuns, and to leave such goods
as they have unto them. How much need soever Nuns have of their own dowries,
there be some that both have, and will tax them with this kind of fishing.
For the which I refer you to what is writ of late in the discoueries of such
their proceedings. But thus much I can say, that there have been Gentlewomen
sent over by them, who have returned back, as wise as they went, with no small
waste of their portions. I must conceal their names of necessity, to avoid
their dangers.

All University men, and such as have taken any degree in schools, the Jesuits
hate, despise, and contemn. Howsoever Ma. Parsons asks you, whether this be
true, or verifiable, we can assure you, that they so little esteem of any, who
have taken degrees in schools, that oftentimes in open words, they will
derogate both from the men, and their degree. Witness their dealing with D.
Bagshaw, tearming him Docter erraticus, et per saltum: Witness their repyning at
D. Norris, and D. Hills taking degree, for preventing the like whereof
hereafter in others, Fa: Parsons (as he said) procured a Breve against taking
of that degree: Witness their contempt of the reu: Doct: of Paris, concerning
their censure and judgment in our matter of schism, for which they derogated
most disgracefully from them, as all men know: Witness their contemptuous
dealing with the University of Louaine: Witness their arrogancy in all
Universities where they come, and their insulting against all ancient customs
and privileges, for the which never University did, or could affect them, as
they do other orders of Religion.

To conclude, Catholics stand in more fear of Jesuits, then of the heretics,
etc. and that indirectly they cause Priests to be apprehended. This he
remitteth unto all good Catholics judgment. Which although I mean not to
draw upon my self, as an accuser: yet must you give me leave to show you,
upon what grounds or reasons such things might in part be objected against
them. It is not unknown unto our world here, how uncharitably the Jesuits
have dealt, and do continually deal with all sorts of persons, as well
priests, as lay; noble, as mean; if in any sort they stand in their ways, or
seem to dislike any course of theirs. For manifestation whereof I will set you
down some particular examples, by which you may guess, whether sufficient
cause be not daily given by them, to make all sorts of Catholics stand in
fear of them. I need not here to stand much upon their practices in countries
beyond the seas; how, and in what sort they have dealt with all our Countrymen
abroad, as well Priests, as lay, seculer as religious; the fame thereof being
so loud, that almost the whole world does ring thereof: Witness their dealing
with Docter Barret, in most notorious and infamous sort: Witness their dealings
with the worthy Bishop of Casana, Doctor Jews: witness their proceedings with
Ma. Doctor Gifford, of which we shall have cause hereafter to speak more at
large: witness their continual infamies cast upon Ma. Charles Paget, Ma.
Robert Markham, Ma. Tho: Throgmorton, Ma. Nicholas Fitzherbert, Ma. Fran:
Roper, Ma. Charles Brown, Ma. Tresham, Ma. Godfrey Foulgeam, whose untimely
death was occasioned by Fa: Holt, as many men affirm. But to conclude, because
a whole volume would be little enough to comprehend the Catalogue of such
Gentlemen, and priests, as have tasted of this kind of whip from the Jesuits,
and their followers, being sometimes reputed for espialls, sometimes termed
seditious, other-some taxed with ambition, others noted as factious, and some
worse. So that believe me, I know no one eminent man or person of sort, and
quality living beyond the seas, whom they have not wronged in some degree, or
other, by way of calumniation, especially if they have but so much as made any
show of dislike in their proceedings. Let us see some examples within our
Country: amongst the multitude whereof only some few I will name, well known
to many: that thereby you may have a further taste of their proceedings in this
sort. And first for such as have lately died Martyrs (as I think:) notorious
were the Jesuits calumniations against the Franciscan Friar Ma. Jones, alias
Buckley, I my self was particulerly acquainted therewith, and his letters writ
to Fa: Garnet after his condemnation, may be a sufficient testimony thereof.

Ma. Harrington was so oppressed with such calumnies in like sort, that having
honest means for his liberty offered him, he rejected it; saying, that then
he should be accounted for no honest man, and that he must be hanged to prove
him self honest, and free from such calumniations. Ma. Fixar was in such sort
slaundered by them, that he was forced to leave England, and they afterward
forced him with their bad usage in Spain, to loose his life, with grief and
sorrow. Ma. Pibush, during his remain in Gloucester prison, was calumniated by
them as unconstant in his faith, and suspicious of revolt: my self am witness
thereto. It is not unknown, that Ma. Plasden was so wronged by Ma. John
Gerards dealing, and others of them in this kind, that he could not be received
amongst his old acquaintance in London. By which means he fell into the
officers hands, and was executed. Ma. George Beesley, was notoriouly abused by
them.

The day would fail me to recite all I could, for proof of this one point. As
for men yet living, how many be there, whom they have of late touched with
defamations, both in Wisbich, and other prisons, as well as abroad? Witness
this Ma. Wingfield, called into suspicion for Ma. Southwell his apprehension:
Witness this all the Priests who^ they have charged with schism, disobedience,
and mortal sin: Witness this all the Priests that came from Rome during the
time of the stirrs there, defamed, and held as spies by them. Verily, I think
the third priest now in England has not escaped their spightfull tongues.

And as touching lay men, what man is there, that has in any matter taken
course against any of their proceedings, and has not felt their bitter sharp
calumniating tongues: besides others of worth, not huing any dealings with
them? Witness this their invectiues against my old Lo: Mountacute, when he
lived: witness their disgraceful speeches against my Lo. Dacres of the North,
my Lo. Paget in Flaunders, Sir Thomas Tresham, Ma. Talbot, Ma. Sheldon, and
others, whom they have not spared to detract in very uncivil sort. Witness this
Ma. Ashfielde now in the Tower, whom openly they made a spy. Witness this Ma.
Antho: Copley defamed in the same manner. It were an infinite labor to set
down all particular wrongs done by them in this kind. Assuredly to me it
seems a common practice amongst them, to slander, defame, and detract
whomsoever they affect not, or that opposes their proceedings; which is no
less then a Machiuillian practice. And that I have no small reason to press
them heere-with, one of their own speeches unto a Priest, complaining of the
wrongs, done to Ma. Edward Bennet in this kind, import no less, which were
these, or to this effect, that it was necessary or convenient he should be
disgraced, because he was against their society. Judge of the honesty of this
necessity or conueniencie, and then think you, whether Catholics, and
priests both, may not justly stand in fear of them, holding such devilish
principles whereby they may at pleasure defame; whom they please; and (their
sway and power being so great at it is) may also drive the same into the heads
of many, and infinite their followers, who are ready to believe, whatsoever
they affirm, yea to affirm whatsoever they suspect. And this I think in my
conscience makes many of both sorts to fear to encounter with them. I know it
to be true in some, who will spare to open no man's faults, (if he have any they
know of) and invent or exaggerate, what they can devise against such as oppose
them, as you may see by these last books of Fa: Parsons. Yet have not we dealt
so with them, as to enter into their particular lives, and discover their
imperfections (as you may not think, they be all Saints, unless you affect to
be deceived) but only press them with their unjust proceedings, (which being
not private to their own particular hurt only, as secret infirmities are, but
tend to the hurt and ruin of many, yea the general damage of both our Country
and Clergy) may no way be tolerated, because every man is more bound to
provide for a general, then a particular good, and more bound to hinder a
general, then a particular mischief.

But to come at length to the second part of the conclusion, which is, that
they indirectly cause priests to be apprehended, let the example of Ma. Plasden
before cited, be duly considered, and their dealing with Ma. Edward Bennet,
whom they so defamed with the note of espiall, and the like, that he was thrust
out of his residence, and the calumniation so generally spread in the Country
about him, that had not a good old Gentlewoman been, he could not have told
whether to have gone; being not very well acquainted in the Country. Besides,
at that time he was so ill of an hurt received in his leg, that if he had one
day rode, he had not been able to have stirred of a fortnight, or three weeks
after at the least (as they can testify, who had the curing thereof.) Judge
you then what might have been likely to have followed, (if he had been
rejected of that old Gentlewoman) through those reports, being but slenderly
stored with money at that time, nor very well provided for his horse.
Furthermore, I think there is no man so simple, but he must needs imagine that
this kind of course of defaming priests for spies, etc. can do no less then
hazard their liberties, and lives both; when as thereby they shall be rejected
of Cath: and driven to shift for themselves at six, and seven, in these
dangerous times. And thus we will end the pursuit of Fishers Memorial, and
leave the indifferent Reader to judge, whether there were not somewhat a part
rei, to occasionate such accusations against them. And here I cannot choose
but a little note good Fa: Parsons folly, (which he so much urges against us)
in that he would call in question so slightly (besides simply) those
accusations of Fisher only set forth simply, and barely by us, as themselves
had divulged them, without further exaggerations; leaving the truth thereof
vnsifted; thereby to cause us to open those dealings, and practices in him, and
his, which they will never be able to clear, whilst they live, and
there-withall to give that light unto all men, not only to look into the
grounds of these accusations, but also to look further into other their
dealings hereafter.

Now to the 2. and 3. Catalogue of chief points of accusations, wherewith
many English men have justly charged the Jesuits. These accusations (Ma:
Parsons says) were written by some of our friends, and sent to Rome underhand,
to increase the flame of sedition there, when it was on fire, and that we have
divulged them without scruple of conscience (being notoriously false) or
respect to our friends credit, who were authors thereof. As touching the
falsehood or verity thereof, (whosoever was the author) we will examine by
leisure. But for our divulging them, they were first published (as we have
said) by themselves, and put in print by us, but as they came from their hands.
And therefore for quotations, let good Ma: Parsons impute the blame thereof
unto his own subjects, that sent copies abroad, without quotations of either
the parties, or their letters, and not impute iugling or cunning shifting unto
them, that printed but what they receau^d from his pupills. For that kind of
iugling is not so common with any, as with his maistership, and his Scholars.
Neither would it have made against us, or the verity of the accusations, to
have named Ma: Doctor Gifford, or Ma: Charles Paget, for authors thereof, as
he cunningly deciphereth in letters, with a seeming unwillingness to reveal
them, though his characters make them no more known, then the nose upon a man's
face. For if it may go current, that they were the authors thereof: I suppose
that all men of wit, and judgment, that ever have either known, or heard of
those two parties, would begin (at the least) to suspect something, when they
should see such matters delivered by men of their sort, and calling. For
whatsoever this Fa: pretends, the credites of these men will extend as far
as his, in any place in the world, where all parts are known; and therefore
there was no reason at all to have concealed their testimonies, if it had been
known that they were authors of these accusations.

But to speak a little of the imputation laid upon these two worthy men,
concerning these Memorialls. I would feign know of this honest Father, if Ma.
Doctor Gifford were accessarie hereto, how chanced it then, that master
Blackwell, our Archpriest, publicly before witness cleared him, affirming that
he was not Author thereof? Again, how happened it, that a commission being
procured for his examination, nothing could be proved, Fa: Baldwine coming in
against him in the behalf of Ma. Parsons, and all the Jesuits? Furthermore,
how came it to pass, that you Ma: Parsons wrote to Fa: Baldwyne to make an end
with the Doctor, and in any case to procure peace with him? Whereupon he with
great and earnest entreaty, urged the Nuncio to send for the Doctor again
when he was gone, and persuade a mutual peace. Which the Nuncio performing,
your Factor Fa: Baldwyne upon his knees asked forgiveness of the Doctor, both in
your name (good Fa:) and in the name of the whole Society; and the Doctor
afterward in some sort, performed the like to him of humility, not as having
offended, but if in any thing he had wronged any of you. Although it pleased
you afterward, against the Nuncio his commandment of silence, to publish the
act out of the pulpit in Rome, as though the Doct. had asked you forgiveness,
and not you him: and writ so both into Spain, England, and into other places,
whilst the good Doct. kept silence upon conscience, which in such cases was yet
never found in you. These are the ordinary iugling tricks which are too too
familiar with you, good Fa. Now (my good Sir) was Ma. Doct. Gifford author of
these accusations? If he were, why did you not then take your pennyworths of
him, and make him to do public satisfaction, these things being so
notoriously false? I am sure you might have had justice, when the matter came
to hearing before his holiness his Nuncio.

Believe it, good Fa: these circumstances will make all the world think these
accusations true, if you maintain the D. to be Author of them, since that he
not only went unpunished, but that you also by your Proctor asked him
forgiveness. And as for Ma. Charles Paget, the world knows, you would never
have spared him one jot, if you had found the least hole that might be in his
coat. But (to let this pass) it skilleth not much from whom the accusations
come, the author must bear his own burden. Yet will we perform our office,
and sincerely examine the truth of every particular accusation.

The first article is this. Artic. 1.
The Jesuits are so ambitious, as not content with the bounds their Fathers had
placed, they have in their insatiable desire, already swallowed up kingdoms
and Monarchies. Ma: Parsons in a marginall note terms this an absurd
contumelious speech: and in the text asks with what conscience we could
publish this slander to the world, etc. To this I say, that being but printed,
as themselves divulged the^, whether the words may be stretched in worse sense,
then in the original in Latin (if any such be) we know not, and might
suspect (perhaps not without reason) the worst at their hands; yet, as they
are, I will not say, that this is so absurd and false as Ma. Parsons affirms.
For if you will but indifferently consider what we have said concerning their
practices with us here, both in Wisbich and abroad, as also their plots and
practices concerning matters of state, apparent by their own books, letters,
and open actions, discovered in part, both in the Important considerations, and
in the book of Quodlibets, and others of late printed; I do not see how a man
can well avoid the suspicion of a desire in them of the whole Monarchy of
England. Which suspicion is not a little fortified, by their forecasting of
matters, both for general and particular affairs to be ordered by them, or at
their discretion and directions, when the time serves: as appears by Fa:
Parsons proud pamphlet of Reformation, intermedling with all estates. See more
thereof in the Quodlibets. Which points considered, may not a man reasonably
suspect, that they have swallowed already in their desires the kingdom, and
Monarchy of England. Do not their late attempts in Ireland show as much for
that kingdom?

I will omit their stratagems in France, and Scotland, and that which is
reported of Iapona, and other places in the Indies: where they keep to
themselves the sole dominion, and will admit no other Clergy, but play Bishop,
priest, and Munck themselves. Neither is it a sufficient answer to reply, that
they take not upon them the name or title of King. For that imports not, so
they may govern and direct Kings, Nobles, Bishops, prelates, and others.
Therein consists their ambition, Artic. 6.
and swallowing of kingdoms here spoken of. And by this you may see the truth
and verity of the sixth article of accusation against them. sct. That if this
ambition do remain unpunished, the age that is to come, shall see that it will
bring bondage, not only to Prelates, but to Princes and Monarchs themselves.
etc. Judge whether this do not probably, yea evidently follow upon the first.
And for the subiecting of Prelates, it is too too well known by experience,
that many Bishops have much to do with them, their force is so great, and
they stand so much upon their privileges. Besides, the foundation laid by Ma.
Parsons, in the forenamed Treatise of Reformation, Artic. 7.
sct. of making all Bishops and Prelates pensioners, does convince no less.
For which they had cause (whosoever they were that dealt in this matter) to
beseech his holiness, that he would lay the axe to the tree, and cut of the
pride of this Society, etc. which we likewise pray and beseech (for their
good) may be done by the axe of Reformation; that being brought within order,
as other Friars and religious men be, they may attend unto the quier, and their
devotions, and not to kingdoms, and Monarchies; which must needs either breed
their own overthrow, or the destruction of kingdoms, and sedition to all
Christian common welths, as by many examples in France, Swethland, England,
and else where they have already wrought.

The Pope can command nothing in all his Mandates, Artic. 9.
but the Jesuits find means to frustrate it by seculer power. This is the 9.
article of accusation, of which this our Fa: asks whether it can be true, or
probable. He has forgot belike the notorious fact at Louaine, where the
Jesuits, by the power, and authority of the King of Spain, forbad the
publishing of the Popes order for the University against the Jesuits. This
fact belike this good father thought to have been so secret, as it was unknown
to the world, or at the least forgotten. He likewise thinks, that the world
took no notice of their dilation even in Rome it self to admit the Popes
Breve against vti scientia habita in confessione, making use of any thing,
which was learnt by confession (which al other religious men presently admitted
without reply,) until such time as his holiness sent them a new Mandate, in
virtute sanctae obedientiae, sub censuris ipso facto incurrendis, presently
without delay to admit thereof. Many more examples in this kind might be
produced, to show their aptnes to resist the Popes Mandates, and the little
esteem, or reverence they bear toward such of them as check, or co^trole
their disorders. Witness this their irreligious irreuerence toward Sixtus
quintus, and open preaching against him in Spain: and railing against him else
where, using approbrious, and irreuerent speeches of him in Rome it self.

That the Jesuits do eagerly wait for the death of the Pope, and of the
renowned Cardinal Toled, Artic. ^0.
that they may bring slaughter upon all, etc. What their desires have been
concerning the death of his Holiness, I cannot affirm, but sure I am, they
affected him but a little in the beginning of his reign, both for his
proceedings against them, in the behalf of the Scholars in the English
College in Rome, (as by the History thereof you shall shortly see at large) as
also for his joining with his Majesty of France, that now is against the
Spanish intentions, and designs, wherein their fingers were deeply plunged
(as all men know) and they yet feel: but as for the worthy Prelate Card:
Toled, I think few men be ignorant of their clamours against him of ambition,
and partiality for his dealings in the affairs of the English College. Which
might give a probable conceit of their desire, or expectance of his death. For
they use not much to lament the death of their enemies. And if any man shall
go about to deny, that any clamours or detracting speeches were ever used by
them against this worthy Card: I will say, he is impudent, and has a face of
brass, and is as shameless as Ma. Parsons; who will affirm, or deny any
thing. For my self have heard the foresaid irreuerent speeches from some of
their own mouths. Now for the sequel of slaughter, or bloodshed, I leave it
as divulged by themselves, and to the proof of the author, if any such thing
were laid to their charge by any. And for the truth thereof, their own
consciences must answer, though they give no great occasion of our good
conceit toward them, for their future actions by their former dealings,
touching the 23. 24. and 25. art: of the Jesuits, seeking the government of the
College of Doway, or dissolution thereof; we have said sufficiently already.
As concerning the 13. art: preposterously brought in here, that it is a known
maxim among the Jesuits divide et impera, set division, and them you shall
govern at your pleasure. I think no man that is not wilfully blind can excuse
them herein, if he do but half indifferently consider their proceedings from
time to time, as well in the College at Rome, and amongst the English in
Flaunders, as also in England at Wisbich Castle, and in these late general
garboiles. In all which stirs, their chiefest business has been to set men
first together by the ears, by strange slanders, calumniations, and other
Machiauilian policies, and then to attempt their purposes, and designs of
rule, and dominion. He that reads what is already showed in this reply, and
what has been said in former discourses, concerning their proceedings both at
home, and abroad, must needs confess as much, unless he will deny apparent
effects to proceed from their proper and unknown causes.

That the Jesuits use to intercept all manner of letters, Artic. 10.
is so general an acclamation in foreign Countries, that it seems not to be
clean void of verity, though for my own part I cannot say that I have seen
them intercept any Card: or Princes packets. But for experience of this matter,
concerning meaner men's letters, many a score will bear witness with me, that it
is too too usual amongst them, not only in Rome, but also in the low
Countries, and in England to, and some letters cited by this good Fa: in his
Apology approve as much.

As concerning the attestation in the 12. article, Art. 12.
see what we have said before to the conclusion of Fishers Memorial, as also
for the 13. article following. Art. 13.
For more proof* and verity whereof, consider but their late dealings both in
the Roman College, low Countries, Wisbich, and now generally throughout
England. Which I omit here to recite, because you may read more at large
thereof in the former treatises, heretofore published.

For the verity of the 19. article, touching the contempt of the President, and
the renowned Card: we refer you to what is said before to the 20 article.

To speak much to the 17. article of the revolt of either priests or Jesuits,
Art. 17.
I am not willing, pitying, and lamenting as well the fact of the one, as the
other. Yet this I must tell Fa: Parsons, that it is a very common practice
amongst his people, and their followers, to note not only the revolt of any
priests, but also whatsoever infirmity they can imagine to be in them: and this
of purpose to the disgracing of priests, every where suggesting, that never any
of their order fainted in the least sort. Which how contrary to truth it is,
we know, and are rather sorry for them, then purpose in vaunting manner to
press them with the ignominy thereof. But if they will needs prosecute such
uncharitable courses to our disgraces, I promise this good Father, that I will
note him above eight of his order that have incurred this disgrace, and bring
him testimony thereof, sed qui stat videat, ne cadat. I pray GOD heartily never
any of them may revolt.

And by the way, I must tell you that it is but a iugling trick to delude your
eyes, when they say that never any, sent in obedience of his superior, fell.
For hereby will they exclude any one that shall incur this disgrace; either
affirming that they had dismissed him before he fell, or that they came not
from their superiors, but of their own heads. This is a politic shift which
they have in their order, above all other religious societies; that they may
dismiss any out of their order before his last vow, which few, in respect of
the multitude of them, are admitted unto. Whereupon it happens, that
sometimes a man is 20. or 30. years a Jesuit, and afterward is dismissed. By
which shift they put of many notorious things committed by them; dismissing the
persons delinquent out of their order secretly, to avoid the note of their
crimes, which other Religious orders cannot do. Yet cannot this justify them
neither, if we would enter the lists with them in this point. Now to the other
articles of English matters, and English Jesuits, the first is of their
dissension, and particulerly of Fa: Garnet, and Fa: Weston, which this Fa:
says we contradict in our latter books, complaining that Fa: Garnet, Father
Weston, Fa: Parsons, and the rest, are too much united, the one obeying the
others beck.

You have read I suppose the history of Sampsons Foxes, who were all tied
together by the tails, running with their heads diverse courses, yet all into
the Philistians corn. To let you therefore understand more, both of their own
contradictions, and of their unity, it is with them, as it often times
happens amongst children of one family, s^t. brothers and sisters, who will
very ordinarily fall out amongst themselves, but when they come to a third
controversy, or conflict, to wit, that any one of them falls out with a
third person, a stranger unto them, they will all take part together, and fall
upon the forrainer: like as the seditious in Herusalem quarrelled daily, and
hourly one against another, to their miserable destruction by civil mutiny,
yet would they alvvayes join together against the Romans. So the Jesuits,
howsoever they jar amongst themselves, yet are they all bent together, and
united against all others that oppose any one of the^, or their proceedings.
Hereupon Sixtus quintus, of famous memory, was wont to say of them (as diverse
of credit in Rome reported) Qui tangit vnum, tangit omnes, and themselves many
times have affirmed no less, in the late stirrs of the Roman College. But
for this Fa: or any other to say, that they have not many and often iarres, and
those no small ones neither, is to fall into the depth of impudency. Witness
the great controversy betwixt the Spanish and Italian Jesuits not many years
past: witness the iarrs between fa: Crighton and father Parsons, for Scottish,
and Spanish affairs: the like betwixt him and fa: Haywood in England; him and
fa: Holt, and diverse others of them, as fa: Cresswell, and fa: Edmund Harwood,
against fa: Hieronimo Fierouante, and fa: Iulio, the Confessor of the English
College in Rome; whereupon the remove of the two latter followed, as all
know, who were then in the College. This point is so evident to all the world,
as I assure my self no one religious Order in Gods Church comes near unto
them therein: witness their daily expulsions out of their order, and the
multitude departing from them yearly.

The 3. 5. and 7. articles are, that the Jesuits be firebrands of all sedition,
enemies to all secular priests: such notable liars as none will believe them,
no not when they swear: that by the schismatics in England, they are called
Horsleeches. etc. For the two first points, their late actions both at home,
and abroad, do witness so evidently, that none, who are therewith acquainted, can
judge any otherwise of them. For the last, concerning the imputation of lying,
so famous and notorious are their equivocations, and so scandalous, that the
very Protestants take notice thereof, to the great prejudice of our profession,
always heretofore famous for our truth and sincerity. But such iuglings and
shiftings of late have been used by them, that not only Protestants, but also
Catholics, yea Priests can scarce tell, when they speak sincerely, when
otherwise.

I know they will usually make great shows of kindness, where they least
affect: witness this a pretty cunning policy of one of them, Ma. Jones.
not long since practiced upon an honest gentleman: who being to have
entertainment in a certain place, before his repair thither, this Jesuit
using great show of kindness toward him, would needs of courtesy bestow his
Letters upon him for his better credit, and kinder entertainment: which the
honest gentleman, receiving as a kindness, departed. But by the way (being
somewhat acquainted with their tricks, and having no great cause to put
overmuch confidence in their dealings) he thought good to see, whether he
carried not hot coals, to burn his own coat. Whereupon opening the Letter,
he found such stuff against him self, as had I not seen the same, I should
hardly have believed it to have been true. But this trick of honesty was
borrowed of worthy father Parsons, the cunningest politician in these practices
alive, I think.

Witness this his dealing with Robert Shepherd, in his commendations to Doctor
Eley in Musepont: Witness this his dealing with diverse scholars after the
atonement in Rome. How soever this kind of dealing may seem excusable unto
them, under the name of honest equivocations: sure I am that few honest men
will excuse it from dishonest lying. I remember that a reverend Ma. A. R.
honest Priest once told me, that he discoursed above an hour with a Ma. Ioh.
Gerard.
Jesuit, and many complements passed, but not on real intended verity from
the good Father. A worthy practice in Religious men to affect such dishonest
dealings, which tends to naught else, but to take away all society and
conversation amongst men, which is hateful even unto Pagans and Turks. For
how should a man converse with such a one, whose conceits and meanings he
shall never understand, whereby he shall often conceive most good, when the
other intends most knavery and villainy.

But to make an end of these articles. Fa: Parsons collecteth one (in close and
end of all) to make you laugh, to wit, that he, and his companions (as is
reported) gathered fifty thousand pounds out of England to their own use. But
Fa: Parsons merry jest is, the multiplication of this sum to 200. millions of
Italian scudi. Here forsooth he tells you the people must laugh. I know some
persons so merrily disposed, that eftsoons they can laugh at a feather; but if
wisdom with discretion, and gravity, consider this multiplication, I verily
think no such merry mood will move their conceits, but rather judge that error
to have been either in the transcription to the press, or in the Printer,
then of malice which were too too blind, or ignorance (which were as gross,)
to mistake so much the alteration of the sum out of one kind of coin into an
other. See now whether there were more malice or ignorance in the error, or
more folly in the carping exceptions. But we must give him leave to snatch at
the least advantage; for all will be too little to justify themselves, or
excuse their actions. But let us come a little to the accusation about their
collections. It is well known that collections in England have not been small,
yet have the distributions been so scant, and sparing, that poor prisoners
never lived in the like want, as of late years they have done: let them speak
hereof, that have felt the smart; yet all the world knows, that such
Collections have passed generally through their hands, what becomes thereof
God knows. But sure I am that for themselves, (howsoever prisoners are
pincht) they live in abundance, and excess, (as before I have noted some
examples thereof, and something by the way I will tell you. It is not long
sithence 22. hundred pounds in gold were taken going over the Seas, which being
confiscate to her Majesty, never any came to claim the same, neither could it
be known whose it was, and more then this; by some of the highest it was
thought verily to be the Jesuits money. I will not say absolutely it was
theirs, because I was not of their counsel: but it was a wonder that the
owners (if it belonged to any others) would make no means by way of suite, or
supplication, to have got (at the least) some part thereof back again, since
the chiefest penalty was but the confiscation of the money taken; which no man
going about, made the matter more suspicious to all men. But more will be said
hereof, if there be any further occasion.

Now I will only proceed by conjectures, and add to the rest some other
probabilities, or inducements, in that the Jesuits being religious men, and
therefore poor, yet some of our English Jesuits beyond the Seas, who have no
revenues, or commings in any way known; will sometimes bestow largely in
crowns, of their own purse, upon such favorites or factors, as they employ in
their affairs, and practices abroad in the world. This is a thing not unknown
to many of our English men, living abroad in the low Countries, and else where.
How many did Fa. Holt deal with-all in the low Countries in this kind, keeping
correspondencie with many needy fellows, and employing many bare mercenarie
men in his affairs? There be also that will affirm (and of credit) that Fa:
Rich. Walpole in Spain, giving good store of crowns unto a certain English
man (whom it was thought he meant to use in some honest piece of service,) was
afterward (the matter being known) examined how he came by so much money, and
he answered, that he received it out of England from his friends: But we all
know that Fa: Rich. Walpoles friends in England are not of such ability, as to
send him such exhibition. Now would I ask Fa: Parsons whence this money came?
But you perhaps will demand how such sums should come to their hands? I
answer, that it is well known that they have had the disposition of the common
purse for many years, and the receipts of almost all legacies in pios vsus,
yearly alms, extraordinary gifts, besides restitutions de bonis incertis,
much for dispensations in diverse cases, (every one running to them by reason of
their large faculties*) and for alienations, ad-vousions, etc. All which
receites rise to no small sum. There has fallen by way of legacies within
these few years of my knowledge (besides what other men can say) 2000. pound,
(some affirm 3000. pound) from one man of worth, 500. pounds from an other
private Gent: 800. pound from another, and some 100. pound yearly in lands,
and rents besides. All which portions, besides infinite other legacies of less
sums, have come unto their hands, and disposition: and whereof no man can say
justly that he has received one penny, I verily think. Besides, Ma: John
Gerard for his part, got by one Gent: 200. pound at one time, (the bonds for
which I once saw by chance) and 700. pound at another time, (as his nearest
kinsmen will depose,) besides the disposition of 100. pound by the year: of
which the Gent: (all accounts being taken to a pot of beer) never spent 50.
pound yearly. The said Jesuit had in another place by a priests procurement,
who told me thereof, Clx. pound, of another he received 500. pound in a matter
of restitution, certa pro incertis, the party having compounded before by the advice of another priest, for 300. pound, which he should have given to the
prisoners of Wisbich. But this young Father coming to the party hoysed the sum
unto 500. pound, and took it unto himself, depriving the said prisoners
thereof. Furthermore, he received at times of a Gent: and his mother, by his
means, above 1000. marks. All this to me is known, besides what I know not
of, and what he has gotten by the use of his exercises, in which kind many
will say he has got no small sums. Judge then by these few examples, what
great sums may soon accrue unto their purses: and with this do but consider
how their factors, and such as have employments for them in this kind, grow
from mean estates, and small expenses unto good shows in the world, and much
increase in their yearly expenses. Of which number two for example are
generally known (I dare say) unto many.

There is a Gentleman in London, I. G.
whose estate we know to have been so weak, as that his show could not reach
unto his rank; but shortly falling in with the Jesuits to be a factor for
them, since these late garboyles, he is become a man of no mean reputation.
His maintenance is sound, and large, insomuch that whereas xx. shillings has
been money in his purse heere-to-fore, he can now hazard twenty nobles at play.
I verily think you will say that this increase can come no other way then from
their box.

There is likewise another Gentleman, that has been longer acquainted with
the Jesuits affairs, and a man wholy employed by them, especially as
Dispensator, or rather receauer of such beneuolences as have been given in
pios vsus, for the maintenance of poor prisoners. We have known this man
sometimes of the Temple, not so largely provided for by his friends, as able to
make half that show he now does: yet did he then enjoy all that his friends
had left him. For if he remember, when he used the Ordinary, at a kinsmans
house of his own with other Gentlemen, his commings in were so small, that
diverse times, and (unless I be very fowly deceived) for some years together,
his kinswoman to maintain his credit with the other Gentlemen, gave him his
ordinary money before meal to pay with the rest. Believe me, by the port he
now carries, and the state he takes upon him therewith, you would think him a
man of no small revenues. Whereupon you may guess, that either his fortunes
have been very extraordinary of late, and unknown too, or else he is
largely beholding unto his good Masters that employ him in these affairs. But
howsoever the world fares with him, I would his charity, or justice, or
both, were more indifferent in his distributions, then they have been: and
that he would not at his pleasure, and small discretion, discern betwixt the
deserts, or not deserts of prisoners, lay, or priests, and exempt at his will
whom he list. If he will be an Oeconomus or Dispensator, he must one day
reddere rationem villicationis.

I remember once this Gentleman came unto Bridewell to certain poor prisoners
there to see their wants, and finding them in extreme necessity, he began to
examine them, whether they resorted, and to whom; and finding that they were
acquainted with a priest in the Clinck, he turned his back in a choler,
saying; that they deserved nothing, and that they should lie, and do as they
would for him, and so departed leaving them never a penny. How true this is,
the poor prisoners, that felt the smart, can tell; and one can testify that
was within hearing, when this passed which I have declared. Many more hangers
on this box, and those hungry ones too, could I name, if I would spend my time
so idly as to enrole them here. Wats:
I could name one that was of late a prisoner (not for building of Churches)
who (by his own confession) received 30. pound of the Archpriest, and Jesuits.
This man should have been employed for them in our affairs. All this, to any
man of wisdom, and indifferency, can import no less, then that the Jesuits
be Masters of no small co^mings in, when as, both themselves are so well
furnished, and their followers, and hangers on so extraordinarily provided for.

But you will say, that although much come to their hands, yet does it not
follow, that they either heap it up for themselves, or send it over unto their
Society beyond the seas. For it is well known, that very much is sent by them
unto prisoners abroad in all places. And since there must be some to have care
of those matters for prisoners, it is more befitting unto the Jesuits, (being
religious men, and therefore not of the world, nor to gape after worldly
things, or to respect any thing in the world more then for necessity to
maintain nature) then to any other, who have not forsaken the world, and
preferments thereof. First I answer, that I take not upon me to charge them
with sending over of sums beyond the seas, neither do I mean to draw upon
my self the maintaining of these objections and accusations laid to their
charge, (as at the first I said) but only to deliver sincerely such matters
which I know to be true, and that even plainly as they were, leaving the
judgment thereof unto the indifferency of the Reader; only to that end, that
the world might see upon what grounds such accusations might arise, and that we
have had more occasion in very deed to complain against them, then the world
would take notice of.

And for their large dispensing of alms given, and received, let any that has
wit and understanding, judge by that little, which we have set down, (which in
very deed is very small, in respect of that, which has been given) whether
there be any proportion betwixt the receipts, and the distributions: besides,
we talk not here, nor speak one word of the common Collections which are
yearly made for prisoners, nor such yearly exhibition, as we know good devout
Cath: do give to prisoners, and prisons, neither of private alms given in
particular, from particular friends, unto particular men in prison: all which
considered, I think it will not be found out, that very much more comes to
prisoners besides this. What then (think you) may become of that which we
have spoken of, and such like sums?

And touching the Jesuits sending so largely to prisoners, let the Clincke,
Framingham, and other places, witness their great charity for these two years
past, or there abouts. Concerning their abnegation of the world, and worldly
preferment, whereby the credit and trust of such collections, and
distributions, should rather be committed to them, then others; I would it were
with them, as it is with other religious men, that forsake the world. But it is
otherwise, for they are never without one foot in the world, and that deeply
to. I might say (I fear me) hands, legs, body, and all, howsoever they make
show to the contrary. And for to show you, that they too too much affect the
world, and seek too earnestly after the wealth thereof, I will set you down
one pretty Spanish example, omitting infinite other which I could relate.

It fortuned that a rich man in Valledolid in Spain, lying at the point of
death, had given largely unto the Jesuits, and upon compassion toward the
English men living in the English College there, he laid out a good sum of
gold upon a table, by him in the chamber, where he lay, with order that it
should be given to that College, toward the maintenance of the English there.
This gold lying thus in view, in comes a lay brother of the Jesuits to visit
the sick; and falling into discourse with the party deceased, began to relate
unto him what care was had of him by their Fathers, and that there was
continual prayer for him in their College. The sick man thanked him, and
them for their mindfulnes of him in those extremities, and told him that he had
also taken order, that the poor English men which lived in the town for Gods
cause, should have such a sum of money, which lay upon the table, to pray for
him. The lay brother perceauing the gold to make a fair show, repined that it
fell not also to their share. Whereupon he entered into a discourse with the
sick person of the poverty of their Fathers, and that they being naturally
borne in the Country, were forgotten of every body, and by that means were
very poor: but the English men were very rich, and every man gave unto them,
adding with-all that their Fathers would be more careful to pray for him then
the English men, and their prayers more effectual for him. By this discourse
he got the gold into his fingers, and departed merrily: but the English
Jesuits, who were in the English College, when they understood thereof, were
evil appayed, and complained thereof. If this be a lie, blame the English
Jesuits of Valedolid, who spared not to complain hereof to the Scholars. I
should weary you, to relate all the stories I could tell you, of them in this
kind: but to avoid tediousnes, you shall content your self only with this
at this time.

After that Fa: Parsons had done with these accusations, he brings in again
preposterously a thing delivered in the 25. page of our Relation, viz. that
after Cardinal Allens death, the students in the English College at Rome,
felt no less oppression there by the Jesuits tyranizing Governors, then we
did at home, etc. How true this accusation is, the story of those stirs shall
show you, as in part has already been delivered, neither will this Fathers
threats, and big words serve his turn, to out-braue innocent men for telling
truth, and shaming the devil, and the authors, and actors in such unjust,
uncharitable, and irreligious proceedings: which his Apology deceitfully
shufleth of, and untruly relates, as shall appear in the discourse thereof.
Concerning Fa: Garnets bestirring of himself for subscriptions against the
foresaid accusations, we have already said sufficiently how unjust both the
letters, writ in that behalf were; as also how indiscreet the subscriptions
were of such, as without all limitation freely subscribed thereto. Yet here by
the way, I may not omit Fa: Garnets letter in that behalf, wherein (the rather
to move all men to subscribe to a general acquiting them of all such things)
he protests coram deo et angelis, that there was not mica veritatis, in those
accusations; which yet Fa: Parsons durst not so peremptorily affirm: when he
says only that all was not true therein contained, covertly insinuating that
some things were true. And I will refer my self, and all my poor credit
unto the Reader hereof; whether many things in that Collection be not true,
yea, all things either in whole or part; whereby you may note, what a dangerous
protestation Fa: Garnet entered into, materially containing a manifest untruth;
howsoever the formality thereof may seem to be excused by some hidden
equivocation or other. And as for his modesty or scrupulosity in his triple
division, (as Fa: Parson says) you must give me leave to think it rather to
have proceeded upon a guilty conscience, or policy, or both; thereby to draw
every man to subscribe. For he might well imagine, that some men would look
into the matter, at least so near, as not to subscribe more, then they could
avouch, howsoever some few might be induced thereto. And what reason, or show
of innocence there was in the performance of that office, on the Jesuits
behalf, I know not; neither do I see that necessity in the prosecution
thereof, that Fa: Garnet could do no less (as Fa: Parsons affirms.) For I
would but ask him this one question; why he did not procure a iuridiciall
examination of matters, that men might speak, what they knew upon their oaths;
but would shuffle them up in corners, and seek to draw men by favors,
persuasions, and the like, to testify for them, as I am able to prove they
did. This kind of covert dealing in any wise man's judgment, could not but
yield great suspicion of guilty consciences in them: For all men know, that a
man will conceal many things, which he could say, being but ordinarily thereof
demanded; which he would not do, being examined iuridice upon his oath.
Besides, who is ignorant, that such as should have accused them by their
subscriptions, should thereby have incurred their high displeasure, (which for
ought I see many yet fear) and yet have done thereby small good, in that their
subscriptions should have been concealed, or by some means or other frustrated
of their ends, as the subscriptions of the three priests were, who subscribed
somewhat disliking to their humors. But there was a farther policy in these
matters. The procuring of these subscriptions, were but an introduction to
other points, which they had in hand, concerning the Archpresbiterie. For by
this means did they first sound the affections of priests toward them, and
try what they could do with them, if the like manner of occasion should serve
afterward, as in the same sort they did, after the institution of the Archp:
by priests subscriptions to a congratulation procure his confirmation.

After the end of all this, our good Fa: seems to lament our case for
defaming of their order: and he cites many Authors against diffamations, and
defamors of others, and specially of Religious orders. But I would feign know
to what end he so much labors, in quoting Authors to this purpose. Can he
think that men, who profess to direct other men's consciences, can be ignorant
of the sin of detraction, and penalties thereof? Well, in execution and
practice men may err, but it were great folly and rashness for him to think
them ignorant in the knowledge or speculation of it. Or is Fa: Parsons so
vnobseruaunt of his own actions and writings, that he does not see that we
can retort all that he has said herein against himself? Is there any man
living that has more defamed Ecclesiastical men then Fa: Parsons? Was it not
Fa: Parsons that defamed so many virtuous Priests and scholars in the Seminary
of Rome, and divulged the same to all the world, and now in print in his
Apology? Is it not fa: Parsons that in the said Apology has defamed 12. or
13. reverend priests prisoners in Wisbich? Is it not Father Parsons that has
divulged in the said book, and by letters through the world, diffamation
against all the priests of England, that refused to subscribe to the
Archpriest? Was it not fa: Parsons that informed falsely unto his Holiness,
against not only all the Priests of England, but also all Cath: suggesting to
his Holiness, that they were at varience and quarrelling one with the other? Was
it not Fa: Parsons chiefly that defamed Ma: Doctor Gifford, and now renueth
the same course again in his Apology? Nay, who lives amongst us, that ever
opposed himself against any proceedings of the Jesuits, and felt not this
Fathers good words? See now good Sir, what danger you stand in, through your
unjust and slanderous calumniations. But as for that we have said or done, you
shall see that we will sufficiently purge our selves of all such dangers,
which he shall never be able to do.

First you know, it is a general received ground by all, that when the actions
of any particular man or men, (be they of what degree they will be, secular or
religious, Ecclesiastical or Lay) do tend unto any general, or common hurt of
a co^munitie: (as for example, the actions of some particular servant in a
family, to the ruin or overthrow of the family, some particular scholar or
scholars in a College, to the subversion of the College, or some particular
men in a common wealth, to the destruction of a Common wealth,) it is then not
only lawful to disclose these particular men, and their particular actions,
though otherwise private and diffamatorie unto the said particular parties (as
all such actions of their own nature must needs be) but also every honest
servant, every faithful servant, every true scholar, and loyal subject, is
bound in conscience upon his duty to his Master, faith unto his College,
loyalty to his Prince, and love to his country, to disclose such persons, and
their facts or intentions, with our regard or respect unto the hurt, or damage,
that may redound unto the said particular parties so offending. The reason
hereof is this, because a general good is always to be preferred before a
particular, and a greater hurt to be eschued before a less. As for example,
when two evils concur so that both cannot be avoided, but that necessarily
the one must happen, it is not only charity, but every man is also bound to
prevent the greater evil with permission of the less rather then the contrary.

This foundation being laid, which is grounded upon the law of nature; now
will I easily make you see, that our divulging of some proceedings of Fa:
Parsons, and other Jesuits, is not only void of just imputation, but also
lawful, just, and necessary, all circumstances considered, and therefore free
from the danger of those penalties cited by Fa: Parsons in this work. And
first, for the revealing, or indeed divulging of things already reveled by
their own foolish open dealings. Concerning matter of state, who can be so
ignorant, as not to know, that he is bound more to love his country then a
Jesuit, yea, the whole order of the Jesuits: since unto the first he is bound by
the law of nature, to the second only by the law of fraternall charity. Now
then the actions of the Jesuits tending so evidently as they do, and have done
to the ruin, subversion, and overthrow of our Prince, and country, both by
secret practices, and open incursions of Spanish invasions, (as is manifest
both by their own books, letters, and other dealings, as well in Ireland, as
England) what good subject, or true-harted Englishman can do less then
disclaim with his mouth, resist with his blood, and open with his tongue, all
such unnatural and treacherous attempts?

And if any man be so simple, or so deluded by their fair words, as that he
has not, or does not see any such practice, or intention in them, let him not
therefore blame us for speaking thereof, or divulging the same, who are too well
acquainted therewith, and therefore bound to reveal, what we know therein,
when it shall be necessary for the preservation of our Prince and Country.
Neither let any man be so simple as to think, that because they are religious
men, and Catholics, therefore they may be privileged the more in such
courses, under pretense of Reformation, for such a conceit were very erroneous.
If in a Lay person, (under what pretense soever) it be unlawful to work the
ruin of his country, much more is it unlawful in a Religious person, unto
whom such affairs belong not. But some will say, they tend not unto any
subversion of their Country, but to a Catholic reformation. To such a fond
objection (yet too too common) I answer, that whatsoever they pretend, they
go about to effect it by externe hostile means. And how this should be
without conquest and mutation, and subversion of all, is impossible to be
conceived. Besides, he that has wit will know, that the kingdom of England is
a fair mark to shoot at: and therefore cannot be so fond or foolish as to
imagine, that an inuader having got the field, will leave the crown, which
once possessed, he will seek to keep. And I suppose you will imagine that a
Spaniard will rather put himself in trust to himself, and his force, by which
he enters, then unto the courtesies of those, whom he conquereth. If so, must
he not do as William the conqueror did, erect his vassalls, and Country men,
and suppress the nobility, and other the natural inhabitants of the Country?
Does he not so in other places, which he has got by the sword, transferring
in some parts of the Indies, and rooting out all the inhabitants almost of the
Countries, and planting Spaniards and Aliens? And can any Cath: be so simple,
as to persuade himself of any regard to be had to him, in such an invasion,
because he is a Cath: Truly I do wonder at such fond conceits. Have they
forgot, or have they not heard that in the year 1588. all had gone to wrack,
Cath: and others? If they will not herein believe me, let them believe Fa:
Parsons affirming as much to diverse. And that the Duke de Medina, general of
the Navy, affirmed, that he knew no difference: let them believe Fa:
Southwells speeches, uttered to the same purpose at Wisbich, amongst the
priests there. Incredulous men herein do not certes understand of their
proceedings at the winning of Antwerpe, where they made no difference of
murdering, and spoiling whomsoever; amongst whom were diverse Cath: slain, and
spoiled after their entrance; and the sooner when the Soldiers perceived they
were Cath: (as I have heard) for fear of loosing their pray: See what reason
we have to press them with these matters.

Secondly, for the opening of their proceedings concerning their Clergy, we
have much more reason to disclose the same, because they tend to a greater
mischief being against a greater, and more precious Commonwealth. Wherefore
if those things by us divulged touching such affairs be true, there is no man
of judgment, and understanding, can blame us for manifesting the same; since it
is more, then necessary, that such evil attempts, and endeavors, which tend
to the overthrow, and destruction of the ecclesiastical Hierarchy, be known,
and foreseen of all men; that thereby the universal mischief, which
otherwise would ensue, might be avoided, and their insultations against
ecclesiastical persons, and the privileges of the seculer Clergy with more
speed checked, and controlled.

This is so true a position, that I suppose no man will deny it, in that the
church of Christ cannot stand, without the seculer Clergy, viz. Bishops,
Priests, etc. But it is certain, that it may stand without any particular
order of Religion, being magis ad ornamentum, et adiumentum ecclesie ex
conuenientia, quam ex necessitate. And therefore every man is bound in
conscience more to the preservation of the seculer Clergy, and privileges
thereof, then to any particular order of Religion in the Church; yea, then to
all orders whatsoever of particular observations. Now then the question only
remains, whether the imputations of those things, objected by us against
them, be true or no: which known, all the controversy of detraction, or
penalties thereby incurred, is easily answered. And for the proof of this
matter, I refer you to what we have already written, as well in this reply, and
in our former books; as also to an indifferent consideration of their late
practices here amongst us for a subordination, to depend at their direction,
and devotion: and their attempts in Wisbich, together with Fa: Parsons new
work of reformation. All which duly, and indifferently considered, I know you
will say no less, then we have said, and condemn them, as deeply as we do,
for such unjust insultations to the perverting of all true order in Gods
Church, tending to the defacing of that excellent Hierarchy, instituted by
Christ him self. Neither have these practices been only attempted in
England, but also in diverse other parts beyond the Seas; and diverse Cath:
vvriters have taxed them therewith. If you urge yet the divulging of other
particular actions, and proceedings, as particularly those matters of Rome
against the Scholars, and also some particular proceedings against some private
men: I answer, that those proceedings in Rome had the same end, and scope,
which these in England have in seeking to impose a yoke of bondage upon the
Scholars there, before they came into England, that they might tyranize at
their will without check, or control, and disgrace such as contradicted their
desires, as you shall more at large see in the discourse of those stirs.
Besides, Fa: Parsons, and the Jesuits had defamed many Priests, and Scholars
unjustly, and untruly: whereby they were enforced to enter into the opening of
such their proceedings for the maintenance, and recovery of their fames, and
credits by them unjustly assaulted, which course (justice and truth being
observed) no man can deny to be lawful. And as for other particular wrongs
done to particular men, they have for the most part tended unto one and the
same end, and therefore upon one and the same ground revealed.

Furthermore also, An other case deduced out of the former grounds.
to acquaint you with an other case of conscience, whereby all such particular
objections may be answered, and we easily cleared: you shall understand, that
when any person or persons take such courses, as that thereby under feyned
shows, or fair glofes, they obfuscate or blind the eyes of the people,
whereby they cannot see into the miseries, or dangers whereinto they draw them,
then is it lawful for any man that sees into the general evils, which will
ensue thereby, not only to open their said practizes, but also (if it be
necessary, and that otherwise the parties will not be seen into, and such
mischiefs avoided) to open some other particular facts or practizes more
familiar, or apparent, thereby to give light unto such, as otherwise will not
conceive the dangers, and mischiefs following the actions, and practices of
such men, or be induced to believe any such manner of dealings in them, and
thereby avoid them, as dangerous.

As for example: If I knew any one man near to a Prince or general
Magistrate, whose secret actions, and private workings tended unto the
subversion of the Prince, and Country, or Magistrate, and City, and that this
being unknown to the Prince, or Magistrate, affection would not suffer them to
see their own danger, and the danger of their Country, Commonwealth, or
City; it were not only lawful for me, to disclose the particular actions of
the said party, though private, thereby to give occasion unto the Prince or
Magistrate, to be more vigilant unto themselves, and their estates, and more
obseruant of the aforesaid dangerous person, but also an act of allegiance to
my Prince, and of love unto my Country, unto which every man is bound in duty
and conscience. So in our case, if any particular actions of the Jesuits be
discovered, they are but matters of proceedings with particular men, that
thereby you might learn by particularities, and matters of less moment, to
conceive the better what, and how dangerous their practices be in matters of
greater weight; and how their proceedings hold one and the selfsame course,
both in particular and general affairs, in matter of less and greater
moment. And this (so long as we observe truth in our relations) is both lawful
and necessary (as the case now stands with the Jesuits, and their actions in
England,) and we are free both from the note of detractors, in revealing their
exorbitant proceedings, and penalties thereby incurred. The like cannot be said
in their behalf for defaming of us. For they have not only unjustly, and
untruly detracted from our good names, and credits in these matters of our
proceedings (as all the world now sees) but also entered into our particular
lives, most falsely going about to touch therein our good names, which no way is
excusable, in that if any such thing had been true in any of us, yet could it
not (being a secret infirmity) have tended to any general hurt of any whole
body, or commonwealth, but only to a particular hurt of a man's self, which
by no law of conscience could be revealed by them: Neither have we done so by
them, though I think no man will reckon them all saints. But those secret
diffamations proceeded doubtless of a machiauilian ground, and not of justice,
or charity.

Now let us come at length unto the book of Important considerations,
Important considerations.
at which our dear Father spitteth no less then fire, with words of folly,
frenzy, fury, mutiny, war, and defiance, parasiticall, pernicious,
erroneous, heretical, wicked, reproachful, traiterous, ridiculous, impious,
base, and wickedly minded, proctors for heretics, accusers against persecuted
Catholics, transformed with passion, envy, malice, sold our tongues to the
common enemy, united in wicked attempts, contemptible to all Catholics of
discretion, and the like. Certes this good man's zeal was great, when in his
heat of choler he uttered so many fiery and passionate speeches. But yet I
must needs crave pardon at his hands to run over this matter a new, and
request his patience, that we may examine the book again, and see, whether
it deserve so mighty blame, as he makes show of. Believe me, if it do, we
will cancel it, and blot out his date: but if it prove otherwise, he must be
content to let it pass with a more favorable interpretation, and not wrest
matters into worse sense, then ever the Authors intended.

In the very first entrance into this book, I wish you to note a cunning
falsehood of this Father, in the relating of the title of this book, which he
sets down thus. Important considerations to move all true Catholics that
are not wholly Iesuited, to acknowledge all the proceedings of the state of
England against Catholics, (since it excluded the Roman faith, and fell to
heresy) to have been not only just, but also mild, and merciful. etc. In
this altered title, (which is not verbatim with the title of the book) Fa:
Parsons shows himself not a little; first in foysting in of the world all
before proceedings, thereby to take advantage of every petty matter, that has
happened perhaps sometimes by the knavery of some Pursuiuant, or other odd
fellow without commission, or warrant; as also in adding with a Parenthesis
(since it excluded the Roman faith, and fell to heresy) thereby to make the
matter show more hateful and heinous. Whereas in very deed, (as every man may
see, that list to read over the Treatise) the intention is not to excuse, or
justify every particular action of the state, as the action may be in it self
considered without further respect, then to that particular bare action. For
who will or can justify, or excuse the killing of a priest as a priest, or
confiscating or hanging of a Cath: as a Cath: merely for religion. This (I
say) is not intended in that book, as all the world may see, for therein is
lamented the hard course taken, as well against Priests as Catholics; neither
for ought I see, does the state make show of persecution quo ad vitam et necem,
for matter merely of religion, and conscience, but upon pretense of treason,
or attempts against her Majesty's person, or state, or (at the least) upon the
fear thereof.

Now then all the end, and scope of this book, is none other then this; to
excuse the state from such general imputation of infamy laid upon it,
especially by the Jesuits (who have been the chiefest causers of those vehement
afflictions) as though the state without all cause, or show of cause, had made
laws against innocent men, and there-vpon persecuted them unto death, no true
occasion of exasperation having ever been given from any such person, either to
prince or state. To take away (I say) this vnderserued infamy, this treatise
was written of purpose, to lay the fault truly, where indeed really it has
been; humbly desiring at the feet of our Sovereign that we being innocent in
such actions, may not sustain the burden of their offenses; but may obtain so
much favor in her gracious sight, as to be numbered amongst her loyal
subjects, and those that hate such unnatural, and ever accursed practices,
least otherwise we be enforced to say (lamenting our case) with the Prophet
patres nostri peccauerunt, et non sunt, et nos inquitates eorum portamus. This
I say is the whole scope, and intention of this work, and therefore does the
author give reasons by particular men's actions, and indiscreet attempts, as
well by writings, as practices, that the state has had just cause to fear,
when it perceived such dealings, and there-vpon was moved to provide by laws,
and premunitions against the like afterward. And if by these laws, and
provisions it happened, that innocent men sometimes were wronged (as in all
general laws it happens sometimes) yet was not the state (all causes first
given considered) so much to be condemned; nay, rather it was to be excused, in
that it is most certain, that it has not proceeded with that rigor, upon such
causes given, as otherwise it might have done, to the extirpation of all such
persons, from whom, or from whose degree, such actions proceeded. And I would
but ask Fa: Parsons (because I know him to be a great statist) this one
question, whether in his conscience he do think there be any Prince in the
world, be he never so catholic, that should have within his dominions a kind
of people, amongst whom diverse times he should discover matters of treason, and
practices against his person, and state, whether he would permit those kind of
people, to live within his dominions, if he could be otherwise rid of them, and
whether he would not make straight Laws, and execute them severely against
such offenders, yea, and all of that company, and quality, rather then he would
remain in any danger of such secret practices, and plots? I think Fa: Parsons
will not for shame deny this; especially if he remember the examples of the
French religious men, for the like practices expelled England generally, in a
Cath: time, and by a Cath: Prince, and their lyuings confiscate, and given away
to others. The like was of the Templars, both in England, and France. Yea, to
come nearer unto him, was not all their order expelled France for such
matters, and yet the King, and state of France free from imputation of
injustice in that action? If these things proceeded from Cath: Princes justly
against whole Communities, or orders of Religion upon such causes; we cannot
much blame our Prince, and state, being of a different Religion to make sharp
laws against us, and execute the same, finding no less occasion thereof in
some of our profession, then the foresaid Princes did in other religious
persons, whom they punished, as you see. But you will say, that there is no
reason, that the innocent should be condemned for another man's fault; if some
one Cath: or Priest were faulty in this kind, all were not so; how then can the
actions of the state against such be justifiable? To this I answer, that you
cannot think that every particular French Monk, was guilty of treason in that
Kings days, when all were expelled, nor is it like that all the Templers were
so irreligious, as some of them were, neither do I think that all the Jesuits
were accessarie, or consenting unto their practices in France; yet all (you
see) paid for the delict of some. Princes are jealous, and have cause so to be,
there depending so much upon their safety as there does. When therefore they
find treachery in any Community, they will be sure to provide for the worst,
and rather extirpate that Co^munitie, then live in fear thereof. Does it not
so happen always, when the Governors or Magistrates of a City, counite, or
concur unto any treason; does not the City presently lose all her
privileges, and the Prince seize upon the same, and take all into his own
hands, and government, suppressing the whole state of the City, for the
faults of a few only? what marvel then, if this has happened in our case,
where there has been such difference in religion? And then judge whether we,
that have been innocent in such practices, (as GOD and our conscience can
witness, and yet have felt the smart of such proceedings) have not great cause
to clear our selves; to exclaim against such as will never leave to irritate
our Prince, and state, and to make known unto her Majesty, and our state, the
innocence both of us, and of our ghostly children (who have been pressed with
the burden of afflictions, by reason of such undutiful attempts in some few
unrestrained persons) most humbly craving at her sacred hands, some redress
for such miseries, that the stroke may light where the offense has been given,
and not henceforth upon the necks of poor innocents. If there be any offense
in us toward her Majesty, or her proceedings, it is only in matters of
religion, which being a thing not only proceeding of man's will, but by a
light from God, informing first the understanding, and then the will, (and
therefore not to be altered or disposed as other indifferent actions or conceits
may be,) we hope may, and will be more excusable in her gracious sight. But
for matters of practicing against her person, crown, or state, that is a thing
only proceeding from a perverse, and passionate will, the understanding still
remaining sui iuris, able to discern ad vtrum libet, either of the
co^ueniencies or mischiefs of such affairs, which no way can be excusable.

Now whereas some worthy men are touched with such undutiful proceedings in
the aforesaid Treatise, you must understand, that thereby the persons of the
men are not condemned, but rather their facts, or they only in those facts,
yet worthy men in themselves. And you must understand, that good men, yea
Saints, have had their errors, (as these proceedings in these worthy men must
be acknowledged) neither may we approve such errors because the Authors of them
were Saints.

No man approves the defense of rebaptization in Saint Cyprian, because S.
Cyprian is a Martyr, and yet whilst he lived he defended the same very
earnestly, and practiced it with great contention against other Bishops. David's
fact of murdering Vrias, must not be excused, because he was secundum cor Dei,
and now a Saint: no, no, passions and errors have reigned in Saints whilst
they were upon the earth, yea even amongst the Apostles, and disciples of
Christ, whilst he was with them. Therefore let no man be scandalized, that good
men and worthy persons are condemned in some particular facts, since no man
lives on earth without error.

But you will say, it is commanded in the Law non reuelabis turpitudinem
patris tui, and the two sons of Noe were cursed of God, for revealing and
laughing at their fathers nakedness: therefore we should rather have buried such
defects of our worthy parents in perpetual oblivion under ground, then have
published them thus to the world. Alas, I would to God it had been in our
power to have hid these things, without the mischiefs before expressed,
believe us assuredly the world then should never have had knowledge of them,
but it was not in our power, their facts were so public to the world, and
better known unto our state then to our selves. But it will still be said, if
such men of worth, and great virtue, dealt in such matters, why should we so
much exclaim against the Jesuits? Is their fault so heinous therein above the
others? To this I answer, that the Jesuits faults are much more, as you also
will confess, if you consider all circumstances well. For first, what was done
by these worthy men, was done almost in the first heat of change of Religion,
wherein both more passion might move, and greater hopes of recovery of religion
stir them up to such attempts. Besides, their hopes of sincere dealing in
such as should have concurred in those actions merely for religion, and not of
ambition, might draw them on to follow such devises. For as then the ambitious
intentions of the Spaniards were not discovered unto them; which once
appearing, such as lived, and saw how little sincerity or care of Gods cause
they had, (but merely sought after the Crown, and the subversion of our
country) not only repented them of their former dealings, but also detested,
and hated such proceedings: as was manifest in Cadinall Allen: and doubtless
would so have happened in the rest, if they had lived to have seen the handling
of matters since. But for the Jesuits they are so headlong, and violent in
these courses, that they seem no more to regard the good of our Country, or
estate thereof, then the Spaniards themselves. For notwithstanding the manifest
intentions of conquest, and subversion by the Spaniards intended, yet do they
so concur with them, as whereas the Spaniard of himself seems slow, they
prick him on continually with plots and suggestions. Witness Fa: Parsons
actions concerning two several Nauies which miscarried: in one of which Ma:
Doctor Stillington took his death: of the other since he speaks in a letter
writ from Rome to Ma. Thomas Fitzherbert. Witness this the late attempt in
Ireland, in which Fa: Archer, an Irish Jesuit was a great actor. Who will not
say now, that the Jesuits are much more to be blamed then any of the former
worthy persons, since they desist not to prosecute that, which by some of them
was afterward disliked, and continue an offense begun, yea and upon knowledge
of the infinite deformity thereof, into which the other saw not so deeply, as
is probable.

Having thus given you some light, whereby you may truly see into the drift
and end of the foresaid Treatise of Important considerations, and the reasons
we have to purge our selves of such inexcusable practices, (for the which
hitherto we have all smarted) and the causes we have, not only to condemn
those facts, and attempts, (how worthy soever the persons were, that dealt
therein) but also to exclaim against those, that still run such disloiall
races, and with all our power and might, not only to disclaim, but also
resist, and reveal such undutiful practices, and endeavors, of her Majesty's
disloyal, yet natural subjects, be they what they may be, and of what
condition, and quality they will be, (for no condition, or quality may
patronize disloyalty:) having I say, given you some light hereof, let us now
consider, what particular objections, (or indeed barren exclamations) this
Father makes against this Treatise.

We will let pass his vain quipping at sundry: and seculer: being both
scurrilous, and irreligious, in abusing the phrase of seculer priests used, and
approved always in Gods Church, with great reverence to the order of
priesthood, which he not without note of contempt, joins with an allusion
unto secular minds and desires; saying, not only secular in order, but also in
mind, heart, and desires, making the word secular in one sentence to be
predicatum indifferently, and in like sense (as a man would think) unto order,
mind, hearts, and desires, and so may a man say, ordo saecularis, men's
saecularis, corda saecularia, desideria saecularia, in one, and the same
profane understanding, which how irreligiously it sounds from the mouth of a
religious man, judge you. Verily if he had been careful of his pen, he might
have severed the sentences at the least so, as the sense of the word might have
appeared diverse, and therein have showed a reverent respect to priesthood,
howsoever he had otherwise despised our persons. But let us see I pray you,
what he says to our mislike of certain Treatises, letters, and reports
written, and made in diverse parts of the world.

All that he says to this matter, is nothing but a shufling up of grave, and
worthy men of our nation, who have writ or dealt in such affairs; but whether
therein they did well or ill, he never shows by any reason or proof in the
world. Only he exclaimeth at us, as envious, and malicious, and such as have
sold our tongues to the common enemy. This kind of shifting dealing is common,
and ordinary with this father, but how simple in the sight of wise men, I
leave you to consider. If it be a sufficient proof, or excuse in every
particular fact, viz. such a grave, and worthy man did the like, what matter
of fact may not be excused? Did not S. Cyprian rebaptize such as had been
baptized before by heretics? Is it therefore upon this ground a sufficient
warrant to any man to rebaptize such as are baptized by protestants? Have not
diverse Saints, and Martirs, done diverse things not to be imitated of the
generations following? What good conclusion then is this? Grave and worthy men
have writ, and dealt in this affair, therefore it is good, convenient, and
lawful. If such grave and worthy men had infallibility in their actions,
(which Saints in this life have not had) then such an infallible inference
might be made, but not otherwise. Therefore good Fa: you should not only have
produced the actions of such men, but also the reasons, and grounds of their
actions, and proved them to have been good and current, by some conuincing
reason and proof: but this you never touch. Any shadow seems sufficient to
you to bleere men's eyes, but this may not serve your turn.

Wise and grave men have erred, and sometimes do err; and yet remain both
wise, and grave. We are not Angels who intuitiue see into the natures of
things, what is convenient, or inconvenient; but we are men subject to passion,
and mutability, gathering things a posteriore, whereof follow many errors, and
imperfections in our actions. And heere-vppon it comes, that posteriores
cogitationes solent esse meliores; and we often find that by experience, which
at the first we were ignorant of. A notable example hereof we have in this
very matter by Card: Allen, both a grave, and a wise man, (as all the world
knows.) For he was somewhat faulty in the beginning in this kind (as by a
certain treatise wherein his finger was, is too too manifest,) yet do we well
know, that in his latter time this worthy prelate was such an enemy unto those
proceedings, as he never could endure to hear of them, and much complained of
the proceedings of some Jesuits therein, as many can witness. Now then either
Fa: Parsons must condemn the former actions of this worthy man as erroneous
(as well as we do) or else disclaim from his latter proceedings, being not in
the same course with the first. Yet here by the way I must tell you, that I
verily think, that this worthy man was drawn unto these proceedings, more by
others, then of his own nature; and I have no small reasons to induce me
thereto: For first you know the general expectance of the whole world,
concerning the Armado of 1588. as well for the greatness thereof, as the opinion
of the Spaniards sincere pretense of Religion, which was nothing so. This
conceit might draw the good Card: to be deceived, as well as Pope Sixtus, who
(it is well known) was drawn into a conceit thereof, and deceived by them.
Secondly, you are not ignorant, that even against that pretended invasion, he
was advanced unto the honor, and dignity of a Prince, which might move a right
good man. And that he had an opinion of a moderate course to have been taken by
the Spaniards in that attempt; his own words in the said treatise do plainly
show, saying, that he was made Card: for the sweeter managing of things in our
Country after the conquest. Yet I cannot, but much wonder at this honest Fa:
that in his marginall notes upon this point, he was so blind, or so bold, as to
cite Doctor Saunders works de visibili Monarchia, and de schismate Anglicano;
which works contain so many irreuerent speeches, and the divulging of such
odious matters against her Majesty, and her noble progenitors, as the untruths
of some, and the incertainty of others considered, could not but irritate the
most Christian Cath: and patient Prince in the world. But because the things
are not meet to be repeated, yea, are scandalous to proceed from an English
man; I refer my self for proof hereof to every man, that has read the
books. I would to God so worthy a man had not stained his works, with such
stuff in these times, then would I dare to say, that he had been the greatest
honor to his Country, and the worthiest man of the world. The like I may say
of Didamus veridicus: For it is well known, that although the man was most
worthy, and one of the most famous Clarks of this age, yet was he very
choleric, and would sometimes bite more, then was convenient. But as for
Philopater and Perni, I scorn to think of such foolish stuff, hatched by this
Fa: and Fa: Creswell. And this shall serve in answer of the first point,
leaving every man of indifferency to judge, whether such proceedings in
matters of state, to the ruin, and overthrow of our Prince, and Country, daily
practiced by the Jesuits (wherewith they are charged in the treatise of
Important considerations) be sufficiently justified by the example of such like
proceedings in other men, and whether there be any wrong done by us, in
disliking of such courses, in those worthy men, whereof some of themselves
afterward disliked.

Although I was purposed to have omitted that point, because I think you shall
shortly see a particular Treatise thereof, yet will I now say a word or two,
briefly of it. And the rather I will so do, in that I see Ma. Doctor Ely in
his notes upon the Apology somewhat distasting the mention thereof, induced
(as I verily think) by this only respect, that our state, being only
Protestants, and in nothing consenting unto the authority of the sea of Rome,
therefore there should be no reason, why the Pope should in any thing
(necessary, or convenient for our Church) stay, or respect the consent or
permission of our Prince, notwithstanding the pretense of the said law of
Praemunire. But to satisfy in part Ma. Doctor, and whosoever else in this point,
I thought good to add this consideration or motion, which drew me, and others
of us, to make the matter more weighty, and urgent, then it seems Ma. Doctor
Ely, and others apprehend.

You must therefore understand, that the chiefest occasion of this law at the
first was, to prevent many mischiefs, and inconveniences, which happened here
in our Realm, by diverse privileges and indults, that were procured from Rome
by surreption, unjust favors, and false informations, by virtue of which
indults and privileges, many contentions arose, as well amongst the seculer
Clergy, as the religious, yea often times to the spilling of blood. To avoid
these so great inconveniences, our Cath: Kings, with the free and full consent
of all the Clergy, and temporalty, enacted that no such grant, procured from
Rome, should be executed within the dominions of England, upon the penalties
specified in the said statute, until the Kings consent thereto were first
obtained.

Now then to the purpose, if his holiness had instituted any usual authority,
heretofore accepted by our Kings and Clergy, and in use in Cath: times
amongst us, and by the ordinary course of law (to wit by election or otherwise)
ex plenitudine potestatis, (so that we had had sufficient notice thereof, to
bind us to obedience) it may be said, that herein the offense unto the Cath:
law of praemunire, had been only a material offense, if any at all, because we
may judge all Princes to be bound in conscience, to become Cath: and to accept,
and concur with such ordinances of his Holiness, as are usual, or necessary
for the upholding of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy of Christ's church. As now
her Majesty, being a Protestant, and so persuaded in conscience, is bound to
concur and accept of such Ecclesiastical subordination, as is both usual and
necessary for the preserving of the Protestants Church, and Clergy. But to
accept and admit of an extrauagant jurisdiction, unusual not only in the
Church of England, but also in the whole church of Christ, from the time of
Christ himself unto these days, and such an one, as was altogether
unnecessary for our Church, yea very hurtful both to our poor afflicted Cath:
and state also, (as we will show at large hereafter, if occasion be offered)
could not (in my opinion) but draw after it the penalties of the law aforesaid,
and justly. For if that law were just, when it was first instituted, it not
being abrogated, is still just, and in force.

Well then, this authority of the Archpriest being such an exorbitant,
unusual, and inconvenient jurisdiction, and therefore such an one as could not
in conscience bind any Catho: Prince to admit thereof, or consent thereto (were
the times Catholic) I do not see why the same reason does not hold now with
us in these times, and how any man can be excused from the penalty of that
law, in admitting an external jurisdiction without the knowledge of their
Prince, and against her consent, unto which if she were a Catholic, she were
not bound to consent, but contrariwise to repugne. This I say is wilfully,
without all reason or necessity, to contemn her princely prerogative, and
therefore no excuse of religion, conscience, or the like* can (in my conceit)
free any man, thus accepting of this authority at the first, but mere
ignorance of the law, and case which I think was invincible in most.

The third point of the argument of this work of Important considerations, is
so falsely and so maliciously related by him, that (believe me) it does not a
little amaze me, to consider so strange boldness in a man of his coat. First
he says, that in the said book we affirm: that neither the Pope, nor any
other Ecclesiastical power, has authority to restrain, punish, or repress,
by way of force, or arms immediately, or by others, any christian temporal
Prince whatsoever, for any delict of heresy, Apostasy, impugnation of
Christian faith, extirpation of religion, or other crime whatsoever, though
never so much danger, or damage should ensue by his default to the Common
wealth, or the rest of Christendom. If any living man under heaven (reading
the aforesaid discourse) do find any such speech, as this here delivered by
this dishonest Jesuit, let all that he has said, be believed against us: yea I
say moreover, if any man of indifferency, do gather any such meaning, or
intention in the foresaid Treatise directly, or indirectly delivered, by any
phrase or sentence whatsoever, I will say, what he will have me. How wicked,
and spightfull a collection then this of Father Parsons is, Judge you.

All that is said to this purpose in that Treatise, is this, in the 37. page.
Secondly, we do acknowledge by our learning, (secluding all Machiauilian
Maxims) that Ecclesiastical persons, by virtue of their calling, are only to
meddle with praying, preaching, and administering the Sacraments, and such other
like spiritual functions, and not to study how to murder Princes, nor to
licitate kingdoms, nor to intrude themselves into matters of state,
successions, and invasions, as Friar George did in Pannonia, to the utter ruin
of that beautiful Realm. Let any man of reason say, whether this be not a
most Catholic and true discourse, or whether out of this, any such irreligious
paradox (as fa: Parsons affirms) may justly be deduced. And note here by the
way, that all this speech is of inferior Ecclesiastical persons, not of the
Pope, for that is afterward touched precisely by it self.

Note also that it is said, that Ecclesiastical persons, by virtue of their
calling, that is, as they are persons spiritual, are only to meddle with
praying, preaching, and administering of the Sacraments. etc. Which is so true a
Position, and Catholic, as no Catholic dare to deny it, the institution
thereof from Christ himself being to no other end. Yet you must understand,
that many times ecclesiastical vocation, is also joined with temporal
jurisdiction, as now in the Popedom, and in diverse Bishoprics in Germany,
and some here in England, if I be not deceived. We do not deny, but such
ecclesiastical persons as they, being also temporal Princes, may execute
temporal laws, and punish etiam quo ad vitam, et necem, their subjects, and
those that live under their government: but as he is a Bishop or spiritual
person, he cannot muster soldiers, bear arms, or march against his enemies
in the field. But you perhaps will say then, that an Ecclesiastical person may
not defend his right by force, when otherwise he cannot, and by that means he
shall be subject to all incursions of thieues, murderers, and other barbarous
and wicked people. To this I answer, that as he is a man, and therewith
enjoying all the privileges of the law of nature, he may defend himself in
such cases, not defensorie only, but also offensive, not only by bare
resisting, but even by striking, wounding, slaying, etc. And hereupon he may
take arms in his own, or countries defense: (such I mean as in their
precincts have absolute authority) but this is not as he is an ecclesiastical
person, but as he is a civil Magistrate, and enjoys the freedom of the law
of nature, which he loses not by being ecclesiastical, seculer, or
religious. And upon these grounds oftentimes have Religious men defended their
houses, and Monasteries with arms, and justly.

But that ecclesiastical persons, as they are ecclesiastical, should go
about to reduce either Pagans, Turks, or heretics by force, and dint of
sword, by poisoning, or murdering of Princes, by soliciting rebellions, or
invasions, to the destruction of their Prince or country* leaving thereby the
ordinary means of preaching, and teaching, with sufferings, and
bloodsheddings commanded by Christ, and by himself, and his disciples, and
all former Christians practiced, is scandalous, not religious, Pagan like, and
not Christian like. Could not Christ (think you) have enforced the Jews to
the Gospel, having so many legions of Angels at his command? Were not the
Jews as much bound to harken unto him, and follow his doctrine, as the
Protestants, or any other can be to us? Or can we think that Christ did not
command the best way, when he said unto his disciples, euntes in mundum
vniuersum praedicate euangelium omni creaturae: qui crediderit, et baptizatus
fuerit, saluus erit, qui vero non crediderit, condemnabitur? Did he not hereby
leave it to the liberty, and freedom of the hearers, whether they would
believe, or not? Or did he command the^ to murder or take weapons against
such, as would not believe them? or could he not have subdued the whole world
by force of arms, unto the Gospel, if he would? If then Christ gave these
directions, why should we seek new stratagems for conuersions of countries?
But you will say unto me, that our Protestants have been of the Church, that
they are Christians, and by their baptism borne true subjects unto Christ's
church, and afterward are revolted from their due obedience, which they owe
unto her: wherefore, they may be constrained unto their obedience again as
well, as any natural subject rebelling from his natural Prince unto his
temporal obedience. To this I answer, first, that the case is not all one:
for why, the obedience of a subject to his temporal Prince, consists only
in the will, which is in every man's power within himself, but the obedience
of every Christian catho: to Gods church, consists as well in the
understanding as the will, and chiefly in the understanding, which ought to
direct the will.

Now I think all men know, that the understanding of a man cannot be forced by
any, to this, or that; but as it is informed and convinced by reason. For who
is he that can enforce his understanding to judge it to be midnight, and
extreme darkness, when the Sun shines at noone-time of the day? Whereupon it
follows, that there is more reason, and less difficulty for a temporal
Prince to enforce his subjects to temporal obedience, then for the Church by
temporal force to constrain Countries and kingdoms unto the faith. But you
will again object, that by the same reason, a Catho: Prince, or Bishop in his
own absolute dominion, or sovereignty, may not, by the force of the laws of
the Church, or state, enforce any subject to live a Cath: but he may follow
what religion he list; which would breed both confusion in the Church, and
commonwealth quickly. To this I say, that there are two things to be
considered in this case; the first is his religion, the second is his example,
whereby there arises not only danger, and hurt unto the Church, and sound
members thereof, but also damage unto the settled Commonwealth, and prejudice
unto the Prince in his quiet estate, in that by one, or two particular peevish
men's example, division and strife may arise in his Commonwealth, to the ruin
or subversion thereof by inward mutinies, and dissension, which ordinarily
follows novelties, and innouations. For the first part, which is his
difformity in faith and religion, the Clergy, or Bishop, has to look unto
it, and reform it if he can; if he cannot, but finds him obstinate in his
opinions, he executes the spiritual law upon him, by the sword of
excommunication, whereby he is spiritually slain and cut off from Christ's
flock. Which if he still continue, then does the Church judge him not only
withered in the branch, but also dead in the root, and therefore as a dead
tree, delivers him up unto the seculer power, to execute law and justice
upon him. Where note, that the Church takes not away his life, but
contrariwise, delivering him up unto the seculer power, entreats for him: and
then does the Prince, or seculer Magistrate, execute the sentence of death
upon him, as a person dangerous to the state of his Realm, and his other good
and loyal subjects for the reasons aboue-said.

These kind of proceedings in Gods church, show how far she has ever been
from so violent courses, as to plant religion, and faith, by blood; and that
unto a Clergy person, as he is a Clergy person, the power of life and death
belongs not; neither do such proceedings in deed imitate the clemency of
Christ, whom the Church and Clergy (framed unto him) should imitate. Neither
did the Bishops in the primitive church, put to death such heretics, as fell
from their faith, and taught false doctrine, (as they might have done many
times, no doubt, especially if private murmurings in such cases had been
tolerable.)

S. Bernard, a religious man, dealing with S. William, Duke of Aquitaine, (a
great persecuter of gods people at that time, did not seek to poison, or
murder him secretly, to rid the world of him, and yet he had him privately for
some time together in his Monastery, where he might with great facility have
done it: neither did he seek to suggest practices against him in his own
country, or invasions from the King of France, or other Princes adjoining, but
to win him by wholesome instructions, spiritual conferences, and the like.
Neither did the Pope at that time seek his subversion, but his reformation,
sending perswasiue messages unto him to desist, yea and embassages by the said
holy Saint Bernard, to move him to better courses: and by these kind and
wholesome means praying continually for his conversion with patience, and
expectance, they won him from a persecuter, and a very wicked man, to become
the rarest penitent, and strangest pattern of austerity in the world. Whereby
of a vessel of ignominy and reproach, he became a vessel of glory, and of a
bad man, a Saint. Why should we not have dealt so with our prince, and state,
by prayers and supplications, if they had been never such cruel persecuters,
which (all occasions that have been given them being well considered) we
cannot justly affirm, who knows whether God by such prayers, and means,
would not have converted their hearts to other courses, since the hearts of Kings
are in the hands of God.

But says Fa: Parsons, this paradox tastes of Lutheranisme and Anabaptisme.
We answer, that by Gods grace, we are as far off from either Luthers, or the
Anabaptists doctrine, as he, or any of his Society. Neither do we either
deny external force, or civil Magistrate, or dispute (as Martin Luther is
said to have done) to prove that it is not lawful to wage war against the
Turk. We have not in all this discourse once gone about to affirm, much less
to prove, that any one king may not upon just causes, make war against
another. Nay, we did never say, that cause might not be given of such just
war even in some case of religion: but leave that as a matter not pertinent
to be handled of us at this time. This only we have said, and do say, that
religious men or priests, have not to do with kingdoms, and those of our own
Nation, which have dealt in such affairs against their prince, and country* we
do therein condemn their actions, and disclaim from them, as undutiful and
unpleasant to all true English natures. And we wish also with all our hearts,
that no Pope, or other Clergy person, had ever meddled therein to exasperate
our prince and state against us at home. Yet if we had generally kept our
fingers from such matters, howsoever they had been attempted by forrainers, we
are persuaded, that the wisdom of our prince, and state, would not have
imputed their actions unto us, in whom we could not have had so much interest,
as to infringe either their wills or endeavors. But it being otherwise too
evident, that some have intermedled in such matters (though sore against our
wills) we can do no less, but acknowledge it to be a fault, and worthy of
punishment: humbly prostrating our petitions at the feet of her Majesty, that
it will please her to make distinction of the innocent, and such as never have
offended in this kind, from those, that have entangled themselves in such
monstrous, and unnatural attempts; that poor harmless innocents, and such
as with their souls love her person, and with their blood are ready to defend
her estate, and their country, (as I am persuaded all the Catholics in
England are, which remain untainted with Iesuitisme) may not perish for the
offenses of others.

Another falsehood of this Fa: is in relating another place in the 38 page of
the aforesaid Treatise of Important considerations, which he thus reports,
viz. The word of the spirit, and not the sword of the flesh, or any arm of
man, is that which gives life, and beauty to the Cath: Church, and that the
promise made to Saint Peter, is a sure, and sufficient ground to defend
Catholic religion without arms. Thus he relates our words, and then
exclaimeth against the paradox forsooth. How sincerely and truly he sets our
words down, you shall see, and thereby judge of his honesty. Our words are no
other then these.

The Catholic faith, for her stabilitie and continuance, has no need of
treachery, or rebellion. The promise made to S. Peter is her sure ground, and
is more dishonored with treasons, and wicked policies of carnal men, then any
way furthered or advanced. The word of the spirit, and not the sword of the
flesh, or any arm of man is that, which gives life or beauty to the Cath:
Church. Confer I beseech you, this speech delivered as it was by us, and as Fa:
Parsons relates it, and see whether he has played the part of a faithful and
honest relator. First therefore before we enter into his false dealings herein,
it is most evident in the judgment of wise men, that arms, and weapons never
beautify Gods Church, or the Catholic faith, howsoever they may be necessary
or convenient, sometimes to defend the same from incursions of adversaries, or
oppressions of Infidels, Turks, or Heretics, as in some sort is before
expressed. For all beauty of the Catho: Church, consists in unity, and
consent of doctrine, true, and reverend administration of Sacraments, true, and
sincere preaching of Gods word, holy observations of the rights, and ceremonies
thereof, and the like. In these consist the beauty of the Catho: Church, and
Religion, and not in any arm of man, or sword of flesh, as all men I think
will confess. But see now his fidelity. In the place of this sentence, set:
the promise made to S. Peter, is her sure ground, and is more dishonored with
treasons, etc. He puts down these words: The promise made to S. Peter, is a
sure, and sufficient ground to defend Catho: Religion without arms. Who would
think a religious man would deal so falsely in relating one poor sentence?
verily if he were not a Jesuit, I would think it impossible. What
vnco^scionable dealing is it in him to add unto our words (sufficient) thereby
to make appearance, as though we excluded all means else of preservation of
Gods Church, but only relying upon that promise to S. Peter, without any other
endeavors? Would he have the world to think us so simple, as that we do not
know, that God uses secondarie means, and men's particular endeavors, both
for the advancement of his Church, as also the continuance thereof, as well as
he did for the Sinagogue of the Jews? Or will he make it a necessary
consequent, because we exclude treasons, and wicked policies of carnal men:
therefore we exclude all honest, just, and lawful means of defending, or
propagating of Gods cause? How does this follow, unless there be no other
means, but by treasons, and wicked policies, which none but wicked persons
will affirm, and such as will make treasons, and wicked policies acceptable
sacrifices unto Christ? as though God delighted in wickedness, or had need of
such means, to defend what he has erected in manu forti, et brachio excelso:
No, no; we say further, to confirm our former proposition, that although God
does use second causes in diverse his works, and the help, or concurrence of
man in the aduauncing of his Church, yet is his promise made to S. Peter so
sure a ground, that if it were possible, that all men's endeavors should
surcease, yet should not his Church fail. Ipse enim dixit, for he has said,
it shall not fail, nor hell gates prevail against it. And further we affirm
to strengthen, and stablish the second part, that treasons, and wicked policies
of men, are so far from aduauncing Gods cause, that both he, and his cause
are much disgraced: he dishonored, and his cause much hindered thereby. Now
let Fa: Parsons prefer these propositions to the Inquisition, and we will be
defendants, and yet in all things submit our selves, actions, and words, unto
the judgments of Christ's spouse, as willingly, and readily as any Jesuit, or
Christian else (by Gods grace) in the world.

Furthermore, also he foysteth these words in the tail of our sentence, (to
defend Catho: Religion without arms) which are his own additions, and no
words of ours. These unfaithful dealings cannot hold out: God will not be
mocked with his iuglings, and shiftings; truth will be seen do, what Fa:
Parsons can do, with all his cunning shifts. To conclude therefore upon the
ground laid, we say again, and with as great confidence affirm as before;
that all arguments brought to the contrary of this we have said, whether by the
Jesuits, or any other disloyal subject, they be mere untrue Sophistications,
and therefore not to be believed. And as for the labor which Fa: Parsons has
bestowed, in citing of authors, he has done, but as Ma: Lyster did in his
Libell of schism, labor about a matter not in controversy, always flying
the true point of difference betwixt us. For in all the work of Important
considerations, the Popes indirect authority in temporalibus is not called in
question, nor any one word spoken thereof; neither is the power of deposing
Princes examined or meddled with-all, only therein we complain of treasonable
practices, and attempts against our Prince, and state, by some of her disloyal
subjects, and of false subordinations, and informations to his Holiness; whereby
some Popes have been drawn to consent, and enter into such inconvenient
courses. And what we speak of resisting the Pope, is not in respect of his
ecclesiastical authority (whereof we only speak,) but of hostile invasion,
against which to defend our selves, and Country, we are taught by the very law
of nature, without respect of person, or intention of the Inuader, as I shall
show manifestly in the answer to that point objected. By this you may see,
whether the reasons, and authorities alleged by Fa: Parsons, be not
sophistications, and false arguments (as he urges them, and draws
conclusions from them,) in that he proceeds upon a false ground, and makes
thereupon untrue illations. Because forsooth the Pope has indirectam
potestatem etiam in temporalibus (according to the common opinion,) that is,
such power as is necessary for the reformation of the subjects of Christ's
Church; therefore if he go about to transfer gentem in gentem, (which is
only a power belonging unto almighty God) or to invade with weapons in hostile
manner, he is not to be resisted. This is the conclusion he would, and must
infer upon the reasons, and authorities alleged by him; or else he proves
nothing against us. Which conclusion how false, and absurd it is, both against
the law of Nature, and common practice of the world, I leave every man of wit,
and wisdom to judge.

Now whereas in the 4. point, he urges against us these words, that if the
Pope should come in person with an Army, where we are, under pretense to
establish catholic Religion by force: we would oppose our selves against him,
and spend the best blood in our bodies in that quarrel, etc. and terms it a
brave, and resolute protestation against the Pope. This fellow was ashamed to
relate, what we had spoken concerning our obedience, and love to the Sea
Apostolic immediately before, which was, that if either his Holiness should come
in person, or send some Damianus or Augustine, etc. we would lie at his, or
their feet* and defend with them the Catholic faith by sacred Scripture, and
authority of the Church, though it cost us our lives. This saying (which cannot
but show our sincerity toward Gods Church, and Vicar general to all
charitable men) this good Fa: left out of purpose, snatching only at our
heels like a Cur, and taking the ends of speeches to comment upon at his
pleasure.

But to show you that Fa: Parsons cunning wit cannot infringe our protestation
(as he terms it) of resisting the Pope, if he come with Arms to invade,
though with pretense of Religion; you shall understand first, that (as we have
often said) every man is bound by the law of Nature, to defend his life, his
Country, and freedom of both. Upon which irrefragable ground, I do infer
this sequel: that if any man in the world, under what pretense so ever, do
enter the bounds of my Country, with fire, and sword in hostile manner, (by
which of necessity, spoil of my Country, subversion of the state, oppression
of Innocents, loss of my life, or friends will ensue) I am not only
patronized therein to defend my self, friends, and Country, opposing my self
against such evils, but also am bound thereto. Neither therein can I justly be
said to resist, or impugn the Catho: Religion, or defend heresy, in that I
only stand directly for that, which the law of nature binds me unto. And if
any hinderance thereby of Cath: Religion should follow, it were not to be
imputed unto me, not intending any such impeachment, or damage to Gods Church,
nor doing any act, which of it self tends to any such end.

Secondly, it is well known unto me, that Christ has left other means, by
preaching, teaching, and good example of life, for the conversion of Infidels,
Heretics, or sinners, and to me it is not known, that Christ's will is, that
my Country shall be converted by the sword, and not by his word, and such
other holy means: Yea, it rather appears unto me, that our relapsed Country
is to be converted by the way, and means that Christ himself, and his
Apostles used, and not by such bloody, and desperate courses. Therefore I may,
and am bound, rather to cleave unto that mean, then to any other extreme, or
unnatural enterprises. Thirdly, we see by practice, that GOD has ever
disfauoured such attempts, to the admirable preservation both of her Majesty,
and our Country, which may give us just cause to think, that God is not pleased
with such violent courses.

Fourthly, whatsoever cause may be in a forrainer, or in the Pope himself to
impugn, or invade our country, which may make his quarrel just, and lawful
on his part, yet am not I to take notice thereof. Yea, though the cause were
evidently just in my knowledge, and conscience, yet I am not bound to leave my
country, and assist him. For the common good of my country, and weal thereof,
is to be preferred before the particular right of any person whatsoever. And
hereupon it falls out, that many times the inuader or oppugner, has just
cause to invade with arms, and therein does no injustice; and yet for all
that, on the contrary side, the defendants may justly by force of arms keep,
and defend themselves, and country, from such hostile incursions, their
liberties and country being more dear unto them, then the righting of any
particular parson.

For if a private person, possessing goods or lands in controversy, be not
bound in conscience to forsake them, and deliver them up unto the owners (who
by sentence of law has recovered them) until such time as by execution of the
civil Magistrates or sherieffe, the possession thereof be given from him, what
reason is there that a whole country, wherein always are many innocents, not
guilty of any just cause of such oppressions, should yield up their rights, and
become slaves and vassalles to forrainers, loosing the rights and privileges
of their country?

But you will say unto me, that neither the Pope is a forrayner in respect of
his authority, and dominion, extending over the whole world, neither is this
cause, being Catholic religion, his particular right, but the right, which
ought to be in every creature. To the first I answer, that notwithstanding
that the Pope, according to his spiritual authority, might be said to be no
forrainer, yet if he come as an Inuader, under what pretense soever, he may be
said to us a forrayner, in that his power consists of forrainers, and cruel
soldiers, by whose villainy, many miseries and oppressions, were sure to light
upon innocents, and utter spoil upon our whole country. Neither were I bound
to believe the Pope, though he should affirm the contrary; because the wills
of soldiers, (by who^ such villainies and oppressions would be committed) could
not be in his power. And therefore I say, that if the Pope could bring Christ
with him in person, or an army of Angels, whereby we might be assured, that
reformation should follow without oppressions, or extreme miseries and
calamities: then we might take part with him: but if he come with an army of
men, (and such men as soldiers are, whom all villainies follow) he must not
blame us, if to avoid such evils, we stick to the law of nature, and defend
our selves, our Prince, and country. And hereupon it is, that we say we be
persuaded, that priests of what order soever, ought not by force of arms, to
plant or water the Catholic faith, but in spiritu lenitatis, et mansuetudinis,
to propagate and defend it: considering the inconveniences, which follow arms,
and invasions, and the little fruit, that comes thereof, or the small number
of Catholics that arise thereby, so little good example of virtue being given
by soldiers, especially Spaniards. Yet by the way I may not omit to note
again Father Pars: his perfidious dealing, in displacing of the word defend,
saying, that no priests ought to plant, water, or defend, which follows not
in our sentence. For a man may by arms sometimes defend a thing got, which by
arms he could not justly get.

As for example, Munks or religious men, may not get themselves Monasteries or
lands by force of arms, but having justly got them otherwise, and having an
absolute authority within their precincts, they may by force keep them from
such forrainers, as unjustly invade the^, if otherwise they cannot. So may and
ought religious men, and priests, to defend catholic countries from the
incursions of the Turk, Infidels, or heretics, as often times they have done.
But it follows not therefore, that they may go into the countries of Infidels
in hostile manner with arms, only to plant the catholic faith by force. But
this is after the old fashion of Fa: Parsons just dealings.

I could here urge him with an objection, which would please him but a little;
to wit, that if every man be bound to assist the Pope, inuading as he would
have him, it is for that the cause he pretends is just. And then do I say
secundum magis, et minus, that not only the Pope, but every Prince, or other
person, coming with force of Arms into any Country is to be received, and
assisted by the inhabitants, and subjects of the Country, if his cause be
known to be just under pain of deadly sin. Which if it be true, why then
did not his great Majesty of Spain, in Paul the fourths time, restore Naples
unto the sea of Rome, when as Caraff invaded the same with force of arms? The
world will say, and the Pope himself will affirm, that he has more right
thereto, then the Spaniard: how chanced it then that he kept it by force from
the Pope, and still does? See what confusion would follow Fa: Parsons doctrine.

But he will say, that religion is not only a matter of justice, but also of
necessity, binding all men thereunto. To this I answer, that though it be a
thing of necessity, yet is not this necessity of force, or compulsion, but upon
election, as Christ left it: and every man has in his free will, whether he
will accept of Gods grace offered, or no. Neither can any law, or necessity in
the world, contradict or impeach the law of nature, borne with man, and always
remaining in him.

To the 5. point objected by Fa: Parsons, we have said sufficient already, for
our honest and lawful excuse, in blaming or condemning of some actions, done
by worthy men, not thereby defaming, or condemning such persons, but such acts,
as errors, in these worthy persons. Which is not (as he falsely affirms) to
cast any fault upon any worthy person or Martyr, or to defame them in any sort:
since the facts imputed unto them, were too too well known unto the state, and
too public unto the world. Whereby we were but constrained to purge our
selves, as guiltless of any such matter; rather choosing that the fault that
was, should fall upon particular men, dealers therein, and so known to be to
the world, then upon the whole company of innocent priests, and Cath: which
was (I think) but according to the rules both of justice and charity.

And whereas it is said, that if some of us had been of the counsel, and
knowing as much as we do know, we should have given our co^sents to straight
laws, for the suppressing, and preventing of such wicked designements; you
must understand, that this is delivered but as the particular speech of some
few, and not of all in general (as Fa: Parsons falsely sets down.) Neither
did we say, that we would have given our consents to that, which has been
done against Catho: as he maliciously peruerteth our words, but only to some
straight laws, for the suppressing and preventing of such wicked designments.
Which I think any good Commonwealths man in the world, of what religion
soever, would have done, and could have done no less, then have yielded, and
given consent to make some straight laws for preventing the ruin, and
subversion of his prince and country, unless he had been perfidious unto his
prince, and traiterous to his country.

But by your leave Fa: Parsons, these laws should have have been made to have
brideled such good fellows, as your self, and others, that have dealt so
perfidiously with their prince and country, and not generally, against all
priests and Catholics. And we persuade our selves, they had not been made so
general, if her Majesty, and the state, had seen into the roots of such
proceedings, and known that they had grown only from some few particular
persons, such as your self, and not from the body or most part of priests, and
Catholics. Which the state could not see into and discern from the beginning,
being ignorant of the distinction which ought to be made between us and your
fellows: and therefore is not so much to be cried out against, and defamed for
tyranny (this ignorance considered) as by you her highness, her laws, and
government have been traduced: making your selves thereby, and by others, the
wicked enterprises, the principal, and chief cause of all such straight, and
bloody laws. But rather is her Majesty, and the state to be excused, and
implored for more pity and compassion toward us for the time to com: since
they now see farther into the true roots, springs, and causes, from whence,
and from whom such attempts have come.

Neither is Fa: Parsons recapitulation of some laws made, and some executed
before their coming into England, a sufficient excuse; because it is well
known that her Majesty, and the state, was diverse times (as by the Important
considerations you may see) irritated by sundry undutiful attempts of her
subjects, and forrainers together, before she made any bloody law at all. And
there are many pregnant presumptions, that the Jesuits fingers were meddling in
some, or most of them. For there be Priests, who have heard Fa: Parsons (when
they were Scholars in Rome) make set Lectures for a whole Lent, (as I remember)
of all matters, which had happened from her Majesty's beginning of her reign:
In the discourse whereof he was so ready, and could descend so far into
particular plots, and intentions of plots, which never came to pass, and were
unknown to her Majesty, and the state, (as in the practice concerning the
Earl of Northumberland, and the like) that you would swear, he or his, had
been in the bosom of every such plot, and devise.

To the sixth, and last point brought in preposterously, as he commonly uses to
do, taking his bits by snatches here and there to make up his gallymaufrey,
it deserves no other answer, then has already been given, it being no
other, but a fond exaggerating of his old common points, with exclamation, and
bitter words; without reason, or proof of any one absurdity, or unjust untruth
delivered by us. Which argues his spirit to be more fraught with spite, then
power, or ability. We will not ask him, which of the seven devils rayleth,
and biteth with so many bitter words, and false calumniation unjustly, and
untruly against us, but heartily pray God to deliver him from all incursions of
the devil, and all Atheism, and Machiauelisme, that he may sincerely see, how
he has offended God by his plots, and practices in abusing his poor afflicted
Church in our Country, and setting dissension, and division in his Clergy, for
the compassing of his policies, and designs, which so long as he, and his shall
practice, we cannot but still entreat Cath: to forbear the sending of their
children unto the schools, where such masters, as Fa: Parsons, and his
associates, shall be teachers, and governors: but rather to send them to other
Universities abroad in other Countries, until God shall provide better for us.
And thus we will end our answer, unto the first Chapter, in which we have
been over long, and tedious, because of the diversity of matters hudled up
therein by Fa: Parsons, after his accustomed manner, desiring the Reader to
bear with us therein, in that we were willing to open some things more
largely, that such as were ignorant, or not so well acquainted with these our
affairs, and the true causes of them, might see the better into the very
grounds of all, which being so largely delivered in this first chapter, we
shall with more facility, and more briefly pass over the rest that follows:
always (as occasion happens) referring you to what is delivered at large in
this first treatise.

An answer to the second Chapter, concerning our pretended passionate spirit,
in the manner of the handling of our former arguments.
FA: Parsons his 2. Chap. contains little in substance, but what has been
said in the former, and is at large by us answered: only he has taken a
little pains, in speaking largely in his own praise, and to the commendation
of some others of his own order; because they want good neighbors to
advance, and extol them; and in gathering together of some choleric words,
here and there delivered, in some of our former books. In which kind of
style, although he, and some of his deserve the garland; yet he omitteth not to
make the best show of advantage thereby, that he can against us, not looking
back into himself, and his own most bitter speeches, no less full of gall,
and choler, and much more untrue. Wherefore to answer that point, without
farther particular repetitions of every word spoken in heat, which yet are but
to be attributed unto the natures of the Writers, or rather in very deed unto
the unjust, unconscionable, and irreligious dealings of Fa: Parsons, and other
his associates, with the Archpriest, against us, whereby the natures of very
good men, sometimes may be stirred up to heat, and choler, (as you may see in
S. Hierom against Ruffinus,) and not to the whole company of our brethren,
though as the proverb is, Loosers should have their words. To answer this, I
say, we will bestow a little pains in collecting this good Fa: patient, and
charitable words, and phrases uttered against us, in this work of
Manifestation, and place them by themselves in the end of this treatise;
desiring his Fatherhoode to set the Hares head against the Goose giblets: and
then considering the innocence, and justice on our parts, and the wrongs, and
oppressions we have received from him, and his: I hope the indifferent Reader
will the rather bear with the excess of choler, uttered by some of our
brethren in zeal of justice; the injuries offered, exceeding far the measure
of heat on our bretherens part. But yet because some things may happily
occur in this Chapter, which the Reader may be desirous to be satisfied in:
we will briefly examine the chiefest points of moment therein, though (believe
me) they be so confusedly hudled together, that the pains are greater to
marshall them into any good order, then to answer them. In the entrance to
this Chap: (after his old accustomed manner) he pours upon us store of
choler, out of his distempered stomach; as, spite, rancour, envy, malice,
desire of revenge, insufficiency in wisdom, learning, and all other virtues,
carried away with fury, passion, and rage of revenge; not caring what, or how,
or of whom they say any thing, so they may utter their gall, and disgorge their
choler, upon them whom they envy, fear, or hate. These are the preparatiues
to his discourse, whereby you may perceive, what cause this man has to
exclaim, or take advantage of the bitter phrases of some of our brethren. But
to leave him in his fumes: in the 20 page, after he had related some speeches,
delivered in the preface to the Relation of Wisbich, against a letter of the
Archpriest, he sets down the Archpriests words therein concerning that
point, and calls it a mild, and an humble kind of writing. Which being
examined in the Hope of peace, and convinced to be full of untruths (and
therefore rather to be termed, a cunning clawing Epistle, and couerture of
falsehood, then mild or humble,) we remit the Reader thither for his further
satisfaction therein. As touching the speech of Fa: Weston delivered to M.
Dolman, which he alleges in the 20 leaf, and of his recollecting himself
with his associates unto prayer, his framing of his countenance to weep, and
of M. Doct: Bauands like show; (which he most highly commends as religious,
and full of piety, and humility, and blames us of contempt, in the relating
thereof, and disliking thereat) you must understand that there is no good
thing, or action in the world, but it may be abused; neither do any men use
more ostentation of devotion, and humility, then hypocrites, and such as seek
most to deceive. Did any man show greater reverence in outward behavior to
Religion, and religious men, then Nicholas Machiauell, as all men report of
him? And yet he was, but an Atheist inwardly. Therefore not the bare actions
of themselves, (which may be indifferent either good or bad,) but the manner,
and intention, with all other necessary circumstances, must be considered. For
if any circumstance be faulty, the action is thereby vitiated, though otherwise
good of it self. Bonum est ex integra causa, malum autem ex quolibet defectu.
If then the intentions, or circumstances of these extrinsecall shows of piety,
or devotion were to evil ends: how can the actions be said to be good, humble,
or religious? Is it Religion or devotion to pray, that a man may meet with
another man's purse by the high way side? Doubtless no, but an abuse of prayer,
and yet prayer is good in it self.

These actions then of Fa: Weston, tending to the oppression, and defaming of
his fellow prisoners (as we have showed manifestly in the former chapter) could
not be termed humble, devout, or religious; but an abuse thereof, and therefore
justly taxed as such, in the relation of those stirs. And as for his fair
show unto Ma: Doleman, that if the rest would be persuaded, he would give over,
and meddle no further, it was but a mere shift, as the event afterward
showed, and as you may see by the former chapter. Besides, Ma. Dolman can well
testify so much, and my self also, who urged this point precisely unto him,
but could draw him to no indifferency. And when I had pressed him earnestly
therewith, he shifted me of unto the rest, whom he knew to be so settled by him
in that course, that it was bootlesse for me, or any other to deal with them
therein.

But I would demand of you Fa: Parsons this one question: If father Weston
were so virtuous, so humble, and so religious, as you would make the world
think him to be, why (I beseech you) did he not humbly imitate the example of
S. Gregory Nazianzen, who being lawfully chosen Bishop of Constantinople,
without either faction, or sedition, yet when he afterward perceived
contention to arise amongst the Bishops about him, (though unjustly) he
voluntarily departed, using this speech of Jonas the Prophet, Si propter me
orta est haec tempestas, proijcite me in mare, rather choosing to prejudice
himself, then that tumult and contention should arise in the Church.

Doubtless, if Fa: Weston had been a man of so rare humility, as here Fa:
Parsons affirms, he would have departed from that faction, how violent soever
they had been, and rather then such scandalous stirrs should have been caused
by such emulation for him, to the infamy of so reverend a place, as Wisbich was
before that time, and the infinite hurt of our poor afflicted Church in
England, he would (I say) have withdrawn himself from them, and chosen
rather to have lived in a hole, then to have referred the matter to his
copartners, sct. if they be pleased, I am content.

If S. Gregory had stood upon such terms, concerning those Bishops, that
took his part, when (I pray you) would there have been an end of those
contentions? No, no, there was no such spirit of humility in Fa: Weston as you
talk of, but contrariwise, too too much desire of rule, and pre-eminence. I
pray God he may prove more humble in all his life to come, then he showed
himself to be, in those garboyles. Touching Ma. Doctor Bauand, I know he will
not deny, but that the second, or third day after his being at Wisbich, he
much disliked the violent proceeding of fa: Westons part, and complained of the
impatience, and importunity of some of them, saying that they were ready to
pull his cloak from his back, because he would not hear their clamors.
Howsoever he grew afterward to favor them, and their proceedings, let him
look to it. It is true, that since that time he has prosecuted some matters,
further then any man in conscience could do, (so has affection blinded, or
ouer-ruled him) as by a letter written by him in the Jesuits behalfes, I have
showed in the first chapter.

Concerning Fa: Garnets politic dealing in those affairs, then, and in diverse
other since, I refer you also to the first chapter of this Reply, to the
Relation it self: and to all those books that have been written of our late
troubles. Wherein if you find not store of policies, and such as (I think) may
beseem a right cunning politician: blame my judgment, as very mean, and
weak. And therefore as in the beginning I said, so say I still, that no wise
man will measure every man by every good action that proceeds from him, or
every good word he utters, but measure his actions and words by their
sequels, and circumstances. Because every defect diminishes the good, and
corrupts the best moral deed of man. Otherwise, we might truly say,
hypocrites were the best men, because commonly they do (at the least
publicly) the most moral good deeds.

We may not omit here the great humility he also notes in this Fa:
Weston, for his promiscuall sitting at the table, sometimes here, sometimes
there, as it pleased him, leaving his proper place, which was beneath Ma.
Doctor Bagshaw* and Ma. Bluet, which in the Relation is justly condemned. For
before this, there was much murmuring amongst his associates, that he was not
preferred unto the highest place, before the foresaid two priests: which
because he could not obtain, he framed that new fashion of sitting, (as
novelties always follow pride) thereby (under a color forsooth of humility)
to take away the note of his minority, to the aforesaid Doct: and M. Bluet. And
let not Fa: Parsons after his accustomed manner, say, that this is a malicious
interpretation of his humble act; for novelties never follow humility, but
pride, and disdain. Neither can he avoid the note of nouelty in this action of
fa: Weston, because religious men use such manner of sitting in their
Monasteries. For to introduce into the secular Clergy, those things which may
be fitly used of Friars, and Monks in their Monasteries, were both a nouelty,
and ridiculous. And so we account of this particular action of promiscuall
taking place at meals, resembling the Puritans consistories, where there must
be no Bishop, nor degree, but a democraticall brotherhood all alike; which the
Church of GOD has ever detested in her Clergy. John as good as Thomas.
But if this humble Father would have showed true, and sincere humility
indeed, he should have betaken himself to his true place (in that he was a
religious man) and have set himself beneth all the priests there at the nether
end of the table. Neither could be in justice challenge any higher place,
being a private religious man in his order, and no prelate, as Father Parsons
would have him to be, because he had been his substitute in England, over the
Jesuits, but never Provincial, though we termed him so, in that he was his
delegate. For his said substitution surceasing, he was but as before, a
private religious man, whereas the other priests were and are vere pastores.
And every man knows, that the place of a pastor is above any private
religious man, though of courtesy sometimes they may, upon opinion of their
sanctity, give such a place unto them.

In the 22. leaf he talks of wonderful folly in us, and passionate
proceeding, in telling you of the greatness of that society through all
Christendom; that many great men, both of the Laity and Clergy were Jesuits,
and Iesuited: and that fa: Parsons was an especial man with the king of
Spain, the Pope, and Cardinals. All which make against us, as he says, and
show fa: Parsons virtues and good parts, and the great reverence, and esteem
of the whole Society. A strange folly sure this is, Cardinal Wolsey was a
great man with King Henry the eight, with the Emperor Charles the fifth, with
the King of France, and other great Princes, and for a time he could do great
matters with them all; ergo, Card: Wolsey was a virtuous and holy man. Stay
there Ma: Parsons, you will not say so. Friar George in Hungary was a great
man with the Emperor sometimes, and with other Princes other times, and ruled
all the country at his pleasure, ergo, a good and virtuous man? It does not
follow. Fa: Parsons is, or has been a great man with the King of Spain,
deceived the Pope, abused Cardinal Caietane, and other princes, and many great
men, have had a better opinion of him then he deserved, whereby he has been
reputed for a more honest man, then he proves; ergo, fa: Parsons is a Friar
George, or Wolsey. Does not this conclusion follow as fitly, as the other?

Have not many times bad and lewd men won great favor and credit both with
Popes and other Princes? What great folly (I pray you) was it to tell you, that
father, Parsons could do much with the Pope, or other great men with his
iugling; or that he was great with the king of Spain, by reason of his
practizing unnaturally against his own Country in his behalf? or what folly
is it to tell you, that his Order is very powerful in all Christendom? Indeed
it is a bugge to many faint-harted Catholics, yea, and to some of our brethren
to: who seeing their greatness, are afraid to encounter with them, though their
cause be never so just. But let them be as great as they can: the greatness of
their order, and power thereof, gains not sanctity to every member. I pray
God that the conceit thereof, make not some of them be bold in going still
forward with their most wicked designements: which howsoever they shall presume
to attempt, they shall (by Gods grace) find such, as both dare, and will, to
their powers, withstand those their endeavors, notwithstanding all their
greatness.

As for the auerring of some great men to have been Jesuits, or Iesuited it is
certain, that many great men have too much favored them, through an opinion
of their sanctity. Whereby some times they have been the easier drawn to
like of their proceedings. But that ever any of us said that Cardinal Allen
was a Jesuit, it is an untruth of a Jesuit: and the same I think of Doctor
Saunders, and Doctor Bristow, though they might be too much affected toward
them, upon such an erroneous opinion. But as for Don Bernardino Mendoza, it is
known, that he was wholly affectionate to the^, and it is but an ordinary course
with the Jesuits, to bind both noble men and women, and others also unto them
by vow, and yet leaving them in the world to be their instruments, of which
kind in both sexes, I could name some in our own Country. And therefore it is
no strange thing to charge the Jesuits to have men in the world abroad that are
theirs, and bound to them in vow, and therefore may be termed Jesuits. For what
does incorporate into a religious body, but the vows thereof, amongst which
obedience, is the chiefest.

Touching the relation of matters objected against our friends in Wisbitch:
there was no more folly therein, then is in clearing any innocents of false
matters objected against them, or for Fa: Parsons to lay down objections,
urged against himself and his friends, and to go about, to answer them. And
as for the disorders objected, if they be not so to the full answered, that
all note of folly thereby is sufficiently taken away, and that with the
discredit of some of his subjects, chief actors in such uncharitable, false,
and unjust accusations; let them urge them a new, and prosecute them, either
iuridice, or by writing, and we will be ready to answer him at every turn, to
his discredit.

In the 23 leaf, he sets down certain propositions, given up unto the
arbitratours in Wisbich, at the first meeting about those stirs; by which
articles (he says) the quiet part meant (as you may see) to have matters
quietly, and secretly decided, and the defects, and disorders, which had been
cause of the separation, to be uttered modestly by common consent, and no man's
fame publicly hurt. This assertion is so false, as Fa: Parsons cannot but know
it to be false. For (as in the former Chap: we have set down, and is declared
in the Relation) before any separation was made by them, they had by letters,
and messages spread abroad into all coasts, infamous slanders against the
united part, and at their very separation, prefixed the cause of their retire
to be for scandalls, and mortal sins. How then was it possible, that matters
could be secretly examined, without hurt of any man's fame, when as they had
defamed them long before, and published the same to the world? And as for the
articles, the very first of them (to omit the rest) contained such a condition,
as might have tied the arbitratours to have stayed 7. years, to hear an end
of their fiddle-faddles, every foot faining new accusations, though nothing to
the purpose, to delay time, and weary the arbitrators. Besides, by the course
of their conditions proposed, they would seem but to have tied themselves to
have been enformers, and not accusers; so that the arbitrators should have
proceeded by way of interrogations, to examine men upon questions without
accusers; which kind of dealing how unjust, and uncharitable it was (being
both against the law of justice, and charity, to urge men against themselves
without accusers) let every man of understanding judge. To prevent these
inconveniences, our friends set down four other articles, which he afterward
mentions. The first is this, viz: we require that satisfaction be made for
the slander, and diffamation sustained by the breach, if sufficient cause
cannot be proved for their so doing. Upon this Fa: Parsons makes a marginall
note of satisfaction desired for things past; and prosecuteth the same
afterward, as if it had been a heinous matter, for Priests being defamed, to
require satisfaction, when the diffamation is past. I would feign know when men
should demand satisfaction, if not when wrongs were already done. I am sure a
man can demand no satisfaction before the wrong be past; for before it be
past, it is no wrong. Whether then in demanding of satisfaction, when no just
cause could be proved against them, they did otherwise then any men in the
world might in conscience, and would do, judge you.

The second article is as follows. We require that every accusation be set
down in writing under the accusers hand, sub poena Talionis, if it be not
proved. This in the margent he calls a threat to all accusers; and in the
same sort also prosecuteth it in his comment. Whereby you may perceive that the
intendment of him, and his fellows, was naught else but to slander, and
defame, and to be bound to no satisfaction, for never so great wrongs offered.
This is, and always has been a familiar course with the Jesuits, they must
be tied to no law of justice: to mention but the law Talionis, which punishes
the accuser, that untruly, and unjustly accuses his brother, as a calumniator,
was pety treason. Deem by this, I beseech you, whether it be probable in your
conceit, that our brethren were guilty of such deformities, and notorious
enormities, as this man affirms; when as the accusers durst not take upon
them the part of accusers, with condition to do the satisfaction, if they were
found to have wronged them by such slanderous accusations. I am sure where
there is any justice in the world used, this condition will not be taken, as a
threat, but as an honest, just, lawful, yea, and necessary condition. Howbeit
forsooth nothing must be just, or lawful, which pleases not a Jesuit.

The third article ensues in these words. We will answer in all things
according to the Canon law, supposing these men to be our lawful Judges. This
condition Fa: Parsons notes in the margent, for a mere evasion, and in the
comment, a tedious progress, by reason of delays, and exceptions, which are
ordinary in the course of the law. Belike this Fa: would have you think, that
because our brethren would tie themselves, and the rest unto iuridicall, and
lawful proceeding, as well in their aunswering to matters objected, as in the
others accusing; therefore they meant to keep terms four times in the year
about them, or have some set Court day, with Crier, and Sumner, once in a
fortnight, or three weeks, or else to what end speaks he of delays, and
exceptions in the course of the Canon law? Or might not our brethren have the
privileges of the Canons, not to answer, but sufficiently accused by
sufficient witness in law, and not by every raggamuffin, suborned perhaps for
the purpose? Or would they have every scullion in a kitchen a sufficient
witness, and his testimony current against a priest? Or would they have the
accusers (as it seems) free to tax them, without bond of satisfaction for
the wrong, if they failed? If this be not his intention; why might not the
Canons have been observed, quoad substantiam at the least, and that speedily
without delays, the arbitrators, and witness, and parties being all present?
But it was not delays they feared, but the law, and justice thereof, which
would have lighted heavy on their backs, if they had proceeded: and therefore
in very deed they and not our friends sought all the delays, and exceptions
they possibly could.

The fourth article which he cauilleth at is this. We will sustain any
censure with this condition, that being censured by these men, we may be
secured thereby from all other censures concerning that matter. In the margent
Fa: Parsons says, this is a confession with a prouiso; and in his Comment he
adds, that it showed their guilty consciences, and how gross disorders they
had committed. A strange sequel this is, that this assecuration desired,
should convince them guilty of all, that was objected. I verily take it in my
understanding, that no men but fools would have done less, to prevent double
payment for one delict, if any should have been proved. In a Community where
many be, who could answer for every one in particular? Therefore least any
petty matter might be proved against any one, having ouer-shot himself at any
time (as in deed there was one, against whom they seemed to except very much
at that time, as a disorderly person) yet afterward returning to their part,
he was a very honest man, though worse then before, although as I am able to
testify upon my oath, when he was with our friends, they never defended his
errors, yea, some of them, the Doctor especially, rated him more for them, then
any in the house else did: for this cause, I say, and in the behalf of this
person, they required security from farther censuring afterward, being once
censured by the arbitrators. And this I think was but a reasonable demand in
the sight of any indifferent man. What needed the other part to have stood
upon this quirk, as the times are now in England, but either to have censured
the delinquent, and secured him, or if they could not have so done, (which was
no difficulty) then to have remitted the censure, as they had pleased, which
would have been sufficient for their purpose? Now what folly there was in the
setting down sincerely of all these things in the Relation of Wisbich stirs,
judge you, or whether indeed it does not evidently note, both fidelity, and
sincerity in the writer of that story, that he would omit no one thing of
moment, whether making for the one side or the other, no shufling, and shifting
off of matters, concerning the truth, and delivering falsehoods, as Fa: Parsons
does. And here by the way, note a little folly in the good Father, that he
would observe these matters as ouer-sights, and advantages for his faction,
which were indeed very real verities, and did lay out apparently the unjust,
and uncharitable proceedings of fa: Weston, and his adherents. For hereby any
man of wit or reason will see plainly, that the foresaid Relation of those
matters is most true, and sincere, and thereby be secured, that he may not
only read the same (which the Jesuits most fear, and give warning of, as most
dangerous) but also rely upon the fidelity and truth thereof.

In the pages following, he gathers together bundels of sharp sentences,
and words used here, and there, as heat moved men's particular passions,
against the Archp: and Jesuits. Which although I wish had been omitted, yet all
things considered, the wrongs that the parties have particulerly received at
their hands for many years together, as well as in general, may somewhat
excuse their choler. But for the further answer to this point, they shall be
paid with their own coin gathered out of this book (omitting the raylings
used by Ma. Lyster in his Libell, and fa: Parsons in his Apology, and else
where) and laid up as in a treasury to be viewed together in the end of this
reply, as before I have promised. Now as touching some of the imputations to
the Archpriest, as that of writing false letters against his conscience, or
knowledge, or both; his Letters to Rome before his institution, do manifest as
much, and it shall be auowed when he pleases. For his forgery about his
authority, term it how you will, Ma: Collington, and Ma: Charnocke, two
reverend priests took him with the manner, and are ready to justify the same.

And concerning that arrogant speech of Fa: Parsons, in the 25. leaf, the
second page, that without the coming in of the Jesuits, the most of us had not
been Catho: much less priests: it sauoureth of too too much pride in
arrogating so much to themselves. For since their coming into England, where
one has been converted from heresy to catholic religion by the Jesuits, I
dare boldly say, above an hundred have been converted by the Priests: yet never
were the priests an hundred for one of them. No, no, the Jesuits scorn to
meddle ordinarily but with great personages, and men and women of wealth, or
great expectation. But the priests (making no distinction of persons) deal
with all sorts, poor as well as rich. Whereby they bring more to Gods church,
one of them, in a year, then any one Jesuit in seven. I know some one priest
that has reduced above an hundred in one year. All the Jesuits in England (I
verily think) never brought in so many in the like space since their first
entrance. See then what a proud and arrogant speech of father Parsons this is.

Believe me, if never Jesuit had entered England, I suppose there had been more
Catholics, then there now are, and with less danger of laws. And as touching
our selves, for the most part of us, as we were catholics before we knew any
of them: so might we have been priests though they had never been borne.
There were priests in England before they came hither, and will be hereafter,
when peradventure there will not be a Jesuit in the world. But we must give
them leave for their time to set out themselves.

In the page 27. he takes occasion to speak of our folly forsooth, in
choosing our means to compass our intentions, and bring our matters to
effect. And first of The hope of peace, he says, that the means were contrary
to the end, as tending rather to war, by laying open many untruths against
our Superior. I verily think, that he understood not the cause of the title
of the book, for if he had, surely he would not so much have mistaken the
matter as he does. It was not intended as a means to procure peace: but rather
to show the iuglings of the Archpriest, and fa: Garnet, the latter writing
letters unto a priest in the Clincke, to deal with Ma. Bluet and Ma. Clarke
there, and Ma. Collington and others abroad to come to a peace, with fair
offers, and intertayning treaty of conditions by two or three several letters:
and in the mean time the Archpriest writing abroad most false, and untrue
things against us, and our books to his assistants: which several proceedings
being so contrary, showed what hope, or expectance we could have of honest
dealing at their hands, or of any true and sincere peace. This then was the
intention of that book, to discover these iuglings, and therefore was it
entitled The hope of peace, to show that there was no real hope of any true
peace to proceed from them. As for the folly committed in the other book to
the Inquisition, once more I would entreat his fatherhood, to refer the
censuring thereof unto his betters, the worthy congregation of the Inquisition,
unto whom it is dedicated and presented. And as for his carping at the
similitude of the man casting out devils in Christ's name, I will let it pass
for him to take his advantage as he list, and make his own exposition. For I
verily think, that every wise man that reads his interpretation thereof,
will discover more folly in him for his applycation, not intended by the Writer
in that sense but only a simili, then in him that first alleged the example.
And for our accepting, or seeking of favor at the hands of Protestants, and
our Governors in temporalities: I think no man can condemn us therein,
unless he will also condemn the practizes of all times of persecution, both
in the time of the law of Moses, and also since Christ.

In the 28. page he cites certain words of the Epistle to the Important
considerations, wherein it is affirmed, that there is no sin arising upon
infirmity, and frailty of man committed by an Apostata, an Infidel, an
Heretic, a Schismatike, an Atheist, cast out of the favor of God, and
accursed out of his Church, but a Cath: may fall into the same, and yet remain
constant in his religion to death. This father Parsons affirms to be a false
assertion. And therein say I, that fa: Parsons manifests more folly, then all
the follies he notes in all our writings, put the^ all together; to say
nothing of his ignorance or simplicity. For it is a matter certain, and de
fide, that a man has free will unto all kind of sins; and it is no less
manifest, that sins of infirmity, and frailty, never cut a man off from Gods
Church. Neither can infidelity, heresy, or schism, be termed sins of
infirmity or frailty, but of malice. For no man can be an Infidel, heretic,
or schismatic, without obstinacy and pertinacity of will, which cannot be
called frailty. Therefore may a Catholic commit of frailty any sin that an
Infidel, heretic, or Schismaticke commits: remaining still a resolute
catholic. And this we see daily by experience, all Catholics being not
saints. See therefore what learning fa: Parsons dropped out here, and what
store of wisdom he showed in contradicting so manifest a truth. Now will I
leave the Reader duly to consider, whether our follies in relating such things
as here, and in the first chapter fa: Parsons obiecteth, being urged thereto
upon necessity, in defense of our innocence, be greater, or his, in cunning
iugling, and shifting, always flying the true and real point of controversy,
and carping at by-matters, and for his advantage reporting our words, and
speeches falsely, and otherwise then they were delivered by us. Whereby we have
been enforced (as you see) to take him tripping, to his eternal disgrace (if
he have any grace left) which we had not done, if his overmuch boldness had
not made him run himself out of breath, forgetting all truth, honesty, and
sincerity.

An answer to the third ^^^pter, concerning our pretended folly, and
presumptuous spirit, in making to ur selves such adversaries as we do.
IN father Parsons handling of this chapter, I cannot but wonder at his
exceeding oversight, in that he admiring so greatly our follies, would so
palpably discover his own. For what man I beseech you of wit or understanding,
would urge the contradicting of our Archpriests unjust oppressions; our
exclaming against the Jesuits uncharitable courses against our selves, and
condemning their unnatural practices against their prince, and state; our
resisting of the King of Spaines attempts against our Country, our displaying
the cruelty of Spanish Soldiers, and the tyranny of their government, to
auert the minds of all natural English men, from all vain, and mad
expectations of any good, by their invasions; as foolish occasions given by us,
to make to our selves enemies of our Archp: the Jesuits, and the King of
Spain? What great potent person is Ma. Blackwell, in the world, that he may
not be contradicted, when he does amiss? Is it lawful to resist, and appeal
from a Bishop, an Archbishop, a Patriarch, and is it not lawful to appeal
from an Archpriest? Must justice be afraid of bugges? If any irreuerent
speeches have been uttered, where they should not have been, we are sorry for
it; and let your payment made to the full, in the same kind cancel ours. But
otherwise for our proceedings against Ma: Blackwell our Archpriest, we do,
and will defend them; and you in all your discourse in his behalf, seem to
draw more from us unto him, then ever was due to any subordinate Superior in
the world, unless you would put infallibility in every governor, without the
which, no such bands can be, but that just exceptions may be taken against
them; and appeals there-vpon framed, and prosecuted, as you see in our case is
admitted. Concerning your potent order; such vizards are for children, and
temporisers, and not for men of our profession: who should in every cause
prefer justice, and right, before potencie, and might. We know many in your
order, to be apt to remember old quarells, and to pay home when advantage, and
time serves, and we look for no other at your hands. But what then? Shall we
therefore desist to prosecute justice, and hinder your exorbitant endeavors?
Shall I hold my tongue, because Fa: Parsons may work me a shrewd turn, if I
come into Spain or Italy? No, no, non confundar pro anima mea, dicere verum; I
will (God willing) utter nothing but truth, and necessary truth, and that shall
out; let Fa: Parsons threat, what he can. And touching the Spaniards, they are
professed enemies to our Prince, and Country, and seek nothing more, then our
subuersions. As they are Cath: in Christian charity we will love them; but as
enemies to our Country, we contemn them, and will with our bloods resist them.
And (as I suppose) we have not only right so to do in respect of our
Countries defense, but also iure gentium, in that they were the first breakers
of the league betwixt us, and them, as by their attempt in Ireland, in the
year 1579* may appear; to omit the plot of Robert Rodulphi, some years
before. But in this Fa: Parsons plainly discovers his love, and affection
toward his Country, and what a treacherous mind he carries toward his true,
and natural Prince: in that he seeks to draw her natural subjects, to keep
amity, and bear affection toward her professed adversary, and the only
enemy of our Country: Howsoever false hearted he be, yet was it a point of
exceeding great folly for him, so openly to discover the same, that now no man
of wit or discretion, and love to his Prince, and Country (which every natural
borne English, is bound to have) can judge other of him, then as a professed
enemy unto them both.

And touching the Colleges, and Pensions that are maintained, and given by the
Spaniard (which he so often inculcateth) we no whit thank him for them, as
things are handled, and occasions thereby ministered of our greater persecution
at home, by reason of Fa: Parsons treacherous practices, thereby to promote the
Spaniards title for our Country; and his hateful stratagems with such
scholars, as are there brought up: enforcing them to subscribe to blanks, and
by public Orations, to fortify the said wrested title of the Infanta: which
courses cannot, but repay us with double injuries, and wrongs, for the benefits
received. If they had been sincerely given us for Gods cause, without any such
unjust conditions; we should have cause to thank him, and ever pray for his
regal prosperity. But being otherwise (as we have said) we cannot think it a
point of ingratitude, not to respect his liberality therein. And whereas Fa:
Parsons in the 31 page, labors to persuade us, that the King of Spaines
intentions against our Country, were principally for the advancement of Cath:
Religion; and that he never meant, or pretended in his life any temporal
interest for himself, to the crown of England: he both iugleth with us, and
also speaks against his own knowledge, and conscience. First, he iugleth by
a notable equivocation, in that he says, he never pretended interest for
himself, to the crown of England, because forsooth he meant it for his
daughter the Infanta; a pretty shift to play bo-peepe with. I pray you what ease
should have come more to us* by pretending it for his daughter, then if he had
pretended it for himself? And as touching his intention principally (as you
say) for Religion: did not you Fa: Parsons affirm to diverse Scholars in
Spain, (who are yet ready to justify the same against you) that if the Duke
de Medina had prevailed in 88. he had made no regard of Cath: and that the
state of our Country was not known unto the Spaniards, before you came to
Spain, and made them therewith acquainted: and that it was Gods doing to
prevent that attempt, for our Countries good? Have not you delivered the like
speeches to the same effect since to diverse Scholars in Rome? Did not Fa:
Southwell coming over to Wisbich, use the like speeches there of that attempt?
Have not our Scholars in Spain diverse times heard the religious Preachers in
open pulpit condemn their intentions, as not principally for Gods cause, but
for ambition, and the like. How can you then assure us of his principal
intention for Religion? Have not you in the hearing of diverse Scholars used
these speeches, in talking of the Spaniards attempts against our Country, viz:
It is no matter, let them alone, when they have once subdued our Country, and
settled the same, we will quickly thrust them out again. A pretty persuasion to
children; but sottish, and ridiculous in the ears of wise men. Yet did it show
your great regard either to one thing or other, so you might draw all to your
desire. You have certainly a very factious brain: and so that you may set men
together by the ears, you care not. But to leave these Spanish intentions, let
us proceed with you to other matters.

From the Archpriest, Jesuits, and king of Spain, he comes unto the Popes,
and fourthly he reckons that we should have abused his holiness that now
reigns, whom we have made (as he says) our adversary. And why forsooth?
Because we did not admit the Archpriest at his first institution by the Card:
protectors letters: and that we affirmed, that a Breve might be procured out of
some office, without his holiness knowledge: and that we said our two
messengers, Ma. Doctor Bishop, and Ma. Charnocke, were ill handled by Fa:
Parsons procurement in Rome: and that his holiness, being moved by the French
Ambassador, or Agent, was once determined to hear our said two Agents, but
afterward dissuaded by the Spanish Ambassador, and other means wrought by
fa: Parsons. These forsooth are the great matters that have made his holiness
our adversary: which things because they are childish objections, and mere
Pageants of folly in fa: Parsons, scanned and answered, and justified so often in
our several writings, I will omit to be wrapped up amongst other his follies.

But concerning the other three Popes, viz. Pius Quintus, Gregory the 13. and
Sixtus quintus, whose actions against our Country, by the inducements
principally of the Jesuits, and such like, we both dislike, and wish never had
been: I see no how he can draw us to any inconvenience in the world, unless
it be unlawful to dislike any particular action done by any Pope. For
otherwise I am sure, that by those actions came no good, but much hurt: and I
assure my self, that if the aforesaid Popes had foreseen the inconveniences,
that have ensued such actions, they would never have been drawn thereto. But
they were deceived and seduced by diverse, Stukeley, the Jesuits, and the
Spaniard, who should have been named first, as being the first and the last,
in plotting of all mischiefs against our country. Neither is it strange to
have Popes drawn to inconvenient courses by the advice and counsel of others.
For in these matters they are but as other princes, depending upon their
counsel and advise which may err: as in the attempt of Paul the 4. against
Naples. But it may be lawful for the Jesuits to tax Popes actions in higher
points a great deal, without danger, and yet we may not say this, or that
particular fact in a Pope, had been better omitted.

What folly, if not insolency, is this? Did not the Jesuits generally condemn
Sixtus quintus, and publicly one of them preach against him in Spain,
because he would have changed their name to Ignatians, after the manner of
other religious orders, taking their name of their first founder: and have
brought them to the Quire. And for his dealing in the behalf of the King of
France that now is; did they not say that his holiness, Clement the eight erred
in absoluing the said King of France, being therein deceived by his Divines?
These are matters of a little more consequence, then our dislikes of particular
actions against our country, or resisting a Cardinals Letter. Yet ours argues
great folly, and must needs procure the Popes to be our enemies: and theirs
great wisdom, meriting much at the Popes hands for their good service done
therein. What is this but to arrogate infallibility to their proceedings, and
to draw all states, Popes, and Princes, both to be directed and ruled by them?
But by the way, I may not omit his cunning leaving out of half a sentence in
the 52. Imp. P: 40.
page, where relating our words out of the Important considerations, which are
these; If the Pope had never been urged by them to have thrust the King of
Spain into that barbarous action against our Realm: he leaves out the first
half, and cites them thus: If the Pope had not thrust the king of Spain,
etc. which makes the sentence to sound more odious against the Pope, as
proceeding of his own proper motion, and desire of our Countries overthrow,
where by our words we show him to have been induced, and urged thereto by
others, as indeed he was: but Fa: Parsons will never leave his old tricks of
iugling.

From these higher powers of Popes, by one step up, and another down, he
comes unto the greater part in Wisbich, which (he says) we make our enemies,
and he notes 30. well near of them, and but seven or eight of ours: whereas
when these contentions began in Wisbich, and during their most aboade there,
the number was not of such inequallity, as he tells you there; being 13. on
the united part, and 19. on the other, and no more. How they may be increased,
or diminished, since the end of those stirs, by new missions from other
prisons, imports little to the purpose. Yet we assure our selves, and know it
to be true, that necessity forces some to hang on their sleeves there, least
otherwise they should starve in prison, by the uncharitable subtraction of
exhibition, caused by the Jesuits, as all men know.

But to come nearer to the purpose: Be the number more, or less, what folly, I
pray you, is it in prosecuting of a just cause, to make a few priests in prison
our adversaries? Indeed if the cause were evil, I would hold with Fa:
Parsons, that we ought to have respected the gravity, and merits of so many
Confessors in prison, together with the injustice of the cause by us taken in
hand, but seeing our cause is just, and most just (as in the chiefest point of
the Archpriest, and matter of schism already is evident, and in the rest (I
doubt not) will prove in the end) what ouer-sight was it by such honest, and
lawful means, to procure their enmity, if they will thereby make themselves
unjustly our enemies, or adversaries. Marie says Fa: Parsons, because theirs
being the greater part in that house, every man of judgment considering the
odds, and differences of these two parts, to wit, the number, and quality of
each side, will easily incline to give sentence against them. To this we say,
that every man that takes father Parsons courses, and regards multitude, and
strength more then equity and justice, will easily condemn indeed the lesser
part: but every wise, and honest man, will look into the cause, and not to
the number, or outward fair show of the persons, which often deceaueth the
vulger sort, but never any discreet indifferent person, not carried away with
partiality.

And as for the co^mendations of fa: Weston, they had been better out of
another man's mouth then fa: Parsons, and we have sufficiently spoken thereof
in the first chapter. But touching Ma. Pond, we can better commend his
constancy in religion, and durance, then his discretion in his particular
actions; which we will omit, not indeed intending the disgrace of any, rather
attributing such things to a defect in nature, then otherwise: though I must
needs tell Ma: Parsons, that he tastes too too much of spite and malice,
in disgracing ^oure reverend and worthy men our friends; to wit, first Ma:
Doctor Bagshaw, whom in disdain he calls a Doctor of his own procuring,
without license of his Superior. Whereas all men know there is no other
license required in taking degree in schools, but sufficiency in the party
proceeding, which (all the world knows) was more in him, then any Jesuit that
ever came into England, and approbation of the University, where he takes
degree, which he had with great applause. See whether this sauoured not of
malice against the Doctor in particular, making him further the Author of all
contention, because he opposed himself to their ambitious desires; and
charging him with expulsion out of the Roman College, which is most false,
and that he was of an unquiet spirit there. All these objections proceed of an
old grudge, without any jot of verity.

The Rector Alphonso Agazara, that then ruled the College, betwixt whom and
the scholars was difference, was then thrust out for his troublesome, and
unquiet government, and unjust dealings against the scholars, as is well known
to all that lived then in Rome. You may find more of this matter in Ma. Doctor
Bagshawes answer to the Apology, joined with Doctor Ely his notes.

The second person whom he so much disgraceth, is Ma: Bluet, a man of great
gravity, and for his long sufferance, the most worthy Confessor of our Nation:
and whose person, and carriage has been such, as thereby he has been, and is
venerable in the sight of all men, even amongst the Protestants. And as
touching his having once been a Minister, it is a lewd objection against him,
no more derogating from his virtues, and good parts, then S. Augustines, being
once a Maniche, derogated from his authority, and sanctity, when afterward he
was Bishop of Hippo. Who knows not that diverse worthy men of our Nation have
been Ministers, and yet doubtless are, whom we hope to see united with us in
the body of the Cath: Church? Have not diverse been called from the very Altars
of Idols to become Christians, yea and priests to; and will you say that the
office of the Ministry is more disgraceful, then the office of Idolaters? But
this still shows a spice of too too much malice.

The other two reverend priests, are Ma. Champney, and Ma. Barnbe, whose parts,
and virtues are known to be such, as all the envy in fa: Parsons cannot
impeach. Ma. Bluet and Ma. Champney are now in Rome, if any just exceptions
could be made against them, were it to touch their lives, I think fa: Parsons
would urge it against them. But all that he, or any other says to discredit
them, is untrue, and fained of purpose, to keep their ignorant affected here
at home in iealousies, blinding them with muddy mists of detractions, that men
should not see into their own sleights and deceits, and discover their bad
proceedings in these affairs.

The next rank of the enemies we have procured (as he says) is Doctor
Saunders, Ma. Moreton, Doctor Web: and Cardinal Allen: and with these he
joins Doctor Stappleton, Doctor Bristow, Ma. George Martin, and Ma. William
Reynolds. It is a world to see how this man shuffleth and cutteth, to draw all
famous men to be favorers of his fond and foolish courses, and by consequence
adversaries to us; of some of which it was never heard, that ever they meddled
in any matter concerning state. And if ever they did (which to us is unknown,
and as we think to the world) we would as well dislike of them therein, as
we do with all actions of that quality, proceed they from whom they will. Yet
is not this to condemn or disgrace the men (as we have said) or to make them
justly our enemies, no more then to dislike the fact of S. Cyprian in
rebaptization, is to procure S. Cyprian our enemy: but rather the contrary, to
procure their amity, and greater love, (if duly and justly they consider it,
speaking of such as are yet living) in that hereby we give them sufficient
light, to see the errors of such proceedings, and what harm has come to Gods
cause by such attempts. Into which the worthy Cardinal Allen looking more
narrowly, saw right well, and therefore detested such proceedings in his latter
days, as you may see more plainly in Ma. Charles Pagets answer for himself,
I note the suspicious deaths of these two prelates, not as accusing him
therewith, leaving it to Gods judgment, but because he makes no conscience
what suspicions he casts out of others.
in the end of Doctor Elyes book against the Apology: where also you may
perceive, how far he was from joining with fa: Parsons, or favoring his
proceedings, who^ he held for a man of a violent, and headlong spirit, and much
complained thereof. And if it had so pleased God that he had lived, fa:
Parsons would have found, that he had disliked his courses, and would have
curbed him for them. But he lived not, and some say his death was not without
suspicion. It is certain that whilst he lived, fa: Parsons kept himself
aloof in Spain: but after his death, he hastened him as soon as he could
conveniently to Rome. Where after the said Cardinals death, and the death of
the worthy Bishop of Cassana, which was by flat poison, (as many affirm) he
reigned like a little King. But God that throws down the highest Ceder tree,
would have things fall out as they have done: that his pride, and ambition
might be seen, and his secret, unjust, uncharitable, and disloyal facts,
wherein he has long steeped his practicing fingers, to the oppression of many
innocents, and increase of our domestical afflictions, might be seen on all
sides, to his speedy humiliation (which God grant) or his everlasting infamy,
which I wish he may by just satisfaction in true humility avoid.

But to come (...) our purpose, for the facts of Doctor Saunders, they have
been sufficiently both in the first chap: and Important considerations proved
to have been unjustifiable, and it little imports, whether he did thrust
himself into the Irish matters, or was commanded thereto (as Father Parsons
affirms, which yet we believe not) the action it self being unnatural, and
therefore not falling under command, and much less to him being a priest.
Neither was he forced to justify the action of the nobles in the Northern
commotion, or to defend any such courses, as he did, which no way were
convenient; and therefore let Fa: Parsons hold his babble, unless he will
still discover more his treacherous will toward his Prince, and Country, to
make himself more hated of both, which need not, his deserts have been so
good. As for the action of Doctor Web, and Ma: Morton, it was an inconsiderate,
and unadvised act, irritating the Queen, and state, without any reason in the
world. And assuredly had Pius quintus seen the inconveniences thereof, I
assure my self he would have kept in that Bull. But many fair tales of great
matters to be performed by the Nobles, within the Realm, drew him thereto: as
in like manner the hopes of the Recovery of Ireland, buzzed into Pope Gregory's
head by Stukley, provoked him to the like attempts afterward. Let any man of
indifferency judge, whether we have not cause to dislike these course. But
sure I think Fa: Parsons did long for a general massacre of Cath: throughout
England, in that he would have us to justify these things, and favor still
his wicked plottings, and practisings. As concerning the book set out in Card:
Allens name in 88. it is the terriblest work, that has been writ of that
subject, and able to hang all the priests, and Cath: in England, if they had
but the least finger in it, and yet this holy Fa: would have us to justify it.
If the worthy Card: did so much ouer-shoot himself, we know it was much
contrary to his heart, in his latter days; and therefore are verily persuaded
(for diverse reasons) that the work either wholly, or in the greatest, and worst
part thereof, proceeded from Fa: Parsons, under the good Card: name; which made
us to impugn it, not as the Card: work, but as Fa: Parsons. And such
derogating words, as are used against it, touch not the worthy Card: but that
unworthy Jesuit. Neither is it the Card: that is called by the name of this
Jesuit; but Fa. Parsons, though he would fain shift it off, to the Card.
Touching the Card: book against English justice, showing that Cath: did truly
suffer for Religion, and were free from matters of treason, and treachery, and
that priests were not sent in, to deal in matters concerning the state, but
Religion only, is so little impugned by us, that every where in all our
writings, and in the Important considerations it self, we auerre, and defend
the same in that point. But to say that no Priest, Jesuit, or other Cath: has
practiced against the sacred person of our Sovereign, and quiet of her state,
as well by their dealings within the Realm, as by their procuring invasions,
and laying the plots thereof without the Realm; it were mere impudency, and
to deny a verity as apparent, as the sunshine at noone days, as both by
diverse public conuictions thereof, and by books, letters, and pamphlets
written to that purpose may appear; and Fa: Southwell in his supplication in
part confesses as much. Therefore these things being so evident, and public,
as they be, we do no more, but seek to clear our selves, and Cath: hereof,
letting the burden light upon some particular persons, medlers in such
undutiful actions, and not upon the whole innocent body of Priests, and Cath.
Which course how necessary it was for all Cath: in our Country, let themselves
be Judges, unless they would willingly have had their throats cut, or have
been hanged for other men's actions.

In the tail of this Catalogue of our made enemies, Fa: Parsons places
himself, as the chief of all the rest, and I believe him to be the chiefest,
and only, as the spring, and head, from whom all our miseries, and mischiefs,
both temporal, and spiritual, in part, or whole, for many years, did and
still do proceed, although he reckon up a fardell of Fittons, in his own
commendations, wondering from whence all these imputations should come, and that
in all our books he can find no one thing of substance, that we have against
him. And then he reckons mountains of mighty great good things done for us,
and many other matters, for the justifying of himself. All which praises would
have sounded far sweeter our of his neighbors mouth, then his own, unless
such neighbors were scant in those coasts. First, he says, his departure out
of England is highly justified in the Apology, that no man without shame can
object the same again. For this Fitton, read Ma: Doctor Bagshawes answer to
the Apology, in Ma. Doct: Elyes notes. Then he talks of his joining with
Card: Allen in Flaunders, and Rome, for the promoting of the Cath: cause in
England. It seems he was an ill copesmate; for I am sure Cardinal Allen
quickly shot him off for a wrangler. After this, he reckons his Seminaries in
Spain, and Flaunders. A goodly brood; he gave us a reward to break our
heads, by his good deeds to bring men into treasons against their Prince, and
Country, as is declared before, and more appeared by his soliciting some of
the Priests brought up there, to come in hostile manner against their Country.
So he dealt with Ma. Thomas Leake, and others: and such as refused, he fell out
with them. Now he reckons his coming back to Rome, and saving of that
College; but in very deed he was the destruction thereof, as in the History
of that College, at large you shall see. Yea, he is so void of shame, that he
is not afraid, to recount his procuring of us a Superior the Archpriest,
(which with an impudentlye, he says, was our own petition) as also his
proceeding with Ma. Doct: Bishop, and Ma: Charnocke in Rome, as great benefits
unto us, and merits in himself. Believe me, when I read this, I was amazed
with wondering at this man's brazen visage. Never did I in my life (I protest)
read, or hear so notorious wickedness, and injustice, so impudently recounted
for just: nay, and which is more, for benefits unto us, and meritorious in
himself. Jesus whether will this man go, or what will he not justify and
commend? Does not all our little world know, that the erecting of the
Archpriest, was the cause of all our dissensions? How then was he procured at
our own petition? Did not Ma. Standish most falsely by his means, suggest unto
the Pope in our names a desire of such a thing, we never dreaming thereof? Did
any one priest in England, send his hand, or consent with Ma. Standish to
solicit any such matter? Were not the Jesuits constrained, cunningly to
extort Ratihabitions from the priests themselves, by subscriptions unto a
congratulatory letter, after that they had by forgery erected him, and saw him
impugned? Diabolus est mendax, et pater eius, God send father Parsons more
shame, more honesty, and more truth. Pardon my plainenes courteous Reader, for
the matter is most palpably gross, and such as I thought could never have
proceeded from a Christian, much less a religious man.

And for the usage of our two Agents in Rome, the heavens themselves cry out
against his barbarousnes therein. Even some of his own faction, yea, and as we
have heard, him self has since wished he had not dealt so with them. Read
what is written of this matter in the copies of discourses, in the censure upon
fa: Parsons letter, in Ma. Doctor Bishop his letter to fa: Parsons there, and
in Ma. Doctor Elyes answer to the Apology. After these notorious untruths
poured forth, he brings yet another rank, to wit, such as have died
Martyrs, whom he says we condemn as traitors, and there he calls us in
doubt of betraying our brethren, and thereby making of Martyrs. But I wonder
not now at any thing he says, for I well see he has wholly given himself over
to the trade of Fittening; with the which it seems he has made sale of his
conscience: how could he else call us into question for such bloody practices,
in whom he never saw the least inclination to such villainies. Which of the
Jesuits has hitherto been in danger of apprehension by our means, and yet we
know all, or most of their residences in England, and their walks? I am sure
he will say, that if we were so lewdly disposed, we would begin with them
first. What malignant spirit is this in him, to call our names in question for
such treacheries? And touching such as have died in these times, in whom such
practices have not been found, we defend them for true Martyrs,
notwithstanding whatsoever imputation of treason laid upon them by any. But
others which have been tainted heerewith, whether priests or Jesuits, we
cannot so affirm of them: but leave them to Gods mercy, (as Ma: Ballard
amongst the priests) and this is defended even in the book of Important
considerations.

Now concerning Ma: Sherwin: his words, or deferring to answer, are not
brought in, to derogate from his martyrdom (as fa: Parsons falsely gathered,)
but to show, what iealousies such doubtful speeches, or refusing to speak
directly, did put into the Queen, or States heads, of general concurrence in
those matters of state against them. Which made them more earnest in their
proceedings, for fear of afterclaps, as not knowing at that time, the
difference betwixt the affections of the Seculer priests, and the Jesuits
toward their country. It is evident, that in the beginning some were
scrupulous concerning Pius quintus his Bull, which might make Ma. Sherwin to
desire, that the questions propounded unto him, might not be urged. Neither
does the story written by Cardinal Allen prove, that in his private
examinations, he made no such answer; for he had not the Register of their
examinations, but by relation, in which that might be omitted.

Nor does it follow, that if he had said those words, they would have been
urged at the bar, or execution. For that every thing, spoken in every private
examination, is not produced always at the bar: and whether it was or no, I
know not. But sure I am, that such delayings of aunswers in that case,
concerning the excommunication, and the Popes inuading under pretense of
religion, did much irritate the State. Yet do we not thereby condemn them,
as not Martyrs, (as most falsely Ma. Parsons accuses us) neither is there any
word in our Treatise to that effect. And therefore he might with more charity
a great deal have denied, that we rather imputed those taciturnities, and
ambiguous aunswers, unto scrupulositie, and fear, what they might do in such
cases (as doubtless it was) then to any inward treacherous affections toward
their Prince and country. And for Ma. Haywoods forbidding of acta Martyrum,
they that informed it, will avouch it in place and time convenient.

Touching his running upon designed Martyrs, it might please him to remember,
that there is a little difference between a man designed for a Cardinal in
his own conceit, and our brethren that are in prison, subject by the laws of
the Realm every day to be put to death. But to satisfy the good father, let
him know, that for the name he so plays with, it is not arrogated, by any
imprisoned, to themselves, but attributed to them by their brethren abroad, as
an usual name to constant Confessors in prison. S. Cyprian, whom he so much
cites about that phrase, calls such, not only designed Martyrs, but Martyrs
indeed. And the Church celebrateth some for Martyrs, that never shed their
blood, but only died in prison.

For his vaunting of Martyrs that favored his faction and proceedings, where
one has liked them, of such as have died of late, I think 3. have disliked,
and disclaimed them. Witness Ma. Fran: Jones, Ma: John Pibush, Ma. Barkworth,
and diverse others I could name if I were disposed. Concerning Cardinal
Baronius, that he should term our brethren refractarij, I verily think he
abuses him, and that the wisdom of that man would never utter such words of
men, addressed unto Christ's vineard.

But I may not omit the advantage Fa: Parsons takes at our saying, that some
of our brethren, were sometimes as forward in liking some courses taken, and in
pitying the cases of such as justly felt the smart thereof, as at the
Northern, or Irish attempts heretofore etc. Howsoever Father Parsons list to
wrest this saying, it does show as much as before I have said, of the Martyrs
aunswers: that our ignorance in such affairs was great, and therefore not to
be imputed, as we hope to them it is not. But seeing and knowing, what now we
see and know, no ignorance can excuse us, if we disclaim not. Matters were
then carried under a mask of zeal, and religion, and the verities of plots and
treasons were unseen of us; who ever detested disloialty. But their actions
have been since so open, that we could not but see, that religious pretenses,
were but fair shows to color foul matters, which we detest and hate, as no
whit proportionable to religious, or priestly vocation.

And to conclude this chapter of adversaries, with father Parsons, I wonder
that for shame he could note the Duke of Norfolk, as though any loyal person
of the house of Arundell, having wit, or discretion, could be agreeued with us,
for detesting the disloyalty of the Duke. I assure my self it is detested,
and hated of all the honorable generation of that line. For will any man love
the sin, or iniquity of any person, because the said person was his kinsman
or parent? what a ridiculous imagination were this?

And as for our asking, what the state will think of such priests as come
from the Seminaries hereafter, it is not (as maliciously this Calumniator
commenteth) that we will do their errands before they come; but in respect of
his treacherous, and traiterous dealings with them in the Spanish Seminaries, to
draw them to treasonable actions: who now having got the government, and
managing of Rome, Doway, and all, may work the like in those Colleges; so
that no place shall be free from suspicion to our state, of such practices
against them. And thus we will end this Chapter, praying to GOD to forgive all
Calumniators, and draw them to more charitable courses, and then shall it be
happy for Father Parsons.

An answer to the fourth Chapter, concerning our pretended folly, in uttering
open and manifest untruths, and contradictions to our own discredit.
IT is a common practice amongst men, that meddle in broken matters, and such
as will not abide the touch (especially if they be cunning, and of wit and
policy that meddle therein) to seek helps by shifts, circumstances, and
by-matters, (and those less to the purpose, when they are pressed, or called
in question) for such evil or unlawful affairs; that thereby they may give
some glozing show, and appearance unto the world of innocence, to justify
their bad and corrupt dealing. And even so fares it here with Fa: Parsons,
who being taken tardy in his undutiful dealings, and unjust practicing against
his natural Prince, and Country, with such euidencie, and apparent facts, that
convince his guilty behavior therein; to color, and hide these his foul
faults, and make some show of innocence he flies to by-matters, taking hold
of such things, as are of least importance, always flying, and shuffling, when
he comes to the point that touches, and substance indeed of the
accusation. For whereas both he, and some of his associates, are in particular
accused, as dealers in state matters, and practisers against their Country, and
some plots, stratagems, and devises of his, and theirs, and specified
particulerly; he shuffeleth them off in have, as though he were afraid much to
meddle with them, only snatching at some circumstances now and then, he
leaves the matter unsatisfied, or fully answered. As where it is auerred in
the Important considerations, that we think in our consciences, they have
been instruments, and meddlers in all things which have been intended against
her Majesty: here he keeps great revel, and makes such a stir, that he
runs over all the attempts, that were practiced before their entrance into
England, to show that there were matters attempted before they came hither, or
any English Jesuit was in authority. Which assertion being auerred, but
opinatiuely, as that we think, they have had their fingers in all matters, not
absolutely auouching the same, is not a substantial accusation, but a thing
left in doubt, and suspense, as all matters under opinion are. And therefore
that was but a by-matter, in respect of the real facts, and attempts laid to
their charge afterward; yet shall you find, that he uses the canuasing of
these by-matters, to discredit all other real accusations, and to make
himself, and his associates, to seem innocent in all the rest. But this
cunning must not serve his turn, we will p^^inly let you see, wherein they
have directly offended in these kinds of dealing; that they shall never be able
to deny the same, with any show of probability. And for diverse of the former
devises, we will give you some reasons, and probabilities, that induced us to
think, that their heads have been hammering in all the rest.

First, for his evasion in matters attempted before their entrance into
England, or that any English Jesuit was in credit, it does not follow, that
therefore no Jesuits had their fingers in such attempts. Were there not Jesuits
of other Countries to step into such actions? In the action of Parry, you shall
find there were. Secondly, was not Fa: Darbishire a Jesuit, long before the
English Jesuits came into England? And I have heard men, that knew him very
well, affirm that he was a great medler many years ago in such affairs.
Might he not then have his fingers in the French matters, concerning the Duke
of Guise, and Queen of Scots? Some will affirm, that he was an abetter
therein. Thirdly, were not the Jesuits from the beginning, great with the
Spaniards, whose fingers have been almost in all matters, as that of the Duke
of Norfolk, that of Ireland, and diverse others? Is it not somewhat probable by
this, that the Jesuits might be Counselors, or abetters in these affairs,
being men of such stirring spirits, and so forward to put themselves into
Princes matters, and dealings of state? Were they not likewise very great with
Pope Gregory the thirteenth, their greatest benefactour, and most affectionate
unto their order of all Popes? Might they not then be of counsel in Stukleys
intention for Ireland? Are not these great probabilities to induce men to
think, they have been hammering from the beginning; having had such fair
offers, and so fit oportunities, and themselves being so ready, and desirous to
deal in such kind of affairs, as all the world sees, both by experience, of
France, England, Ireland, and other places? Judge by this, whether the
assertion in the Important considerations, that we think they have been
instruments, and dealers in all practices from the beginning, against our
Prince, be so void of reason, or probabilities, as Fa: Parsons would make you
believe: or whether it be malice in us to suspect the worst, upon such
probable grounds against such men, whom we know to be settled enemies against
our Prince, and Countries safety; as Fa: Parsons, and some other Jesuits are,
and ever have been, as by the practices following, you shall evidently see, if
you be not over blind, with affection toward them; with which no man of
wisdom in matters apparent, will suffer himself to be seduced. If you will
excuse their intentions upon affection, be it at your pleasures: but deny not,
that the sun is up, when it is noone, for so I shall think you to be either
too much affectionate, or stark blind. But what if Fa: Parsons have falsified
both our words, and our meaning? In deed he has so done, very notoriously.
For page 14. of his book, where we seemed to ascribe all the said mischiefs
to our English Jesuits: we did presently prevent this cavil, by a
parenthesis, in these words: We mean both them, and others of that society,
with some of their adherents. Now this plain fellow, leaving out this
parenthesis, runs riot ridiculously with open mouth against us. In deed the
parenthesis was left out by negligence afterward, page, 24. which was not
greatly material, it being apparent, that we ascribed all the treacheries,
and treasons we there spoke of, not only to the Jesuits, but likewise to some
of their good friends, that were then Iesuited in those desperate designments.

But now let us come to particulers, since their coming into England, which
was in the year 1580. And first, we will begin with William Parryes action,
which happened in the year 1584. his araignment was the xxv. of February, and
his execution, the second of March following. This William Parry departing
England in the second year, after the entrance of the Jesuits, (as appears
by his examinations, araignment, and letters writ with his own hand upon
record, conferred in Venice with a Jesuit, named Benedetto Palmio, of the hard
state of England, concerning Cath: and by him was resolved, that he might lay
violent hands upon her Majesty, and commended in that resolution, and
encouraged thereunto. Coming afterward to Lions in France, and
communicating the same again, with some of the Jesuits there, he was also
resolved in diverse points. And upon these practices after his return into
England, being attached, arraigned, convinced, and condemned, he confessed the
whole matter at his arraignment, and by letters writ with his own hand. Now
let the world judge by this, whether the Jesuits have not meddled in matters
concerning her Majesty's person, and state. This fact of Parry, Fa: Parsons
shuffles off with asking, whether it was by the plotting of any English Jesuit,
not daring, to ask the question of Jesuits in general, because he knew them
to be guilty therein; yet so hansomly was the question demanded, with a
clearing of himself afterward, by Parries confession, that you would have
sworn (I dare say) that no Jesuit had intermedled in that action. See by this
(as at the beginning I told you) how he fastneth upon circumstances of English
Jesuits, shuffling of the substantial accusation, that the Jesuits practiced
with Parry in that action. Neither was it said in the Important considerations,
that Parry dealt, or plotted with English Jesuits, but with the Jesuits. Nor
that we think English Jesuits to have had their fingers in all matters, but
the Jesuits in general, or some other infected with Iesuitisme, and their
practices. And that Fa: Parsons had not his hand in this matter, was not for
want of will (as may be presumed by other actions since,) or that he could not
talk with the said Parry in Paris (as he says,) but because Parry refused to
confer with him, as you may see by his confession, even as Fa: Parsons has
set it down. But by his leave, I smell a Rat. Shall we think that any Jesuit
in Paris, would have dealt with Parry, Fa: Parsons being then in the City, but
that he would first have acquainted him therewith? Are Jesuits so sparing, to
impart such matters one to another? It is well known they are not. Besides, is
it likely that any man would have offered, that Fa: Parsons should have
conferred with Parry, to have confirmed him in his most villainous plot, except
he first had known his mind, and that he was ready for such a hellish
conference? Shrug and shufflle good father Parsons as you list: I fear that
all the water in the Thames, will not wash you clean from this so barbarous a
designement.

Now will we come to Frauncis Throgmorton, the next after Parry, (though fa:
Parsons preposterously puts him in the first place) for he was convicted
the 21 of May following. First his practices were all communicated and plotted,
with Bernardino Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador, wholly Iesuited, if not a
Jesuit, and therefore it was not like, that these things should pass without
their knowledge, priuitie, and consent. Besides, the plot was about one, and
the same matter with that of Parries, especially concerning the Queen of
Scots, in which (as I have showed) they were practizers. Add to this Mendoza
his words, concerning fa: Parsons going to Rome about the matter, and that the
Spaniard, and the Duke of Guise, were partners in these plots, with both whom
(all men know) the Jesuits were very great.

As for Mopp, alias Spring, whom he says to be Ma. Charles Paget, Ma. Thomas
Morgan cleared him by letters to Francis Throgmorton, from dealing to move any
man in this attempt: but that he came only to view the country. By which it
seems altogether fained by fa: Parsons, that he should deal with the Earl
of North: and Ma. Shelley, whereby followed, (as he says) their overthrow.
But in this I leave the farther answer to Ma. Charles Paget himself: assuring
my self, that he is abused herein: although whatsoever he dealt in this
affair, or any other, that might be prejudicial to her Majesty, or state,
(if he have dealt in any) it seems to have been by the Jesuits persuasions,
as you may see by his answer to the Apology: where he has these words: If I
had dealt (says he) in any matter of practice for our country besides you, (as
I never did) but that you were the inuenters of the same, and the perswaders of
me thereunto (the more unfortunate that I had such directors.) By which words
you may see, that if Ma. Charles Paget were any dealer in this matter of
Throgmorton, he was urged thereunto by the Jesuits. So that fa: Parsons
bringing in Ma. Paget, must of necessity bring in himself, or other Jesuits.
Add also unto this, that Sir Frauncis Inglefield, had been urging Ma.
Throgmorton for almost two years together unto this plot, as by his confession
appears: and all men know that Sir Frauncis Inglefield was wholly at the
Jesuits devotion. And fa: Parsons in the first chapter of his Apology, the
third leaf confesses, that this Sir Frauncis Inglefield and he, were joined
in the affairs of our Country: by which it is more then probable, that fa:
Parsons was a dealer in this action likewise.

As touching the Earl of Northum: all the probability we have that fa: Parsons
was a stickler therein, or some other Jesuits, is this; that in the Roman
College, before diverse of the students there, he could deliver the plot, and
every circumstance thereof so exactly, that all men which heard him, adjudged
him to have been in the very bosom of that designement. In which discourse,
he delivered some particulers: as that it was plotted, that the Earls son
should travail upon license out of England, and coming into Millaine, should
have been stayed (under I know not what pretenses) that thereby the Earl
himself might have been less suspected in England about his plot, and
intentions. This fa: Parsons delivered there, (as diverse yet will witness) which
could not but demonstrate him to have been inward with that plot, in that also
this intention concerning the Earls son, was unknown unto the Queen and
state, (as I understand) until by this his discourse it was made public.
Note still (gentle Reader) how all circumstances bring in the Jesuits to be
accessory to all plots and devises.

As concerning the plot of Babington, and the other gentlemen, it is not
ascribed unto the Jesuits directly, but only alleged as an undutiful
practice, and treacherous against her Majesty and state, by those graceless
Iesuited gentlemen, whereby great hurt and prejudice arose unto the Catholics,
and catholic cause in our Country. And (the matters being so apparently
treasonable) fault is found with Ma. Southwell, for that he excuses it in his
supplication, going about to lay all the blame thereof upon the Secretary Sir
Frauncis Walsingham, as though he had been the inuenter, and layer of the
plot, and perswader, or drawer on of the Gentlemen thereunto. Which is both
false, and ridiculous to imagine, that he durst practice, in laying such
dangerous plots of state without her Majesty's priuitie, howsoever his
intentions were to break the neck of all in the end, with the overthrowing of
the dealers therein. Neither could the Gentlemen be excused, if he had been the
first author and perswader thereof, for that no man's persuasion may excuse an
evil act, that in it self is evil: for so might a man lay all his sins
perhaps upon the devils back. But howsoever Ma. Secretary Walsingham
entertained the plot, (after it was revealed unto him by some of the
confederates) to bring it unto the full perfection, wherein perhaps he did more,
then he had thanks for of her Majesty, yet can it not be denied, but that the
plot, and practice proceeded from themselves, and their own confederats, and
was by them really intended, as appeared manifestly by their own confessions.
And therefore to be excused afterward by a Jesuit, could not but yield
suspicion unto her Majesty, and the state, of hollow loyalty in Catholics
toward her: who would go about to excuse apparent treasonable practices
against her person, thereby to persuade her subjects, and others, that such as
were justly put to death for their treasons, were not guilty therein: but that
they were only plots and inventions of the state themselves, which is to
defame the public justice of a Prince: the^ which a greater wrong cannot be
done, especially when matters are apparent to the contrary. And that this fact
of Ma. Southwell was justly condemned, and disalowed as inconvenient (to omit
injuries to her Majesty and state) the effects since have demonstrated as
much: the state having been more exasperated therewith, then with any pamphlet
writ these latter years: Collins.
as has appeared by the execution of three several persons for only meddling
therewith, Bullocks.
and divulging it. Thus you see, Ducket.
that what has been said concerning Anthony Babingtons matter, has been
spoken with great reason, and moderation, without any accusation at all of the
Jesuits therein, but only touching our dislike of the excuse of this foul
fact, afterward made by Fa: Southwell, by which the inconueniencies specified
arose, as all men will witness. But since Fa: Parsons is agreeued with that
little, sparingly set down in some five lines only; he must give us leave to
deliver you some probabilities, whereupon we could have taxed them with
suspicion of dealing therein. The plot was but a continuance (as it were) of
Parryes devise, and Throgmortons practices, in which (as you have seen) they
and their favorites were Counselors, perswaders, and abetters, and therefore
not improbable, that they would prosecute the same, when any opportunity should
be fitly offered; and a fitter the^ this (wherein so many resolute Gentlemen
were combined) they could not have. That the Jesuits were not taxed of this, at
the arraignments of these Gentlemen, or accused by their confessions, imports
little. For you must know, that the Jesuits are wise, Their dealings in the
affairs of our Archpriest, under the name of the Priests themselves, does show
as much.
and cunning politicians, and can tell how to manage matters by secondary, or
third means, lying aloof off themselves, and being least seen or suspected,
such as have been acquainted with their dealings know this, which I say, not
to be void of truth. Having then had some experience in the fail of Parry his
plot, and Throgmortons, in which (especially the first) they were nearly
touched; it behooved them to be more wary, and deal with more cunning, and
secrecy then they had done. That Fa: Parsons, Fa: Holt, and Fa: Creswell, were
at Rome, and Naples, is little to the purpose; the intercourse of letters, and
intelligences from all places, being so speedy, familier, and common with them,
wheresoever they remain, as it is known to be.

Besides, at that time Fa: Darbishire lay in France, and (unless I be
deceived) in Paris: a man fit (by the reports of men of judgment, to deal in
such affairs, and with cunning enough. And to all this, the conference which
Ma: Ballard had with their most entirely Iesuited friend Mendoza: and the
sequel also of Fa: Southwells defense, or excuse. This have we related, not to
accuse the Jesuits directly with this plot of Babington, and his confederates;
but only to show you that less was said thereof in the Important
considerations, then might have been, if the author had uttered those matters,
of malice against the Jesuits, as Fa: Parsons affirms. Some thing further
might be said hereof, concerning Fa: Weston (that worthy wight) his inward
acquaintance, and familiarity with Ma: Babington, that summer that he was
executed. But thereof we will be silent at this time: neither would I now have
made any mention of (...) but that I find our common adversaries to be
acquainted with it. Now are we come to Sir William Stanlyes yielding up of
Dauentry, condemned in the Important considerations, as a cause also of
exasperating our Prince, and state, against Cath: at home. Father Parsons after
his accustomed manner, carpeth at his knighthood, given by Sir William Drury in
Ireland, and not by the Earl of Leister in Flaunders, which being a by-matter
from our purpose, little imports, being that he received that degree by her
Majesty's authority: and therefore it forced not by whose hands he received it.
And for his holding the town in the right of her Highness, or the right of
the States, it as little imports, considering that he was put in trust with
it by her Majesty, and upon his allegiance to her, should have discharged the
trust, and fidelity, reposed in him in that charge. To dispute the case,
whether he might in conscience, or ought in danger of mortal sin, deliver
up the Town to the King of Spain, is not necessary to our purpose: yet this I
will say, that all which Fa: Parsons has said in proof thereof, is not worth
a rush, unless he prove two points: first, that her Majesty is the person,
that has given the first cause of breach of the league with the Spaniards,
which I think (if matters be well examined) will prove contrary, as you may see
by the attempts made by the Spaniard, both secretly, and publicly, against
her Highness, and state, before aleadged, nothing being attempted by her
against his Majesty of Spain, or any his Countries. Which being true, then
might she justly, and in conscience, iure gentium, make war against him, win
his Towns, and Countries from him, and in right and justice detain them.
Secondly, he must prove that Sir William Stanley, knowing in his conscience,
that she had no just cause of war against the Spaniard, (which I think he
could not know) might deliver up the said Town, without a greater mischief to
follow upon such restitution: for a man is not bound to make restitution of
goods evil gotten, or possessed mala fide, when without imminent danger of his
own, or other men's lives, he cannot do (as all Canonists will confess)
because the life of a man is dearer then goods, and the less evil must be
preferred, before the greater. As for example, if I should have unjustly taken
away the weapons of another man, and had been malae fidei possessor: yet if I
should perceive that the true owner were paratus ad homicidium, and thereby
either my own life, or others, might be endangered (if I should restore his
weapons unto him, which erst I had taken unjustly from him) in this case it is
evident, that I were not bound to make restitution, although I were (as I have
said) malae fidei possessor. So in this case of Sir William Stanleyes, if
greater mischief might probably ensue thereof, then the deteyning of the Town
could be, he was not bound thereto. Which case Fa: Parsons has not handled.
Now will I refer the censure to other men, whether greater evil did not grow
unto our common cause in England, by this particular fact of Sir William
Stanlies, in that the state was thereby exasperated against all cath: for his
fact, which great damage, and common hurt of his Countrymen, and Cath: he was
in charity bound more to regard, then the restitution of one Town to the
Spaniard. And therefore waying, and considering the auersion, and alienation of
our state from Cath: for such facts as these, of Sir William, and the like: we
have often wished, that if his conscience had felt any touch, or scruple
concerning those wars, he had otherwise quietly left them off, or with-drawne
himself, without giving any such open occasion of complaint unto the state.
But his not only delivering up of that Town, but also joining himself with
the Spaniard in field against his Sovereign, and Country, may not be approved
by any good subject. And therefore I wish that so worthy a martial man, had
converted his sword against the Turk, or other common enemies, and not against
his own Sovereign, and Country, that by his actions our Prince might have had
no just cause to have been offended with us at home. Aliens and strangers may
do what they will, and we yet remain blameless, if we have no part with
them, because they are strangers; but when natural subjects of our own
Country, and Cath: shall in these jealous, and suspicious times, practice or
convert their weapons against their Prince, and Country: it cannot but incense
their wrath, and indignation against all Cath: at home, as by experience we
have felt.

Touching Fa: Parsons urging of an Epistle writ by Card: Allen, in defense
hereof, what might be his reason, or whether he did it of himself, or urged
thereunto, by reason of the great expectance of the Spanish intention anno
1588. immediately following, (which we suspect) I cannot tell: but I wish with
all my heart, it had been unwritten, considering the little good has come
thereby. Neither is this to dishonor the worthy Card: (as Fa: Parsons would
make it) but contrariwise to show our love, and honor, we bear toward him,
in that we heartily wish such ouer-sights, or inconvenient actions (as the best
man in this life is not without imperfections, nor the wisest in his judgment
without errors) had never proceeded from him. And whereas such things (as the
book written in the year 1588. and this Epistle) are too too evident, and
publicly known to our state, and all men else: we seek to excuse the same
as much as in us lies, that the fault, or rather the error, may by
circumstances seem more tolerable, which no man of wit or discretion, can deny
to be an evident demonstration of our love, and affections toward him, as our
dearest, and worthiest Father. Which cannot be odious, and offensive in us to
our Prince, and state, as we trust in that duty, and nature binds every man
extraordinarily to love their parents, and founders either natural, or
spiritual. And therefore to excuse them, is but a show of filial love, and
affection; but obstinatly to defend, and maintain that in a parent, which is
no way approueable, were mere sycophancie, not love, mere peeuishnes, not any
tolerable affection.

Now come we to the great attempt made by the Spaniards in the year 1588. out
of which action Fa: Parsons exempteth all English Jesuits, because (he says)
himself, fa: Holt, and fa: Creswell, were then in Rome with Cardinal Allen:
and that no English Jesuit at all was residing at that time, either in Spain,
or in the Low Countries. But all this proves not, that therefore the Jesuits
had no part in this action. Neither can it be probable to any man of judgment,
or understanding, that the Jesuits being so great with the King, and so
forward in attempts against our Country, having had their fingers in matters
precedent, (as you have seen) would now sit still, having so fair an offer
made, and so good opportunity to be doing? I confess that there was no great
respect made to the English beyond the Seas in that action, (nor in any other
of the Spaniards will be, if ever matters come to issue) nor perhaps were the
English Jesuits called to be counselors therein, as since they have been,
because indeed the Spaniard intended a most bloody conquest, and translation
of our state, and people. But to think that the Jesuits were not vrgers
thereto, and setters forwards (to their power) of that attempt, were to
contradict all reason, and probabilities. For first it is most certain, that
all the world had very admirable expectance of that army, and the Jesuits more
then any. Secondly it is plain by the Cardinals book, (if it were his)
written as a preparatiue to that action, that he was made Cardinal of purpose
for that exployt, and to have been sent hither presently upon the Spaniards
conquest. But Father Parsons says, that he labored to set forwards at that
time the Cardinals preferment (if you will believe him) which makes it evident,
a primo ad vltimum, that father Parsons was a dealer in this action. Thirdly,
it is also certain, that the Jesuits in Rome, were great with the Spanish
Ambassador, liger there, and had great recourse unto him, when the matter was
on foot. Does not this then argue them to be concurrers thereunto? Fourthly,
it is likewise most true, that the English Jesuits in Rome, appropriated
certain palaces in London to themselves, to fall unto their lots (when this
matter was in handling) to wit Burley house, Bridewell, and an other, which I
have forgot, making themselves cocksure of their already devoured pray. This
all the students that lived in the College at that time will witness with me.

Now would I demand of you, what reasons they might have to be their own
caruers, if they had not had some interest in that affair? Fifthly we know,
that they were more forward in Rome, concerning this matter, then the
Cardinal, or any other, insomuch as at the first news of the Spaniards
coming down into the narrow Seas, they would have had Te Deum sung in the
College Church for joy of victory, if the Cardinal had not stayed it. Does
not this also show, that they were as far in the matter as Card: Allen, or
any other? And to conclude, did not the posting over of fa: Parsons into
Spain, presently after the overthrow of this army, for farther dealing with
the Spaniard for the time to come, and his better informations in English
affairs, and fa: Holt, posting into the Low Countries for the like purpose, to
keep the Spaniard still in hope of future times, that this mishap might not
withdraw him from ever enterprising the like afterward, show that they were
dealers in the former: doubtless all these circumstances cannot but
sufficiently prove it that they were, in the judgment of wise men.

Now, as touching the speech of the Duke of Medina Sidonia, we have already
showed out of Fa: Parsons own speeches, that he made no respect at all of
Catholics: neither knew he (as Fa: Parsons said) whether there were any
Catholics in England, or not.

The next point brought in by Fa: Parsons, is the last Irish attempt; but
before we say any thing to that, we must put his fatherhood in mind of his
practices, concerning two other preparations, wherein he cannot deny himself
to have been not only a dealer, but also the very chief and principal
actor? The first was that wherein Doctor Stillington and some others got their
death, which miscarried by reason of the ignorance of their Pilots, or rather by
the provision of God, 34. shyps being shiuered upon their own Bays. If he
deny this, we have Ma. Thomas Leake a reverend priest, and others witness
thereto, with whom he dealt to go in that Army. And because Ma. Leake
refused, he entreated him accordingly. This preparation was intended (as the^
was thought) for Ireland. The second preparation was some three or four years
after (if I be not deceived) of which Fa: Parsons makes mention in a letter
writ to Ma. Thomas Fitzherbert from Rome into Spain, desiring to hear of the
success thereof, saying withal, that they had little hope of that attempt at
Rome. This preparation (as I remember) was in the same year that the Earl of
Essex went unto the Islands: and it miscarried also by tempests. One of the ships
(unless I be deceived) was driven into an Haven in South Wales.

These two preparations are so evident, to have proceeded with his concurrence,
and cooperation, as he no way can deny it without the note of impudency, so
many witnesses and his own Letters, being in testimony against him. By this
you may see how foolish, false, and ridiculous that protestation is, which he
alleges of Sir Frauncis Inglefield, and Ma. Thomas Fitzherbert, (if any such
were) wherein they say, that never any conquest was intended by the old King of
Spain, nor by his Majesty that now reigns. For I would but ask Fa:
Parsons to what end these preparations were? whether they were to catch
Butter-flies upon the seas? I think few men of understanding will think, that
good King Phillip meant to have only established Catholic religion by force
of Arms, and when he should have seen himself master of the field, and
Crown, would depart quietly: leaving all to our selves, as he found it. No,
no, the sweet Kingdom of England, would have been perhaps as precious unto
him, as his best dominions in the world. No less absurd is the protestation
concerning Fa: Parsons, and Father Creswell, that they did never treat in their
lives, nor consent, that the King of Spain should have any temporal interest
in the Crown of England: nor that the old King, or his Majesty now reigning,
ever intended any such thing, but only the good of Catholics, and their
ease. This is so frivolous, so childish, and so senseless a protestation, that
I am ashamed to think of the folly thereof.

What wise man will not laugh at Fa: Parsons, to hear him in such sober
protestation affirm, that he never intended, that the King of Spain should
have any temporal interest to the Crown of England, and yet by all his might
and power seek to make him Master thereof, by invasion and force of arms; or
that he pretended nothing but the ease of Cath: when he sought the cutting of
their throats? These are strange contrarieties, in words to protest our good,
and in action to seek our lives. Was the book of Titles, (wherein the Kings
daughter, the Lady Infanta was entitled to all her Majesty's Dominions) writ to
no purpose, but to exercise father Parsons wit? Was it a vain speculation in
the air, without relation to effect or end? Or if it be a sottish dullness for
any man to think so, how then was there no temporal interest sought to the
Crown of England? But because the interest was laid upon the Infanta,
therefore belike father Parsons thinks all inconveniences and absurdities
salued, and himself excused. A simple shift to blind a buzzard. As though the
Infanta could get, or possess the crown of England, without as much prejudice
to our Country, as if the King should have taken the right to himself? Must
they not both come in by force of arms, and must not that be with conquest and
subversion of the state, debasing of all nobility, and translation of our
English nation in the greatest part? Can we expect less by a Spanish conquest,
then we found by the Norman, in the Conqueror his days? No certes. It will be
far worse. Let any man but look back to those times, and see the miseries
and oppressions, that fell upon the English, with the slaughters, murders, and
expulsions of all the nobility almost, and gentry of the Realm; and doubtless
he will detest the conceits of fa: Parsons herein, and hold him for the most
deadly enemy that the English nation has this day living.

But to pass over this point, let us now come to his excuse, concerning Irish
matters: which is but a mere evasion, and to little purpose. For whether his
finger were not in the last practice (as may be somewhat probably coniectured,
by the former attempt for Ireland, in which he was an actor) or whether it were
not, it is evident that the Jesuits were dealers therein, and Ma. Archer an
Irish Jesuit, a chief moouer thereto, as appears by Letters written by Don
John d' Aquila, and intercepted by the Lord Deputy. There is a most traiterous
letter of his extant, which in time may come to light. But should I labor to
light a candle at noone-tyde, whose positions good Fa: are these? The
Catholics in Ireland, may favor the Earl of Tyrone in his wars, idque
magno cum merito, et spe retributionis aeternae, and that with great merit, and
hope of eternal reward, ac si bellum contra Turcas gererent, as though they
warred against the Turks. 2. All Catholics do sin mortally that take part
with the English against Tyrone, nec possunt aeternam salutem consequi, and can
neither be saved, or absolved from their sins by any priest, unless they
repent and leave the English. 3. Idem censendu^ est. etc. They are in the same
case that shall help the English with any victuals, vel quid simile tribuunt,
or any such like thing. 4. The most worthy Prince Hugh O Neale, and other
Catholics of Ireland, that fight against the Queen, are nullo mod^, by no
construction Rebels.

How say you Friar Robert, out of what forge came these warlike engines? They
were hammered in Salamanca the 7. day of March, 1602. and are as you see red
hot. But what Vulcan was the workman of them? You shall hear every one of
them speak for themselves. Sic ego. etc. So I John de Sequenza, professor of
Divinity in the College of the society of Jesus, in the famous University of
Salamanca, censeo, do think. Idem conseo ego, I Emanuell de Royas, professor
of Divinity in the same College of the society of Jesus, am of the same
opinion. Et ego, etc. And I Jasper de Mena, professor of Divinity, and of the
sacred Scripture in the same College, do assent to these Fathers sentence,
tanquam omnino certae, as to an assured truth. Ego, etc. I Peter Osorio,
Preacher in the College of the society of Jesus, at Tire, am altogether in
judgment with these Fathers. Now Fa: Parsons, speak out man, have any of your
company been practicioners in the treasons of Ireland? The Catholic Author of
the Jesuits Catechism, tells us, that all the late rebellious treacheries,
and murders he there mentions, were plotted and contrived in the Colleges
of the Jesuits in France. And do not these Jesuitical professors tell us as
much of their own proceedings in their Colleges of the society of Jesus in
Spain, for our treasons, rebellions, and murders in Ireland?

May I be so bold as to imitate these Spanish Divines style? Ego F. B. do
profess in the sight of almigh^^e God, and to the whole Catholic Church,
that I do veri^^e think in my conscience, the said four Propositions to be
most false and unchristian: and that howsoever certain Jesuits and their
followers do dissemble, and equivocate for the time with some men here in
England, who show too much weakness in being so greatly led by them, and what
vain, and childish euasions soever this foxed Father of ours deuiseth to shift
of matters from himself, and his society, not of Jesus, in these points, yet
if ever they be able to procure another invasion, or to stir up any Tyrone in
England, these traiterous positions, hatched in hell, will be again revived
amongst us by them. If this concern the state to be considered of, it were
well it were looked into in time. I can be but sorry, that the ancient
Christian faith and religion of Christ, should thus be scandalized by
Machiauillians, under pretense of the blessed name of Jesus.

As concerning Fa: Parsons letter to Fa: Holt here cited, out of the which he
only notes what pleases himself, but yet in such sort, as if his wits were
breeched* or that the man had been building Castles in the air. In one part of
that letter, he talks of a Catholic Prince to be thought of after her
Majesty's death, whether Spanish, Scottish, French, or other. Is it not strange
that a Friar should thus bestir him? In any wise man's judgment, it includes
much folly, great ignorance, no small pride, and a world of factious garboyles,
and mutinies. His folly and pride appear, in that he will intermeddle in
matters so far beioynd his reach, as though he could dispose of kingdoms,
and successors to Crowns. We shall sure have a Neuell, Earl of Warwick of
him, to erect and depose Kings at his pleasure. His ignorance is also as
manifest, in that he is so simple as to think, that his plots or dissignements
shall be like to take effect in those times; or that the Catholics (if they
would follow his Chimericall conceits) should be able to make a King at their
pleasures, and dispossess the right successors, or frustrate the designement
of the whole Commonwealth. And it is clear that his heart is possessed with a
world of tumults, in that thereby he would make our cou^^^y a perpetual Camp
of hostility. For does he think, that any true Competitor will loose his
right for his invasions, or ^^at his Majesty, our neighbor Prince, will sit
still, while he creates Kings? Or that the Commonwealth, will yield the dispose
of the scepter to his worships designement?

See what bloodshed this fellow would draw upon us, with his Machiauillian
devises, to the utter ruin and subversion of the whole. Besides his folly, I
say, which appears in this letter (as himself cites it) and tends to the
ruin of our Country, and Commonwealth, as you see: we have noted to him
other Letters writ to Master Thomas Fitzharbert into Spain, concerning the
Kings preparation against England: which sufficiently discovers his
affections toward his Prince, and Country. And we can allege his Letter,
written to the Earl of Angus the 24. of January, 1600. wherein he confesses,
that he had labored eight or ten years for his Majesty of Scotland, and
the preferment of his title, with the sum of twelve hundred Crowns a year
for 2. years together from Spain, which were as he says, disbursed in the
year 83. and 84. As also 4000. crowns, procured to the same effect, from Pope
Gregory the 13. by bill of exchange, which he confesses he brought to Paris,
and there delivered it. And he says the same had continued, if any
correspondencie of gratitude, or hope had continued from Scotland: with no
small assurance of far greater matters, and advancement to the Kings person,
if the enemies since of both our Realms (as he says) had not overthrown, and
altered that course.

This he has in that Letter, and much more. Whereby you may perceive, what his
practices have been from time to time, against her Majesty, and state: seeking
first (as you see) by large pensions got from Spain, to work with the Scots,
and others, for the untimely advancement of his title, which must have been
with the overthrow of her Majesty, or otherwise (you know) it could not have
been. And here I request the Reader, to note these labors of father Parsons
for the affairs of Scotland, to have been in the years 1583, and 1584, in
which self same year, happened the traiterous plots of Parry, Fran:
Throgmorton, and the Earl of Northumberland, and the practices with the Duke
of Guise, Spaniard, and other English abroad, about the delivery of the Queen
of Scots, and overthrow of her Majesty, and shortly after the treasons of
Babington, and his accomplices. Which I note, that you may see how fa: Parsons
courses concurred at the same instant with their attempts: and by this you may
guess, whether it be not more then probable, that he was inward with all those
devises, and perhaps some of that money was employed to the setting forward of
those attempts, though he would seem clear in all things. But it is Gods
will, that his own Letters and writings, should discover his dealings. There
want not other Letters of his, and his accomplices, which show his good will
toward our Sovereign and country: but these shall be sufficient at this time.

Now will we come to the objections made against him, concerning his intituling
the Spaniards to the Kingdoms of England, France, and Scotland, and of the
Students subscribing in Spain to the Lady Infanta her title, as also
concerning the Lord Dacres, and diverse of our nation, discredited by fa:
Parsons, to the loss of some of their lives, and lastly of the book of
Titles, or succession: to all which we will answer in order. To the first, of
intituling the Spaniard unto England, France, and Scotland, it is plain, and
evident in it self, that by intituling them to England, consequently he
entitled them to Ireland, and all her Majesty's dominions, and to France,
because of the right we pretend to that Crown. Touching Scotland, it may
follow by a sequel of neighborhood: because (you know) the Spaniards creep
ever forwards, loving rather to gain by their neighbors an ell, then lose an
inch. For by reason of the imminent danger of that Crown, and the rather,
because that King is a Competitor to England, and therefore sustayning great
wrong by his inuading of us; would no doubt stir and make war against him,
which happily might occasionate his overthrow, and loss of that Kingdom
likewise. So that fa: Parsons falsely intitling the Spaniard unto the Crown of
England, does also in effect, entitle him to Scotland likewise, in that he
could not possess the one quietly, without the other, considering the wrong
that of necessity must be done to the Scot, which would make him stir so
long, as he were able to leauie but a thousand men, or procure aid from
neighbors adjoining. I do not take upon me to determine of any man's right,
or title, praying with my heart, that her Majesty may long continue amongst us:
but do note in a word, what bloody mischief fa: Parsons does breathe out in
his famous libell of succession.

For the proof of the second objection, of the scholars being urged to
subscribe to blankes, and to confirm the Infanta her title to the Crown of
England, is a matter very notorious and evident. We have diverse priests yet
alive in England, to confirm the same by oath, as well of them, that were
enforced to subscribe against their wills, as others that openly refused the
same. I do therefore wonder to see the man's unshamefast denial of so manifest
and apparent a truth.

As touching the fained matter of the Cardinals devise for certain courses to
be held in our country after her Majesty's time, and his proposing of the same
to diverse, it is a most egregious calumniation against the deceased Cardinal,
and all men may easily see it to be but a mere invention of fa: Parsons, in
naming only two persons deceased, Sir Frauncis Inglefield, and Doctor
Stillington for witness, knowing what proof a dead witness may carry, either
in Court or country. Besides, there were diverse men of wealth of ou^ nation,
with whom he was as like, or more like to have communicated the same, as with
the two dead persons named, who for ought I can learn, never heard of any such
speeches from him. Whereby you may see by whom the worthy Cardinal is
disgraced, and dishonored now he is dead, being by Father Parsons drawn
into all foolish, and fond devises, as an actor with so factious creatures, in
matters by themselves devised. But they which disgraced him living in his
latter days, will not suffer him of likelihood to rest quiet, now he is dead.
Concerning his proposing the book of Tytles to have been read, in the
Refectory in Rome, in steed of a spiritual Lecture, used to be read at such
times: there be diverse yet that will depose the same against him; and Ma:
Lowbery now a reverend priest, was the man should have read the same, but he
rejected it, utterly refusing to meddle with such stuff. To the third point
concerning the L. Dacres usage amongst them, we will refer the relation
thereof to Ma: Charles Paget, best acquainted therewith, who has promised (if
Fa: Parsons surcease not) to discover his usage with others.

To the fourth matter of diverse disgraced by him, and his accomplices; it would
make a huge volume, to set down the particularities of every one that has
been abused by them in this kind. And therefore we will reserve it for a
particular treatise of purpose* if occasion enforce us hereafter, to discover
more at large their particular dealings against particular men. Only at this
time I will note unto you one or two notable examples. The first shall be of
Ma: Barkworth, now I trust in heaven. This Ma: Barkworth being a priest in the
College of Vallidolid, was by the Jesuits suspected to be a furtherer, and
concurrer with certain youths, that entered into the order of S. Benedict.
Whereof Fa: Parsons having intelligence, did write to the Rector of that
College, that he should be dismissed presently, showing in his letters some
anger, that he stayed so long. Whereupon the Minister of the College came
unto him one morning (being sick of a fever, and not well recovered) and bad
him to arise, and make himself ready to walk with him, saying, that it would
be wholesome for him to walk, and shake off his Fever, and not to yield
thereto. When they were departed out of the English College, he led him into
the College of the Jesuits, and leaving him in a paued room, he took
occasion to depart from him, upon some affairs, to speak with one of his
fellow Jesuits in that house. And coming back again unto him, he brought the
Rector of the Jesuits College with him: who entered into an inuectiue, and
bitter discourse against him, and the conclusion was as follows. He
commanded him to put off his Scholars robes, to put on a suit of rags (which
they offered him) to depart the College, and City, and to shift for himself;
saying, that he was not worthy to stay longer there, neither should, and that
for a viaticum to help himself in his travail, he should not have so much as
a Spanish real, which is but six pence English. Ma: Barkworth perceauing
their intentions, told them, that he would not depart with such disgrace,
having not offended; in that if he had concurred with the foresaid youths, for
their entrance into Religion, yet was it not such a fault, as could deserve
such expulsion, their wills being not in his power to rule or command. The
Rector seeing he would not dispoile himself, and put on those rags to
depart, called in certain of his lay brethren, strong fellows, to deal with
him by violence, and to enforce him to change his habit. Whereof two coming
unto him, catched him by the legs, and pulling them from under him upon a
sudden, threw him backward flat upon the pauement, with such violence (being
then sick, and weak with a Fever) that he was much bruised therewith, and
in a great maze presently upon his fall, the rest of the lay brethren
apprehended some a leg, some an arm, and so drew him into another room
paued in like manner, as in those hot Countries, all rooms for the most part
are. He being, as I say, thus amazed, and perceauing them to pull, and hale
him, fearing belike, that they would murder him, used these words, but in the
Spanish tongue: What will you kill me? will you kill me? let me first confess
me.

When they had thus dragged him into the other room, with struggling, and
striving, he got upon his feet. No sooner was he up, and recollected, but
that one of them gave him such a stroke with his first upon the face, that he
felled him down backward again. With this blow he was so bruised in his face,
that when he was cold, afterward he was not able to utter his words, that one
though near him, might well understand him, what he spoke. Whilst this was in
hand, and the Rector of the Jesuits College, and the Minister of the English
College, Fa: Blackfan being spectatour of this cruel, and inhumaine tragedy,
in came a Spanish Jesuit, of a noble house in Spain, and finding them in this
sort abusing so outragiously this priest, he reproved them for it; and told
them it would be a great shame unto them, if the world should be witness
thereof. Heere-vpon they left off, and having better bethought themselves of
this fact so outragiously committed, they entreated him to keep silence
thereof, and not to make the other Scholars acquainted heere-with, and they
would kindly entreat him heere-after: he should have large faculties, a good
viaticum, when he went for England, and all the friendship they could show him
else. Hereunto he seeming to yield, they privily conuayed him back to the
English College, and brought him to a sequestered chamber, where he lay until
his recovery. But some of the Scholars, that then were in the College (as
there were then not above 9. or 10. the rest being sent away to another place,
for fear of the plague at that time in the City) seeing him come in all
bruised, began to suspect some ill measure. So that notwithstanding their secret
conuaying him into a sequestered chamber, they found him out, and resorted unto
him; which one of the Jesuits perceauing, spoke unto them saying, Take heed,
come not near him, for we verily think he has the plague. This speech they
gave out to fear the Scholars from resorting unto him, that they might not
see, into what pleight they had brought him. But for all they could do, they
could not hinder them but that they would, and did see him. The Physician being
sent for unto him, and feeling of his pulse, not knowing what had happened,
said, that he had suffered great violence; by which you may guess, how
strangely he was handled in this combat. I know there be diverse, that will
think this History strange, and incredible; but if it chance, that Ma:
Charles Paget do but set down the actions of Fa: Holt, especially concerning
Ma: Godfray Foulgeam (the very cause of whose death he was) you shall see more
strange matters then this. And for the proof of this History of Ma: Barkworth,
my self have heard it related of three or four several parties witness
thereof, and such as desire more certainty herein, I refer them unto those,
that were then in the College of Vall^dolid, and saw him in this extremity,
and heard him afterward deliver the whole course of their proceedings with him
in the Jesuits College, as here it is set down. Of which number some are
priests, who have upon their faith, and fidelity, delivered the story thus
unto me, (as from his own mouth) and their own eyes being witness to part of
it.

Another example of their uncharitable dealing, was with Ma: Fixar (one of the
most famous men of our Nation, for diverse good parts in him) whom first here
in England they disgraced, with the note of espiall most unjustly. And
afterward he being in great credit in Lisbone in Portugale, with the Bishop
(if I be not mistaken) was by Fa: Parsons means with-drawne thence under
color of greater preferment. And when they had him thence into Spain, they
confined him into an out place, with such disgraces, and disgusts, that he
shortly died. These two I thought good to set down, omitting infinite more
examples of his, and other English Jesuits, their uncharitable dealings against
diverse, yea most part of our Countrymen, especially the Gentlemen abroad in
banishment. Believe me, it were far more ease, and tolerable for any Cath: to
live at home, and endure the afflictions of our Country for their consciences,
then to live abroad in Spain, Italy, or the Low Countries, and to suffer that
at the Jesuits hands, which I know diverse to have done.

To the fifth and last point of accusation, concerning the book of Succession,
put out in the name of one Dolman a secular priest; whatsoever his frivolous
excuses may be of vir dolorum, it may have a fitter construction from dolus,
then dolor, in that the whole work is naught else, but a deceitful
conference, and treatise, to bring an old rotten feigned title, never dreamed of
before this vir dolorum, coined it out of a whole Tessaradecades of
genealogies, and generations so long ago, that the very Island it self might
have been turned topsey turuy, since the first spring or root of that title;
and many a score, yea hundreds yet alive that do step before it. And no less
a deceit it seems to be, that he would put it forth in the name of a
reverend ancient Priest in England, to bring him into danger for the same.
Whereas he says, that he never knew Ma. Dolman, it is a manifest untruth.
For he not only knew him, but also knew him to be one of the most principal
priests of our Nation, both for the reverence of his years, gravity,
judgment, and (...) good parts, that has always opposed himself against
the unjust, and exorbitant courses of the Jesuits, whereof (...): Parsons
having such continual, and certain informations of every man in particular,
and their affections, could not be ignorant, especially he being the only man
of respect, amongst the chief Cath: of account, in the East parts of England.
And therefore it may well be presumed that this vir dolorum, as he calls
himself, did dolo malo of purpose publish the same under his name, thereby to
do him a good turn, if he could. We know the Jesuits charity toward their
back-friends, and such as stand in their way. And whereas in disgraceful sort
he seems to excuse him from such an intention, because forsooth (as he
says) Ma: Dolmans talent is known to be far inferior to such a labor:
you may gather his love, and affection toward him, and how willing he is to
do him a good turn, if it lay in his power. We can assure you that all that
know the man; and speak not of him in spleen and hatred (because he is not a
favorer, but an adversary to the Jesuits proceedings) cannot but confess,
that he is a man of excellent good parts, and not inferior to most of Fa:
Parsons faction in England: And therefore no unlikely matter, that a worthier
piece of stuff, then this Libell of Succession, might proceed from his
endeavors, if he would be so idle, as to busy himself about such ungrateful
toys.

After these objections Fa: Parsons by the mistaking of a word falsely printed,
viz: greenewatt for greenecoate, of purpose makes himself ignorant of the
matter, which he knows as well, as a beggar knows his dish. For he cannot
be ignorant of his own speeches delivered in Greenecoate, alias, Leisters
Commonwealth; a book written by himself, to the disgrace of the late Earl
of Leister. Wherein he says, that difference in Religion (speaking in the
behalf of the Scottish title) ought to be no bar in the inheritance to the
Crown. Thus you see him, like a weather-cocke, turning every way. But now he
is become so religious, in the behalf of the Spaniard, that he will have them
all to go together by the ears, and one to cut another throat: yea, suffer
all the villa^^^es, and miserable oppressions in the world by the Spaniard,
^^cause he is a Cath: rather then to admit of the Scot for that (...) is not
so, or of any other in his case; and will needs have all men bound, without
all temporal respects whatsoever, under pain of damnation to strive to bring
in a Cath: Prince, against the true heir, and him that has the best title.
Which general proposition how absurd it is, and against the very law of
nature, we have else where showed. For by the same reason were the Christians
bound, being in great multitudes in the primitive Church; yea, and whole
legions of them soldiers, and therefore in more likelihood to have prevailed
therein, then a few unarmed Cath: here in England, to have joined their forces
at every change, for the erecting of a Christian Emperor: the same being a
thing of greater importance to Gods Church, then for any King, or Prince of so
small an Island to be a Catholic. Neither can the difference of heresy, and
infidelity, the one being a subject to the Church, and the other none, much
help the matter, for your Emperors many times went by election, and faction
of the soldiers, and he that could get the force of the soldiers to
proclaim him, and bring him in, was the true Emperor, without respect of
blood, kindred, or lineage: and therefore there was more reason for the
Christians so to have done at that time, then for Cath: in these. But yet they
held no forcible courses, I mean the Christians, nor thought it lawful so to
do.

As concerning the letter to the Earl of Angus, we have already showed
sufficient out of it to the same purpose, it was cited in the Important
considerations. The whole course of the letter being somewhat long (after Fa:
Parsons manner of writing familiar Epistles,) is to no other end, then to show
his diligence bestowed 8. or 10. years, for the King of Scotland, his untimely
advantage to the crown of England. And for the matter of the French
Ambassadors going to the Pope, to procure audience for our first two
messengers, Ma. Doctor Bishop, and Ma. Charnocke, he may ask Ma. Nicholas
Fitzherbert thereof. I doubt not, but he can resolve him therein of the truth.
Whether it was the French Ambassador or a Cardinal, it was an office agreeable
to their humors and dignity. Neither is it to the purpose that the Duke of
Cessa laughed, or is fained to laugh by fa: Parsons, for all was but a Spanish
laughter, and so must be reputed nothing discrediting any action of ours:
unless he think gestures and laughters, can put us like children out of
countenance. But he is much mistaken: for if laughing will serve the turn, we
can laugh as fast as either Fa: Parsons, or the Duke either: be it spoken
without touch to his degree, which we respect in him, and all persons of
Majesty, grace, or honor.

We will here omit the usage of our two messengers, because else where we
have spoken sufficient thereof, but yet he has heaped up such a farthell of
untruths in the only relating of them, as that they were heard for three
months together, that they were not cast into prison, that justice by that
action was not violated. etc. that I am ashamed to see such palpable
unshamefastness, not one word being true, as by our former discourse to his
holiness (where things must be fifted to their verities) you may see: and also
in the copies of discourses. If furthermore you please to read Ma. Doctor
Bishops answer to fa: Parsons letter, and the censure upon the same, there you
shall find the straightnes of their usage, with a strange imprisonment under
Fa: Parsons their Gayler, and that they were never admitted to deal about
their business, nor heard: but only once, being accused before the two
Cardinals. But these are the straynings and ouerstraynings of fa: Parsons, to
defend his proceedings, which I told you of him in the preface. For his
question, how the restraining of a couple of priests may be both blaspemie to
the sea Apostolic, and to her Majesty, I answer him that this is a forgery,
and an imposture of his own, and no such conjunction made in the Epistle by
him cited. Only it is there said, that neither his holiness, nor any other
competent Judge, ever heard of the coggery, prejudice, and blasphemy done
against the sea Apostolic, and the sacred Majesty of our Prince: not that
their imprisonment was either coggery, prejudice, or blasphemy to her Majesty,
but that by their imprisonment, his holiness could not hear of their
prejudicial dealings against our Prince and state, nor of their coggery and
blasphemy against the Sea Apostolic, all Princes and Prelates in the world,
being in a sort abused by such dealings.

As touching fa: Parsons return into Spain, whether by Mendoza his
commendations, or not (which little imports) we will omit, as not much to the
purpose. All the world by experience sees, that his going thither, was not for
any good to our country, but to procure invasions, and to raise a new bloody
title to the Crown of England. I will note but two circumstances in this
fathers discourse of this matter, not to be omitted: the first is, that no
letter, or message passed for many years together between Mendoza and him, to
wit, after the desastrous affair of Ballard, and Babbington. By this you see
that Letters, and messengers were wont to pass between them before this
desastrous affair: and so it is very probable, that fa: Parsons was made
acquainted with all those practices, wherein Mendoza had dealt, concerning
Throgmorton and Babington, by those letters, and Messengers.

The second observation is, that when Mendoza some years after returned to
Madrill, there passed great expostulation between them two, about that affair
of Babbington, and some other such matters. Wherein the said Ambassador had
been thought to have been overmuch led by the forward men, and their
mates. Does not this show first, that Mendoza was a subject to the Jesuits by
some hand or other; or else, why should Father Parsons a Jesuit, expostulate
matters with a Duke, a Prince, and an Ambassador to so great a King? How durst
he otherwise have noted by way of expostulation (which shows an authority)
his being overmuch misled by the forward men, which insinuates a dislike or
check, for following too much the advice and directions of such men, blaming
the manner, and circumstances, but not directly the matter. Do not these
circumstances leave a suspicion of Fa: Parsons consent to that plot, though he
disliked that Mendoza was overmuch led therein by the forward men. See how
God will that father Parsons should bewray himself.

An answer to the fifth Chapter, concerning our pretended folly: and malignant
spirit, in obiecting certain books to father Parsons, which tend to his
commendation, and of his confutation of a little Treatise, in answer to his
book of Succession.
NOw are we come at length to the fifth chap: of books objected to Fa: Parsons,
which he will have to increase his credit. Of these books he cites 4. in
number urged by us, to wit, Philopater, the ward word: the high counsel of
Reformation, or Memorial, (as he terms it) and the book of Titles, or
succession to the Crown. These he names, but leaves out the scurrilous
pamphlets of Perneus and Green coat, or Leisters commonwealth, with such
other of that rabble; full of exasperations against the Queen and state, and
very scandalous, as containing infamous slanders against both, and in
particular against some of the counsel: which could not but give occasion to
incense them (being in power and authority) against all Catholics, and
priests in England. And all England knows, that the book against the Earl
of Leister, did mightily auert him from all Catholics in general. But it is a
true saying, which often I have heard spoken of father Parsons, that he will
rather lose his friend then his jest, and it is verified in all his
proceedings. For if once he apprehend a course, he will through with it, though
all the world smart for it: of so violent, and pernicious, and headstrong a
nature he is.

But to come to the books which by himself are cited. Of the two first, viz.
Philopater, and the Ward-word, he says no more, but that they be in defense of
the Catholic cause; the first, against the rigorous Edict, the second,
against a bloody-minded Knight. As for the first, it is full of most bitter
railing, and arrogant exasperations, as every man that has read it can tell;
besides foolish scoffings against great persons, which no man of wisdom and
charity would have used in these times, unless he had meant to whet a double
edged sword to cut Catholics throats. The second was a fond and foolish
reviving of a dead matter, not worth a rush; no man either thinking, or
regarding the follies of such a pamphlet. But by his raking again in the old
forgotten dunghill, he has raised up such new stirs, and drawn such persons
into the matter, that (as every man may see) the dead matter is now new on
foot, and alive again, and in a more hurtful sort then before. Let him see
what the Deane of Exceter, Ma. Doctor Sutcliffe, has written in answer of his
Wardword, and judge whether the wound be not worse then before. The Knights
obscure toy, no man regarded: but I dare not say so of Ma. Doctor Sutcliffs
book. And this was the wisdom of this good Fa: in aunswering the Watchword,
needs he must have his jest, though it cost him dear.

As touching his third pamphlet of Reformation, it is a world to see the pride
of the man to take upon him, to meddle with all estates, and give rules and
directions, what must be done, as well in the Court, as Country: Clergy, as
Laity. And when, forsooth, must this be done? Mary when our Country is reduced
again to Catholic religion. But when or how must that be, do you know?
Presently forsooth by a Spanish conquest. For you must understand, that this
work was hatched about the same time, or immediately after the book of Titles,
if not before: so that you see the book of Succession was for the conquest,
and this for Reformation to follow.

What simplicity was it for a man of wit, or understanding, to think that
after a Spanish conquest, he should have the managing of matters for our
Country, to prescribe orders, and laws: as though the Spaniard would have
delivered all matters into Father Parsons hand, and he must have been
Lycurgus, to direct all. Alas poor man, or rather mad man, how great a conceit
soever you have of your self, and how much so ever you presume of your
greatness with the Spaniard, you must give me leave to think, that when that
time had come (as God forbid it ever should) Ma. Spaniard would have as little
regard to Fa: Parsons, in those affairs, as to any of us. I will omit his fond
supposall of easy reformation: because both our Clergy, and Catholics,
having lived in persecution all this time, would willingly concur to a holy
and perfect reformation: as who would say, that all difficulty in that point
should remain in the priests, and Catholics of our own nation, and not
rather in the Spaniards, who then must be our good Masters, and of like, the
greatest number, at the least in all authorities, both in Court, and Country
(as in conquests happens) and all men know the Spaniards to be the most
licentious people in Europe: especially the soldier.

Where is now your ground (fa: Parsons,) of an easy reformation? but commonly
great folly, and blindness follows pride, even in the wisest men. And if
father Parsons say, that this Treatise of Reformation, was not intended upon
any conquest (although it is evident that it was) yet is it both foolish, and
arrogant: Foolish, in that he builds Castles in the air, knowing neither
when, by whom, nor how the reduction of our country shall happen, and therefore
an hundredth to one, that his foolish Chimeras will be either forgot, or
contemned when that time happens. Arrogant, in that thereby he seems to
think, that at such times our country should want men of wisdom, or piety, or
both, to see what will be then convenient, and put the same in execution,
unless, he prescribe them before hand, and tell them what they must do. But to
open a little more in particular his great folly herein, such as have read the
said Treatise, (being priests and men of credit, unto some of whom Fa:
Parsons himself showed the said book, as secretly as now it is kept) do
report that his directions are, that the municipall laws of our Country shall
be so altered, that the Civil laws must bear the sway. And this is the more
probable, because he shuffleth it of, saying little or nothing to this
objection, nor bringing in one word of the Memorial in proof hereof, or of
the disposition of the Innes of Court, how they should be employed, though he
touches both, but so as if he were afraid to show what he has written thereof
for shame. For our Clergy also, they say, that all men should be put to
pensions in the beginning: and the Colleges both in Oxford and Cambridge, in
the same sort deprived of their lands and revenues, and become pensioners. And
this has been maintained to my self by some of his favorites, as a thing
necessary (with great vehemency) both for edification, as also the disposing
of the overplus to other good uses, in the behalf of the Church. And that
which is said here to this purpose in excuse hereof is so little, and nothing
at all of Colleges, that it is apparent he was unwilling to manifest his
follies therein. What he says of the King and Counsel, he will not tell
you, for doubtless it is good stuff. Of the nobility he leaves out what he
has said concerning their pomp, train, revenues, and diet: and concerning
the inferior nobility, (which is our gentry) as Knights, Esquires, and
Gentlemen, he notes her Majesty indirectly with oppression, and contempt
thereof to her dishonor: which shows his pride, and careless carriage
toward all sorts.

Touching religious orders, (which he notes, as a member of his division of
the Clergy, in his Epistle,) he says not one word at all, but shuffleth it
off as forgotten, because therein he should have discovered his love and
affection to all orders of religious people, besides his own. All which
orders; (one order only excepted) he excludes out of England (as they
affirm) for the first seven years or more, that Master Jesuits in the mean
time might have the sway of all, and enter into the houses, livings, and
possessions of other religious orders, if they could. Thus he shuffleth and
cutteth, sparing no estate; and yet here he cites you some fragments of the
best stuff he could pick out of that proud pamphlet, to make you believe
that his endeavors therein, were holy, and zealous, merely for the good of
Gods church, and his country. Sometimes he calls them excellent notes, and
observations, and so proudly extolleth himself therein, as he dares to
affirm, (though like a stage player he takes upon him an other person then
his own) that the contradictors of this his fantastical work, have neither
virtue, nor ability to imitate him. Certainly, the man has a great conceit of
his own doings, and is too much ouercarried with partiality, and ouerweening
of himself. For otherwise, let any man of judgment and indifferency duly
weigh even that, which he has cited himself in the best manner out ^f the
aforesaid Treatise, and he will judge it to be but p^oude and foolish stuff,
and mere Chimericall conceits, ^owsoeuer they carry a show of religious
reformation: for that some of them are inconvenient, and all without his
sphere. But to leave these his foolish vanities, let us see what he says in
the behalf of his book of Succession.

First in excuse thereof he says, that it came forth, with the consent of
Cardinal Allen, and his liking and approbation: which we assure our selves to
be a malicious calumniation of the worthy Cardinal deceased. For is it like
that he, who so mightily disliked the Oration made by a young scholar in
Valledolid, wherein the title and right of England, was offered up into the
Kings hands, together with themselves, and their parents, is it like (I say)
that he would approve this seditious book, wherein all right to the Crown of
our country, is cast upon the Infanta of Spain? Who in the world will believe
this? But it is a fashion with father Parsons, to father his sedicious
practices, and foolish actions, upon other worthy men, and commonly such as
are dead, as you may see by the multitude of dead men's Letters, cited in the
Apology. Howsoever he would draw the Cardinal into this work, we know that
his affection in his latter days, was not so great toward him, as to concur
with him in any such fond intentions.

Add to this, Do: Cicill, Master Wright.
that Fa: Parsons having written this treatise, and showing the same to two
reverend priests, when it was but in papers, one after another, both of them
disliking, and dissuading him from the publishing thereof, he promised that it
should not be printed. But you will easily think, that if he had obtained the
Cardinals approbation, he would little have regarded their opinions, or
promised to have suppressed it, as he did: but would quickly have satisfied
them with his good liking, and applause. And where he says that some of our
selves at the first showed liking thereof: howsoever some one or other not
seeing into the drift of it, might ignorantly like the discourse: sure I am
that none of judgment, looking into it seriously, ever liked it. And I am sure
that both my sel^^, and diverse others of more experience utterly disliked, and
condemned it from the beginning, as diverse know. But (...): Parsons wise and
grave judgment, esteems our heads green: and therefore he says, we carpe
at that we understand not. Indeed it is to walk in a maze, and a labyrinth of
cares, to follow his turbulent brains, in all his sedicious intentions. And
yet by his leave, this was but a proud speech of his: for all the world
knows, that some, if not the most part of those, who disliked this his
heraldrie, were in learning his masters, and in knowledge of the state of our
Country, (what was convenient, or inconvenient, pleasing, or displeasing,
pacifiding, or irritating,) better informed then himself, as being men, who
lived under the burden of affliction, and were not fled the field, as he was,
neither were their wits so weak, as not able to see Fa: Parsons cunning aim
therein. Though like a Gipsey he play at fast and loose: yet men, that are
acquainted with his old tricks, can guess at his new fetches. But whereas he
says, that as times stood when the book was written, it was necessary to
handle that matter of succession to the crown: and that the first book is of
such weight, that it is an irreligious point for any Cath: to be ignorant
therein, concerning the matter of preferring a Cath: Prince; for the which, no
good Cath: can dispense with himself, upon any human respect, or
consideration whatsoever.

These his assertions are so headlong, fond, and desperate, as I know not well,
how to deal with him. As the times then stood, you say. Mean you Sir, as the
times then stood in Spain, or in England? If you were thoroughly pressed, to
name unto us a fit time for xx. years past at least, when we might
conveniently have dealt here with the point of Succession, I believe it would
pose you. Such are our laws in that behalf, as silence in such matters had
been much more fit for you, that live abroad; and less dangerous to us, who
are subject to some storms at home. You must therefore needs have relation to
the times, as they ran in Spain. And so we have descryed the traitor.
After the repulse 1588. this good Fa: hastneth into Spain: and finding no
likelyhoode, that the King would again attempt the like course against this
Realm: he thought it was time to entitle him to the Crown, if so be he might
set a new edge to his former desire thereof. If I miss of your meaning, you
may expound your self hereafter. Next: you commend unto us exceedingly, the
first book of your treatise, like a very wise and a modest man. But when I
perused it, me thought, I was reading all the while your Master in that art
Buchanan the Scot his book, de iure Regni apud Scotos: unto whom you are very
much beholden. If any will take the pains to read them both; let him condemn
me for a seducer, if I have abused him herein. Their full scope is: how they
may set up the people against their Sovereigns. Well, well, good Fa: when
people are thrust into such courses, they are not easily stayed: and you are but
a simple man for all your statizing, if you know not, that popularity in the
civil state, does not well digest a Monarchy in the ecclesiastical. You
tell us further, that it is an irreligious thing for any to be ignorant, who
shall succeed her Majesty: and therefore you (forsooth) thought it time to
teach them. But the time was, when such traiterous courses were utterly
forbidden, and that in Spain it self, by the fifth Counsel at Tolet, under
pain of excommunication. But I know your shift: you will tell us: that there
was no fear then in Spain, but that whosoever should succeed, he would be a
Catholic: which is not so with us now in England. And if not so with us, how
then Father?

It is true I confess, that there is no competitor unto the Crown of England,
that is Catholic, in whom any probability in the world of enjoying the
crown can be imagined, as all men know. But what then? Are Catholics bound
without all humane respect, to dispose themselves for such a Competitor as must
be a Catholic? Again, if Catholics would so dispose themselves, what
probability is there, that they could direct, or make such a King, being the
weakest and the deiectest number in our country, and are besides divided in
themselves, through the Jesuits honest practices, as every man sees?

And as touching the Infanta of Spain, neither is she a Competitor, more the^
every gentleman in England, that can any way derive himself from any noble
house, that has any way matched in the blood royal, (as the most ancient
Gentlemen's houses in England have done.) Neither is there any probability of
her Obtaining the Scepter, unless we be willing to become slaves to Spaniards,
and aliens: as this unnatural English Jesuit would have us. Now in this case,
as all things stand with us in England, I think there is no man of judgment,
that is not Iesuited, and so Hispanized, but will say that we are not bound
to oppose our selves for a Catholic Prince.

I might add some other reasons to this purpose: as that we may not do evil
that good may come of it. The common rule of justice requires, that every man
should enjoy that, which by right and inheritance belongs unto him. In
auncienter times, obedient and dutiful Christians, living under Tyrants,
prayed not only for them, but for their children, that they might succeed
their fathers in the Empire, though they, their said children (for ought the
Christians knew) were like to prove no better then their Fathers. We are to
commit the cause to God, in whose hands the hearts of Princes are, and who does
make, and pull down Kings at his will, praying that whomsoever it shall please
his divine providence, to inuest with the Crown and scepter of our Country,
he will vouchsafe to incline his heart unto the Catholic Roman religion and
favor of his Church. For where in man's reason, no possibility of things are,
they are always to be referred unto Gods holy providence, and disposition, who
works beyond man's expectation.

Besides, the reasons which the Council of Toledo yields, why it was
forbidden to name a Successor to the crown, as long as Chintillus the King
lived, do fight with Fa: Parsons tergiuersations. It was held an unlawful
thing so to do. But you shall have their own words; Quia et religioni
inimicum, et hominibus constat esse perniciosum, etc. Because it is both
contrary to religion, and hurtful for men, to think of future things
unlawfully, to search after the falls of Princes, and to provide for themselves
for aftertimes, seeing it is written: It belongs not to you, to know the
times, and moments, which the Father has put in his own power. We ordain by
this decree, that whosoever shall be found to have sought after such things,
and during the Princes life, to have aimed at an other, for the future hope of
the kingdom, or to have drawn other unto him for that purpose shall be cast
out of the congregation of Catholics by the sentence of excommunication.

By these things you may see whether the peremptory proposition of fa: Parsons,
be not in our case a flat paradoxe: but he never looks to circumstances of
time, persons, or place, so he may by general propositions seem to make a
fair show of somewhat.

But to come to the second part, or book of Succession, he says, and that
with protestation, that he deals indifferently for all tytles, impeaching
none, but showing the true right of every one, without partiality of favor,
more to one, then other. Which notwithstanding his protestations (that are
more frequent, then faithful) is most false, and untrue. For first, what title
is there, which he does not invalidate one way or other, with bastardie, or the
like, the Infanta her title only excepted? Does he not bring the marriage of
the Earl of Harford in question to debar that line? Does he not exclude the
Scot, by the association, and so in the rest? only he leaves the Infanta
sole heir, without spot, or stain. Again, has he not raked up a title for
the Infanta, from John of Gaunt, and before; never dreamed of in the world till
his time, to bring in her as a Competitor. I am sure he might bring in 300 at
the least within our own Country as well, and with as good right and interest
to the Crown. Is this to deal faithfully, and indifferently? But we will
leave this point to be farther searched by such as I think have taken a little
more pains herein for his sake.

Now to come to the pamphlet forsooth against the said book of Succession,
attributed to Ma. Charles Paget, but by Fa: Parsons not thought to be his, and
(I verily think) justly. But howsoever weak it may be in aunswering
particulers, by Fa: Parsons laid down in the conference about succession,
(which I think it intended not to prosecute) yet does it show the work to be
inconvenient, as well for the King of Spain himself, as for our own
Sovereign, or the king of Scots.

He that shall diligently peruse that treatise, and consider the drift of the
Author, shall find it to be of a farther reach, then fa: Parsons will seem to
discern; as aiming at nothing, but to show his folly, his desperate and
traiterous courses, which by arming subjects against their Sovereigns, may
touch in time all Christian Princes* as well as her Majesty.

It is pity that the Treatise is no more common, so as thereby the States in
England might clearly perceive, what a gallimaufrey he would make of laws,
common, civil, and Ecclesiastical, and of the whole Commonwealth, if Parsons
might have his will, according to the plot he has laid in that his worthy
work of Succession.

An answer to the sixth chapter, touching our pretended folly, and deceived
spirit, in persuading our selves to get credit by the manner of our
proceedings, with clamors and libels.
IT is a common observation, and noted of all men, that when any person gives
himself to a custom of maintaining absurdities, he will in the end grow to
persuade himself, that the things he maintains are true, be they otherwise
never so absurd and false; yea and at the first so reputed by the maintainer.
And even so fares it with Father Parsons, for certainly he could not possibly
with any face deliver matters as he does, and so apparently false, with such
confidence, yea and iterations, if the custom of wrangling, and maintaining
paradoxes, had not persuaded his understanding, that what he will defend, must
needs be as he says, and so to be believed as he tells it. Tell me (I
beseech you) who would so peremptorily have affirmed, that we never meant to
prosecute our appeal, but only to gain time. and liberty, (as he here does)
if such a custom of maintayning untruths, had not wholly possessed his
understanding in such sort, as he cannot persuade himself otherwise, then his
extrauagant imagination conceiteth; and that a strong imagination did not
assure him, that all he said should be believed? The world now sees the
contrary to this loud untruth. But to go further with him. What man that
regarded honesty, and truth, if he were not possessed with the aforesaid humor,
and custom, would say that one of our friends, sent before unto the Nuncio,
falling into the company of an Irish man, should say he was a Jesuit to win
credit? Ma. Barnbee was the precurser he aims at; who protests that he
neither was in the company of any such Irish man, neither ever used the name of
the Jesuits.

Again, out of what other humor could he auerre, that they showed diverse
pasports to the Nuncio, viz: one of banishment; the other more large, general,
and ample, full of favor, and privilege to pass, how, when, and where, and
with what they would; since it is most certain, they had but one only pasport,
and that of Banishment, this is the full truth therein. Some of the company
being stayed at Dover, contrary to their expectation, they were enforced to
send back to London: and thereupon procured a note to the searchers and
officers there, that they should pass freely, without search, with such things
as they had to carry with them. In the same sort does he deliver you another
untruth, that all that our friends could say, when they came before the Nuncio
in Flaunders, was that the Archpriest had taken away some men's faculties, and
did not equally distribute alms. There can be no men amongst you so ignorant,
as not to see this to be an egregious fiction. Was the matter of schism, and
all the wrongs therein done us, whereupon all our stirs, and contentions have
risen, nothing? Were all our complaints of meddling in state matters, whereby
the Prince and state were offended, and affliction increased, matters of no
moment? Who does not see the vanity of this untruth? And upon this follows
another as notorious; that the Nuncio, hearing they could say no more, took
upon him to end the matter, writing back to the Archpriest to require his
answer; but being afterward better acquainted with our malicious books (as
he terms them) he wrote again into England in another style concerning
their being with him, then he would have done (as after he said) if he had
been so far privy to their doings, and meanings before.

This is not only an egregious abuse of his holiness Nuncio, who most kindly
entertained our friends, and being thoroughly acquainted with their business,
approved their course, as most reasonable, and writ unto the Archpriest to
restore all in pristinum statum, (which he contemned) but also a mere devise,
in that never any such Letter appeared in England from the Nuncio, for ought we
can learn, of different style to the former, nor can they produce any such.
Besides that, the Nuncio wrote to his holiness concerning our affairs. But Fa:
Parsons must have leave to belie us, when he dare to belie and abuse his
holiness Nuncio.

Like unto this, and out of the same humor of custom, is his often malicious
comparing us to Luther, and sundry heretics: which tastes of a malicious, and
unconscionable spirit of defamation. I could say unto him, that this humor of
maintaining paradoxes and custom of lying, is, and always has been, the
first step unto heresy. But God keep him from the spirit of Machiauell and
Atheism, which these courses too much ^auour of.

An other untruth alleged by him in this chapter is, that we affirm, that his
holiness has no authority to move war for religion against any temporal
Prince. This is a manifest lie; for his temporal authority concerning this
point, was not examined by us, as I have showed above. After this, in the 77.
page, follow three untruths conjoined as in one, that we persuade all the
world, that all is sedition, conspiracy, and rebellion amongst Catholics in
England, and not matter of religion; that we make them the true Authors, and
occasioners, of all their own trouble, vexations, and dangers, by their own
indiscreet, and temerarious actions; and that we also justify the cause of the
Persecutors, and lay the fault upon the persecuted. All these are so manifest
forgeries, as impudency it self, without a brazen visage, could not auerre
it; we manifestly excusing the body of Priests, and Cath: and laying the fault
only upon some particular persons, where the true fault was indeed, thereby
to show the wrongs, and injuries that generally Cath: and Priests have
sustained without just cause, only excusing the Queen, and state by
ignorance, not knowing the difference between the innocent, and guilty; and
not justifying their ^ard proceedings. For it is one thing to excuse a fault,
and another thing to justify the same: yea, we do say, that the extremity of
affliction, exceeded in our opinions, the measure of the faults. But to deny
occasions to have been given by Fa: Parsons, and his accomplices, and some other
also, who we wish had been better advised, we cannot, unless we had, as
shameless countenances, as perhaps he frames to himself, when he denies
such apparent verities. And the same lie is iterated again in the page
following; to wit, that we make sufferings in England, not to be for
conscience, but for practicing against the Prince and state. I do greatly
fear he will prove in the end to have Laesam imaginationem in these matters:
framing to himself a conceit, that all the calumniations which he can devise
against us must be true, because he so dreameth.

Another untruth is in the 79. page, that we have sent to offer our selves to
the King of Scots: which is only spoke of malice, to bring us into suspicion
and jealousy, with our own state at home, a thing he vehemently labors to
do, by all the means he can use, as well by lies and disgraces, as by his
example of Constantius, alleged by him out of Eusebius and Sozomenus, you may
perceive: which testimony in very truth does more properly agree unto
himself, in that he having been an open professed enemy unto her Majesty
always; yet to purchase her favor, and his credit with her again, wrote a
letter some few years past unto her Highness, (a fact of no small presumption)
offering her his service, and that he would give her intelligence out of all
parts of Europe, what was intended against her, and her estate.

This Letter in his own hand has been showed unto some of our friends, who
know his hand, as well as himself, that he may not say, it was counterfeited,
which yet if he do, I think no man of wit or understanding will think
probable. For what advantage should her Majesty or the state get by
counterfetting a Letter of Parsons, to such a vain effect? If you will say to
disgrace him, I verily think, and assure my self, that her Majesty, and the
Counsel no more regard the poor fellows credit, or discredit, then you
regard your old shoes. And in reason do but think, whether it is probable,
that so mighty a Prince, and so great a state, should respect so mean a
fellow. I verily think he is altogether forgot of them, but when as at some
times his practices make him infamous to them, as the burning of Diana her
temple, made the obscure Cripple to be talked of. By this you may see, how
fitly Constans his example may be applied to himself, or to the conceit of
her Majesty, and the state. But as touching us, his malice cannot reach to his
scope: her Majesty, and the State know well, that, as to them we profess our
selves most loyal, and faithful in word, and action, so stand we most
resolute in the profession of our faith, and loyalty to God, and his Church:
which God assisting us, we will continue.

Another lying invention of his own, is, that we have devised a new discourse
about Succession, and have dealt another way in England, for the intitling of
the Crown, more to the taste (as he says) of some great personages of our
estate. This malicious falshoode he has invented newly, to bring us into
jealousy and suspicion, and thereby hatred to his Majesty of Scotland. See
how this Robin good-fellowe plays his part on all sides, to work mischief,
and contention. But he shall never find such shuffling dealing in us, about
matters that concern us not, as himself has practiced. First, he began with
the Scottish title, affirming difference in Religion no sufficient cause of
bar in right to a Kingdom (as you may see in Greenecoate, or Leisters
Commonwealth) howsoever now he inueigh against his Majesty's title, only for
Religion. Then he practiced with the Prince of Parma, to have his son
Ranutius marry to L. Arbella, thereby to fortify his title, derived from the
house of Portugal. And lastly, he practiced with the Spaniard, and has
entitled his daughter the Infanta. These have been his mutable iuglings, by
which his Cath: Majesty might see, how sure a staff he has of him, who has
run through so many titles, ever shifting to the greatest, as occasions do
require. And I am persuaded, that he will return again to his Majesty of
Scotland, or any other, if he see them likelyer once to win the spurs, then
the Spaniard.

Now as he makes no conscience to slander us, thereby to work our discredits
to the uttermost of his power, so to fortify his falsehoods against us, he does
arrogate unto himself, and his, whatsoever good, and laudable action is done
by any of us, or our friends. As for example, the motion of a toleration, and
mitigation of extremities in cause of Religion, known to be first effectually
proposed by Ma: Bluet, and Ma: Clerks means, and as well the petition, as
instructions there-vpon, with informations of the manner of ease desired,
drawn by them, and put into the hands of such of worth, discretion, and wit,
as prosecuted the same: this (I say) he arrogateth to his favorites, and
friends, though I know that some of them did in many places inueigh against the
^ute, and auerted men, as much as in them lay, from harkning thereto, framing
strange falsehoods, and lies about our intentions, and the action it self. And
I am half persuaded, that if the Jesuits had not been, the matter had found
better success: For it is well known, that they have always been enemies to
all toleracions in Religion; because they think, that they should perhaps be
expelled, or forced to retire themselves, upon the conditions of security, to
be given unto the Queen, concerning her person, and state: which they perhaps
are unwilling to be drawn unto, considering thereby all their plots, and
practices should be cut of. Neither happily will the State trust them (in whom
it has found such treachery) by reason of their mutual bond, wherein they are
all tied to follow the direction of Fa: Parsons, the Archeplotter of state
practices against our Prince, and Country. And to prove this part, concerning
the Jesuits affection toward toleration. Fa: Parsons their ringleader, and
square to the rest, openly in Rome before the Scholars (as diverse will testify
against him) made a long speech against toleration of Religion in England, (in
that as he said) Cath: thereby would grow cold, and lose their feruencie, they
had got by persecution. See whether the motion of toleration, was like to
proceed from these me^, and yet he insinuates some motive unto her Majesty,
and the Counsel to deal with him, or his party; because forsooth we being
divided, (as he says) have little credit. By this also indirectly you may
perceive his mind to toleration in Religion, or any benefit to Cath: seeing he
disgraceth to his power, such as deal for their good, when he knows that her
Majesty, and Counsel, will not trust him, or any of his faction, in whom they
have found so much sedition.

But to proceed with the rest of this Chapter, Fa: Parsons would have you in
the beginning, wonder at our friends confidence in Cath: Countries, in that
they durst not go to the Nuncio in Flaunders, without a pasport. But he might
more justly have told you, that our confidence in him, and his fellow Jesuits
was such, that our friends durst not commit themselves into their hands. For if
they had so done, they had all been laid fast for ever coming at Rome; the
Jesuits had so earnestly practiced with the Spanish Ambassador against them,
affirming that they were enemies unto the King, and I know not what. In so much
that (notwithstanding their pasport) the Ambassador came posting down about
them, and Fa: Baldwine, Doct: Caesar, Clement, and others, ran with open mouth
against them to the Nuncio: whereby one of them (as it is known) had like to
have been taken by a policy, if he had been in his Inn. His horse was seized
on, until the Nuncio sent for the Governor, and gave him a check. Consider
then whether they had not cause, to fear the Jesuits, whose irreligious
oppressions our former messengers had once tasted before. But more of this will
be said in another treatise. And as for their telling the Nuncio, that they
were in fear to come unto him: it was true, they said so, and gave their
reasons, not as fa: Parsons sets them down, but that we had been often
provoked by our Archpriest unto him, and threatened with him by these words,
that he, the Archpriest had beaten us with rods, but the Nuncio would beat
us with scorpions. These only were the reasons given to the Nuncio, which were
most true. And for the breve, and his Commission, to end the matter, our
Messengers were content, and did refer themselves unto him. Whereupon he
writ to the Archpriest, to appear by himself, or Proctors, and the Doctor
stayed in Paris to meet them. But the Archp: refused (as seemed) for he never
appeared one way, or other, until his two Agents, some months after, went
over to be his Proctors in Rome, who passed indeed by the low countries, but
what they did there we know not. Only it was said, that being before the
Nuncio, they could not deliver their tale, and that the Jesuits were ashamed of
them. Insomuch that one of the Jesuits of that Country demanded, if the
Archpriest had no more sufficient men in England to send about his affairs.
This was reported, whether it be true or no, I will not auerre.

Touching the Breve, the Nuncio plainly told our brethren, that he had but a
Copy thereof, and that the Archp: had the original sent him long before,
marueyling, as he said, that he had not published it: adding further unto them,
that they were not bound to take notice thereof, since the Archpriest had not
divulged it. And whereas Fa: Parsons says, that our friends being at Doway,
were exclaimed against by the Rector, and seniors there, it is a manifest
untruth. They found nothing but kindness at their hands. For English men of
worth abroad, I think fa: Parsons cannot name one, that exclaimed against
their journey. But I am sure, that all of reconing have ever exclaimed against
his unconscionable practices, as well lay Gentlemen and Nobles, as of the
Clergy: and he can name very few of esteem of either sorts, which have not
complained against him.

As touching his reports written concerning a toleration, upon condition, the
Jesuits and Archpriest should be recalled, I would it were true. And if he had
respect to the common cause, he would wish so to; but they use more to regard
their private interest, then any public good. Concerning the matter of
schism, he writes three untruths in three, or four lines. First, that
Lysters Libell was never published: secondly, that soon after it came forth,
it was recalled by the Archpriest at the atonement. Here are involued two
falsehoods: first, that the atonement was soon after the divulging of that
Libell, there being a full year betwixt them: secondly, that then it was
recalled, which is a lie, for he promised only, the matter should never be
urged, and that the Treatise should die, but he never performed either of those
conditions. Thirdly, that it could not be said to infame any, which is an
impudent assertion; above 30. de facto being defamed by it, and so held, and
practiced against thereupon, besides an hundredth at the least of neuters, and
favorers, whom it concerned.

But to leave these apparent untruths, his best refuges, let us come at length
to Card: Sega his Catalogue or Memorial, alleged against the scholars of
Rome. Fa: Parsons notes the causes of those tumults in Rome, to have been
raised upon the same causes, and against the same persons, that these here in
England have been, and therein we yield he says truly. And for the persons,
to wit: the Jesuits, we agree with him, that as they were the men impugned by
them there, so are they also by us here. Touching the cause also, which he
ascribes to liberty, and freedom from subjection, as such liberty, and
freedom excludes tyranny, oppressions, and unjust insultations of the
Jesuits, we likewise grant it: but as he maliciously co^menteth upon it, with
hatred of order, discipline, and superiority, we say, and will convince him,
that he speaks of malice, and against his knowledge. For he cannot deny,
but that the scholars in Rome, excepting justly against their violent tyranny,
and oppressions, offered notwithstanding to admit of all the bonds, and rules,
whereto any of themselves were bound by their order (their vows excepted) and
to tie themselves to the observance thereof, during their aboade in the
College. If then this were in hatred of order, and discipline, he must needs
grant, that there is no order, nor discipline observed in his own order. And
if there be, let any man judge, whether for voluntary Scholars to live after
the manner and order of religious men, be to contemn order and discipline. But
this offer was rejected by the Jesuits, intending a farther slavery, and
bondage over them, as in the history of those stirs shall appear more at
large. And for our selves here in England, Parsons confesses, that we were
about a sodalitie with rules, and superiors. How does it then follow, that we
hated order, and discipline, who without constraint sought for both? But
whosoever gives not consent to Jesuits inventions, and fa: Parsons order, and
discipline, must be termed a libertine, and disorderly companion; though his
inventions contain plain slavery, and tyranny, as is manifest in the
Archipresbyterie.

Now touching the fragments which he cites out of Card: Sega his Memorial,
all of them being squared to his own humor; they give great occasion to
suspect that they were not his: for that he is made to say, that the Jesuits
have more force, skill, and use in managing of souls, then every other
priest: and consequenly to remove them out of the English Clergy, were as if
one would let forth the best, and most digested blood out of a man's body,
thinking thereby to cure, and preserve him. Is there any man of judgment, or
understanding, that can think this speech could proceed from a Cardinal of
gravity, and judgment, being so contrary to all practice of Gods Church?
Besides, it sounds very ill, to prefer religious men (only dedicated to
themselves) in managing of souls abroad, before the seculer Clergy: whose
proper function, is to give themselves wholly to the direction and help of
others, and to be prepared even by their vocation (and that of justice) to give
their lives for their flock, which no religious man (as he is a religious man)
is bound unto, more then of charity at the most. And heereuppon it is, that
some Divines too probably defend, that to be a Pastor supposes a state of
perfection, as well as to be a Bishop; as the Sorbonists.

Again, this speech is to condemn the whole practice of Christ's Church from
the beginning, as to have taken the worst, and weakest order for helping of
souls. For she has always preferred the seculer Clergy to that office, and
never suffered the religious to intermeddle therein, but upon special
privileges, and graunts, and by dispensation. Furthermore, the Church may
stand without any particular order of religious, or all of them: but she cannot
stand without the seculer Clergy. How then is it true, or sound to say, that to
remove the Jesuits out of England, is to purge away the best, and most digested
blood, a man would think that were the best, and most digested blood, by which
the body were necessarily maintained, and without the which it could not live,
and not that, without which it might live. And then must it follow, that the
seculer Clergy is the best and most digested blood, by which the Church of
Christ lives, and without which it cannot live, and not the religious, whom
she may want.

Judge then whether this erroneous discourse were like to proceed from the
Cardinal, or rather were not fained by Fa: Parsons himself. Another speech of
the Cardinal is said to be, that the Jesuits, being united together, have
better notice of the virtue, talents, and merits of every particular Priest,
that comes into England, and consequently can better assure Cath: what is in
them, and how far they may rely upon each one of them. This discourse
tends only to bring all into the Jesuits hands, and to minister occasion of
infinite oppressions of such Priests, as they shall not affect; as by many
experiences of disgraces, done unto Priests at their first entrance by the
Jesuits, we have found, as also in that great extraordinary privileges have
been granted to men of small talents, being their favorites. How like is it
then, that these were the Card: words? Again afterward he is brought in to
say, that he that takes away from that unfortunate kingdom of England, the
labor of this society in these days, seems to me, not only to take away
the salt of that Land; but even the sun of that afflicted Church. Are these
speeches like to proceed from a grave Cardinal? I marvel how often Fa:
Parsons has heard religious men called, sal terrae, or lux mundi, seu
ecclesiae, they being, by their institute, properly to live in obscurity in
Cells, and Monasteries, and not public in the world. When Christ used these
speeches, he spoke unto his Apostles, whom he sent in to the world to preach,
and instruct people, and to be conversant with them, as well to edify them, by
example of life, as wholesome doctrine, and not unto such as were to live
sequestered from the world, as religious men are, by their institute, and order.
And if any way Fa: Parsons can writhe these Metaphors to appertain unto
religious persons, it is as they are by particular privilege, and dispensation
sent into the world, and not as they are religious men, sequestered from the
world. Judge then how the Jesuits can justly be said, to be the salt of
England, or sun of our Church, and not rather the Priests, unto whom the
function of preaching, and teaching belongs of office, and not unto the
Jesuits. This application therefore of salterrae, and lux mundi unto the
Jesuits, does not seem to proceed from a Cardinal. Again, it is affirmed
that he says, that it was neither convenient, nor possible to remove the
Jesuits from the government of the Colleges, without ouer-throwing of all.
This is so notorious a paradoxe, as it seems incredible to proceed from the
wisdom of a Cardinal. Were there no sufficient men in the world, to undertake
the government of the Colleges, with preservation of things, but that all must
go to ruin, if the Jesuits vpheld not all? what pride, what arrogancy is
this? Could the Seminaries of Doway, and Rhemes, be maintained, and vpheld
almost 40. years without them, and must now all go to ruin without their
managing? Are all our English men in the world abroad so insufficient, as that
no one can be found able to take upon him the government of a poor College?
I wish it would please Ma: Jesuits, to leave the government thereof a while
(which they say their General has desired to do) and make trial, whether we
could not find men sufficient, for the managing of our Colleges, yea more
sufficient then any Jesuit they have, which never yet could maintain that one
poor College of Rome four years together, without some tumult, or other:
which in twenty years happened not in the College of Rhemes, governed by our
own seculer Priests, Doctor Allen, and Ma: Baily: But, for all their
complaints, they find too great a sweetness, to forgo the government of the
Roman College. Neither does the Counsel of dismissing some with these
terms of wanton, or lascivious Colts, seem to proceed from the Cardinal;
especially if we consider, that the chiefest of such, as were to be dismissed,
whom he terms wanton Colts, were (...) be addressed for our Country, as they
were. How unfitting such men were for such an excellent vocation, the world may
judge, and think, whether in conscience they could give them faculties, yea,
and some of them particular favors also for our Country. This conuinceth that
either there was no such speech uttered by the Cardinal, or else uttered
without true ground upon partiality to the Jesuits. Unto whom it seemed he
leaned too too much, in that having another (one M Monsignior oro) joined with
him, as Visitor in these stirs, and finding him inclined to equity, and no
whit partial to the Jesuits; he shaked him off, taking the matter wholly into
his own hands. Which might make us to think, that he was somewhat partial
in his memorial delivered up; but if he were so partial as Fa: Parsons
relates, it was admirable, and most unjust, as we have showed.

After this memorial Fa: Parsons adds two circumstances, which he applies
to the proceedings, as well of the Scholars in Rome, in those tumults, as to
ours here in England. First, he says, that whereas in those it was only
suspected, that the heretics, and common enemy had their hands, as ayders, or
abetters, to make these demands of removing the Jesuits from England, and the
College; now it is openly known, and confessed, that they are indeed the
chief dealers, and stirrers therein. This is a common practice with Jesuits,
when any thing makes against them, then to bring in the common enemy, as an
actour with us, thereby to grace themselves, as impugned by heretics, and
disgrace their opposers, as pertakers with the common enemy: but it is as
ridiculous a shift, as common. For who of wisdom, or understanding will
think that the state of England cannot deliver themselves of a handful of
Jesuits, without the concurrence of a few poor secular priests, or that they
respect, or regard such simple helps. These buzzes are for fools, and
children, and not for men of judgment and discretion, to regard. The second
circumstance is, that as the students in Rome sought to procure some Princes
Ambassadors to favor their cause, by making it matter of state; so in like
manner we should deal with the King of France, that he may back us. But Fa:
Parsons must understand, that we are not so simple, but that we do know it
to be a matter of state. And that point is now most evident by the uniform
banding of the Jesuits, and Spaniards, in this our cause. The Spaniards do
openly profess themselves to be for the Jesuits, as in the behalf of their
own interest, and to requite them, the Jesuit does openly profess himself in
Rome, to be for the Spaniard, engaging him in the cause. Whereby come all the
demurres and delays in that Court, wherewith our brethren are there now
perplexed, and driven off from the deciding of our cause. What the strength of
the Spaniard can work against them, they shall be sure of. Our cause therefore
concerns not only his Majesty of Scotland, but also of France, and all
other Princes adjoining. For if the Spaniard should prevail against England,
(whereunto all these endeavors of the Jesuits tend;) then is not only his
Majesty of Scotland deprived of his possibility, but also the King of France,
and other states endangered by his mightines, and neighborhood. A thing which
Princes will consider: say Fa: Parsons what he can to the contrary.

An answer to the 7. chapter, concerning five other of our books, falsely
termed by Fa: Parsons absurd, and slanderous Libels.
I Remember that this father Parsons, in the discovery of John Nichols, says,
that the fellow when he came to Rome, went only to the Brothell-houses,
Canalls, and base, and stinking corners of the City, where he might find most
lewdest, and filthiest stinkes, and not to any public places, as Court,
Churches, or the like, where he might see majesty, order, reverence, or
devotion, etc. And thus, or to the like effect he writes of him, because of
the venom, filth, and reproachful slanders which he disgorged afterward
against that holy place. And even so may it be said, that he himself, this
good Father, in the survey of all the books that have been writ by any of our
friends, has employed his greatest pains to avoid all substantial, and
sound matters, such indeed as convinced the understanding of the Reader, and
to rake only in by-corners, and matters of least moment, carping at sharp,
and choleric speeches, delivered in heat, running upon some such
particulers, as were writ upon relation only. Where if he find any
circumstance failing (as commonly in matters related at the second hand falls
out, though the substance thereof be never so true) there he fasteneth his
hold, and makes such clamors and outcries, as though the matters were mere
inventions, really, and totally falsehoods, and never any such things had been
in rerum natura. And so does he deal in the seventh Chapter, as well
concerning the book entitled, The sparing Discovery, as the rest. His first
entrance upon the said Discovery, is with general inuectiue; and then he
carpeth at the posie, or sentence: vidi calumnias, quae sub sole geruntur,
which he will retort upon the writers. But if you consider the proceedings of
the Jesuits, and their faction against us, in the beginning of the erection of
Ma: Blackwell to his dignity, with what reproaches, indignities, and calumnious
slanders they abused us; you will say we had reason to use that sentence in
the discovery of such dealings. It is an easy matter to dally in this sort.
We could with more show of reason catch at his sentence, prefixed to this
libell of Manifestation, viz: their folly shall be manifest to all men: Which
saying, how fitly it may be retorted upon fa: Parsons, you will perceive, if you
do but consider his actions, and intermedling in matters, as well unpleasing as
unbefitting, and unbeseeming him; whereby he has not only kindled a flame of
sedition here in our poor afflicted Church; but also drawn a great burden
upon his own neck, in opposing himself against our whole Clergy: which he
needed not to have done, as also perpetual discredit thereby, and a note of a
factious, tumultuous, seditious, headstrong man. All the world certainly that
shall see the effects of this his turbulent spirit, as well in these our
affairs, as in matters of continual practices against our Prince, and
country, must needs say, that his folly is exceeding great, and apparent, in
giving us occasion of publishing such his idle fancies, furies, and indiscreet
attempts unto the world, which by moderate, and indifferent dealing, he might
peradventure have avoided.

His second sentence is, of the unclean spirit, which (if we consider his
foresaid actions, and the great oppressions, wrongs, and unjust, and
uncharitable injuries, and vexations wrought thereby) may not very unfitly be
applied to himself. For the devil where he comes, is always busy,
thrusting the party on to mischief, and the greater and more mischief a man
does, the more do we suppose the devil to be busy with him. Now he that
shall consider fa: Parsons continual contentions from the beginning, with all
men, even of his own order (as has been showed) as also his mighty, and
great attempts in matters of state, (whereby has risen great vexations of
innocent Catholics,) his detestable diffamations, not only of our poor
scholars in Rome, but also of our whole nation in them: his setting of our
quiet Clergy together by the ears (a work proper to the devil) with
infinite wrongs to particular men, may tell me at leisure, whether the parable
of the unclean spirit, and seven more returning, might not be retorted upon
himself. But we rather wish his reformation* then any such oppressions of
seven spirits, as uncharitably he charge us with.

His speech of S. Hillary, proficit semper, etc. might also be returned to the
manifesting of his own follies daily more and more, in that notwithstanding
the euidencie of our cause, proved by us, and still by him reproved, he still
opposes him self: which in the end will prove wilful indiscretion. Also his
often commending of himself, and urging of his own good deeds, and benefits
done to us, argues no great wisdom. Sure I am that many of us, neither ever
saw, or tasted of his great bounty: but many have felt the smart of his
exorbitant actions.

But to pass over this trifling, induced thereunto by his example, in the
progress of his discourse, he canuaseth an humble, and good religious
peticion of Ma. Watsons, (wherein he desires charitable remembrance of his
poor sinful soul) in such sort, as he shows very little charity, or
religion, rather scoffing at the speech with words of disdain, as sinful
sudds, etc, then otherwise. And when he comes to his person, he bewrays no
small envy and gall, by describing him with such disdain, and so falsely also,
(as all men that know him may see) that it seems it grieved him, that he
was made a man, and within the number of reasonable creatures. Afterward, and
conformable heereunto, does he go about to tax his mind (an higher envy then
the former) with a vain brag, and proud assertion of the Jesuits in
general, as men of contrary life, spirit, judgment, will, works, and manners
to him, by a sequel, as it were involuing suspicions (as usually the Jesuits
do) of I know not what imaginations of disorderly life; most falsely, and most
uncharitably. But let fa: Parsons temper this kind of suspicious, and
uncharitable writing, or we will promise him, we will open such matters of his
holy brethren, as shall make both him and them ashamed thereof. Yet are we
not willing to rippe up the lives of any, knowing, that the infirmities of
every Christian, should rather be pitied, and relieved by prayer, then
rejoiced at, or revealed, as the Jesuits use to do in what they can, by all
that oppose their proceedings: discrediting the persons of those, whose cause
they cannot infringe: which is a trick rather of a Machiuilian, then a good
Christian. This course we have hitherto avoided (as all men can witness) never
entering into the particular lives of any Jesuit, or favorite of theirs: and
we wish not to be urged unto it against our wills, by such kind of dealings,
least happily fa: Parsons, and all his company, repent that they ever provoked
us thereunto.

After his uncharitable descriptions of his body and mind, he falls to flat
railing against him, calling him a lost ladde, the stain of his religion, and
order, permitted by God, and used by the devil, and the like uncharitable
stuff: with no less uncharitable surmises of his peace made with my L. of
London, as though it had been for some treachery, or other. All which
calumniations discover envy, and malice without reason. For it is well known
by such, as dealt for him, that his peace was made upon honest conditions, and
most lawful, and that he stood both nice and scrupulous about the admittance
of the offer at the first; which argues, that it was neither sought by
himself, nor accepted upon any base, or unlawful conditions. Besides, it is
well known, that since his coming in, and his peace made, he has done much
good as well to diverse in particular, yea and some of the Jesuits friends, who
little deserved it at his hands (if he had respected persons, or sought to
requite wrongs) as also to the good of all the Catholics in general.

And whereas father Parsons notes out of Cominaeus, that in time of sedition
the worst men grow fastest, who in a quiet state should not be respected, it
seems to be a great touch of his own credit, who (as we have noted before)
never loved in his life to be out of factions, and garboyles, raising and
maintayning tumults in all places in the world amongst English Catholics
wheresoever he came, and continually tempering in our English affairs, as
well against our prince, state, and whole country, as our Clergy, and
Colleges: both which he, and his have tossed, and turmoiled from time to time
with such seditious plots, practices, and garboyles, that it is a world to
consider his busy working humor in these affairs. By which means chiefly,
he has made himself famous, and infamous to the world. See how well father
Parsons has profited by his example out of Cominaeus. For Ma. Watson, all men
know that he has been in very great esteem amongst Catholics abroad, before
these troubles, and more then now he is, by reason of the Jesuits good words
against him, calling him into suspicion, and jealousy of treachery, in respect
of his supposed peace made with the state: which argues, that he has not so
much grown by trouble, or factions (as indeed Fa: Parsons has done.)

After all this, to show more his particular malice against him, he runs
back unto his first going beyond the seas, and his coming to Rhemes, whether
coming (as he says) a poor begging boy, he was taken in of charity, and his
first allowance was, for a good time, pottage only, and licking the dishes,
which other men had emptied before, and afterward was admitted to serve at the
Table, and carry away dishes, and then to make beds, and such other offices: in
which kind he served one Ma: Boast a Priest, etc. All this he spitteth out
against Ma. Watson, wherein you may note a particular malice against the man;
as he showed before in the Apology against Ma. Doct. Bagshawe. For you must
note, that those always, that most stand in this Fathers way, on them he
lays load; as if all his powers were recollected to wreake his teene (as the
saying is) or work revenge. But this kind of fashion will sooner discover his
malice amongst wise men, then procure him credit in his raylings. For if he
were innocent, and not indeed really touched by Ma. Watson, where his sore
lies; what need he to kick so fast; reason and quiet reply would sooner have
showed his innocence (if he had been innocent) then this outrageous
scolding. Believe me if I were altogether ignorant in these affairs, I should
suspect Fa. Parsons to be galld, and rubbed upon the old sore, by his
intemperate inuectiues against him: for that he has taken upon him to discover
his actions, and practices, and so I think the like suspicion will these
immodest inuectiues breed in all wise men's heads. Consider whether fa: Parsons
impatience, and passions, make him not to forget himself, and show overmuch
folly; but he that itcheth, must needs scratch.

Now as concerning Ma. Watsons first going over beyond the Seas, in such mean
estate (as he reports) it is nothing so. For being descended of good, and
honest parentage, both by father and mother; out of both which stocks has
descended worthy men, as the last Bishop of Lincoln, and two Abbots, one of
the which was the Abbot of Blancheland, and one Lord Prior, out of his mothers
line, it cannot be imagined, that he came of any base, or contemptible stock,
though indeed his parents, through some desastrous fortunes, were not in their
latter years in that abundance in the world, as they had, and might have
been, had not such chances, incident unto men in this life befalne them, as
might have made the richest Monarchs mean, and poor: which notwithstanding
was such, as always brought him up in good sort. And for his going over, it
was with such difficulties, and so often repulses having been nine times upon
the Seas for that purpose, that it might consume no small store of money, and
exhaust a well lined purse. Yet notwithstanding, all this his resolution was
such, and Gods concurrence so effectual, that at the length he arrived
according to his desire at Rhemes, where he was lovingly entertained, when as
by reason of the poverty of that place, diverse others were rejected, and forced
to retire to the Camp, or become Seruing-men elsewhere, and his entertaynment
was equal with other men's children of better birth, friends, and parentage,
then ever Fa: Parsons was, and not as a beggar, or of charity, (but as the
admittance of every one, that there was admitted, was opus charitatis) nor in
such mean: and base sort, as maliciously without reason, or truth, Fa: Parsons
affirms; but as a Scholar of the house with the same privileges, that other
had, and so employed unto his book, wherein he profited, as all men see.
Neither (as we understand) was he employed in making of beds, as this Fa:
insinuates to his discredit, although such an office in a College to a
priest, as Ma: Boast was, and the other, but then a youth, was no disgrace, nor
empeachment of credit, as all men know.

But to the point, Ma: Pibush, now I hope a blessed saint, was the man that
attended in that kind upon Ma. Boast, not Ma. Watson. Sed malicia, quo vades?
Thus you see how blind Fa: Parsons envy toward this man is, in obiecting
things, as discredit, which if they had been so, had not been any discredit
at all, if not honor: but being not so, does manifestly convince him of an
envious disposition toward the man. If we should now do, as Fa: Parsons
here has done, enter into the Genealogies of his fathers, and associates, we
could emblazon F: Parsons.
one for a black-smiths son, if so well; F: Garnet.
another, for a very poor, and mean man's child; F: C^rrey.
a third, for a Tanners son; F: Oldcorn*
a fourth, for an Apothecarie his Prentice; F: Percy.
the fifth, for a poor boy, sent over by a priest, one of our friends; F:
Banks.
another, for a Taylours son, and heir, and in that yet som-what. And how
many more might we reckon of as meanestate, if birth should disparage their
degree, and function? but this is a conceit distasting the judgment of any
wise, or indifferent man: since not birth, but merits, and virtuous qualities
makes priests. Neither do we register these we have done, as any touch to
their dignities, and priesthood, but only to check Fa: Parsons exorbitancie,
and discover his folly in bewraying himself, and his best friends.

After all these disgraceful speeches steeped in gall, he touches his lapse,
with more envy, then all the rest, taxing him therein of many untruths, as is
known to such as were best acquainted with all circumstances thereof, and unto
whose refutation we will leave all particulers, as also the falsifying of his
letters, which yet as Fa: Parsons alleges them, taste of more true virtue, and
humility, then he shows charity, in prosecuting the same. He has forgotten
belike how dastardly he fled himself in time of persecution, as Ma. Doct:
Bagshawe notes in his answer to the Apology. Soon after this, he speaks
of his breaking of prison, which may worst of all be noted by him: since it is a
thing so familiar, and ordinary with his pupills, both with greater scandal,
and less cause, then ever was in his; as may appear both by Ma. Lysters
departure out of the Marshalseas, (his fellow prisoners having given their
words for his true imprisonment to the Keeper, whereby they were left in no
small danger) as also Ma. Barrows, and Ma. Rowse, their apprehension caused by
his escape. Such danger, and scandal, by breach of faith, and promise, never
happened in the others escapes. And as for the death of Mistress Ward, for
cooperating to Ma. Watsons escape, she might have avoided it, if she had not
returned to the place from whence she came with the boat after his departure,
by which overmuch zeal she was apprehended, examined, and there-vpon
executed. Her zeal of repairing to that place, to have him prayed for, and to
hear if he were safely departed, being more really the cause of her death,
then the cooperation to his escape, which she had avoided, if she had not
repaired thither, whereof he also warned her before hand, and she promised him
she would not: neither knew he of her apprehension, until news was brought
him of her death, which grieved him sore, as being known to carry that stout,
and grateful mind, as he would either by return have saved her life, with
loss of his own, or else have offered himself to death with her.

Now as concerning his gallantnes, with chains, jewels, and I know not what,
it will be a thing worth the noting particulerly, for father Parsons credit,
and his followers, and fauorits. Thus then was the matter: There was a
Pettyfogger of the Jesuits, a fawner on their favors, and one that to his
petty posse was a factour for them. This good fellow, a Goldsmith by his
profession (and som-what more) fold a certain Jewel to Ma. Watson, which he
prised unto him at ten pound, which Jewel, when it came to be looked into by
another Goldsmith, one Ma. Pareman in Tower street, it proved worth not above
eight shillings. This was the great Jewel that made Ma. Watson so gallant; in
which how honestly he was used by this petty-factor of the Jesuits, you may
see, and not he alone, but others likewise: For he sold certain rings unto a
Gentlewoman for gold, which in the wearing proved copper, and the best, but
silver, and guilt. Was not this a pillory matter? and yet was this Fa: Gerards
man of old: against whom, as also against all the Jesuits, he was wont
afterward to exclaim most bitterly, until that after three or four cosening
tricks played to Ma. Watson, and so many more brothers of our friends, some
whereof might deprive him both of ears, and life, (were we so bloody, as
perhaps others would be in this case) he being discarded for a base consening
companion from amongst us, ran to the Jesuits side again, to rail against
Ma. Watson, and others, as at Framhingham he did of late: and is not this a
credit for the Jesuits, to have so famous a disciple of their own brood, to
build upon in detraction? This (I say) was that great Jewel; for other Jewels,
unless it might be a ring on his finger, he never had such store, as this
Father reports, which argues the honesty of Fa: Parsons, in taxing him so
unjustly with Chains, Jewels, Rings, Bracelets, etc. and those got by
importunity, and shifts. How were such things gotten by importunity and
shifts, which he never had, more then here I have noted? which indeed was
purchased by a shift, but such a shift, as Fa: Parsons would be loath to
purchase another such of the like price.

He says that he could recount diverse other particulers if he had but half
the desire to discredit him, as he says Ma. Watson has malice to belie the
Jesuits. But believe him not (good people) for he that would invent lies, as
you see to discredit him: would sure never have omitted truths, if he had
known any, that would have impeached him, either in fame or credit. And we
know father Parsons not to be scrupulous in taxing men's fames, and credits, as
you may see in his Apology, and this his Manifestation, wherein no one of his
adversaries passes without his blazon, either in general or particular, as
well in the relation of matters in Wisbich and Rome, as also our late affairs
here in England.

He that takes father Parsons, or most of his pupils here in England to be
scrupulous in this point, is mightily deceived. For it is, and has been the
best weapon they fight withal, maintaining their unjust, and uncharitable
attempts, and practices against Innocents by diffamations, and disgraces cast
upon them, by calumnious speeches, and untrue supicions. And that appears
even in the very next lines, where he affirms, that Ma. Bluet made Ma.
Watsons peace with my L. of London, upon condition that he should rail against
the Jesuits, the Archpriest, and their friends, and to write, and print books
by the Bishops direction. Which is a notorious untruth, besides the malicious
intention of bringing them both into obloquie amongst Catholics for suspicions
of trecheries, etc. no man better knows the falsehood thereof the^ my self,
and the good he has done to diverse Catholics in distress, since his peace
made, do convince the contrary. I may not omit this Fathers blessing in the
end and close of this untrue, and uncharitable suspicion, which is thus: This
was William Watsons holy vocation in the state, and dignity of perdition,
wherein now he stands. A learned censure of a Jesuit, and father of all our
English Jesuits. I marvel how he durst thrust himself so peremptorily into
Gods chair. But of likelihood the man has some gift of discerning of spirits,
or else some other such superexcellent illumination, as Ma. Wiseman his friend
speaks of. Go to, go to, proud Jesuit: remember who says, that it is not
lawful for thee to condemn thy brother in this sort.

But now let us see, The Sparing discovery.
what he says to the book of Sparing discovery. First of all he cauileth at
a comparison made betwixt hipocriticall religious men, such as live, in a
religious habit, an irreligious life; which is so true a comparison, as no man
will, or can infringe it. Neither was the example, or comparison brought in, as
of all religious persons generally: but of such as inwardly, and in their
actions, and life perform not, what outwardly they make show of by their
habit. From this cavil he proceeds to the justifying of Wisemans seditious
pamphlet, Wiseman wholly Iesuited, if not a Jesuit.
written in disgrace of priests, with a pharisaicall extolling of the Jesuits,
commending by the fained speech of an Angel, all Catholics to the Jesuits
direction, or to such, as are by them appointed: (for to that end, was it writ,
howsoever he discourses in general terms of such, as live under obedience)
because forsooth they are more free from error, more familiar with God, more
particulerly illuminated, and more specially endued with the spirit of guiding
souls. Which is both a seditious, a false, and erroneous speech, contrary to
the practice of Gods Church from the beginning (as we have showed:) which has
always committed from time to time, the guiding of souls to the seculer
Clergy, as both more fit, and more able, and not to the religious, but by
special privilege, and as coadiutors only therein, and not principal
Agents; and if at any time any religious person for his sanctity, and
extraordinary discretion, have been called to take the charge of souls upon
him, he has thereby been made a member of the seculer Clergy, and exempted
from his religious order, as happens in all Bishops taken out of Monasteries
and religious orders. Whereby you see that a religious man (as so) is not so
fit, nor adjudged by the Church to be more specially endued with the spirit of
guiding souls, then the seculer Clergy. I will not say, that this
hypocritical vaunt smelled of Lucianisme. Neither does S. Bernards words,
rarius cadunt, velocius surgunt, securius ambulant, saepius irrorantur, prove
that therefore they be more specially endued with the spirit of guiding souls.
For then would it follow, that Paulus Simplex was more fit to have been a
Bishop, then most Bishops in Saint Bernards time, because of his excellent
virtues, above any Jesuit, that I know alive. But such is the fondnes of father
Parsons, when he will maintain paradoxes.

Touching the confident speech, uttered in the priests behalf, of Gods
sufficient direction in the execution of our function, it is no vain, nor
proud brag, but an assured repose in the power of priesthood: which God in
the execution thereof, by his holy spirit directs to the effects intended
according to the institution thereof; which is so far from Luciamsme, as it
were heresy to deny the same. Neither do we say, as falsely Fa: Parsons
affirms, that by the character of priesthood, we are made free from sinning,
or erring, nor is there any assurance arrogated unto our persons, by that
speech (as to the Jesuits by the former,) but only unto the power, and
authority of our priesthood, which has the greatest assurance in the world.
It is also false that he says, we jest at familiarity with God, frequent
meditation. etc. but reprove that vanity in such fond Priscillianists, as will
arrogate unto themselves such privileges, and prerogatives, of illuminations,
familiarities, (and I know not what) to the contempt of the seculer Clergy, as
Tertullian did after he fell to be a Montanist, using the very same text of
Scripture against the Catholics and Clergy then, which father Parsons now
uses against us, and to the same effect; to wit, animalis homo non percipit
quae sunt spiritus dei: calling the catholic Clergy carnal men, because they
reproved such fond illustrations, and illuminations, in their two Prophetesses,
Priscilla, and Maximilla, whom father Parsons does herein resemble.

After this, in the 87 and 88 page, he recites a taxation of the Jesuits in
the aforesaid Sparing discovery: for their political devises, and
Machiauilian rules, as also for their slaundering the justice of our Country.
For the first point, their devises political, and Machiauillian practices,
(whether out of general rule of their order, common to all, which I believe
not, or out of particular prescripts, to some of the^ by themselves, only for
better compassing of their designements) they are sufficiently demonstrated, by
their actions, true effects of such devises, and manifest proofs thereof, both
in this reply, as also in all other discourses written of late. Wherein you may
see, with what slights, cunnings, and policies, they first practiced in
Wisbich, then in Rome amongst the scholars, and lastly, in these late affairs
here, for the erecting and maintaining of an Archpriest by deceit, and force
amongst us.

Concerning the second point, it is not affirmed generally of all the
proceedings of our state, (which we go not about to defend, as even in the
Important considerations you may see) but of some evident facts, both notorious
and manifest, which they have gone about to deny, and color, accusing both the
Queen and state therein most falsely. As both in Fa: Southwells supplication,
you may partly see, and also in other books writ by them, and by their
continual rumors buzzed abroad, both in other countries, and here in our own
also at home, as all men know. Which slanders being in things apparent, and
by open confession acknowledged, (as that of the Duke of Norfolk, Parry,
Throgmorton, Babbington, and his accomplices, Heskot, Squire, and the like) have
done much harm, and auerted the state very much from Catholics.

And another thing, which follows in the same page, of the Jesuits ordinary
practice in equiuocating, when they have been examined; is so manifest, and
notorious, as in very deed almost every ordinary officer under her Majesty,
having been acquainted with examining of them, are so well acquainted
therewith, as ordinarily they will urge the^ therewith; yea and commonly say,
that they know not when to give credit to their aunswers, making all the
exceptions of such equiuocating they can: and this point they best know, that
have come under their fingers, and have been urged therewith by them. But I
have already said something of this point, concerning their common practice
herein, by the testimony of a reverend priest, conuersing with one of them.

In the next page he denies that Cardinal Borromaeus put them out of his
Seminaries in Milan, which is a thing so evident, as the Bishop of Cassana (if
he were alive) would justify the same; and there be others yet alive, that
know the same also to be true. In the same page also he says, we scoff at
spiritual exercises, which is most false (as you may see, if you read over
the pages by him cited) for only, their practices in such spiritual
exercises, (whereby they make gain, and tie men I know not with what vows
unto themselves) are utterly disliked; not the thing it self, if it be well
performed, and sincerely, for the profit of the soul exercised, and not to
other reprouable respects, as we know they have used them. And we see such as
they have once had under their hands, in those exercises here in England,
especially women, became so reformed thereby, as they grow to proud and
peremptory humors, taking upon them as Prophetesses, and Doctresses to
censure Priests, and exclaim against them in open assemblies, a virtuous
effect of a spiritual exercise. And of these I could name two notorious to all
men in this kind; the one a married Gentlewoman, the other, a maid.

In the next page 89. Fa: Parsons waxes choleric in his own behalf, (being
touched indeed to the quick,) with words, of fiery darts, hellish hatred,
serpentine tongues, mad, and possessed men, etc. which he so fiercely thundreth
out, as if he were Jupiter Altitonans himself: and yet he says, that in all
our writings you shall find no one point of moment, alleged by us against
him. If this be so, I would feign know of him, why he is so choleric? And why
he takes the matter so heavily to the heart. If the matters concern him not,
what skilleth it what rage or anger is showed against him? For if the matters
be of no moment, they will discover themselves, and then Ma: Parsons may rest
patient, and not so much distemper himself with such outrages. A little more
heat would verily have driven him into a burning fever: Certes his passions
show he was pricked, and for trial thereof, whether the matters objected in our
wrytings against him, be of no moment, I refer you to the evidences of facts,
and proofs clearly set down, both in this reply, and the former books
themselves. If happily you will retort the choler of some of our writers in
like manner, to prove them guilty; you must know that the case is altered: For
here Fa. Parsons shows his choler in his own particular defense: which is
both unseemly, and a note of touch; but our friends, if happily hot words
have passed them, which we wish had not done: it is not in their own personal
quarrel, but in a common cause of the whole Clergy, and to be maintained by
all, in regard of the whole, and not of any particular. And therefore no such
retorture can justly be made, unless by the same reason you will condemn S.
Hillary, writing against Constans, in the common cause of Gods Church, with
many bitter inuectiues, and S. Hierome against Vigilantius, in the like manner.
But he which showed so much choler in his own defense, showed little less
pride in the lines following: where he compares himself with Christ, by the
words only appropriated to him by Simeon: to wit, that he was to be in signu^,
cui contradicetur: Also he draws in Atheists, Heretics, Apostataes,
seditious, contentious, tumultuous, desastrous, and dissolute, to be inueighers
against him; as though he were the only innocent, and pillar of truth, against
whom all such people did inueigh; and that all those who did contradict him,
were Atheists, Heretics, Apostataes, seditious, or the like: A proud,
arrogant, and contemptuous speech. For it is well known, that the best of
fame, and reckoning of our nation, both beyond the Seas, and here at home,
have, and do contradict his courses, witness the Bishop of Cassana, Doct.
Gyfford, Doct. Pearse, Doct. Turner, Doct. Barret, and infinite more of the
Clergy, with Cardinal Allen himself (as we have showed) and all our Nobility,
and gentry generally beyond the Seas, only 2. or 3. excepted of their
favorites.

All these by this Fa: sequel, must be either Atheists, Heretics, Apostataes,
seditious, contentious, tumultuous, desastrous, or dissolute. Touching our
Latin book to his Holiness: if there be nothing in it, but calumnies against
him, I hope he will prosecute the same now in Rome, whilst our Agents are
there, and make his advantage thereof; which yet we hear not, that he has,
or can do. Concerning Fa: Parsons illegitimation, I have often wished it had not
been urged, be it as it will be, being not much to the purpose. But since it
has been urged, and that he denies it: I will but ask him, why he was
expelled Bailioll College in Oxford, and whether the chiefest matter objected,
was not perjury, in taking the oath of the house to the statutes, amongst the
which this was one, Volumus, vt omnes huius Collegij alumni sint legitimo thoro
nati; which was urged against him, and offered to be proved openly. For the
avoiding of which public infamy, he made his own resignation, writing it
with his own hand, as is yet to be seen. This is more, then I meant to have
said in this matter, being a personal touch; had not Fa: Parsons overmuch
urged the objection, not only as an untruth, but also invented, and framed by
us. Hereby you may see, that the matter was not coined by any of us, nor so
void of verity, as he affirms. You may read more concerning his expulsion
out of Oxford, in Ma. Doct: Bagshawe his answer for himself to the Apology.
In the 91. page concerning the matter of Squire, whereby the Doctor, and others
were brought into danger of their lives, he says for Squire, that it was a
mere fiction, and never any such matter: which (he tells us) is already
proved, and appeared so to be, by the fellows death: And that Doctor Bagshawe
was never in danger about it, but in special favor with the state; testified
by his friendly calling up to London, and usage in the Tower. In all this
speech, there be almost as many untruths as words, if not more. First, that he
was in danger of his life: I remit my self to all men's testimony, that were
acquainted with his entreaty; being 11. or 12. weeks close prisoner, and
direct order given to the Earl of Essex for his racking. Read more of this,
in his answer to the Apology. Secondly, his assertion, that Squires attempt
is already proved to be a mere fiction, is an untruth, for ought I know. Once
I saw a little Pamphlet, to clear Ma. Rich. Walpole, as actor, or plotter of
such a matter: but that proves not that the Doctor was not in danger; neither
did I see in my understanding any conuincing argument in the discourse to
clear Fa: Walpole thereof; but that as vehement suspicions remained, as were
before. The chiefest reproves consisted (as I remember) in two points; the
one, that he was named William Walpole, for Rich. Walpole; which being no
essential point, nor circumstance of importance in the accusation, in that a
man's name may be mistaken, his person being well known, and especially in the
Jesuits, who ordinarily are called Fa. Parsons, Fa. Creswell, Fa. Walpole, etc.
without addition of the Christen name, does convince nothing at all.

The other was about the poison, which he affirmed, could not be made, by the
opinion of all learned Physicians; which I affirm to be a very mere toy, and
false, referring my self for proof hereof to any Physician of judgment;
whether a confection of poison may not be made so strong, as that it shall
infect thorough a Glove, or single garment, yea, or thorough the leather of a
shoe, and yet be carried in some vessel, or thing for the purpose, in the
palm of a man's hand, thorough which, it cannot work. Does not Aqua fortis
eat into iron, and not into lead, brass, or other metals? Has not
Quicksiluer the like strange effects in some things, and not in other? Do not
in physic diverse potions work in diverse humors, not hurting the contrary?
Will not some venom, be contained in one thing, and not in another?
Quicksiluer will be carried safe in a quill, yet not in some other things. Why
then may there not a confection be made, which will infect one way, though not
another? Besides, might not Squires poison taynt her Majesty's saddle, and so
her hand, and yet himself have remained safe many ways. These things no
Physician in the world of judgment will deny. And then what proof is this:
that no such matter was, because no such poison could be made? If these be all
the reproves, (and as yet I have seen no other of weight) how is Fa: Walpole
freed by this, and the matter a mere fiction? But for the vehement suspicions
of the matter; consider first Roules and Stanleys discovery of it, a whole
year after (for the which they remain in the Tower, and affirm as much
still:) then that Squier at his death confessed the plot, though he denied his
intention to perform it; so loud an untruth it is, that at his death (as Fa:
Parsons says) it appears to be but an invention. The fourth untruth is
Doctor Bagshawes special favor at that time with the state; being as I have
showed, 11. or 12. weeks in close prison, order taken to carry him to the
rack, and daily expectance of arraignement about it, if miraculously God had
not opened the plot. The fifth untruth is, his friendly calling up to London,
the contrary whereof, even father Parsons friends, of the opposite part in
Wisbich, can witness. For when the Pursuiuant came, he dealt so rigorously with
him, that he would neither suffer him to go into his Chamber, nor take his
leave of his fellow prisoners; but carried him presently forth into the Town,
neither would suffer him to write, or send any private message into the Castle
back to any. Does fa: Parsons call this kind sending for?

A sixth untruth, is his friendly usage in the Tower, whether he was not
committed, but to the Gatehouse (as all men can tell:) where his entertainment
was for 11. or 12. weeks, as I have told you. And this last untruth co^uinceth
this book of Manifestation, not to have been made by the united priests,
(under whose names it walks,) but by a forrainer, (whose intelligence herein
failed him) for the priests in England could not be ignorant of his commitment
to the Gatehouse, and not to the Tower. But God would have father Parsons
discover himself, though he march under other men's colors. I pray thee
(gentle Reader) tell me in sober sincerity, were there not 6. untruths well
packt together in a small room? belike it was for the more easy carriage. But
who now will believe Fa: Parsons henceforward by his own rule, though he say
truth, since he heapeth up so many untruths together in fardels, without
blushing.

In the same page, and the next following, he labors to extricate himself
of an objection, concerning his offering to swear to James Clarke in London,
that he never meant to be Papist, but only to go to Padua to study Physic.
In which the cunningst shift he has, is to rid the same by an equivocation:
because forsooth the word Papist is odious in England, and not a term
professed by us. This is the clenliest and best shift he has, as there you may
see. Whereby you may note, that he had learned Logic before he went over;
and knew the difference betwixt vniuocum and aequiuocum, which practice he
has not lost since, for ought I see. After this he braggeth of his good
deeds, for fear they should be forgot; and in the next paragraffe says, it
is a violent lie, that Cardinal Allens opinion was of him, that he was of a
violent nature: but for that read Ma. Charles Pagets answer to the Apology.

In the next paragraffe he comes to Stukleys matters concerning Ireland,
which he lays upon Doctor Lewis, saying that he had no part therein: which
he confirms by that he had been then but two or three years of the
society, and was not Priest. Of this we have spoken in the fourth Chapter: but
that he had been but two or three years of that society, and was not priest,
argues not, that he was no dealer therein. For if he could be of that credit
and respect, that he entered then into difference with Doctor Lewis, Archdeacon
then of Cambray, and Referendary to Pope Gregory the 13. about some matters
concerning that business (as here he confesses) I see not but that he might in
the same manner, be of like credit with his order to have a hand therein also.
And all men know Fa: Parsons was forward enough at his first going over, in
such busy affairs; and the greatness of the Jesuits with Pope Gregory, might
give occasion and way enough thereto.

In the next page 92. he notes Ma. Blackwells bewayling his coming into
England; and his rising in his order by practices, and untruths, of which he
says, and many more if we can prove any one point, he will say we are
honest men in the rest. Now then for our credits with fa: Parsons, for his
rising by practices, or factious disposition, I will say no more, but what is
justifiable a part rei, viz. that the most stirring, meddling, practicing heads
amongst all of our English nation, (to go no farther) have always come to
credit and preheminencie amongst them. Witness this per inductionem Fa:
Parsons, whose factious disposition has been every where sufficiently
displaied with proofs sufficient. Witness father Haywood, and his busy
factious inclination at his coming into England, of which fa: Parsons can
bear witness, being at variance with him, and many other priests yet living in
England, some of them having been present at his Synodes, where he made
himself President in the Popes name. Witness father Holt, of whose disposition
you may read in Ma. Charles Pagets answer to the Apology. Witness fa: Creswell,
as you may see in Doctor Elyes answer to the Apology. Witness father Garnet,
the only chief actor in all our stirs here in England. I might add Fa:
Crighton the Scot, with the rest; and father Holt (if he were alive) would take
my part. These then are pretty inducements to think father Parsons rose in his
order by his factious disposition.

But for the other point concerning Ma. Blackwell, let him be examined, upon
his oath, whether he came not unto Ma. Bluet, then prisoner in the Marshalseas,
using these or the like words; What meant Doctor Allen to send this man over,
he will undo us all. And being asked why: he answered, that his expulsion
out of Oxford was so infamous, that it would be objected by the Protestants, to
the disgrace of the cause. Let Ma. Blackwell (I say) be urged with this, and I
adjure him, as he will answer it before Almighty God at the latter day, to
say the truth: and then fa: Parsons shall see we have won our credits even
in both these points, besides an hundred more already proved.

As for his action in Paris, to get himself released thence, I have heard men
of credit report the same thing, and that Verstegen alias Rowland, was one of
the three that came to enquire late for him. For his evasion that he was not
there subject, I would ask Fa: Parsons, whether when a Jesuit makes aboade in
any province, he be not subject to the Provincial of that province? for as
then fa: Parsons was no Provincial, but a private Jesuit, though he had indeed
the superiority of such, as came with him into England.

Touching the story of Doctor Gyfford, and father Baldwine, before the Nuncio
in Flaunders, read Ma. Charles Pagets answer to the Apology, and you shall
see the contrary to this fellows words from the Nuncio his own mouth. In the
93 page. b. he denies the Bishop of Cassana to have been general Visitor
over them, because he had an other, viz. the Bishop of Mont Real joined in
Commission with him, which is but a cavil. For they were both Visitors
general, and therefore the Bishop of Cassana had authority over them, to
visit and reform them, if he would have put it in practice against them:
which he would not do to avoid their clamors of partiality against them,
for that they held him their enemy, although he had many memorialls delivered
him up against them, even of diverse of their own order, which he showed to
some priests yet living; God forgive him for his omission herein. Concerning
the Letters writ against the said Bishop, co^taining these words, vel Turca,
vel mors, vel demon eripiat eu^ a nobis: there be yet witness thereof alive,
who saw him burn it with his own hands, using these words, pereat memoria
earum cum sonitu.

For the poisoning of Sixtus quintus, Cardinal Allen, the Bishop of Cassana,
and others: whether they were poisoned or not, God knows, and by whom. But
for Sixtus quintus, it is notorious, that having been sick of a burning
Fever, and being newly recovered, he suddenly fell down again, (and as was
said) with drinking of a cup of Greek wine, This was the Jesuit report in
Rome.
he died within the space of six hours (if I be not deceived.) The suspicion
you see is great, of his poisoning; and that the Jesuits should concur
hereto, the conceit may arise by their evil affection toward him; in respect
of his resolution to reduce them to the form of other religious orders a
little before his death. But that they did concur to this fact, I will not
for any thing accuse them, as being a matter I cannot certainly know, and
therefore will leave it to that day, in which all things shall be opened.

Touching Cardinal Allen, the Physicians opening of him, and finding no
certain cause of his death, might make the suspicion: and a Letter written
unto the Cardinal out of the Low Countries not long before his death (as they
say) intimating the danger of his life, might aggrauate the said suspicion.
Concerning the Bishop of Cassana, and Master Thomas Throckmorton, diverse
report their deaths confidently to have been by poison: and a man of worship*
and good reckoning then at Rome, protested to me upon his conscience, that he
thought them to be poisoned. And the Physician, after the death of the Bishop,
being requested to open Ma. Thomas Throckmorton, used these words, a che
proposito? e la medesima febre: to what purpose? it is the same fever. And at
the opening of the Bishop, he being asked the cause of his death, said;
besogno dire, che e vna febre, we must say, it is a Fever. Which words, and
the manner of their deaths, and the black stuff which came from the Bishop,
made all men suspect, and plainly affirm: that they were both poisoned. The
like Doctor Hugo the Bishops nephew affirmed of himself: after that by the
strength of nature he had overcome the dram.

Sir Griffen Markham had there a little physic prescribed him by the Physician
Signior Marcello, which wrought with him so extremely, that he had like to
have died of it, as himself I think will affirm: and sending for the
Physician, he wondered at the effect of the physic, saying; that physic
which I prescribed, should not have wrought thus: whereby you may guess,
whether there were not knavery in the Apothecary at the least. I will not, nor
do charge the Jesuits heerewith, but it is known that they affected none of
these parties; and I remember what one said once unto one of them, My Masters
you have very good luck, for I see not any man take part against you here,
that lives long after it.

Touching father Haywoods sending to Calabria, which in the 94 page father
Parsons denies; it is manifest that he was sent from Rome (with great disgust,
and coffeehouse) toward Calabria, marry indeed I think it was but to the
utter parts of the kingdom of Naples: as his Letters in peticion for
reformation, writ unto his holiness did show. As concerning Cardinal Allens
greeuing at the Oration made in Valledolid to the old King of Spain: there is
yet a reverend priest in England, to avouch the same, who presented the Oration
unto him.

To conclude this Chapter of scandalous Libells (as Fa: Parsons terms the^)
he falls into a miserable bitter inuectiue, as though he had much choler yet
vndisgested, in this sort, s^t: Wherefore to conclude, seeing that this whole
Libell is nothing else, but a commixtion of monstrous lies, absurd
prophanities, malicious fictions, and consciencelesse calumnations, we will
follow them no farther, either in defense of the whole Society, or Fa: Parsons
in particular, whose actions are so openly known, by apparent public facts,
to the general good of our ^ountry, as these wretched, and miserable men's
hearts, that write so despightfully against them, may sooner break with envy
and rancor, then any least discredit, come unto them by these furious
barkings, in the sight of wise and indifferent Readers. Thus he inueigheth on
the one side, and claweth himself on the other. Do you think he was in
perfect charity all this while? With himself it may be he was, by his good
words: but you will never think he was so with us. And you would say so
indeed, if I should recite, what follows immediately, being much more fiery,
and bitter, then his former railing outrage. But I will not answer him in that
kind: God send him more patience, and better charity.

After his quick, The Dialogue.
and scandalous dispatch of the former books, he comes unto the Dialogue,
wherein he will (as he says) be the shorter, because he has been ouer-long
in the former; and I believe him, as well for the one as the other, for it is
evident (by what we have already said) that he has been ouer-long, having
said little, or nothing to the purpose, abstracting from falsehoods, by-matters,
impugnations of open truths, and uncharitable inuectiues. And in this, he both
is, and must be short; unless by longer discourse he would prolong his folly.
For so moderatly, so charitably, and so patiently is it penned; with such
regard of verity, and truth in every point, as for a man to contradict any
thing therein said, were but to make the world to see, that he rather loved
wrangling, and iangling, then manifestation of verities. All men of judgment,
and indifferency, that ever read the book, do most highly commend it. And
therefore Fa: Parsons extenuating the work, (thereby to give a touch unto the
author:) shows apparently unto all the world, that passion, partiality, and
emulation has weakened, or clean darkened his judgment; or else you must
needs say, that only Fa: Parsons is wise, and all men else are sots, and
fools, yea many of his own faction commend the book, both for moderation,
charity, patience, and well composing thereof. But let us see, I pray you, what
he says thereto: first, we will begin with his most ridiculous comparing of
Ma. Watsons preface to this t^^atise (in that he shows all men to be subject
to sin, by the weakness of man's nature, happening by the fall of Adam) unto
the discourses, made (as he says, for you are not bound to believe him
herein) in King Edwards days, to allure old priests to marry, by telling
them, that concupiscence does remain after baptism, and consequently all must
have wives, or do worse. See how learnedly the man brings in his matters:
man's nature being weakened by the fall of Adam, is therefore subject to sin;
ergo concupiscence remaining after baptism, Priests must needs marry. Will
not every child descrie Fa: Parsons simplicity* or wilful folly herein,
especially in that he further says: that Ma. Watsons discourse, and induction,
is the more fond of the two. Surely if it be a better argument to conclude,
that priests must marry, or do worse, because concupiscence does remain
after baptism: then to dispute thus: man's nature is weakened by the fall of
Adam: ergo the Jesuits may sin. You give a great blow to the Church, in
maintayning an unmarried Clergy. I am sorry to think that he should open his
weakness ^or folly so apparently to the world, having been hitherto thought so
wise a man. But what think you (says he) to the book it self, that has said
so little, and so wisely to the Epistle? Believe me, he says never a word at
all: but only rayleth at Ma. Mushe, (whom he supposes to be the author) for
his ingratitude, taxing him with secret Apostasy, because he had forsooth a
vow of their Society. And who is it, that having a vow of Religion, may not
justly be dispensed therewith, upon diverse reasons, and freed from the
performance thereof in couscience? What reason then has Fa: Parsons to tax
him with secret Apostasy, that might have (as I think he had) a dispensation
for it. For he was in Rome in Cardinal Allens time, and as it was said, about
that matter. Besides, it is not Apostasy to leave the Jesuits order, before
the last vow, (which few of them have taken) upon just, and reasonable causes.
How then could it be Apostasy in Ma. Mushe, to leave that vocation, into the
which he never entered? He says, that the five chief points, of which we are
cleared by this book: to wit, Schism: dealing with the Counsel: our appeal
to Rome: hatred to the Jesuits: and dealing in matters of state: were never
objected against us, by the Jesuits; but that either we accused our selves
thereof, or else went about to purge our selves before we were accused. Verily
it is more then strange, to see such apparent verities denied, by so grave a
man, a religious person, and one whom so many admire for wit, and rare
qualities. Why? all the world will control him in the denial of these things,
and himself, both in the Apology, and this book of Manifestation, shall be a
witness against himself. Does he not oftentimes tax us, with dealing with the
state, Ma. Bluet by name, Ma. Doct: Bagshawe, Ma. Watson, and others? And does
he not say in the last Chap. 122. leaf, that we yielded to go farther with
the state, in matters against Cath: doctrine, for favor, and credit, or to
make others odious, then in conscience we could? Does he not also say, that
Ma. Bluet dealt with the state, to make Ma: Watsons peace: upon condition, that
he should rail against the Jesuits? How often does he inculcate our dealing with
the state in treacherous sort; aduising Cath: in the last Chapter, to beware of
us, and keep themselves out of our reach, for fear we betray them? What will
not this man say, and unsay for his advantage? But his untruths are so common,
and frequent, that it is impossible for him almost, but to contradict himself
sometimes: for (as you know) oportet mendacem esse memorem: he that lies
often, must have an extraordinary memory. The reason is, because falsehoods have
not the like foundations, that truths and verities have; whose ground is so
certain, that the frame stands sure, and strait; but contrariwise untruths,
being fained, have no certain foundation, and therefore the frames and
buildings thereupon, are uncertain, crooked, and apt to alterations. Again,
for our appeal to Rome, does not himself also say, that it was but a cavil,
and slight* to win time, and purchase liberty, and that it was reuersed by
the Pope, and therefore not auailable? Does he not in every Chap: both in the
Apology, and this book, rail against us for malice, envy, and emulation
against his Society in general, and diverse particular men thereof? Were his
wits on wool-gathering (where there are no sheep in the Country) that he
cannot rememeber the very chief scope of his writing all this while? which
has been naught else, but of our hate, malice, envy, and emulation to the
Jesuits for the most part? Wherefore were all his discourses in the Apology of
so many examples brought in of John of Gaunt, King Henry the eight, Queen
Mary, etc. of hurt that came by the emulations against religious men? To what
purpose are all his inuectiues in this Libell against us: if not in favor of
the Jesuits by us impugned? strange was his forgetfulness, or admirable is his
folly. Again, does he not tax us in the Manifestation, for dealing with the
Scot, then with the French, and last of all, of a new plot in England, for the
favor of some great person, to frame or invent a new succession to the Crown?
And yet here he says, that the Jesuits never accused us of these matters, but
that we accused our selves, or went about to purge our selves thereof, before
we were accused. Besides, these open proofs out of his own writings against
himself, I refer the matter to the Readers conscience: whether of his own
knowledge (if he were not extraordinarily ignorant in these our affairs) he
could with any conscieuce affirm these things, not to have been commonly
objected against us. And for the point of schism, it is so notorious to all
the world, that I cannot but blush in Fa: Parsons behalf: to think that he
has the face to deny so open, so apparent, so general, so public a thing.
Thus you see Fa: Parsons honesty, and this is all he says of the Dialogue.

The next matter this Fa: Ma: A. C. his letter to his Cosen.
handles, is Ma. A. C. his letter to his Cosen. In the discourse whereof, he
so uncharitably inueigheth, against the supposed author, that you would much
wonder if you read it. It is but short, yet so couched with pricks, thorns,
and sharp needles of choler, so bitter, and so biting, that it is a world to
see how he straineth himself to bring the honest gentleman into obloquie.

He makes me to remember a tale of a certain poor Catholic recusant now
in prison, who having been a petty Musician, and a wild fellow in his young
years, was for his pleasant conceits desired of diverse Justices of peace in
the country, especially at Christmas time, and much made of. It pleased God to
touch the heart of this Musician, and he became Catholic, and withal stayed,
and reclaimed from his former madness, and wild behavior. Soon after (being
known to be a Catholic) he was apprehended, brought to Winchester gaile,
and called before the Justices. Being conuented before them, some of them began
to rate him, and inueigh against him, exprobrating unto him his former course
of life, and mad, and lewd behavior. Whereunto the poor Catholic made this,
or the like answer. It is a world (says he) to see, how you now run upon
me for these things: when I was such a fellow, as you speak of, I was a
welcome man to all your houses, much made on; and who but I: now it has
pleased God to call me to better courses, you vpbraid me with my old faults,
which then you delighted in. And even so, in some part it fares with father
Parsons, in his railing against this Gentleman: seeking all the advantages that
he can in his young years; which happily might have a taste of youths vanity,
yet never so unseemly, that his honor, or reputation might justly be called in
question thereby, that ever I have heard: and all men, that now know him, will
witness that he is both very stayed, virtuous, and religious: and without
exceptions, a man of very good carriage: notwithstanding Fa: Parsons
uncharitable, and unseemly speeches against him, being a gentleman of worthy
descent. And therefore such base inuectiues, to wisemen, will seem to
proceed, not from any generous disposition (which always regards men of
sort, according to their birth and education) but from some dunghill of baseness
it self, whose thoughts savor but draffe, and swill.

For the particulers which father Parsons urges out of this Letter, I will
pass them over, assuring my self, that, if the Gentleman he notes were the
author of that letter, he will frame an answer to all, that here is
objected, which (God knows) is but little and weak, as men of judgment will
soon see. Only I cannot let pass his urging of the excommunication against
him, because he defends the innocence of the priests in the matter of
schism, which (he says) was forbidden by the breve to be disputed of, under
pain of excommunication. I wonder fa: Parsons could urge this, and forget that
all books in like sort, whereupon odium dissidiumue, etc. in these affairs
might arise, were forbidden in the same Breve, and then by consequence (if this
Breve be of force, and general) Fa: Parsons has incurred excommunication by
this his Libell, without all excuse; because he takes (as you see) notice of
the Breve. But if he view the Breve well, he shall find that Lay men are not
included therein under any censure. Besides that, the Bull was frustrated even
by the Archpriest, and Jesuits themselves, as is sufficiently proved in the
Answer to the Apology.

Again, where Master A. C. says, that power was not given to S. Peter by
Christ, to transfer gentem in gentem, it is both catholic and true
doctrine: and in vain shall Father Parsons go about to infringe it. For the
rest, I leave to the author himself, though there be naught else of importance
against him.

Of Fishers Memorial sufficient has been said in the first chapter. But
where he affirms, that Doctor Gyfford has been a flatterer of Cardinal
Allen, in state practices, and showed the same in sermons in Rhemes, After the
action in the year 88. no man can say that the cardinal dealt in any attempt
against our country.
and in his orations to the Duke of Guise, I do verily think all these to be
mere calumnies. For first, Cardinal Allen was in Rome, when the action of 88.
was intended, and there concurred in what he did concur. The other, (to wit,
Doctor Gyfford,) was then in Rhemes, where no concurrence in the world was, or
could be given, (being far out of the way for concurrence either by advise,
or otherwise) unless it were in private consent of mind, which I think father
Parsons was not of counsel with. And for his sermons, my self have heard
diverse of them, yet never did I in three years space, hear him in his sermons
deliver any, either indecent, or undutiful word against her Majesty or state,
but only lament the times, and exhort to labor for the conversion thereof by
preaching and praying. And touching his orations to the Duke of Guise, I heard
one of them, and to my knowledge, there passed not a sentence in derogation to
the state of England, or drawing to the hurt thereof. But I know the Doctor
will sufficiently purge himself of all such uncharitable, and unjust
accusations, which rather favor of malice, to draw him into obloquie (as
himself is) then of truth, honesty, verity, or charity.

Add also unto this, that if Doctor Gyfford had been a forward man in any
state practices against our country, it is more then probable that he should
have been a dealer, either in the action of Frauncis Throckmorton, being his
near kinsman, or Babbingtons, by reason of Gilbert Gyfford, with whom he was
very inward, and familiar; yet father Parsons cannot accuse him in either: for
the first, he was in Rome a scholar when it was in hammering. For the second,
the contrary appeared by his Letters writ to Gilbert Gyfford, whilst he lay in
Paris: which (as I remember) were found in Gylberts study when he was
apprehended. Thus you see how improbable it is, that he should be such a
forward man in state practices, as fa: Parsons without all proof affirms,
besides, his protestations in his late Letters, are to the contrary, and utter
dislike of such proceedings.

An answer to the eight Chapter, concerning his directions unto Catholics how
to discern the truth: and how to bear themselves in this time of contention.
etc.
WE will let pass in the first advertisement his dangerous terms of
necessity and ineuitabilitie, in these disgustfull accidents: which in the
first sense absolutely understood, taste unsavory, if not heretically; to put
absolute necessity and ineuitabilitie in those actions which are subject to
man's will, reason, and free election, as all the reasonable actions of man are.
In the second understanding, taking the whole sentence together, it includes a
contradiction in ipsis terminis, in the very terms of the proposition. For to
be necessary, and to be accidental, are opposite in the very terms, in that,
to be necessary, or of necessity, is to exclude chance; and to be accidental
or by chance, is to take away necessity, because that which is by chance, may
hap, or not hap, but that which is of necessity, must needs be, and cannot be
otherwise.

As for example, where the sun is, there must needs be light, because light
is a necessary effect of the sun; neither can the sun be without that
effect: but that it shall rain at noone days, is by chance, according to the
disposition of the air, and multitude of vapors gathered together in it. So
that the air being indifferently subject to either disposition, viz. of much
store of watery humor, or otherwise: it falls out to be accidental, whether
it shall rain at noone days, or not rain. And even so in the reasonable
actions of man, being subject to the will, a man may freely make his election
at his pleasure, this way, or that way, without constraint, or necessity,
whereby you see this proposition of fa: Parsons, as he has delivered it in
terms, is either foolish, because contradictory in terminis, or dangerous,
putting things under absolute necessity, and ineuitability, which are subject
to man's will, and free election, and therefore accidental.

But though his proposition be delivered in dangerous, or ill terms, we will
construe his meaning the best way, and as by the words of our Math. 18.
Savior, and the 1, Cor. 11.
Apostle alleged, we think verily he meant; to wit: that although they be
accidental, in the respect of man's free will, upon which they depend; yet are
they necessary, secundum quid for the probation, and true touch of those that
are Christ's, and so inevitable, not absolutely, but secundum quid, supposing
the inclinations of men's wills, and the courses taken in these affairs, upon
which scandalls must of necessity follow. And this we have said to clear Fa:
Parsons dangerous assertion, that no man mistake the verity of the Cath:
doctrine: which puts no reasonable action of man, nor effects there-vpon
following under necessity, or ineuitability. For of the same nature are the
cause, and the effect; so that if the cause be necessary then the effect
depending in esse, et fieri, upon that cause, being a proper effect of the
cause, is also necessary, quia posita causa surgit effectus, sicut posito sole
resultat lumen: so in like manner, if the cause be accidental, the effect
thereon depending, must needs be accidental. As for the wind to be in the
East, or West, is accidental, because the being of the exhalations, which
cause the winds, is a^^identall. The rest that follows of the necessity, and
vtility of scandals, etc. is oration communis, or exordium commune* and may, as
it pleases the Orator, be applied this way, or that way, to this part, or
that. But if any man of judgment will ponder, and without partiality weigh,
what has been done on either side, since these garboyles, and which part it
is, that has suffered the greatest wrongs, and oppressions of the other: he
will soon judge, that the vtility of these scandalous afflictions, has rather
been on our part, then the Jesuits; we having been so narrowly sifted by
them, as we have been. Whereby a man may rather imagine by all probabilities,
that the persons, whom God would have tried, and proved to the uttermost, have
been amongst us; against whom the Archpriest and Jesuits, raised such
whirl-winds of slanders, infamies, opprobries, contumelies, vexations,
insultations, clamours, outcries, penuries, and what else might be devised;
that on their parts there was enough done against us, to have shak^n men of
most constant resolutions. Was not the most hateful note of schism, and
rebellion against Gods Church, most unjustly, most falsely, and most
opprobriously cast upon us by the Jesuits, and Archpriest? Were we not by that
slander rejected of Cath: driven from the Altar, forbidden the Sacraments,
esteemed as outcasts from Gods Church? Was not a seditious Libell with most
uncharitable inuectiues, Listers Libell.
of sin, schism, Idolaters, Sorcerers, publicans, ethnicks, rebels,
seditious, factious, and the like opprobrious, and contumelious names, framed
against us by a Jesuit, and allowed, approved, and published against us by the
Jesuits, and Archpriest? Were not our necessary friends forbid to entertain
us, relieve, or help us, and threatened for the performance of any charitable
office toward us? Were they not had in obloquy, and note, that resorted unto
us, and threatened to be excommunicated, that spoke in our behalfes? Were not
good Cath: told, that it was a mortal sin to send such of us relief, as lay
in prison? Were not all Cath: generally taught by them, that they might not in
conscience communicate with us, either at Mass, or in other Sacraments? Were
we not tax^d of espiall for the state, treachery, and villainy against our
brethren, and open betraying of Cath: when we were most ready to shed our
bloods in their behalf? Were we not made almost odious to Cath: by these
infamies, and opprobrious slanders, laid upon us by the Jesuits, and
Archpriest? Tompson.
Were not the basest of their vassalls, and some of them, Coulson.
such as proved murderers, and thieves afterward, yea, and then had been no
better, maintained to rail, blaspheme, and inueigh against us, as reprobates,
and outcasts amongst men? Waine.
Were not diverse hired, and well feed to make faction against us? Cope.
Were not such as lived in prison, and known to be moderate, and indifferent
neglected in diuident, and alms, that should be given to prisoners, because
they would not rail against us? Ma: Pencheuell.
Were not generally all men accounted honest, and sound Cath: that could open
their mouths to rail at us, and revile us, were they otherwise never so bad,
or notorious in their behauiours? Of which sort I could name diverse, besides
the two first alleged; but that I will not discover them, to impeach their
credites (...) the world. And on the contrary part, were not all that held with
us, called into suspicions, and iealousies therefore? Will not all wise, and
indifferent men (justly considering, and pondering these wrongs) think that
God permitted these things, rather to try, and manifest the virtues, and
constancies, of some on our parts, (who endured these afflictions;) then on the
Jesuits part, who unjustly inflicted the same? doubtless they will. And now I
would have Fa: Parsons to show the like wrongs, oppressions, and injuries done
to them by any of us. Were they ever accounted Schismatikes, Ethnicks, or
Idolaters by us? Were they ever brought into extreme wants, and miseries, by
our means? Did we ever teach, that Cath: might not relieve them as priests?
Did we ever hire, or maintain murderers or thieves, to rail against them?
never in our lives. How when were they tried, and made manifest, as virtuous,
or constant men in these troubles? If he say, because they held with the
Archpriest, and subordination got by their cunning means, and against all law,
conscience, and reason, thrust violently upon us against our wills; therein
they show how much wrong they have done us; which does rather manifest them, to
have been the causers of all this mischief and scandal, then in any thing
display their virtue, or constancy. If they urge choleric words, uttered in
some of our bretherens writings, they have paid us home for the same, both in
words, and action also. If they urge matters laid to their charge, concerning
state practices, and their proceedings in these affairs against us, we
maintain them still, not as wrongs done, but as most true, and are ready to
justify the same, as by this reply you may see. But as for the wrongs (above
specified) which they did against us, all the world sees them to be unjust;
we being (as now is evident) most clear from note of schism, sin,
disobedience, rebellion, etc. whereupon all those injuries arose.

Thus you may perceive how well this exordium commune, of (vtility) does agree
with our part; and how little reason there is, to apply the same unto the
Jesuits, Archpriests, and their followers. But let us consider how he applies
the fame to himself, and his associates; the first application is, that many
as well abroad of other Nations, as of our own, and also in England, seeing
this scandalous fact of division, set in our Church, have meruailously showed
their compassion, love, and zeal in behalf of union. An application, which is
so general, as may be applied to either part, according to the humor of the
Reader, which side he will judge factious, and breaker of union, and by
reasons above alleged, will seem more to note the Jesuits, by whose action of
intruding upon us an Archpriest against our wills, and all law, justice, and
equity, this breach of unity arose. The second application is, that those that
lived only to themselves before, by this occasion have stirred up themselves
to knit, and join with others of the same zeal, to resist the enemies malice
herein. This also is a common assertion to be applied to either part; neither
has he named one quiet, or indifferent man beyond the Seas, that lived to
himself, who has been stirred up by this occasion, to join with him, and
his adherents herein: only the Jesuits and Spaniards prosecute this matter
against us, and their faction. But now for our part: what quiet men have been
stirred up to meddle, I will show you. First, Doctor Ely has in our behalf
written a treatise against the Apology; whom, all the world know to have been
a quiet indifferent man. Secondly, Doctor Parkinson (as by his letters, cited
in The answer to the Apology, you may see) has showed himself for us. And
thirdly, all men almost of worth, as well of the Clergy, as Laity, that live
abroad beyond the Seas, have pitied our oppressions, as it is well known. The
second effect, by Fa: Parsons noted, is: that men's hearts, and inward
cogitations hereby are made manifest, which otherwise might have lurked until
better ability, and thereby have wrought more mischief, which now bursting
forth, will be seen, and avoided, etc. This effect, being also as general, as
the other, and admitting any application; so fitly agrees with Fa: Parsons,
and the Jesuits, as all the world could not have found out an office more
agreeable for the purpose. For may not (I beseech you) by this scandalous
breach, and the occasions and circumstances concurring, every man of wisdom
see what the plottings of the Jesuits have been, and their secret workings
underhand, as well for the overthrow, and subversion of our Country, by
invasions, practices, and treacherous devises, as also the subjection of our
Clergy, to an unheard of slavery: which if by occasion of these stirs, and
fallings out, they had not been made manifest, might have lurked, and lien
secret, and unknown, until their plots, and practices had been ripe, and
their ability, joined with the Spanish forces, able to have wrought the
overthrow of both: which I hope by the providence of God, and concurrence of
all good English subjects, as well Catholics as others, will be avoided:
being, by these occasions made open, and manifest unto them.

As for Fa: Parsons uncharitable prophecy, that the chief and principal of
our part, are like enough to go farther, and become as Bell, and other
Apostataes: we hope in this he will rather prove one of the false prophets of
Ball, then any true prophet of God. But such presages, as these, taste not of
the greatest Christian charity, or modesty, which father Parsons might have
had. These are all the effects and applications of his necessity and vtility,
which father Parsons makes; which how general they be in themselves, and
how weakly by him applied, or whether by this our returning them upon
himself, and his, they carry not more weight and reason by odds, I leave the
indifferent, and discreet Reader to judge.

After these effects, page 122. he begins to direct Catholics how to bear
themselves in this time of trial, as well in respect of the enemy, and
persecutor, as the troublesome, as he terms us. And for the first, he gives
so good directions and aduertisements of humility, patience, longanimitie,
obedience, and true spirit of Christian sufferance; that if he, and his
accomplices, and some few other had observed the same from the beginning toward
their sovereign, and country: it had been (doubtless) far better for all
catholics in England at this day, then now it is. But he can speak well,
though he have done never so unhappily (as in the fourth Chapter you may see)
and this is but a trick of a politician, to use the best words, when he
means least good. And whereas he taxes us in general terms, to have
yielded to go farther with Protestants in matters against religion, and
Catholic doctrine then we might, it is a mere calumny, and for his life
he cannot name the least particularitie of this, but only (after the old
manner) spetteth out general accusations, with out any particulers in the
world, whereas we are able particulerly to charge him, and some other Jesuits,
to have gone farther in their practices against her Majesty, then any
Catholic doctrine, conscience, or religion can warrant them: concerning the
taking away of her life by secret murdering, and conspiracies (see the fourth
Chapter) and I farther say, that Fa: Parsons practices, first with the Scot,
then with the Spaniard (and as they say, with the Duke of Parma also, but I am
sure father Holt did) for inuading his natural country, and subjection thereof
by fire and sword (which must needs have followed) were and are unnatural,
because against his native soil, and natural Sovereign: uncharitable,
because the increasing of Catholics affliction at home: and unconscionable,
because without that just, and due respect of either, which in conscience, he
ought to have had. Now let the world see whether we deal in generality with
fa: Parsons, as he deals with us.

We will omit his inuectiues against us, as men in a frenz^e, and possessed
with violent, and raging spirits, and his warning to Catholics* to keep
themselves from coming within our fingers, or reach (as though we were
traitors, and would betray them:) which shows his small charity, not to add
malice. We will also pass over his long and tedious discourse of the spirits
of men, and trying of spirits: which word spirits, he has so canuased through
all this his Libell, as if he had been some Zwingfieldian, or precise
Anabaptist, endued extraordinarily with the spirit. But I will not omit his
false and heretical interpretation of the place of S. John, Try the spirits,
etc. thereby leading his Reader into a presumptuous error of judging all, both
men and matters, contrary to the true meaning of the Apostle: as you may
perceive by Gerson, and Ma. Gregory Martin upon that place.

In the close, and conclusion of this his discourse of discerning of spirits,
he does so set out himself, as if he had no other mark, or aim: for all men
know him to be (and as he might thereby be discerned) of a most violent, and
headlong spirit. And for the humility, obedience, poverty, patience, and
charity of the Jesuits, which he notes for effects and signs of the spirit
of God, I refer it to the judgment of such, as have known their proceedings
in these late affairs, with what insolency, and violence, they have
prosecuted the matter of the Archpresbyterie, and schism against us; their
insatiable desire of rule, and government over us, first in Wisbich, then
abroad; their excess in apparel, expenses, horses, and attendants;
possessing indeed the whole collections almost of all that is given in pios
vsus: their impatience in being co^tradicted, or controlled, rather moving
sedition in the whole afflicted Church of our country, then they would be
crossed of their wills, or let fall their unjust designs; their bitter
inuectiue writing against us, Lysters Libell.
with the most opprobrious terms that could be devised, before we ever put
pen to paper, or gave them any choleric word. Whereby any wiseman may see,
how fa: Parsons has shaped the declaration of the spirit of Satan (which
uncharitably he would impute unto us, and have all Catholics so to think of
us) which by due, and indifferent consideration, might more fitly be applied
unto himself, and his associates, if I were so uncharitable, as to prosecute
it, and did not rather pray, that Satan may have no power at all over him, or
any of his order.

Now are we come unto the Quodlibets, Quodlibets.
the last book, and that which he most inueigheth at, being indeed somewhat
sharp, and cholerickly written, according to the disposition as well of the
matter, urging choler, as to the natural disposition of the writer, which
being (if a defect) yet a defect in nature, is not to be so much condemned. But
howsoever, fa: Parsons in this work has cried quittance (as by the table of
his words, and phrases in the end of this reply you may see:) and therefore he
may the better rest satisfied therein. In his discourse hereof, he so
ruffleth, as if it were a Pedante amongst his scholars, or that he had Ma.
Watson on the hippe to crush him at his pleasure: whereas indeed he has for
the most part, either altered his words in reciting them, mistaken and
misconstrued his meaning, or stretched the words and phrases farther then their
proper sense by him intended. I will allege you some examples. And first in
the Epistle to the Quodlibets, page 8. Ma. Watson writes thus: If that by way
of quodlibet, or Thesis proposed, a man may without blasphemy, sin,
scandal, or any offense in the world, ask whether God or the devil be to be
honored: whether our savior Christ could sin, or no: whether our blessed Lady
were an adulteress, or common woman, or not: and withal, to bring arguments
pro et contra, for auerring, or impugning the same: then to put forth a
question, whether a Seminary priest, or a Jesuit ought sooner to be credited,
cannot justly incur any reprehension or blame. Which speech cannot be
contradicted, all questions in schools being lawful to be proposed, and
arguments brought on both sides, so that the conclusion be in the defense and
approbation of truth, and verity. But mark how fa: Parsons cites the said
words. He sets them forth in this sort: In this kind of writing it is
lawful for him to dispute, whether God or the devil be to be honored? whether
our blessed Lady were an adultresse, or common woman, or not. etc. and then
mightily inueigheth against him, as of an audatious, and impudent spirited
person, for proposing and putting in print such questions. O the honesty of
father Parsons! Whereas Master Watson by way of supposall, If a man may ask
such questions without sin, scandal, etc, then (a fortiore) is it lawful to
put the questions following: he makes him to say, that it is lawful for him
to dispute, whether God, or the devil be to be honored, etc. thereby to turn
the sense more odious, and evil sounding: which is but a very Jesuitical
trick. For although, even as Fa: Parsons says, it be lawful pro et contra,
to dispute those questions, if just occasion be offered, or in schools for the
exercise of learning, etc, yet as he has altered the speech, you see the sense
more unpleasing then in the former. For he does not propound them as questions,
but only says, that if in the schools such questions may be propounded. If
he insist upon the naming of such things in print, he does but cavil. For who
knows not, that many such questions are disputed by the Schoolmen in print?

Again, where Ma. Watson makes a discourse of the fall of all religious
orders in former times from their first purity, and feruencie, (which
discourse is most true, as we see before our eyes in the Benedictins,
Dominicans, Franciscans, Augustines, and other orders, where they are not of
late reformed, how far they differ from the purity, and piety of their
first institution, in their founders days) this discourse fa: Parsons will
have to be distorted against all religious men, and their orders simply; as
affirming them to be all corrupted. Thirdly, where he prefers seculer
priests in England, before Jesuits, and other religious persons, as well in
preferment of degree, worthiness of person, and superiority in place, as also
in the state of perfection, he says it proceeds of the spirit of pride,
emulation, ignorance, temerity, and folly, and that the doctrine is against S.
Tho. of Aquine, S. Chrysostom, and others, not quoting the places where. But I
will say to Fa. Parsons, and stand unto it, that for him, or any Jesuit to
defend the contrary, is therein to show their pride and ignorance. For in
chalenging place above their betters, both in degree, and honor in Gods
Church, is contrary to all custom, and law of the Church, as Ma: D^ct. Elye in
his answer to the Apology, has showed at large.

Howsoever some men may make question between parochus in genere, and a
religious person, and the states of both (which the Sorbonists defined on the
pastors behalf:) yet no man can doubt betwixt a religious state, and ours in
England, where we are daily prepared to give our lives for our flock, of which
Christ himself says; Maiorem charitatem nemo habet, vt ponat quis animam suam
pro amicis suis. And therefore the state of Jesuits, or any other order
whatsoever, is not to be compared with the state of our Priests in England: let
Fa: Parsons infringe this proposition, if he can. But to make the case more
plain, and evident, we will put this general axiom, or ground, that no man
may leave a more perfect state, to go unto the less perfect, being in vow
bound unto the more perfect; but any religious man may leave their Monasteries,
and domestical discipline, yea, and in some cases are bound thereto, for the
health of their neighbors soul: as for example, if there be no other means
probable of his recovery: therefore to cooperate with Christ in the gaining of
souls, is a more perfect state, then the profession of any particular order of
discipline, or religion. For to that end, a state is said to be more or less
perfect, because it supposes more or less perfection: but that state of life
supposes more perfection, which supposes such inflaming charity, as to be
ready to give their lives for their neighbors spiritual good, then that which
only seeks his own good: therefore the life of a Priest in England, which
supposes such a charity, and such a resolution, as to be ready to die for the
good spiritual of his flock; is more perfect then a religious life, which
only attends to himself, and therefore supposes no more, then obedience,
observance of rules, and ordinary charity. Furthermore, religion is but the way
or means to perfection, and therefore a man enters into religion, because he
would become perfect: but that state wherein a man has dedicated his life for
his neighbors salvation, is not a way, or means to perfection, but supposes
the highest, and greatest perfection in this life: therefore the state of a
secular priest in England, is more perfect then any religious state in the
world. Yet does it not follow, that every priest is more perfect then a Jesuit,
or other religious man: no more then it follows, that every Bishop, because
of his state of perfection, is more perfect, then any priest, or every Jesuit,
then any Lay man; because every man lives not according to the state he
professes. And thus much for Ma. Watsons propositions, in the grace and
preferment of the state of priests in England.

Fourthly, he cites Ma. Watson, to say that their order is no religion, and
the persons thereof neither secular nor religious. This is falsely auerred
against Ma. Watson, for in diverse places of this book, he confesses it to be
an approved order: only here he says, that as they now use the matter,
according to the manner of life amongst some of them, and their politic
courses in the world, they are neither religious nor secular, because they show
themselves to be, the one in name, and the other in practice. And even in that
place he does commend their founders principles, which (he says) many of them
pervert and corrupt in practice: see the place, page, 61.

Fifthly, he alleges places out of Ma. Watson, wishing some Jesuits to leave
the order; which he notes in him, as counselling to Apostasy, which is most
false: First, in that he does not absolutely counsel it, but upon supposition
of bad courses (that many good natures, and men otherwise of good parts are
drawn into) to avoid so great evils, which is charity. Secondly, to counsel
to forsake the order of the Jesuits, is not to counsel to Apostasy, in that
all Jesuits may freely leave the order, before the last vow (which few in
respect of the multitude have taken;) and such only he counsels to come out
of their order (as Ma. John Gerard, etc. For otherwise Ma. Wright, Fa. Arden,
Cardinal Montalt^ his Theologo, Fa. (...) were Apostataes, which is malicious
to affirm. Neither is the Jesuits order, as other orders are, and were in S.
Bernards time; from whence after their first vow, which is after a years
probation, they can never depart: and therefore S. Bernards words cited, serve
him to no purpose at all. We will let pass his uncharitable and slanderous
suspicion, that a notorious Apostata or two, have had their fingers in
compiling the Quodlibets: for these calumnations you see, are as familiar with
him, as his familiar spirit. Sixthly, he notes out of the Quodlibets, certain
inuectiues against their singularity of choice, in the admitting of such, as
would enter into their Society: which sounds as if Ma: Watson had inueighed
against the spirit of discretion, and probation in such, as are admitted;
wherein he peruerteth his sense, as all the precedent discourse shows. For
indeed he only inueigheth against their temporal, and politic respects in
their admittance: Quodlibets, page, 137. 138.
which is too too frequent with them, if the party that would enter, be not
either of great parentage and friends, much wealth, great qualities of
learning, etc. or very practical in the world, and of extraordinary wit, he
is not for them. But if he have any of them, or be of any extraordinary
expectance, they will not only easily admit him, but earnestly seek after
him. This partiality and these respects does Ma. Watson speak against, which
in very deed are not tolerable in any religious order instituted, not for
policy, but for perfection, and therefore ought to be open to all sorts, the
meanest as soon as the greatest, the simplest as soon as the wisest. Mark
Fa: Parsons familiar spirit of prophecy.
And for his marginall note, that diverse of that crew (meaning the priests)
have been refused, by Gods providence, and wisdom of the fathers, that
foresaw their conditions. I will assure Fa: Parsons, for his better information
herein, that diverse of us have been particulerly dealt with-all by the
Jesuits, as well in their exercise, as otherwise, to have drawn us unto their
Society; yea, and some of us have felt their auersions, because we refused.
How often has this complaint been made against them in Rome, for soliciting
the Scholars to become Jesuits?

Seauenthly, he says, that Ma: Watson would have new laws made for the
inflicting of grievous punishments upon such, as should send their children to
the Seminaries, which is a notorious falsehood. Only he says that Fa. Parsons
dealing with the S^udents, concerning the Infanta her title to the Crown of
England (which is a matter of treason) may, and is likely to give occasion of
more severe proceedings, or stricter laws concerning such, by reason that now
he is head and director, and manager of all the Seminaries, and missions, read
the place page, 179. 180.

Eighthly, he brings in a marginall note of Ma. Watsons, against detraction,
as a most dangerous sin, which he applies against him, because of his
choleric inueighing against Fa: Parsons a little before, concerning a letter
writ by him from Naples. Indeed I confess that I wish he had not been so
hot: but yet this I say, that having seen the foresaid letter of Fa: Parsons,
it is so wicked, so uncharitable, and so vile a letter, that no man living (I
think) but would spet at it, if he should but hear it read. You may see part
of it, cited the 128, page of the Quodlibets, and I assure you verbatim: for I
have read the letter it self, which if you read, you will excuse much Ma.
Watsons choler.

Ninthly, he says, that in the 134. and 135. page, Ma. Watson affirms the
Jesuits doctrine to be erroneous, and heretical, for that they teach the Popes
ordinations to be obeyed. This untruth is exceeding gross, for there is no one
such word in the places cited (as you may read) nor any speech at all of the
Popes ordinances; only he calls such doctrine, as to teach men to
back-bite, slander, and detract those that are opposite to the Jesuits
designs, (as also sedicious meddling with the affairs of Princes, teaching
innouations, rebellions, invasions, conspiracies, etc.) erroneous, false, and
heretical doctrine, which no man dare to deny.

Tenthly, he makes Ma. Watson to say in the page 150. that we mean to
abstract matters of succession for our Realm, from matters of religion; and
this also is a notorious falsification. For he only says, that matters of
government, succession, and state affairs, are clearly abstracted from points
of faith, and religion: which is a position so true, as no man can infringe it.
Quodlibets. page 198.
I will omit his foolish cavil at a desired quiet in a frownd on state, as
ridiculous, wishing the Reader to peruse the place, and he shall find it to be
a most honest and a discreet speech I will also let pass his scoffing at Puny,
and other speeches of Ma. Watsons, concerning the preferring of priests, before
Jesuits, as they are only religious persons, which being a very discreet, and
true discourse in him, is foolishly gybed at by fa: Parsons, as if you read the
whole discourses, 51. and 117. you shall see.

What he alleges only by way of quotation, page 12, 13, 17, 38, 133, 194,
25, concerning the discovery of many Gentlewomen, and noble personages, or
sedition set betwixt the houses of Arundell, Howards, and Dacres, or the
threatening of Catholics: with new persecutions, or barking, biting, and
leaping in the faces of the Jesuits; is either false, and no such matter, or
frivolous, and of no importance, tending to no such wickedness as he notes.
Read the places in the Quodlibets above cited, and then judge. Eleuenthly, he
notes the words of Ma. Watson, page 312, that the King of Polonia is defeated
of the kingdom of Swethland, only by the Jesuits treacherous, ambitious, and
tampering aspires; whereas Ma. Watson only says, that this defeating was
occasioned by their ambitious, and tampering aspires. etc. which was a general
report; viz. that their incroaching upon the Swethlanders, being sent thither
to preach, made them to drive them all out of their Country. Whereupon the King
(by their suggestions) making war against the Swethlanders to reduce them by
the sword, they chose his uncle Duke Charles for their King, and so defeated
him of his inheritance. If this relation be not true, (as it was for certainty
auerred to be true) take it as a relation of news only, and blame the first
Author.

He denies also in the same paragraffe, that ever he writ Letter to the
Earl of Huntley in Scotland. But for that he may ask Ma. Mush now in Rome. I
verily think he can tell him something thereof. He also notes for a forgerie
in the same paragraffe, that Ma. Watson says, he sent a Jesuit to the Earl
of Essex, for his taking a pension of the king of Spain. Indeed I think Ma.
Watson might mistake in naming him a Jesuit, but Roules and Stanley had
commission from him, to deal with the said Earl in that behalf, they are
both in the Tower, about the practice of Squire, and have confessed the same as
I have been informed. In the same. also he notes for a calumniation, that
Ma. Middleton was cusened by him of 300. pound. If it be an untruth, Ma.
Middleton is too blame, from whom (as I understand) the information came.
Twelfthly, he brings in diverse things* affirmed by Master Watson, out of his
Memorial, alias his High counsel of Reformation, most of which things by him
cited, I have heard reported by reverend priests, that have seen and read the
work, and one of them, unto whom he showed it within his twelue-months in
Rome. Somewhat more particulerly we have spoken of this before.

After all these collections out of the Quodlibets, (which you see to be
either false, or not of any moment, he falls into inuectiues, running again
to prophecies, and predictions, page 113. where he also affirms, and says:
it cannot be denied that Priests, and Jesuits, joining all together at the
beginning of the Seminaries, both at Doway, Rhemes, and Rome, did set our cause
first on foot, and have promoted the same ever since, with conjoined labors,
etc. Before in the fourth chapter, you have heard fa: Parsons say, that no
English Jesuit was in place, or credit, when some matters were in action
against our Country, as that of Stukley, Doctor Saunders, and others, only to
excuse them in those practices: now here he says, that the Jesuits joined
their labors, with Doctor Allen, Doctor Saunders, Doctor Stapleton, Doctor
Bristow, Doctor Web, and many others, at the beginning of the Seminaries,
both at Doway, Rhemes, Rome, and other places, to set on foot our cause, I
would ask him if they co^curred with Doctor Saunders in promoting the cause of
our Country: wherein was it, if not in the Irish affairs, since he dealt in no
other for our country? Before in the fourth chapter he denies it stoutly,
being pressed therewith, oportet mendacem, esse memorem, God will still have
him to bewray himself. Chap. 4. folio. 39.
Again, if (as in the fourth chapter he said) no English Jesuit was then in
place, or credit, how did they then join at the beginning of the Seminaries
of these men, for our common cause? I am sure no Jesuit entered the harvest of
our Country for some years after the missions of Priests, not until two
years after the erection of the Roman Seminary, which was some years after
the beginning of the Seminary at Doway. If he say, that the Jesuits of other
Nations joined their helps in this action, then say I by the same assertion,
that in joining with Doctor Saunders, they concurred to the Irish attempts,
which was the only affair for our country (or rather against our country) in
which he dealt, and then I have what I intended; to wit, a proof that the
Jesuits have dealt in all actions against our Country, almost from the
beginning.

After this he enters into a discourse about the erection of the Archpriest*
and the writing of the Treatise of schism, Folio. 133.
neither of which (he says) was a sufficient cause to make these garboyles in
such a time and place. But to this I answer, that both being the most unjust
actions that could be, the one in prejudice of the whole Clergy, intruding a
superior, without suffiicient warrant to tyrannize over us, as he did, (which
is sufficiently showed, almost in all our discourses) the other in prejudice of
our fames, and credits in the highest degree (as is abundantly proved, and
dare not be maintained by any Jesuit, be he never so audacious) how could we do
less, then defend our rights, standing only upon justice? And judge whether
the offense were in us of these scandals (standing but in the defense of
justice, as now all men see) or in them that most injuriously against all law,
conscience, charity, and equity, maintained the same against us, (as Ma. Doctor
Ely proves in his answer to the Apology.

In the end of this chapter, and of this book, he makes his conclusion, with
the same charity he began, and has hitherto prosecuted the same, in comparing
us to Luther, and other heretics; and that all we have done, has been upon
ambition, liberty of life, promises and obligation to my Lord of London: which
he says we hold out in spe contra spem, against the remorse of our own
consciences. These are his charitable speeches, which in part we could retort,
and more justly upon himself, but we heartily pray almighty God to give him
more light of conscience, that he may see what an abominable thing it is in
the sight of GOD, to maintain injustice, and impiety, under the cloak and
mask of religion, and piety: least otherwise he pay summam mensuram delicti
one day, for the manifold afflictions, and miseries he has brought upon our
afflicted church, and the infinite wrongs and injuries, that he and his have
done against so many well deserving men of our English Clergy. And thus I will
end this reply, submitting both my self, and it, unto the censure of Christ's
holy spouse the Catholic Church, under whose banner I fight, protesting that
if any thing herein contained, be in the least jot contrary, or dissonant to
the Catholic doctrine, (as I verily hope there is not) I will be ready
hereafter to reform it.

DEO GRATIAS.
A Table of the passionate, and uncharitable words and sentences, used by Fa:
Parsons in his Libell of Manifestation, as well against our persons, as our
actions and proceedings: with the Chapter and leaf noted, where you may see
them.
The preface is an inuectiue discourse upon envy, which he applies in his
book unto us, with other reuiling speeches, as sal infatuatus, infatuated
priests, fuch as have lost not only all savor of priestly wisdom, and
shining light of true understanding, but also the true spirit of Christian
priests, and priesthood: with an application also of the unclean spirit
departing from a man, and returning, enters with seven worse then himself,
and infinite other inuectiue speeches, as proud, turbulent, irefull, impudent,
etc.

In the first Chapter.
Fol. 1. Passionate writers, of distempered humors: our books seditious, full
of iniquity, vanity, scurrility. fol. 2. Passion and perturbation of mind,
folly, imprudencie, clamorous in writing with contempt. fol. 3. Men free of
speech, and conversation given to liberty. fol. 4. Contemners of all helps for
the increase of spirit, used by virtuous men, that we be de larga manica, of
scandalous conversation: turbulent standing in defense of disorder, liberty,
and dissolution: imputation of whoredom, drunkenness, dicing, pewter stolen,
etc. all this against the priests in Wisbich. fol. 5. Extreme surfeit of
unchristian malice, passion, leuitie, anger, high and odious malice, malice and
stomach, perturbation of mind. fol. 6. Shameless Libellers: open, and
apparent malice. fol. 7. Petulancy. fol. 8. Exceeding madness, impotent
blindness of passion, slanderous tongue, malicious objection. fol. 9. Want of
good conscience, envy her self, odious, and malicious stuff, impudency, and
folly: railing, and reuiling without stop, or stay, either of shamefastnes, or
conscience: men expressing the sins of drunken men, and cursers, or evil
speakers, by their intemperancie of tongue, slanderous and malicious,
ignorance or malice. fol. 10. Giber^ fitter for Ruffians and Soldiers, etc,
intemperate tongues, passionate brethren. fol. 11. Folly, phrenzie, furious
inuectiues, spite, highly envying others gifts and graces, private mutiners,
public enemies, bidding war, and defiance to all, etc. madness. fol. 13.
Justifying the proceedings of heretics, and persecutors, etc. excluding all
spiritual authority, etc. defenders of paradoxes, and absurd positions,
parasiticall adulation, pernicious, eroneous, and heretical, wicked, and
reproachful: traiterous, ridiculous, impious, base, and wickedly minded,
public proctors of heretics and persecutors; open accusers against the
persecuted Catholics, sundred in wicked attempts, secular in order, degree,
mind, hearts, and desires. fol. 14. Transformed by passion of envy and malice,
sold their tongues to the common enemy, ridiculous and contemptible, railing
without modesty or measure, tied to no law of truth, probability, proof, or
modesty. fol. 15. Libellers, by passion conspiring with heretics, defenders of
irreligious paradoxes, compared to Anabaptists, and Luther: confident in
follies, pride, ignorance, folly, falsehood. fol. 16. Base flattery of new
fawning brethren, impious brauing against the Pope. fol. 17. Of Priests made
Soldiers, fighting against their chief pastor; anger, envy, passion, giving
consent a posteriore, to spilling of blood, etc. accusers of their brethren,
flattering and perfidious, champions that will fight even with God himself,
etc. perfidious to their own people, Sycophants, possessed with one of the
seven wicked spirits.
In the second Chapter.
Fol. 18. Discontented and distempered brethren, of indiscretion and bad
spirit, odious arguments, defense and patronage of disorder and liberty; open
railing, and rebellion against superiors, errors in doctrine, extreme
passion, lack of judgment, modesty, and moderation: contemptible, and odious:
no reason, desire of truth, zeal of reformation, love of union, spite, choler,
envy, malice, desire of revenge, and other pernicious inductions,
insufficiency in wisdom, learning, and all other virtues. fol. 19. Fury of
passion, and rage of revenge, gall, choler, envy, hate, folly, and lack of
discretion, venom, malice, gallings, and spightfull speech, simplicity, folly,
want of wisdom, and more necessary virtues, folly, malice, contemptuous
spirit. fol. 20. Outrageous injuries, rebellious subjects, intemperance, angry,
contumelious censure, high folly, and higher maleuolence, folly, frenzy,
passionate people, troublesome, and dissolute, unchristian censure, spirit of
scoffing. fol. 21. Clamours, odious braules, disorders, contempt, scoffing at
piety, scoffers, and scorners, foolish caueling and calumniation, against good
things, malicious, interpretations, disdain. fol. 22. Folly, passionate
proceedings, folly, simplicity, blindness of passion, folly, passion, simple,
passionate. fol. 23. Wrangling, brethren, pickers of quarrels, cavil,
calumniats. fol. 24. Cauillations to procure a worse breach, gross folly, gone
in blind passion, egregious folly, highest folly, immodest scoffings, railing
speeches. fol. 25. Pride, phrenzie, comparison to Luther, rancour, malice. fol.
26. Malice, scold, insolents, and intemperate raylings, notorious ingratitude,
folly, bitter gauling, and venomous speeches, bitterness of raylings,
spightfull, venomous slaunderings, soft and delicate nicenes in words,
scandalous behavior, disorders, discontented brethren. fol. 27. Passion, fury
of passion, passion, blindness, and obscurity of passion, passion. fol. 28.
Joining with most bloody enemies impious. fol. 29. Malice, passion, folly,
passionate spirits.
In the third Chapter.
Fol. 29. Angry men, passion, lauished out, and bidding battle, all in their
ways spiritual, sin, pride, and presumption. fol. 30. Disordinate brethren,
contumeliously, presumptuous, and heinous sin^e, infinite discredit, folly, no
credit but with heretics, great passion and folly, hate for religions sake,
notorious inconsideration, hired by the common enemy, contumelious injuries,
intemperate tongue. fol. 31. More impudent, then heretics intolerable
spightfull insolency, barbarous ingratitude, inconsiderate and passionate
people, pride, audatious, contemptuously. fol. 32. Contumely to the Pope,
intemperate behavior, make war against the Popes highest authority,
transported by the force of passion, intemperate speeches. fol. 33. Diverse
false slanders against Doct: Bagshawe, and Ma. Bluet, Ma: Champney, and Ma:
Barnebee, desperate, petty Doctors, young Masters. fol. 34. Younkers,
malicious imputation, odiously, hatred and envy, passion, malice, folly, bid
war to all good and learned men of our Nation, foolish assertion, absurd
Libells, take upon them the parts and persons of heretics, rail, lie, diffame
the actions and intentions of best Catholics, slanderous calumniation,
contemptuously, most spightfully. fol. 35. Calumniation, rail extremely,
contentious words, enemies in heart, hatred, and faction to Cardinal Allen,
follies, madness, enmity, and principal hatred, intemperatly, passion of
hatred, conspiring and coniuring factious attempts, and desires. fol. 36.
Clamorous books, slanders, scoffs, contumelious speeches, much malignity,
shameful, passionate brethren, raging and rauing, wonderful extreme passion,
with open mouth, and most violent spirit impugn true Martyrs. fol. 37.
Flattering the state, betraying their companions, like to make other men
Martyrs by betraying them, false and malicious calumniation. fol. 38. Passion,
hostility with Martyrs, troublesome and sedicious, proud and disobedients. fol.
39. Pride, folly, lack of discretion, reproach, contempt, belyed the
Seminaries to make them traitors that come from thence, passion, enraged by
force of choler, and impotent appetite of revenge.
In the fourth Chapter.
Fol. 39. Follies, improbabilities, open untruths, passionate brethren, bad or
no conscience at all, custom of telling untruths, not reflecting upon
conscience or credit, falsehood uttered with facility, notorious falsehoods and
untruths. fol. 40. Manifest and open untruths, slanders, and calumniations,
forsworn. fol. 41. Lies, false calumniations, little conscience, poison of
malice, malignant fruits, cries, clamors, oaths. fol. 42. Malice exceeding
the malice of heretics, malignant proceeding, malignities, malignity exceeding
malice. fol. 43. If they be brethren, if they be Priests, odious speech,
malignant and false, calumniators. fol. 44. Sedicions, joining with enemies and
heretics, cynicall, or sycophanticall. fol. 45. Opprobrious and contumelious
calumniations, sedicious people. fol. 46. Barbarous insolency of slanderous
companions, contempt, hollow hearts, oath, and consciencelesse protestation,
spightfull and injurious arraignment of Catholics, perfidious, and unchristian
malice, lost lads, apparent false calumniations, lie notoriously against their
conscience. fol. 47. Blind rancor, wilful malice, lack of conscience,
malignant passion, mad and furious inuectiue, spightfull, calumniations,
ridiculous, malicious sycophancie. fol. 48. Foolish malicious people,
calumniations, malignant envy, malignity. fol. 49. Distracted passionate
clamours of discontented people, calumniate, discompose, wrangle, trouble, cry,
and curse, shameless calumniation, lies. fol. 50. Poetical fictions, false,
slanderous, malignant untruths, open calumniation, seditious writer,
makebate, manifest slander. fol. 51. Malicious fictions, lying detractions,
malicious cauillation, absurd calumniation. fol. 52. Bold and ridiculous
assertion, unprofitable wrangling people. fol. 53. Contumely far from
wisdom, etc. extreme, audacity, absurd and ridiculous matters. fol. 54.
Mere faction, audacity, little shame and conscience, wrath, rail, follies,
open falsities, immodesty, passionate and inconsiderate brethren, folly,
falsehood. fol. 55. Fond railing, without end or measure, exceeding folly and
malice, conspiracy, seditious designments, folly, passion.
In the fifth Chapter.
Fol. 56. Envy, emulation, anger, passion, boysterously, furiously, passionate
people, outrageous dealing, envy exceedingly, rancor, malice, envy, railing
and calumniation, all their virtue, and humanity extinguished with envy,
grief, and envy. fol. 57. Falsity, falsely, calumniation, notoriously false,
peevish, and malign calumniation, wrangling, and lying humor. fol. 58.
Detractors, want of virtue, malicious envying humor. fol. 59. Impugn the very
name of reformation. fol. 61. Calumniators, calumniations, odiously, malicious.
fol. 62. Spightfully do malign and cavil. fol. 63. Great passion,
intemperate folly, malepert saucines, younglings, insolent dealing,
indiscreete, rash green heads, deuoued to carpe, malign, cauilations, men of
humor. fol. 64. Intemperatly exclaim, dispassionate, heretical, Libell,
contradicting company, counterfeit Doctor, impupudent cauiller. fol. 65.
Egregious foolery, wise Doctor, wise discouerer. fol. 66. Confederates of
faction, revolted Priests, hatred and enmity, eger discouerer, sedicions. fol.
67. Weakness and folly, calumniation, malicious empeachings of others,
malicious, malignant, flattering malignant discouerer. fol. 68. Flattering
discouerer, mutinous partners maleuolous calumniator.
In the sixth Chapter.
Fol. 68. Folly and blindness, deceived spirits, passionate if not possessed,
perturbation of envy, emulation, malice, revenge, anger, and like
enchauntments, and sorceries of their souls, furies of spiritual madness, rage
and run a desperate course of railing, and rauing outcries. fol. 69.
Clamors, mutinous and sedicious people, outcries, stomach, sobernes, notorious
lie, flattery, false procupation, gross and odious untruths. fol. 70. False
detraction, sedicion, clamors, scandalous tumultuation, deceitful speaking and
dealing, malicious books, scandalous and sinful action, folly, fury,
shameless Libells, horrible scandal. fol. 71. Hired to make debate, and set
division, spies, in way to be heretics, rebellion, tumultuous, scandalous
tumultuation of turbulent students, tumults, broils, sedicion, tumultuous
people. fol. 72. Tumultuous, tumultuous students, tumultuation, hatred of
order, discipline, and superiority, tumultutous, tumultuous people,
troublesome, tumultuous, tumultuous, tumultuous. fol. 74. Tumultuous,
troublesome, envy, emulation, malice. fol. 75. Troublesome, outcries, Horses,
Colts, fiercely wanton, tumultuous, turbulent crew, folly and indiscretion,
clamors. fol. 76. Troublesome sedition, sedicious course, tumultuations,
unchristian device, odious to God and good men, maliciously, malicious, set
sedition, tumultuous, presumptuously. fol. 77. Passion, venom of stomach,
indiscretion, intemperance, lack of conscience, modesty, shame, contumelious
speeches, a most wicked and injurious devise, unfortunate men, hired by the
public adversary, capital slander. fol. 78. Slanderously, injuriously,
strife, contention, great and strange passion, intemperate spirit, revenge,
envy, and precipitation, treason, traitors, contemptible. fol. 79. Betrayed,
and injuriously vexed by our own, small consideration, mutable, weak and
passionate. fol, 80. Folly, bad and mad course.
In the seventh Chapter.
Fol. 80. Transported brethren, exceeding the limits of modesty, anger,
emulation, passionate motives, no stay of conscience or religion, open breach
to all licentious liberty of vnshamefull railing, opprobrious, and contumelious
scolding, breach of modesty, contempt infamy. fol, 81. Notorious lies, manifest
slanders, false calumniations, scurrilous, immodest, neither modesty, shame,
nor conscience, disgorging gall, wanton, malapert, and mad speeches, wicked
Libell. fol. 82. Hideous and horrible detractions, slanders, and infamations,
sinful dealing, sinful burden, horrible sins, unchristian calumniations,
sinful lad, sinful suds, defectuous and sinful, wrong shapen, blinking
aspect, looking nine ways at once, wanton imaginations, lascivious phrases,
sensual and venerous apprehensions, contemplations, and desires. fol. 83.
Sinful and wretched poor fellow, lost lad, true stain of his religion and
order, falsely and wickedly, used by the devil, public reproach of our
profession, infamous books, factious, base and absurd instrument, base
instrument, mutined brethren, rebellion, begging boy, contemptible and
ridiculous thing. fol. 84. Liberty and sensuallity, dizzards, and absurdities.
fol. 85. Bewraying; and betraying Cath: simple ridiculous, no learning,
voluntary conspiring with the common enemy, mere malice, envy, pride. fol,
86. Miserable fellow, state of damnation, desperate case, licentious course,
shifter, malice, disorderly life, notorious foolery, dignity of perdition,
mutined and discontented priests, mutiny, dissension, no care of truth, rail,
revile, and revel, as turbulent spirits, shameless, foo^ish, malicious,
insolently, faction and rebellion, impudent lies, absurd, wicked, impious
speech. fol, 87, Heretical objection, a most ridiculous companion, pride, as
high presumption as any heretic can profess, few companions, impiety,
Lucianisme, raylings, lyings. fol. 88. Proctors for persecutors, wicked,
impious, Herodians, wicked devises, bloody companions, odious dispute, impiety
suggested by heretics, ribauld speech, notorious lies, shameless,
contemptuous and scoffing spirit. fol. 89. Infidelity, profane irreligiosity,
lack of spirit and sense in Gods affairs, outrageous detraction, fiery darts
of hellish hatred, serpentine tongues, mad and possessed men, rave and rage,
sedicious, contentious, tumultuous, desastred, dissolute, malicious and envious
calumniation, passionate emulators, malicious slanders, impudency, lies, and
malicious inventions, miserable men, envy, setters on of heretics, malice,
wicked men, unchristian and deuillish devise, malicious people. fol. 90. Wicked
companions, exorbitant malice, consciencelesse railing people, malice,
scurrilous objection. fol. 91. Malicious cavil, counterfeit or cauiling Cath:
malignity, pure malice, swelling envy, pestilent books, violent and virulent
people, without wit or honesty. fol. 92. Shameless books, false Libellers,
wilful calumniations, fabulous Lucianicall narration, spirit of spite, lack
of shame. fol. 93. Infamy, fardell of lies, impudency her self, brazen or
iron face, desperate behavior, a life of loud lies desperately faced out,
monstrous lie, impudent lie, shameless, insolent, impious. fol. 94. Wild, mad,
insolent, desperate course, frantike and possessed men, monstrous lies, absurd
prophanities, malicious fictions, consciencelesse calumniations, wretched and
miserable men's hearts, dispightfully, break with envy and rancor, furious
barkings, outrageous Libells, hatred, hellish spirit, poisoned entralls,
horrible puddle of lies, slanderous inuectiues, deuillish detraction, base,
vile, malicious, venom of life, and loose tongue armed with audacity, defended
with impudency, stirred up with envy, enraged with fury, bounded by no
limits of conscience, piety, or fear of God, etc. loathsome rags of a filthy
dunghill. fol. 95. Unworthy rags torn and rent from the honorable Clergy by
wilful mutiny and rebellion, wrangling Clergy, pride, arrogancy, ignorance,
obstinacy, wicked and odious both to God and man. fol. 96. Malicious things,
desperately, secret Apostasy, sedicions, a scold, wanton idle headed boy,
younkers, leuity of the lad, unconstant head. fol. 97. Infamous inuectiue,
spleen, spite, malicious stomach, way to perdition, vnsuited Gentleman,
shuttle brains, lascivious companion, beastly and sensual imagination. fol.
98. Copes-mate, and Apostata in heart, impudencies, deadly and deuillish hatred,
traiterous and Judas like natures, slanderous lies and reproaches, malice,
malicious devised calumniations. fol. 99. Sedicious falsehood, forged and
malicious, shameless creatures, ridiculous, impious, fond, furious, mad men,
watt tumbler, contemptible and contumelious, audacious, rash, unlearned,
fantastical, scurrilous, infamatory, a most lewd Libell fraught with foolery,
ignorance, audacity, and notorious impudency, and irreligious impiety,
egregious impiety, contemptibility.
In the eight Chapter.
fol. 101. Scandalous, clamorous, contradictious scandalous fact, disordinate
and discontented Priests, sedicions, assault of satan under Priests coats,
sedition, dangerous, and poisoned humors, naughty will, railing broils. fol.
102. Become as Tho. Bell, passion, malice, brabling people, unquiet spirity,
envy, perfidiousnes to God, passionate disordred brethren, friends in a
trance, men possessed with violent and raging spirits. fol. 104. Spirit of
pride, envy, revenge, clamors, slanders, calumniation, disobedience, wicked
spirit, quodlibetticall companion, profane, audacious, impudent spirit, wicked
spirit, irreligious companions. fol. 105. Pride, emulation, ignorance,
temerity, and folly, outrageous malice. fol. 106. Folly, madness, spiritus
vertiginis, or arreptitius, enemies against the Pope, deadly hatred. fol. 107.
The devil himself, railing, lying, malicious fashood, calumniator, wicked
forgery, malicious people, odious and irefull vain of railing, mad fellow.
fol. 108. Contemptuous discourse, Pharisaicall vanity, baseness, evil feature,
contemptible qualities. fol. 109. Insolences, vain, false, and wicked,
without all conscience, modesty, or respect of Christianity, perfidious
detractions, seditiously, rancor, malice, sedition, impudent forged lies, mere
forgery, without remorse of conscience, spirit of satan. fol. 110. Disorderly
Scholars. fol. 111. Lying spirit, notorious slanders and lies, shameless
assertions, notorious lies, blind Bayard. fol. 112. More then half frantic,
mere madness, spirits of clamors, rage, revenge, envy, emulation, audacious
speeches, disobedience, contempt, etc. discontented people. fol. 114. Ambition,
liberty of life, etc.
I have here set down only the words for the most part, not the sentences,
for the avoiding of tediousnes: referring the reader for trial, unto the
Chapters and pages cited: yet have I omitted not only diverse bitter words and
sentences, and all his uncharitable predictions and forspeakings, but also all
his contumelious, and disgraceful comparisons made very often and frequent
between Luther, Anabaptists, and other heretics, and us: as also all his
untruths and falsehoods, which if I should have compiled here together, would
have exceeded the measure of this work intended at the first: wherefore I
remit the Reader to the discourse it self, where he shall find them dispersed
in great number thoroughout the book.

FINIS.
Errata.
FOl. 5, a. line 1, for examples, read epistles. Ibidem, b, line, 35, for
judgments, read inducements. Fol. 11, a. line 10. for example, read epistle.
Fol. 12, a line 2. for example, read epistle. Ibidem, line 15. for seemed,
read seeming. Fol. 15. a. line 5. for, to be, read, to have been. Fol. 21,
b. line 11, for unknown, read known. Ibidem, line 13. for acclamation, read
exclamation. Fol. 26, a. line 29. for deceased, read diseased. Fol. 28. a.
line 17. for servant, read Citizen. Fol. 67. a. line 7. for F. B. read W. C.

