A book, or counseill against the disease commonly called the sweat, or
sweatyng sickness.

Made by Ihon Caius doctor in physic.

Uery necessary for every person, and much requisite to be had in the
hands of al sorts, for their better instruction, preparacion and defense,
against the soubdein coming, and fearful assaultyng of the same disease. 1552.

To the right honorable William Earl of Pinbroke, Lord Harbert of Cardife,
knight of the honorable order of the garter, and president of the kings
highness counseill in the marches of Wales: Ihon Caius wishes health and honor.
IN the feteful time of the sweat (right honorable) many resorted unto me
for counseil, among who^e some being my friends and aquaintance, desired me to
write unto them some little counseil how to govern themselves therein: saying
also that I should do a great pleasure to all my friends and contrimen, if I
would devise at my laisure some thing, which from time to time might remain,
whereto men might in such cases have a recourse and present refuge at all needs,
as the^ they had none. At whose request, at that time I wrate diverse
counseiles so shortly as I could for the present necessite, which they both
used and did give abroad to many others, and further appointed in my self to
fulfill (for so much as lay in me) the other part of their honest request for
the time to come. The which the better to execute and bring to pass, I
spared not to go to all those that sent for me, both poor, and rich, day
and night. And that not only to do the^ that ease that I could, and to
instruct the^ for their recovery: but to note also thoroughly, the cases and
circumstaunces of the disease in diverse persons, and to understand the nature
and causes of the same fully, for so much as might be. Therefore as I noted, so
I wrate as laisure then served, and finished one book in English, only for
English me^ not learned, one other in latin for men of lerninge more at large,
and generally for the help of the^ which hereafter should have need, either in
this or other countries, that they may learn by our harms. This I had thought
to have set forth before christmas, and to have given to your lordshippe at
newyeres tide, but that diverse other businesses let me. Nevertheless that
which then could not be done comes not now out of season, although it be
never so simple, so it may do ease hereafter. which as I trust this shall, so
for good will I give and dedicate it unto your good Lordshippe, trustyng the
same will take this with as good a mind, as I give it to your honor, which
our Lord preserve and grant long to continue.

At London the first of April. 1552.

The book of Ihon Caius against the sweatyng sickness.
MAN being borne not for his own use and commodity alone, but also for the
common benefit of many, (as reason will and al good authoures write) he which
in this world is worthy to live, ought al ways to have his hole mind and
intent given to profit others. Which thing to show in effect in my self,
although by fortune some ways I have been let, yet by that which fortune
cannot debar, some ways again I have declared. For after certain years being
at cambrige, I of the age of.xx. years, partly for mine exercise and proof what
I could do, but chefely for certain of my very fre^des, did translate out of
Latin into English certain works, having nothing else so good to gratify
them with. Whereof one. of S. Chrysostom de modo orandi deum, that is, of ye
manner to pray to god, I sent to one my friend then being in the court. One
other, a work of Erasmus de vera theologia, the true and ready way to read
the scripture, I did give to master Augustine Stiwarde Alderman of Norwiche,
not in the full as the authore made it, but abbreuiate for his only purpose to
whom I sent it, Leuyng out many subtle things, made rather for great and
learned divines, the^ for others. The third was the paraphrase of the same
Erasmus upon the Epistle of. S. Jude, which I translated at the request of
one other my dear friend.

These I did in English the rather because at that time men ware not so given
all to English, but that they did favor and mayteine good learning contained
in tongues and sciences, and did also study and apply diligently the same the^
selves. Therefore I thought no hurt done. Sense yt time diverse other things I
have written, but with entente never more to write in the English tongue,
partly because the commodity of that which is so written, passes not the
compass of England, but remains enclosed within the seas, and partly
because I thought that labors so taken should be half lost among them which
set not by learning. Thirdly for that I thought it best to avoid the
judgment of the multitude, from whom in matters of learning a man shall be
forced to dissente, in disprouyng that which they most approve, and approuyng
that which they most disalowe. Fourthly for that the common setting furthe
and printi^g of every foolish thing in english, both of physic imperfectly,
and other matters indiscreetly, diminishe the grace of things learned set forth
in the same. But chiefly, because I would give noue example or comfort to my
country men, (who^ I would to be now, as here tofore they have been,
comparable in learning to men of other countries) to stand only in the
English tongue, but to leave the simplicite of the same, and to proceed further
in many and diverse knoweleges both in tongues and sciences at home and in
universities, to the adournyng of the common welthe, better service of their
king, and great pleasure and commodite of their own selves, to what kind of
life soever they should apply them. Therefore whatsoever sense that time I
minded to write, I wrate ye same either in greek or latin. As first of all
certain commentaries upon certain books of William framingha^, master of art
in Cambrige, a man of great wit, memory, diligence and learning, brought up
in the same schools in England that I was, ever from his beginning until his
death. Of the which books.ii. of co^^ine^tia (or co^tinence) were in prose, ye
rest in meter or verse of diverse kinds. One a comfort for a blind man,
entitled ad Aemilianum caecum consolatio. one other ^cpyros^s, seu incendi^
sodomo^^, the burning of Sodom. The third Laurentius, expressyng the
torments of Saint Laurence. The fourth, Idololatria, Idolatry, not after
the trade and vein of scripture (wherein he was also very well exercised) but
conformable to scripture and after the civil and humane learning, declaryng
them to worship Mars, that war, or fight: Venus, that live incontinently:
Pluto, that follow riches couetousely: and so forth through all vices used in
his time. The fiueth book Arete, virtue: the sixth, Epigra^mes, contained in
two books, which by an epistle of his own hand before ye book yet remainyng,
he dedicated unto me, purposyng to have done many more pretty things, but that
cruel death prevented, and took him away where he and I was borne at Norwiche,
in the year of our Lord M. d.xxxvii. the xxix day of September, being then of
the age of.xxv. years, vii. Months, and vj. days, a great loss of so
notable a young man. These works at his death he willed to comme to my hands,
by which occasion after I had viewed the^, and perceived them full of al kinds
of learning, thinkyng the^ no works for all me^ to understand with out help,
but such as were well seen in all sorts of authors: I endeavored my self
partly for the help of others, and partly for mine own exercise, to declare
upon them the profit of my study in civil and humane learning, and to have
before mine eyes as in a work (which was always my delyght) how much I had
profited in the same. This so done, I joined every of my commentaries to every
of his said books, faier written by Nicolas Pergate puple to the said Master
Framyngham, myndyng after the judgment of learned men had in the same, to have
set them furthe in prynte, if it had been so thought good to them. For which
cause, at my departing into Italy, I put an Epistle before them dedicatorye
to the right Reverend father in God Thomas Thirlbye, now Bishop of Norwiche,
because the same master Framyngham loved him above others. He after my
departure delivered the books to the reverend father in god Iho^ Skippe, late
bishop of Hereforde, then to. D. Thixtle, tutor to the said master framyngha^,
from him to sir Richard Morisine, now ambassadoure for ye kings majesty with
the emperor, then to D. Tailour Deane of Lincoln, and sir Thomas Smithe
secretary after to ye kings Majesty, all great learned men. From these to
others they went, among whom the books died, (as I suppose,) or else be
closely kept, that after my death they may be setfurthe in the names of them
which now have the^, as their works. How soever it be, well I know that at my
return out of Italy (after.vj. years continuance there) into England, I could
never understand where they were, although I both diligently and desirousely
sought the^. After these I translated out of Greek into Latin a little book of
Nicephorus, declarynge how a man may in praiynge confess him self, which
after I did give unto Iho^ Grome bacheler in art, a young man in years, but in
wit and learning for his time, of great expectacio^. That done I began a
chronicle of the city of Norwiche, of the beginning thereof and things done
there from time to time, The matere whereof yet rude and undigested lies by me,
which at laisure I mind to polishe, and to make an end of that I have begun.
And to be short, in physic diverse things I have made and settefurth in
print both in Greek and Latin, not mindyng to do other wise, as I have before
said, al my life: For which cause al these things I have rehearsed, else
superstuous in this place. Yet see, meaning now to counseill a little against
the sweatyng sickness for help also of others, notwithstanding my former
purpose, two things compel me, in writynge thereof, to return again to
English, Necessite of the matter, and good will to my country, friends, and
acquaintance, which here to have required me, to whom I think my self borne.

Necessite, for that this disease is almost peculiar unto us English men, and
not common to all men, following us, as the shadow the body, in all countries,
albeit not at al times. There fore compelled I am to use this our English
tongue as best to be understand, and most nedeful to whom it most follows,
most behooves to have spedy remedy, and often times least nyghe to places of
succourre and comfort at learned men's hands: and least needful to be
setfurthe in other tongues to be understand generally of all persons, whom it
either haunteth not at all, or else very seldom, as ones in an age. Thinking
it also better to write this in English after mine own meaning, then to have
it translated out of my Latin by other after their misunderstandyng.

Good will to my country friends and acquaintance, seeing them with out
defense yield unto it, and it ferefully to invade the^, furiousely handle them,
spedily oppress them, vnmercyfully choke them, and that in no small numbers,
and such persons so notably noble in birthe, goodly conditions, grave
sobriety, singular wisedo^e, and great learning, as Henry Duke of Suffolk,
and the lord Charles his brother, as few has been seen like of their age: an
heavy and pitiful thing to here or see. So that if by only learned men in
physic and not this way also it should be helped, it were nedeful almost
half so many learned men to be ready in every town and city, as their should
be sweating sick folks. Yet this notwithstanding, I will every man not to
refuse the counseill of the present or nighe phisicen learned, who may,
according to the place, person, cause, and other circumstances, give more
particular counseil at need, but in any wise exhort him to seek it with all
diligence. To this enterprise also among so many learned men, not a little
stirs me the gentilnes and good wills of al sorts of men, which I have
well proved heretofore by my other former books. Mindynge therefore with as
good a will to give my counseil in this, and trusting for no less gentleness in
the same, I will plainly and in English for their better understanding to
whom I write, first declare the beginnynge, name, nature, and signs of the
sweating sickness. Next, the causes of the same. And thirdly, how to preserve
men from it, and remedy them when they have it.

In the year of our Lord God, The beginning of the disease.
M.CCCC.lxxxv. shortly after the.vij. day of august, at which time king
Henry the seventh arrived at ^ilford in walls, out of France, and in the
first year of his reign, there chanced a disease among the people, lastyng
the rest of that monethe and all september, which for the soubdeine sharpenes
and unwont cruelnes passed the pestilence. For this commonly gives.iv.
or.iiij. often.vij. sumtyme ix. as that first at Athenes which Thucidides
describes in his second book, sumtyme.xj. and sumtyme.xiiij. days respect,
to whom it vexes. But that immediately killed some in opening their windows,
some in plaieng with children in their street doors, some in one hour, many in
two it destroyed, and at the longest, to the^ that merilye dined, it gave a
sorrowful Supper. As it found them so it took them, some in sleep some in
wake, some in mirthe some in care, some fasting and some full, some busy and
some idle, and in one house sometime three sometime five, sometime seven
sometime eight, sometime more some time all, of the which, if the haulfe in
every Town escaped, it was thought great favor. How, or with what manner it
took them, with what grieffe, and accidents it held them, herafter the^ I
will declare, when I shall come to show the signs thereof. In the mean space,
know that this disease (because it most did stand in sweating from the
beginning until the endyng) was called here, the Sweating sickness: and
because it first began in England, it was named in other countries, the
english sweat. Yet some conjecture, that it, or the like, has been before
seen among the Greeks in the siege of Troie. In the emperor Octauius wars at
Cantabria, called now Biscaie, in Hispaine: and in the Turks, at the Rhodes.
How true that is, let the aucthours look: how true this is, the best of our
Chronicles she with, and of the late begone disease the fresh memory yet
confirms. But if the name were now to be given, and at my liberty to make the
same: I would of the manner and space of the disease (by cause the same is no
sweat only, as her after I will declare, and in the spirits) make the name
Ephemera, which is to sai, a fever of one natural dai. A fever, for the feruor
or burning, dries and sweating feure like. Of one natural day, for that it
lasts but the time of.xxiiij hours. And for a distinction from the commune
Ephemera, that Galene writes of, coming both of other causes, and with unlike
pains, I would put to it either English, for that it follows somoche
English men, to who^ it is almost proper, and also began here: or else
pestilent, for that it comes by infection and putrefaction, otherwise then
does the other Ephemera. Which thing I suppose may the better be done, because
I se strange and no english names both in Latin and Greek, by commune usage
taken for English. As in Latin, Feure, Quotidia^, Tertian, Quartane, Aier,
Infection, Pestilence, Uomite, Person, Reins Ueines, Peines, Chamere, Number,
etc. a little altered by the commune pronunciacion. In Greek, Pleuresie,
Ilchiada, Hydrops, Apostema, Phlegma, and Chole: called by the vulgar
pronunciatio^, Schiatica, Dropsy, Impostume, Phleume, and Choler: Gyne also,
and Soutyre, Sciourel, Mouse, Rophe, Phrase, Paraphrase, and cephe, whereof
comes Chaucers couercephe, in the romant of the Rose, written and pronounced
como^ly, kerchief in ye south. and courchief in the north. Thereof every head or
principal thing, is comonlye called cephe, pronounced and written, chief Uery
many other there be in our commune tongue, which here to rehearse were to
long. These for an example shortelye I have here noted. But for the name of
this disease it makes now no matter, the name of Sweat being commonly used.
Let us therefore return to the thing, which as occasion and cause served, came
again in the.M.D.vi. the.xxii. year of the said King Henry the seventh. Aftre
that, in the year M.D.xvii. the.ix. year of King Henry the viii, and endured
from July, unto ye midst of Dece^bre. The.iiii time, in the year.
M.D.xxviii. the xx. year of the said King, beginning in the end of May, and
continuing June and July. The fifth time of this fearful Ephemera of England,
and pestilent sweat, is this in the year. M.D.LI. of our Lord GOD and the
fifth year of our Sovereign Lord king Edward the sixth, beginning at
Shrewesbury in the midst of April, proceadinge with great mortality to
Ludlowe, Prestene, and other places in Wales, then to Westchestre, Couentre,
Oxenfoorde, and other tounes in the Southe, and such as were in and about the
way to London, whether it came notably the seventh of July, and there
continuing sore, with the loss of.vii.C.lxi. from the.ix. day until the.xvi.
day, besides those that died in the.vii. and.viii. days, of who^ no registre
was kept, from that it abated until the.xxx. day of the same, with the loss
of.C.xlii. more. Then ceassing there, it went from thence through all the east
parts of England into the North until the end of Auguste, at which time it
diminished, and in the end of Septembre fully ceased.

This disease is not a Sweat only, (as it is thought and called) but a fever.
as I said, in the spirits by putrefaction venomous, with a fight, travail,
and labor of nature against the infection received in the spirits, whereupon
by chance follows a Sweat, or issues an humor compelled by nature, as also
chances in other sicknesses which consiste in humors, when they be in their
state, and at the worste in certain days judicial, as well by vomites,
bledinges, and fluxes, as by sweates. That this is true, the self sweates do
show. For as in utter businesses, bodies yt sore do labor, by trauail of the
same are forced to sweat, so in inner diseases, the bodies traueiled and
labored by the^, are moved to the like. In which labors, if nature be strong
and able to thrust out the poiso^ by sweat (not otherwise let) ye person
escapes: if not, it dies. That it is a fever, thus I have partly declared,
and more will straight by the notes of the disease, under one showing also by
the same notes, signs, and short tariance of the same, that it consists in
the spirits. First by the peine in the back, or shoulder, peine in the
extreme parts, as arm, or leg, with a flusshing, or wind, as it seems to
certain of the pacientes, flieng in the same. Secondly by the grief in the
liver and the nigh stomach. Thirdely, by the peine in the head, and madness of
the same. Fourthly by the passion of the heart. For the flusshing or wind
coming in the utter and extreme parts, is nothing else but the spirits of
those same gathered together, at the first entering of the evil air, against
the infection thereof, and flyeng the same from place to place, for their own
sauegarde. But at the last infected, they make a grief where they be forced,
which commonly is in tharme or leg (the fartheste parts of their refuge)
the back or shulder: trieng there first a bru^t as good soldiers, before they
will let their enemy come further into their dominion. The other grefes be
therefore in the other parts aforsaid and sorer, because the spirits be there
most ple^tuous as in their founteines, whether always thinfection desires to
go. For from the liver, the nigh stomach, brain, and heart, come all the.iij.
sorts, and kinds of spirits, the gouernoures of our bodies, as first
spronge there. But from the heart, the liuish spirits. In putrifieng whereof by
the euel aier in bodies fit for it, the heart is oppressed. Whereupon also
follows a marvelous heaviness, (the fifthe token of this disease,) and a
desire to sleep, never contented, the senses in all parts being as they were
bound or closed up, the parts therefore left heavy, vnliuishe, and dulle. Last
follows the short abidinge, a certain Token of the disease to be in the
spirits, as well may be proved by the Ephemera that Galene writethe of, which
because it consistethe in the Spirits, lasts but one natural day. For as
fire in hardes or straw, is sone in flambe and sone out, even so heat in the
spirits, either by simple distemperature, or by infection and putrefaction
therein conceived, is sone in flambe and sone out, and sooner for the vehemencye
or greatues of the same, which without lingering, consumes sone the light
matter, contrary to al other diseases restyng in humors, wherein a fire ones
kindeled, is not so sone put out, no more then is the same in moiste woodde, or
fat Sea coals, as well by the particular Example of the pestilence, (of al
others most like unto this) may be declared, which by that it stands in euel
humors, tarieth as I said, sometime, from.iiij.vii.ix. and xj. until.xiij.
days, differentlie from this, by reason thereof, albeit by infection most like
to this same. Thus under one labor shortelie I have declared, both what this
disease is, wherein it consists, how and with what accidents it grieueth
and is differente from the Pestilence, and the propre signs, and tokens of the
same, without the which, if any do sweat, I take them not to Sweat by this
Sickness, but rather by fear, heat of the year, many clothes, great
exercise, affection, excess in diete, or at the worst, by a small cause of
infection, and less disposition of the bodi to this sickness. So that,
insomoche as the body was not al void of matter, sweat it did when infection
came: but in that the mattere was not great, the same could neither be
perilous nor paineful, as in others, in whom (...) was greater cause.

Hitherto I have showed the beginning, The causes.
name, nature, and signs of this disease: now I will declare the causes,
which be.ij: infectio^, and impure spirits in bodies corrupt by repletio^.
Infection, by thaire receiving euel qualities, diste^pring not only ye hete,
but the hole substance thereof, in putrifieng the same, and that generally.ij.
ways. By the time of the year unnatural, and by the nature and site of the
soil and region. whereunto may be put the particular accidents of this same.
By the time of the year unnatural, as if winter be hot and dry, somer hot
and moist: (a fit time for sweates) the spring cold and dry, the fall hot and
moist. To this may be joined the euel disposition by coustellation, which has
a great power and dominion in all erthly things. By the site and nature of the
soil and regio^, many ways. First and specially, by euel mistes and
exhalatio^s drawn out of the ground by the su^ne in the heat of the year,
as chanced among the Greeks in the siege of Troy, whereby died first dogs and
mules, after, me^ in great number: and here also in England in this m.d.lj.
year, the cause of this pestilent sweat, but of diverse nature. Which miste
in the country where it began, was seen fly from town to town, with such a
stincke in morninges and eueninges, that me^ could scarcely abide it. The^ by
dampes out of the earth, as out of Galenes Barathru^, or the poets auernu^, or
aornu^, the dampes whereof be such, that they kill ye birds flie^g over them. Of
like dampes, I heard in the north country in cole pits, whereby the laboring me^
be straight killed, except before the hour of coming thereof (which they know
by ye flame of their ca^dle) they avoid the ground. Thirdly by putrefactio^ or
rot in grou^des aftre great flouddes, in carions, and in dead men. After great
fluddes, as happened in ye time of Gallien the^peror at rome, in Achaia and
Libia, where the seas sodeinly did ouerflow ye cities nigh to yt same. And in
the.xi. year of Pelagius, when all the flouddes through al Italye did rage,
but chieflye Tibris at at Rome, which in many places was as high as the
walls of the city.

In cario^s or dead bodies, as fortuned here in England upon the sea banckes
in the time of King Alured, or Alfrede, (as some Chroniclers write) but in the
time of king Ethelred after Sabellicus, by occasion of drowned Locustes cast up
by the Sea, which by a wind were driven out of France thither. This locust
is a fly in bigness of a man's thumb, in color broune, in shape somewhat
like a greshopper, having.vi. fiete, so many wings, two tiethe, and an hedde
like a horse, and therefore called in Italy Caualleto, where over ye city of
Padoa, in the year.m.d xlij. (as I remember,) I, with many more did see a
swarm of them, whose passage over the city, did last two hours, in breadth
inestimable to every man there. Here by example to note infection by deadde
men in Wars. either in rotting above the ground, as chanced in Athenes by
them of Ethiopia, or else in being buried ouerly as happened at Bulloigne, in
the year M.D.xlv. the year aftre king Henrye theight had conquered the same,
or by long continuance of an host in one place, it is more plain by daily
experience, then it neadeth to be showed.

Therefore I will now go to the fourth especial cause of infectio^, the pent
aier, breaking out of the ground in yearthquakes, as chanced at Uenice in the
first year of Andrea Dandulo, then Duke, the.xxiiii. day of Ianuarye, and xx.
hour after their computacion. By which infectio^ mani died, and many were borne
before their time. The v. cause is close, and v^stirred air, and therefore
putrified or corrupt, out of old wells, holes in ye ground made for grain,
whereof many I did se in and about Pesaro in Italy, by openi^g the^ aftre a
great space, as both those cou^trime^ do confess, and also by example is
declared, for yt many in openi^g the^ unawarely be killed. Out of caves, and
to^bes also, as chanced first in the country of Babilonia, proceeding aftre
into Greece, and so to Rome, by occasion that ye soldiers of the emperor Marcus
Antoninus, upon hope of money, brake up a golden coffine of Auidius Cassius,
spie^g a little hole therein, in the temple of Apollo in Seleucia, as Ammianus
Marcellinus writes. To these may be joined the particular causes of infectio^,
which I call the accidents of the place, augmenting the same. As nigh to
dwelling places, merishe, and muddy grounds, puddles or donghilles, sinkes or
canales, easing places or carious, deadde ditches or rotten grounds, close
aier in houses or ualleis, with such like. Thus much for the first cause.

The second cause of this English Ephemera, I said were thimpure spirits in
bodies corupt by repletio^. Repletion I call here, abundance of humores euel and
maliciouse, from long time by little and little gathered by euel diete, remaining
in the body, coming either by to much meat, or by euel meat in quality, as
infected fruits, meats of euel iuse or nutrime^t: or both jointly. To such
spirits when the air infectiue comes co^sonant, the^ be they diste^pered,
corrupted, sore handled, and oppressed, the^ nature is forced, and the disease
engendered. But while I do declare these impure spirits to be one cause, I
must remove your minds from spirits to humors, for that the spirits be
fed of the fiuest parts thereof, and aftre bring you again to spirits
where I took you. And forsomuche as I have not yet forgotten to whom I write,
in this declaration I will leave a part al learned and subtle reasons, as here
void and vnmiete, and only use such as be most evident to whom I write, and
easiest to be understood of the same: and at ones therewith show also why it
hau^teth us English men more the^ other nations. Therefore I pass over the
vnge^tle sauoure or smell of the sweat, grosenes, color, and other qualities
of the same, the quantity, the danger in stopping, the manner in coming furthe
redily, or hardly, hot or cold, the notes in the excreme^tes, the state longer
or soree, with such others, which may be tokens of corrupt humors and
spirits, and only will stand upon.iii. reasons declaring yt same swet by great
repletio^ to be in us not otherwise for all ye euel air apt to this disease,
more the^ other nations. For as heraftre I will show, and Gale^ confirms, our
bodies cannot fuffre any thing or hurt by corrupt and infectiue causes, except
there be in the^ a certei^ matter prepared apt and like to receive it. else if one
were sick, al should be sick, if in this countri, in all cou^tres where the
infection came, which thing we se does not chance. For touching the first
reason, we se this sweting sickness or pestilent Ephemera, to be often in England,
but never enters Scotland, (except the borders) albeit they both be ioinetly
within the co^pas of on sea. The same beginning here, has assailed Brabant and
the costs nigh to it, but never passed Germany, where ones it was in like
facio^ as here, with great mortality, in the year.m.d.xxix. Cause whereof none
other there is natural, then the evil diet of these three contries which
destroy more meats and drynckes without al order, convenient time, reason, or
necessite, the^ either Scotland, or all other countries under the sun, to
the great annolance of their own bodies and wits, hinderance of them which
have need, and great dearth and scarcity in their common welthes. Wherefore if
Esculapius the inuentour of phisike, ye sauer of me^ from death, and restorer
to life, should return again i^to this world, he could not save these sorts
of men, having so much sweatyng stuff, so many evil humors laid up in
store, from this displeasante, fearful, and pestilent disease: except they
would learn a new lesson, and follow a new trade. For other wise, neither the
auoidyng of this country (the second reason) nor fleyng into others, (a
commune refuge in other diseases) will preserve us English men, as in this
last sweat is by experience well proved in Cales, Antwerpe, and other places
of Brabant, where only our contrimen ware sick, and none others, except one
or.ij. others of thenglishe diete, which is also to be noted. The cause hereof
natural is only this, that they carried over with the^, and by like diete there
incresed that which was the cause of their disease. Wherefore let us
asserteine our selves, that in what soever contrie like cause and matter is,
there coming like aier and cause efficient, will make like effect and disease
in persons of agreeable complexions, age, and diete, if the time also do serve
to these same, and in none others. These I put, for that the time of the year
hot, makethe much to the malice of the disease, in opening the pores of the
body, lettynge in the evil aier, resoluynge the humores and making them
flowable, and disposing therefore the spirits accordyngly, beside, that (as I
showed in the first cause of this pestilente sweat) it stirs and braweth
out of the earth evil exhalations and mistes, to thinfection of the aier and
displeasure of us. Diet I put, for that they of the contrary diete be not
troubled with it at all. Age and complexion, for this, that although it spares
no^ age of both kinds, nor no complexion but some it touch the, yet for the
most part (whereby rules and reasones be always to be made) it vexed them of
the middle age, best lust, and them not much under that, and of complexions
hot and moiste, as fitteste by their naughty and much subtlety of blood to
feed the spirits: or nigh and like to the same in some one of the qualities,
as cholerike in hete, phlegmatike in moister, except the other their qualities,
as dryness in cholerike, and cold in phlegmatike, by great dominion over
the other, did let. For the clean contrary complerio^s to the infected aier,
always remain helthful, saulfe and better then tofore, the corrupt and
infected aier notwithstanding. Therefore cold and dry persons either it
touched not at all, or very few, and that with no dangers such I say as beside
their complexion, (which is so hard to find in any man exact and simple, as
exact helthes) were annoied with some corrupt humors and spirits, and
therefore mete by so much to receive it, and that by good reason. For nothing
can naturally have power to do ought against any thing, except the same have
in it self a disposicion by like qualities to receive it. As the cause in the
foot cannot trouble the flank and leave the knee (the mean betwixt) except
there were a greater consent and likeness of nature in sufferance (which we
call sympathian) betwixt those then the other. Nor fire refusing stones, ca^^e
burn hardes, straw, sticks and charcole, oil, wax fat, and seacole,
except these same first of al were apt, and by convenient qualities disposed to
be enflamed and burned. Nor any man goes about to burn water, because the
qualities thereof be contrary, and the body undisposed to the like of fire. By
which reason it may also be perceived, that ye venemouse quality of this
corrupt is hot and moiste. for it redily enfectethe the like complexions, and
those nygh unto them, and the contrary not at all, or hardly: and easily does
putrify, as do the Southe wyndes. Therefore next unto those cold and dry
co^plexions, old men escaped free, as like to them by age: and children, as
void of replecion consumed by their great hete, and therefore always ready to
eat. But in this disease the subtle humor evil and abundant in full bodies
fedyng ye spirits, is more to be noted then the humor complexional, which
notwithstanding, as an helper or hinderer to ye same, is not to be neglected.
For else it should be in all contries and persons indifferently, where all
complexiones be. The third and last reason is, yt they which had this sweat
sore with perille or death, were either men of welthe, ease, and welfare, or of
the poorer sort such as were idle persons, good ale drinkers, and Tavern
haunters. For these, by ye great welfare of the one sort, and large drinkyng
of thither, heped up in their bodies much evil matter: by their ease and
idleness, could not waste and consume it. A comfirmacion of this is, that the
laborouse and thin dieted people, either had it not, because they did eat
but little to make the matter: or with no great grefe and danger, because they
labored out much thereof. Wherefore upon small cause, necessarily must follow
a small effect. All these reasones go to this end, that persons of all
contries of moderate and good diete, escape this English Ephemera, and those
be only vexed there with, which be of immoderate and evil diete. But why?
for the evil humores and corrupt aier alone? No. for the^ the pestilence and
not the swet should rise. For what then? For ye impure spirits corrupt in
them selves and by the infectiue aier. Why so? for that of impure and corrupt
humores, whether they be blood or others, can rise none other then impure
spirits. For every thing is such as that whereof it comes. Now, that of
the best and fineste of the blood, yea in corrupt bodies (which best is
naught) these spirits be engendered and fed, I before expressed. Therefore who
will have them pure and clean, and him self free from sweat, must keep a pure
and clean diete, and then he shall be sure.

Infection by the aier, The preseruacion.
and impure spirits by repletion thus found and declared to be the causes of
this pestilente sweat or English ephemera, let us now see how we may
preserve our selves from it, and how it may be remedied, if it chance, with
less mortality. I will begin with preservation. That most of all does
stand in auoidyng the causes to come of the disease, the things helping
forward the same, and remouyng that which is already had and gotten. Al be done
by the good order of things perteynyng to the state of the body. Therefore I
will begin with diete where I left, and then go forth with aier where I began
in treatyng the causes, and declare the way to avoid infection, and so furthe
to the rest in order. Who that lust the to line in quiet surety, out of the
sudden danger of this English ephemera, he above all things, of little and
good must eat and spare not. the last part whereof will please well (I doubt
not) us English men: the first I think never a deal. Yet it must please
them that entende to live without the reche of this disease. So doing, they
shall easily escape it. For of that is good, can be engendered no evil: of that
is little, can be gathered no great store. Therefore helthful must he needs be
and free from this disease. that uses this kind of living and manner in
dietynge. An example hereof may the wise man Socrates be, which by this sort
of diete escaped a sore pestilence in Athenes, never fleing ne keeping close
him felfe from the same. Truly who will live according to nature and not to
lust, may with this diete be well contented. For nature is pleased with a
little, nor seeks other then that the mind void of cares and fears may be in
quiet merrily, and the body void of grefe, may be in life swetly, as
Lucretius writes. Here at large to run out until my breath were spent, as
upon a common place, against ye intempera^ce or excessive diete of England,
thincommodities and displeasures of the same many ways: and contrary, in
comme^dation of mean diete and temperance (called of Plato sophrosyne, for
that it co^serueth wisdom) and the thousand commodities thereof, both for
health, welthe, wit, and long life, well I might, and lose my labor: such
be our English facions rather then reasones. But for that I purpose neither to
wright a long work but a short counseill, nor to weary the reders with that
they lust not to here, I will let that pass, and move the^ that desire
further to know my mind therein, to remember that I said before, of little and
good eat and spare not, whereby they shall easily perceive my meaning. I
therefore go forth with my diete, wherein my counseill is, that the meats be
helthfull, and holsomly killed, swetly saved, and well prepared in rostyng,
sethyng, baking, and so forth. The bread, of swet corn, well leuened, and so
baked. The drink of sweet malte and good water kyndly brued, without other
dross now a days used. No wine in all the time of sweatyng, except to such
whose sickness require it for medicin, for fere of inflamynge and opening, nor
except yt half be well soden water. In other times, old, pure, and small.
Wishi^g for the better execution hereof and oversight of good and helthsome
victalles, there were appointed certain masters of health in every city and
town, as there is in Italy, which for the good order in all things, may be
in all places an example. The meats I would to be veale, muttone, kidde, old
lamb, chikyn, capone, hen, cock, pertriche, phesane, felfare, small birds,
pigeon, young pecockes, whose flesh by a certain natural and secret property
never putrefie, as has been proved. Conies, porke of mean age, neither fat
nor leave, the skin taken away, roste, and eaten cold: Tartes of prunes,
gelies of veale and capone. young befe in this case a little poudered is not to
be dispraised, nor new eggs and good milk. Butter in a morning with sage and
rewe fasting in the sweating time, is a good preservative, beside that it
nourishes. Crabbes, crauesses, picrel, perch ruff, gogion, lampreis out of
grauelly rivers, smeltes, dace, barbell, gornerd whityng, soles, flunders,
plaice, millers thumbes, minues with such others, sodde in water and vinegre with
rosemary time, sage, and hole maces, and served hot. Yea sweet salt fish and
linge, for the saltes sake wasting ye humores thereof, which in many fresh
fisshes remain, may be allowed well watered to the^ that have non other, and
well like it. Nor all fishes, no more then al fleshes be so evil as they be
taken for: as is well declared in physik, and approved by the old and wise
romans much in their fisshes, lusty chartusianes never in fleshes, and
helthful poor people more in fish then flesh. But we are now a days so
unwisely fine, and womanly delicate, that we may in no wise touch a fisshe. The
old manly hardness, stout courage, and peinfulnes of England is utterly
driven away. in the stead whereof, men now a days receive womanlines, and
become nice, not able to withstand a blaste of wind, or resist a poor
fisshe. And children be so brought up, that if they be not all day by the fire
with a toste and butire, and in their furs, they be straight sick.

Sauces to metes I appoint first above all things good appetite, and next
Olives, capers, iuse of lemones, Barberies, Pomegranetes, Orenges and Sorel,
veriuse, and vineigre, iuse of unripe Grapes, thepes or Goseberies. After mete,
quinces, or marmalade, Pomegranates, Orenges sliced eaten with Sugar, Succate
of the pills or barks thereof, and of pomecitres, old apples and peers,
Prunes, Reisons Dates and Nuttes. Figs also, so they be taken before diner.
else no fruits of that year, nor raw herbs or rotes in sallattes, for that in
such times they be suspected to be partakers also of the enfected air.

Of air so much I have spoken before, as apperteinethe to the declaration of
enfection thereby. Now I will advise and counseill how to keep the same pure,
for so much as may be, or less enfected, and correct the same corrupt. The
first is done in taking a way ye causes of enfectio^. The second, by doing
in all points the contrary thereto. Take away the causes we may, in damnyng
diches, auoidynge cario^s, lettyng in open air, shunning such evil mistes as
before I spoke of, not opening or sturrynge evil brethynge places, landynge
muddy and rotten grounds, burieng deed bodies, keeping canelles clean, sinkes
and easyng places sweat, remouynge dongehilles, box and evil sauouryng
things, enhabitynge high and open places, close toward the sowthe, shut
toward the wind, as reason will and thexperience of. M. varro in the pestilence
at Corcyra confirm the. Correct in doing the contrary we shall, in dryenge
the moiste with fyres, either in houses or chambers, or on that side the
cities, towns, and houses, that lies toward the infection and wind coming
together, chefely in mornings and eueninges, either by burning the stubble in
the field, or windfallynges in the woods, or other wise at pleasure. By which
policy skilful Acron delivered Athenes in Gretia, and divine Hippocrates
abdera^ in Thratia from ye pestilence, and preserved from the same other the
cities in Greece, at diverse times co^yng with the wind from aethiopia, illyria
and paeonia, by putting to the fires well smelling garla^des, flowers and
odoures, as Galene and Soranus write. Of like policy for purging the aier
were the bonfires made (as I suppose) from long time he thereto used in ye
mids of summer, and not only for vigiles. In co^fortyng the spirits also,
and by altering the aier with sweet odoures of roses, swet perfumes of
the same, rosemary leaves, baies, and white sanders cut, afewe cloves steped
in rose water and vinegre rosate, the infection shall be less noious. with the
same you may also make you a sweet house in casting it abroad therein, if
first by auoidynge the russhes and duste, you make the house clean. Have
always in your handcercher for your nose and mouth, both with in your house
and without, either the perfume before said, or vinegre rosate: and in your
mouth a piece either of setwel, or of the rote of enula campana well steped
before in vinegre rosate, a mace, or berie of Juniper. In want of such
perfumes as is beforesaide, take of mirrhe and dry rose leaves of each a like
quantite, with a little frank encense, for the like purpose, and cast it upon
the coals: or burn Juniper and their beries. And for so much as clenelines is
a great help health, mine advise is, that all your clothes be sweet smelling
and clean, and that you wasshe your hands and face not in warm water, but
with rose water and vinegre rosate cold, or else with the fair water and
vinegre wherein the pills or barks of orenges and pomegranates are sodden: or
the pills of pomecitres and sorel is boiled. for so you shall close the pores
against the air, that it redily enter not, and cole and tempre those parts so
washed, according to the right entente in curing this disease. For in all the
discurse, preservation, and cure of this disease, the chief mark and purpose
is, to minister such things as of their nature have the faculty by colyng
dryenge and closyng, to resist putrefaction, strength and defend the
spirits, comfort the heart, and keep all the body against the displeasure of
the corrupt air. Wherefore it shall be well done, if you take of this composition
following every morning the weight of.ij. d. i^.vi. sponefulles of water or
^uleppe of Sorel, and cast it upon your meat as pepper.. sei^s citri, acetos,
ros. rub, sa^dal. citrin, a^n, 3. i, boli armeni orie^tal. 3. ^. 8, terr.
sigil. 3. 8, margarit. 3. i, fol. auri puri. no. iiii, misce. and f. pull.
diuidatur ad po^d. 3.8. Or in the stead of this, take fasting the quantity of
a small been of Mithridatum or Uenice triacle in a sponeful of Sorel, or
Scabious water, or by the self alone. And in going abroad, have in your hand
either an handekercher with vinegre and rose water, or a little musk balle of
nutmegges, maces, cloves, saffro^, and cinamome, of each the weight of.ii. d.
fiuely beaten. of mastike the weight of ij. d. ob. of storax.v. d. of ladane.x.
d. of Ambre grise.vi. grains, of Musk.iii. grains dissolved in right
Muscadel: tempre al together, and make a balle. In want of Mithridatum or such
other as I have before mentioned, use daily the Sirupes of Pome granates,
Lemones, and Sorell, of each half an ounce, with as much of the watres of
Tormentille, Sorell, and Dragones, fasting in the morning, and one hour before
supper. A toste in vinegre or veriuse of Grapes, with a little poulder of
Cinamome and Settewelle cast upon it. Or two figs with one nutte carnelle,
and ten leaves of rue in each, and a little salt. Oboutire, rue, and sage,
with bread in a morning eaten next your heart, be as good preservatives, as
theie be easy to be had. These preservatives I here appoincte the more
willingly among many others further to be fetched, because these may easelier
behadde, as at hand in niede, which now to find is my most endeavor, as most
fruictfulle to whom I write. And this to be done I counsaille in the
sickness time, when first you hear it to be coming and begone, but not in
the fit. Always remembryng, not to go out fasting. For as Cornelius Celsus
wrytethe, Uenime or infection takes hold much sooner in a body yet fasting,
then in the same not fasting. Yet this is not so to be understand, that in
the morning we shall straight as our clothes be on, stuff our bellies as fulle
as English men, (as the French man says to our shames,) but to be
content with our preservatives, or with a little meat both at breakefaste
(if custom and need so require) dynner and supper. For other wise nature, if
the disease should take us, should have more a do against the full bealy
and fearce disease, then it were able to sustain.

Aftre diete and air followethe filling or emptieng. Of filling in the name of
repletio^ I spoke before. Of e^ptieng, I will now shortly write as of a thing
very necessary for the conseruauation of man's health. For if that which is
euel within, be not by good means and ways well fet out, it often times
destroys the life. Good means to fet out the euelle stuff of the body be
two, abstinence, and auoydance.

Abstinence, in eating and drinckynge little, as a little before I said, and
seldom. For so, more goes away then comethe, and by little and little it
wastes the humors and dries. Therefore (as I wiene) through the counseil of
Phisike, and by the good civil, and politic ordres, te^dring the wealth of
many so much given to their bellies to their own hurtes and damages, not able
for want of reason to rule the^ selves, and thereby inclined to al vices and
diseases: for thauoiding of these same, increase of virtue, wit and health,
saving victualles, making plenty, avoiding lothesomenesse or weariness, by
change, in taking sometime of that in the sea, and not always destroieng yt
of the land, an order (without the which nothing can stand) and common wealth,
days of abstinence, and fasting were first made, and not for religion only.

Auoidance, because it cannot be safely done without the healpe of a good
Phisicien, I let pass here, expressing how it should be done duelye
according to the nature of the disease and the estate of the person, in an
other book made by me in Latin upon this same matter and disease. Who
therefore lusts to see more, let him look upon that book. Yet here thus much
will I say, that if after euacuation or avoiding of humors, the pores of the
skin remain close, and ye sweating excrement in the flesh continues gross
(which thing how to know, hereafter I will declare) then rub you the
person meanly at home, and bathe him in fair water sodden with Fenel,
Chamemil, Rosemarye, Mallows, and Lauendre, and last of al, power water half
cold over al his body, and so dry him, and clothe him. Al these be to be don a
little before yt end of yt spring, that the humors may be seatled, and at rest,
before the time of the sweting, which comes commonly in somer, if it comes at
al. For the tormoiling of the body in that time when it ought to be most
quiet, at rest, and armed against his enemy, likes me not best here, no more
then in the pestilence. Yet for the present need, if it be so thought good to
a learned and discrete Phisicien, I condescend the rather. For as in this, so
in all others before rehearsed, I remytte you to the discretion of a learned
manne in phisike, who may judge what is to be done, and how, according to the
present estate of your bodies, nature, custom, and proprety, age, strength,
delyghte and quality, time of the year, with other circumstaunces, and
thereafter to give the quantity, and make diversity of his medicine. Other
wise look not to receive by this book that good which I entend, but that euel
which by your own folly you vudiscretelye bring. For good counseil may be
abused. And for me to write of every particular estate and case, which be so
many as there be men, were so great almost a business, as to number the
sands in the sea. Therefore seek you out a good Phisicien, and known to have
skille, and at the least be so good to your bodies, as you are to your hosen
or shoes, for the well making or mending whereof, I doubt not but you will
diligently search out who is known to be the best hosier or shoemaker in the
place where you dwell: and fly the unlearned as a pestilence in a comune
wealth. As simple women, carpenters, pewterers, brasiers, sopeballe sellers,
pulters, hostellers, painters, apotecaries (otherwise then for their drogges.)
auaunters the^ selves to come from Pole, Constantinople, Italy, Almaine,
Spain, France, Greece and Turkey, Inde, Egypt or Jury: from ye service of
Emperoures, kings and quienes, promising help of al diseases, yea incurable,
with one or two drinckes, by waters six months in continualle distillinge,
by Aurum potabile, or quintessence, by drynckes of great and high prices, as
though they were made of the su^ne, moon, or sterres, by blessings and
Blowinges, Hipocriticalle prayenges, and foolysh smokynges of shirtes Smockes
and kerchieffes, with such others their fantasies, and mockeryes, meaning
nothing else but to abuse your light believe, and scorn you behind your backs
with their medicines (so filthy, that I am ashamed to name them) for your
single wit and simple belief, in trusting the^ most, which you know not at al,
and understand least: like to them which think, far fowls have fair
feathers, although they be never so euel favored and foul: as though there
could not be so conning an Englishman, as a foolish running stranger, (of
others I speak not) or so perfect health by honest learning, as by deceiptfull
ignorance. For in the error of these unlearned, reasteth the (...) of your
honest estimation, diere bloudde, precious spirits, and swiete life, the thing
of most estimation and price in this world, next unto the immortal soul.

For consuming of euel matter within, and for making our bodies lustye,
galiard, and helthful, I do not a little commend exercise, which in us
English men I allow quick, and liuishe: as to run after hounds and hawks,
to shote, wrestle, play at Te^nes and weapons, toss the wind balle, skirmishe
at base (an exercise for a gentlemanne, much used among the Italianes) and
vaughting upon an horse. Bowling, a good exercise for women: castinge of the
bar and camping, I account rather a laming of legs, then an exercise. Yet I
utterly reprove them not, if the hurt may be avoided. For these a conueniente
time is, before meat: due measure, reasonable sweatinge, in all times of the
year, saving in the sweatinge time. In the which I allow rather quietness
then exercise, for opening the body, in such persons specially as be liberally
and freely brought up. Others, except sitting artificers, have their exercises
by daily labors in their occupatio^s, to whom nothing niedeth but solace
only, a thing convenient for every body that Iusteth to live in health. For
else as no^ other thing, so not health can be long durable. Thus I speak of
solace, that I mean not Idleness, wisshing always no man to be idle, but to
be occupied in some honest kind of thing necessary in a common wealth. For I
account the^ not worthi meat and drink in a commonwealth, yt be not good for
some purpose or service therein, but take the^ rather as burdennes unprofitable
and heavy to the earth, men borne to fille a number only, and wast the fruits
which therthe does give, willing sooner to fiede the Lacedaemonians old and
crooked ass, which labored for the living so long as it could for age, then
such an idle Engisshe manne. If the honestye and profit of honest labor and
exercise, conservation of health, preservation from sickness, maintenance
of life, advancement, safety from shameful deaths, defense from beggerye,
dyspleasures by idleness, shamefulle diseases by the same, hatefulle vices,
and punishemente of the immortalle soul, can not move us to reasonable
labor and exercise, and to be profitable members of the commune welthe, let
at the least shame move us, seeing that other country men, of naught, by their
own wit, diligence, labor and actiuitie, can pick out of a cast bone, a
wrethen straw, a light fether, or an hard stone, an honest lyuinge: Nor ye
shall ever hear them say, alas master, I have no^ occupacio^, I must either
beg or steal. For they can find other means between these two. And
forsomuche as in the case that now is, miserable persons are to be relieved in
a common wealth, I would wisshe for not favoring the idle, the discretion of.
Marc. Cicero the roman were used in healping them: who would compassion
should be showed upon them, whom necessity compelled to do or make a fault:
and no compassion upon them, in whom a fault made necessity. A fault makes
necessity, in this case of begging, in them, which might labor and serve,
and will not for idleness: and therefore not to be pitied, but rather to be
punished. Necessity makes a fault in the^, which would labor and serve, but
cannot for age, i^pote^cy. or sickness, and therefore to be pitied and relieved.
But to avoid punishmente and to show the way to amendmente, I would again
wish, yt for so much as we be so euel disposed of our selfs to our own profits
and commodities with out help, this old law were renewed, which forbids the
nedy and impotent parents, to be releued of those their welthi children, that
by them or their means were not brought up, either in good learning and
Science, or honest occupation. For so is a man without science, as a realm
without a king. Thus much of exercise, and for exercise. To the which I would
now join honest company between man and woman, as a part of natural
exercise, and healpe^ to yt emptieng and lightning the body in other times
allowed, in this sweating time for helthes sake, and for fear of opening the
body, and resolving the spirits, not approved, but for dout, that with
lengthing the book, I should weary ye reader. Therefore I let yt pass and come to
sleping and waking, which without good order, be greatly hurtful to the body.
For avoiding the which, I take the mean to be best, and against this sweat
most commendable. But if by excess a man must in either part offend, I permit
rather to watch to much, then to lie in bed to long: so that in watchinge,
there be no way to surfeiting. Al these things duly observed, and well
executed, which before I have for preservation mentioned, if more over we can
set a part al affections, as fretting cares and thoughts, doleful or
sorrowful imaginations, vain fears, folysh loves, guawing hates, and give
our selves to live quietly, friendly, and merrily one with an onther, as men
were wont to do in the old world, when this country was called merye England,
and every man to meddle in his own matters, thinking them sufficient, as they
do in Italye, and avoid malice and dissencion, the destruction of commune
wealths, and private houses: I doubt not but we shall preserve our selves,
both from this sweatinge syckenesse, and other diseases also not here purposed
to be spoken of.

But if in leauinge a part these or some of them, The cure or remedy.
or negligently executing them, it chances the disease of sweating to trouble
our bodies, then passinge the bonds and compass of preservation, we must come
to curation, the way to remedy the disease, and the third and last part (as I
first said) to be entreated in this book. The principalle entente hereof, is to
let out the venime by sweat according to the course of nature. This is
brought to pass safely two ways, by suffering and serving handsomely nature, if
it thruste it out readily and kindly: and helping nature, if it be let, or
be weak in expellinge. Serve nature we shall, if in what time so ever it
takes us, or what so ever estate, we streyghte lay us down upon our bed,
if we be up and in our clothes, not taking them of: or lie stille, if we be
in bed out of our clothes, laiyng on clothes both ways, if we want,
reasonably, and not loadinge us therewith vnmeasurably. Thus laid and covered,
we must endeavor our selves so to continue with al quietness, and for so much
as may be without fear, distruste, or faintehartednesse, an euel thing in all
diseases. For such surrendre and give over to the disease without resistance.
By which occasion many more died in the first pestilence at Athenes, that I
spoke of in the beginnynge of this book, then other wise should. Our kepers,
friends and lovers, must also endeavor them selves to be handesome and
dilygente about us, to serve us redilye at al turns, and never to leave us
duringe four and twenty hours, but to look well unto us, that neither we
cast of our clothes, nor thruste out hand or foot, during the space of the
said four and twenty hours. For albeit the great daungere be paste after
twelve hours, or fourtene, the last of trial, yet many die aftre by to much
boldenes, when they think them selves most in suretye, or negligence in
attendaunce, when they think no necessity. Whereby it is proved that without
dout, the handsome diligence, or careless negligence, is the saving, or
casting away of many. If.ij. be taken in one bed, let them so continue,
although it be to their unquietness. For fear whereof, and for the more
quietness and safetye, very good it is during all the sweating time, that two
persons lie not in one bed. If with this quietness, diligence, and order, the
sick do kindelye sweat, suffer them so to continue, without meat all
the.xxiiij. hours: without drink, until the fifth hour, if it may be.
Always taking head to them in the fourth, seventh, nineth, and eleventh
hours specially, and fourtenth also, as the last of trial and daungier, but
of less in both. For these be most perilous, as I have observed this year in
this disease, having ye hours judicial, as others have their days, and
therefore worse to give any thing in, for troublyng nature standing in
trialle. Yet where more danger is in forbearyng then in taking, I counseill not
to spare in these hours to do as the case requires with wisdom and
discretion, but less then in other hours. In the fifthe hour give them to
drink clarified ale made only doulcet with a little sugar, out of a cruet, or
glass made in cruet facion, with a nebbe, for fear of raisynge them selves
to receive the drink offered, and so to let the sweat, by the air strikyng
in. But if the sick on this wise beforesaid cannot sweat kyndly, then nature
must be helped, as I said before. And for so much as sweat is let in this
disease four ways, by disorder, wekenes of nature, closenes of the pores in
the skin, and grosnes of the humors: my counseil is to avoid disorder by
such means as hitherto I have taught, and next to open the pores if they be
close, and make thin the matter, if it be gross, and provoke sweat, if
nature be weke. Those you shall do by gentle rubbynges, this by warm drinckes
as hereafter straight I will declare. And for that every man has not the
knowledge to discern which of these is the cause of let in sweatyng, I will
show you plainly how to do with most surety and lest offense. I will
beginnne with wekenes of nature. Therefore remember well that in treating the
causes of this disease, I said that this sweat chauncethe commonly in them
of the mydde age and best lust, the infection having a certain concordance,
or conuenience with the corrupt spirits of them more then others. Know
again that nature is weke, ij. ways, either in the self, or by the annoiance
of an other. In the self, by want of strength consumed by sickness or other
wise. By annoiaunce of an other, when nature is so ouerlaid with the quantity
of evil humors that it can not stir. Between these two set your wit, and
se whether the person be lustye or sickly. If he be lustye, understand that
the sweat does not stop for wekenes of nature in it self. Then of necessity
it must be for some of the other causes. But for which, thus know. Consider
whether the lusty person were in foretyme given to much drynkyng, eating and
rauenyng, tomoch ease, to no exercise or bathinges in his health, or no. If all
these you find in him, know that both nature is wekened by the annoiance of
the humors, and that the skin is stopped, and the humor gross, and that
for this the sweat is let. If you find only some of these, and that
rauenynge, annoiance is the cause. If want of exercise or bathinges, stoppinges
of the pores and closeness, or grosenes of humors, or both, be the cause of
not sweatyng. On the othersyde, if the person be sickely, it is easily known
that his wekenes consists in nature the self. And for so much as weke folks
and sick shall also by other causes not sweat, consider if in his sickness he
has swette much or no, or has be^ disposed to it and could not. If he
neither has swette, nor could sweat disposed, know that closenes of the
skin, and grosenes of the humor is the cause. Therefore every thing in his
kind must be remedied. Wekenes of nature, by drinks prouokyng sweat:
closenes, and grosenes, by rubbing, as I said. But be ware neither to rub or
give drinks, except you see cause as beforesayd. Forother wise, the one
hindrethe nature, and the other lets out the spirits and wastes ye strength.
Therefore accordyngly, if rub you must, give to the sick in to their beds
a new and somewhat hard kerchefe, well warmed but not hot, and bydde them
rub all their bodies over therewith under the clothes, neither to much
neither to little, nor to hard or to soft, but meanly between, taking you
head which be about them, that by stirrynge their arms they raise not the
clothes to let in the air. This done, if case so require, give the^ a good
draught of hot possette ale made of swiete milk turned with vinegre, in a
quarte whereof percely, and sage, of each haulfe one little handful has been
sodden, with iii. sliftes of rosemary, ij. fenel roots cut, and a few hole
maces. Always remembrynge here, as in other places of this book, to heat the
herbs in a peuter dishe before the fire, or wash them in hot water, before
you put them in to the posset ale, and that you put their to no cold
herbs at any time during the hole fit. Or give them posset ale hot with
rosemary, dittane, and germander. Or baie beries, anise seades, and calamintes
with claret wine sodden and drunk warm. Or white wine with hoar and wild
tansy grown in medes sodden therein, and ii. d. weight of good triacle, drunk
hot, or in yt stead of that, wild tanesy, mogwort or feuerfue. These provoke
sweat, may easily be had, and be metest for the^ which have al ye causes
beforesayde of lettyng the same. But specially if for cold and gross humors,
or for closenes of the skin, the sweat commethe not furthe. If with one
draught they sweat not, give them one other, or.ii, successively, after half
one hour between, and increase the clothes, first a little above the mean,
after, more or less as the cause requires, and make a little fire in the
chamber of clean wood, as ash and oak, with the perfume of bdellium: or swiet
wood, as Juniper, fyrre, or pine, by theimselues: remembrynge to withdraw the
fire, when they sweat fully, and the clothes above the mean, by little and
little as you laid them on, when they first complain of faintyng. And
after.xii. or.xiiii. hours, some also of the mean, but one after an other by
half one hour successively with discrecion, always not lokyng so much to
the quantitte of the sweat, as what the sick may saufely bear. And in such
case of faintynge, suffer competent open aier to come into the chamber, if
the same and the wether be hot, for smoderynge the pacient, by such windows
as the wind liethe not in, nor opens to the south. Put to their noses to
smell vinegre and rose water in an handkercher, not touching them there with
so nighe as may be. Cause them to lie on their right side, and bow them
selves forward, call them by their names, and beat them with a rosemary
branch, or some other sweet like thing. In the stead of posset ale, they
which be troubled with gowtes, dropsies, reumes, or such other moiste evil
diseases, chauncing to sweat, may drink a good draught of the stronger drink
of Guaiacum so hot as they can, for the like effect, as also others may, not
having these deseases, if it be so ready to them as the other. After they ones
sweat fully, myue advise is not to give any more posset ale, but clarified ale
with sugar, during the hole fit, neither unreasonably, nor so often as they
call for it, neither yet pinchyng them to much when they have need, always
taking head not to put any cold thing in their mouth to cole and moiste
them with, nor any cold water, rose water, or cold vinegre to their face
during the sweat and one day after at the least, but always use warmeth
according to nature, never contrariyng the same so nighe as may be. If they
rave or be phrenetike, put to their nose the same odor of rose water and
vinegre, to let the vapoures from the headde. If they sleep, use them as in
the case of faintyng I said, with betyng them and calling them, pullyng
them by the ears, nose, or here, suffering them in no wise to sleep until
such time as they have no lust to sleep, except to a learned man in physic
the case appear to bear the contrary. For otherwise the venime in sleep
continually runs inward to yt heart. The contrary hereof we must always
intend, in prouokyng it outward by all means during the fit, which so
long lasts in burning and sweatyng, as the matter thereof has any fyrie or
apt parts therefore. For as great and strong wine, ale, or bear, so long do
burn as their is matter in them apt to be burned, and then cesse when that
which remainethe is come again to his first nature: that is, to such water
clear and unsavory, as either the bruer received of the river, or vine of
theearth: even so the body so long continuethe burning and sweating, as
their is matter apt therefore in the spirits, and then leaves, when the
corrupcion taken of the finest of the evil blood is consumed, and the spirits
left pure and clean as they were before the time of their corruption.

This done, and the body by sufficient sweat discharged of the venime, the
person is saulfe. But if he by unruliness and brekyng his sweat, sweateth not
sufficiently, the^ he is in danger of death by yt venime that does remain, or
at the least to sweat ones again or oftener, as many has done, falling in
thrice, six times, yea, xii, times some. If sufficiently the sweat be come,
you shall know by the lightness and cherefulnes of the body, and lanckenes in all
parts, by the continual sweatyng the hole day and out of all parts, which
be the best and wholesome sweates. The other which come but by times and only
in certain parts, or broken, be not sufficient nor good, but very evil, of
whose insufficiency, ij. notes learn: a swellyng in ye parts with a
blackenes, and a tinglyng or prickyng in the same. Such I advise to appointe
them selves to sweat again to rid their bodies of that remains, and abide
it out until they feel their bodies lanke and light, and to move the sweat as
before I said, if the same come not kyndly by the self. If they cannot
forbear meat during ye space of their fit, and fast out their.xxiiij.
hours, without danger, give them a little of an alebrie only, or of a thin
candel of an egg sodden with one hole mace or ij. If they be forced by nature
to ease them selves in the mean time, let them do it rather in warm shetes
put into them closely, then to arise. After they have thus fully swette, convey
closely warm clothes into their beds, and bid them wipe themselves there
with in all parts curiouslye: and be ware that no air enter into their open
bodies (and specially their arm holes, the openest and rarest part thereof)
to let the issue of that which does remain. The like may be done in the rest
of their fit, with like warenes, for that clenlinesse comfortethe nature, and
relieueth the pacient. If in duringe out the four and twentye hours there be
thought daungiere of death without removing, rather warm well the other side
of the bed, and will him to remove himself into it, the^ to take him up and
remove him to an other bed, which in no case may be done. For better is a
doubtful ware hope, then a certain auentured death. The four and twenty
hours passed duly, they may put on their clothes warm, arise, and
refresshe them selves with a cawdle of an egg swietelye made, or such other
meats and sauces reasonably and smally taken, as before I meucioned. And if
their strength be sore wasted, let them smelle to an old swiet apple (as
Aristotle did by his report in the book de pomo) or hot new bread, as
Democritus did, by the record of Laertius in his life, either by it self alone,
or dipped in well smelling wine, as Maluesey or Muscadelle, and sprinkled with
the powder of mintes. Orenges also and Lemones, or such musk balls as I
before described, be things mete for this purpose. For as I said in my ij.
little books in Latin de medendi methodo, of devise to cure diseases, there is
no thing more comfortable to the spirits then good and swiet odoures. On this
wise advised how to order your selves in all the time of the sit, now this
remains, to exhort you not to go out of your houses for.iij. days, or.ij.
at the least after the fit passed, and then wiselye, warely, and not except
in a fair bright day, for fear of swouning after great emptiness, and
unwont air, or for forcyng nature by soubdaine strikyng in of the same aier,
cold, or evil, in to the open body. For nature so forced, makes often times a
sore and soubdaine flux, as well after auoidaunce of these humores by sweat,
(as was this year well seen in many persons in diverse contries of England
for none other cause) as of others by purgation.

Thus I have declared the beginning, name, nature, accidents, signs, causes,
preseruations, and cures natural of this disease the sweating sickness,
English Ephemera, or pestilent sweat, so shortly and plainly as I could for ye
common saufty of my good countrymen, help, relieve, and defense of the same
against ye soubdaine assaults of the disease, and to satisfy the honest
request of my loving friends and gentle acquaintance. If other causes there be
supernatural, them I leave to the divines to search, and the diseases thereof
to cure, as a matter with out the compass of my faculty.

IMPRINTED at London, by Richard Grafton Printer to the kings majesty.

Anno. Do. 1552.

Cum priuilegio ad impri^ mendum solum.




