The Comentaries of M. Jhon Calvin upon the first Epistle of Saint Ihon, and
upon the Epistle of Jude: wherein according to the truth of the words of the
holy Ghost, he most excellently opens and clears the poinct of true
justification with GOD, and sanctification by the Spirit of Christ, by the
effects that he brings forth in the regeneration. Translated into English
by W. H.

Psalm. 129 5. They that hate Syon, shall be all ashamed and turned backward.

Prou 19.14. House and riches are the inheritance of the Fathers: but a
prudent wife comes of the Lord.

Psalm. 32 11. Be glad ye righteous, and rejoice in the Lord, and be joyful
all ye that are true of heart.

Jmprinted at London by Jhon Kyngstone, for Jhon Harrison the younger.

To the Worshipful my very good friend Master William Swan of Wye in Kent,
and to the right Virtuous and Christian Gentlewoman Mistress Amy Swan his
Wife, with all those that in the truth of a single heart love the Lord Jesus, in
that Congregation, 1. Tim. 4.8.
W. H. wishes plenty of those blessings which have promises of this life
and the life to come.
IN the often consideration (right dear in the Lord) of the righteous Genesis
2.17. Romans 5.12.
judgment of GOD, against all the sons of men, with the infinite
ouerflowinges of all Genesis 8.21. Esa. 64.6.
guiltiness before him, the many assaults of Genesis 3.1. 1. Cro. 21.1.
Satan, and dangerous inticements of our own Romans 8.13.
hearts into the way of evil, the Deuteronomy. 32.^8.19 20.21. Romans 6.23.
fearcenesse of the Lords wrath for sin, and our own utter 1. Sam. 2.25.
inabilitie to stand in his sight, which causes that the hearts of many
Psalm. 6.1.2.3.4 5. Math. 24.46.
righteous in the feelyng of their own wants do even faint before the anger
of the Lord: has in the direction of Gods Spirit, given an hearty desire to
be assured of the way of safety, with what soever belongs to the right
application and continuance of the same. Wherein as the Lord has made known
the riches of his own free Jeremy. 32.3. Ihon. 3.6. Romans 5.8. Gala. 2.21.
Ephe. 3.19.5.2.
love toward his, the head and alone fountain of all eternal safety unto
his elect, so is it also plain that by no other way or mean we have attained
unto the free gift of grace, and full reconcilement with the Lord, then by the
mediation of the Romans 8.3. 1. Tim. 3.16.
son of God in our own flesh. For all the counsel, Math. 3.17. Gala. 5.17.
Ephe. 28. Phil. 1.6.2.13.2. These. 2.17. Tit. 17.14. Heb. 13.21.
will, wisdom, and power of the sons of men, as in them selves they are
most unclean, so must they fly before the face of the Lord and never be able
to plead innocence for his Saints. Which reconcilement as (albeit in it
self it is alsufficient for all the sons of men) it is only effectual to
the Lords Romans 9.11.11.5.11.7.
elect, who in the power of an effectual Act. 13.39.26 18. Romans 3
21.24.25.28.4.5 11.24. Phil 3.9. Heb. 11.14.
faith alone receive the favor of the Lord with application of the promises
of his grace: so in the like power unto himself, always rulyng where he is
had, prouidyng chiefly for the Psalm. 11 5. 1. Ihon. 17.4. Act. 3.13. 1. Cor.
6.20.
honor of his name with a joined care for the good of his Church, Exo. 29.45.
Leuit. 26.12. Esa. 43.2. Math. 9.36.21.41.
and woorking a newness of the whole Ihon. 3.3. 2. Cor. 5.17.
man, does only seal unto the souls of the Saints of God the assurance
of their good estate with the Lord. For Romans 8.28.29 30.9.24. 1. Cor 1.9.24.
whosoever by an effectual calling is grafted into the Son of God, and made
a member of that body whereof Jesus Christ is the head, is one with him in the
Math. 12.50. Ihon. 20.7. Romans 8.29. Heb. 2.11.12.
fellowshippe of all the blessings of the Lord. And albeit they are only
infinite in him, who has received above his fellows, yet according to the
measure of the dispensation of his grace, they are freely given unto all his
elect, and are assured unto them by a most effectual witness, even the
Spirit of adoption and grace, by who^ he dwells in those that be his, who
as he is not without his effect, so in a most lively and quickening power he
both applies and seals up. And as he has appeared for us a 1. Sam. 2.
Psalm. 2.6. Esa. 3.6.7. Jeremy. 23.5.6. Ez 34.24.
King a Heb 4.14.8.6. Heb. 5.6.^.11.
Priest and a Deuteronomy 18.8. Act 3.11.22. 1. Cor. 1 30. Collo. 2.3. Iere. 23.5
45.5. Ezec. 21 26. Zach. 9.9.
Prophet, so the great kindness of the Lord, is severally applied according to
the same. As in the first, he has utterly spoiled and laid waste the power of
all the enemies of his Church, and justly taken the Kingdom unto himself, the
Scepter whereof shall Psalm. 45.^.
never fade or decaie, so we being cleared of all danger, and freed from the
peril of all our foes, are in all care and conscience, to confess him our
Lord alone, and as true subjects of so good a King, to hold our selves against
Satan and men, unto the pure obedience of his will. Again, as he is the only
true Priest, Psalm. 110.5. Zach. 6.13. Heb. 2.17.
who is sanctified of God to offer unto him a most sweet Sacrifice to
reconcile us unto himself, and as by his alone execution of this office, and
offering of himself, we have by him a sure peace and free entrance into the
presents of the Lord, as by him all enmity is done away, and there
remains inaccomptable peace and favor for evermore, so we are most strongly
to cast out of sight the sleightes of Satan and all the devises of men, as
most unclean filthiness for ever, and not to set our selves, or admit others
of what sort soever, to stand for us in this duty, to spoil us of assured
safety, and the Lord Jesus of this honor, that he alone and none but he is
the Priest of his Church, and has fully and alsufficiently performed
whatsoever appertains to their peace for evermore.

And as he alone among all the Prophets of the Lord, Esa. 40.11.^1.^. Deuteronomy.
18.15.
has infinitely opened the will of God, and as in him is al fullness of divine
wisdom, Ihon. 10.11.
to reveal and make known the will of God unto his Church, and as what
soever he discloseth unto his Saints, has a sound warrant to be the will of
the most highest, and ought to hold us in the awe of the same: so he alone has
this peculier unto himself, to be the most excellent Prophet and Apostle of
his Church, and that none must be unto us in this place but he alone, and
whatsoever does not proceed from him must not be held of power to bind the
consciences of men. 2. Cor. 2.12.


In all which as the Lord Jesus has trodden the Winepresse alone, 2. Cor.
1.24. 1. Tim. 4.1. Esa. 63.3.
and carried captive for evermore, what soever might withstand the salvation
of his, and by his Spirit directed us into the light and use of the same: so
in the like power of the same Spirit he seals unto the consciences of men,
the sound warrant of the infinite favor of GOD in the righteousness of his
Son, to the free and sure enioiyng of all the rest. Romans 8.9.
And as who so has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his, Gala. 5.22.23.
whereby is severed the states of men, so the same Spirit is discerned by his
effects, which because in this case they are of two sorts, it shall be
profitable in a word to weigh them a part, that in the effectual trial of
the same, the children of God may in a sound experience of the power of
Christ in their own souls, be cheared unto constancy in every good duty
against Satan and men: and the vain dissemblers, Heretics, time seruers,
Epicures, and carnal Gospellers, with the like, who swarm every where, may
(if they had eyes to see) perceive their just cause to return, and to humble
their souls unto the obedience of the Lord.

The first effect therefore is an inward witness unto the soul of the
infinite love and free grace of God by faith in the righteousness of Christ,
Romans 8.16.
and whereby is given boldness with an assured trust to rest upon him in every
distress, and to repair unto him with calling upon his name. As it is
written: Gala. 4.6.
Because ye are Sons, God has sent the Spirit of his Son into your hearts,
criyng Abba, Father. Which although for a time it seem to be hid, and being
as it were raked under the ashes of our own corruption, yet because it is a
pl^dge of the love of God, which is not for a day: but perpetual in his Son
( For whom he loves, Ihon. 13.1.
he loves them to the end) and working in us an effectual calling, Romans
11.29.
which with God is without repentance, Romans 8.30.
it seals unto us the truth of a sure election, and so consequently, that
there is no fear of falling away, because we rest not on any strength of our
own: but upon the resolute continuance of the love of God, and the infinite
truth of his word and grace.

The other effect is more appara^tly seen. For by faith he does purify the
heart, Acts. 15.9. Romans 6.4. Romans ^.5.6.7.8.
causes a true hatred and continual diying unto sin, and daiely quickens
unto the obedience of the Lord, changes the natural disposition of the
whole soul and body, and frames it to the will of God, Psalm. 69.9.
and works a fervent love above all things unto the Lord, and to those that
be his, with continual calling upon his name according to his will. And these
effects as they are peculier to the Spirit of Christ, and have not been, in a
right purpose (namely for the glory of God and the good of his in any other
then in the Saints of God, so in whom soever these effects are found,
though with much weakness, Who so has the fruits of the Spirit, has the
Spirit. 2. Pet. 1.10.
so it be in truth and with out hypocrisy, it shall ever be found to be
most true, that where is the effects, there is the cause to whom they belong.
So that by this right discernyng of the fruits of the Spirit of the Lord
Jesus, and the having of the same, we may truly gather that we have himself,
so as is meant in the word of God, and so are surely grafted into Christ, and
may assure our hearts before him both for our selves and others, what soever
other ways our fear and feelyng be for the time. For if at sometimes we may
find that in some measure we have had these effects, the true fruits of a
lively faith, and so the assuraunces of our election and salvation by Christ,
then is there no just cause of any fear, if we mourn unto the repossessing
of our peace again, Romans 11.29.
because the gifts and callynges of God are without repentance. And if it be
objected that we have felt the favor of the Lord, but now it is gone, and
clean turned away, as that objection is most untrue, so to think on that
fashion, is to suppose an impossible thing. For God never changes his own
purpose, but what soever he has purposed shall stand, 2. Tim. 2.19.
and his counsel shall take effect, whatsoever lets be against it. Whereupon
we may rightly gather, that who soever has a certain testimony of his
faith and salvation in all his life, may be assured that it is there still:
and shall be unto the end, although for a time they feel it not, nor
perceive the working of it. For it does not follow, that a little child has
no reasonable soul, because he has not the use of it, or that the Trees be
dead in Winter, because they bear no fruit, or that there is no Fire, because
there is no flame.

Again, Romans 8.10. 2. Cor. 5.17. Reave. 21.5.
the Lord Jesus Christ kills in us, that is, begins to kill in us the
whole body of sin, and makes all things new concerning the quality
thereof, so that our understanding and judgment is lightened and governed,
that it begins to approve of those good things which before it misliked,
our will also is cleansed to the hatred of sin, and desire of those things
that be good, and our affection begin to fly and eschew what is forbidden,
and to embrace and follow that which is commended of the Lord. The which
inward power of the Spirit of Christ, if we feel in effect, and working in
our own soul, or see the care it leads others unto: the conclusion is
infallible and plain, that we have faith, and so consequently Jesus Christ
and eternal life.

But it is objected, how can there be assurance of the undoubted favor of the
Lord, and of salvation, seeing all men are sinners: not only in that every
man is corrupted by nature, but that the corrupt nature of man does daily bring
forth effects according to the same, mouynges, prouocations, consentynges, and
actions contrary to the will of God? yea seeing all do sin? The answer is
easy, that albeit every one has continually in him those things that be in
them selves infinitely offensive before the Lord, yet the distaunce is not so
much between heaven and earth, as the difference is great, between sinner and
sinner, that is, between him in whom sin reigns, and him in whom sin is.
Of the first: the Apostle commands such as fear God, that sin do not
reign in them, Romans 6.12.
that is, have power to lead the^ with delight in the way of evil. And of
the other he says by his own example: Romans 7.15.17.
That that I would not do, that I do: yet not I, but sin that dwells in
me. Where he means by sin, the remnaunces of corruption which yet were
sin, albeit he labored against it, and was so far from taking delight
therein, that he even groned under the burden thereof, Romans 7.24.
saying. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death?

But who sees not, that few there are, who strive to give obedience unto the
Lord, and to show forth the effectual cognizaunce and badge whose people they
be, by true regeneration, and sincere love to the brethren? Infinite in deed
are the thousands of men, who bear an outward face to the Gospel of Christ,
that yet do wholly profane them selves in the obedience of sin, not
knowing, or not regardyng, 2. Cor 5.17.
that justification, and sanctification are inseparable companions, who can not
be sondred or put aparte. Yet the old complaint of the Prophet is in use at
this day, that men seem to say in their hearts: Esa. 28.15.
We have made a covenant with death, and with hell are we at a greement,
though a scourge run over, and pass through, it shall not come at us: for we
have made falsehood our refuge, and under vanity are we hidd.

Moises commanded the Israelites carefully to avoid the root of bitterness,
Deuteronomy. 29.18.19.20. Heb. 12.15.
and shows what it is and the danger thereof, that is, an heart hardened at
the judgments of the Lord, and saying: Tushe I shall have peace although I
walk according to the stubbornness of mine own heart. The Lord says
Moises will not be merciful to such a soul. etc.

And who may not see the many, yea infinite thousands of such as have in
their profession succeeded Esawe, as profane as he, Heb. 12.16.
who contemned and sold his birthright for one mess of meat, but they think
they shall safely return in convenient time, yet they are greatly deceived:
Genesis 25.32.
Esawe thought not his birthright worth a straw if he perished with hunger,
that is, except it might serve him in this life. These contemn the truth of
Gods word, the honor of his name, and care of true obedience unto his will, in
regard of their pleasure or profit the least that may. Heb. 12.17.
Esawe found no place to repentance, although he sought the blessing with
tears: and who can assure them that their portion will not be as his. For
howsoever they outwardly pretend to agree with us in one and the same truth
of God, yet we continually see to our intolerable grief, how in the practice
of their life, they run headlong to all prophannesse, cast the glorious power
of the word of God (which should continually bind them to the obedience of
his will) out of their sight, 2. Tim. 3.2.5. 2. Pet. 2.3.
whilst they account more of gain then of Godliness, and wallowe in their
vain pleasures and fleshly delights, as is infinitely seen at this day. Who
makes not a tushe in his own soul, to give obedience to the Lord in all the
actions of his life? If outwardly to brag that we are children of the
righteous, to glory in our titles, Ihon. 8.3.3
if not rightly to account of the excellency of our high calling with God, if
to be hardly drawn to any good way, and to go swiftly to the way of sin,
if our filthy gain though but in a vile thing, or beastly delights, be of
force to carry us against the obedience of the will of God, be to hold an
estate with Esawe as it is in deed, if only they have sealed unto them the
favor of the Lord, who by the power of the Spirit of Christ, are changed in
their whole being, and cherefully led in the obedience of the will of God, then
is there just cause, that all carnal Gospellers, Libertines, careless
professors and profane men, should intollerably fear before the anger of the
Lord. And although they be infinitely drunken with this vile conceapt, that so
they be no Papists, which unclean beasts in deed remain in their sins,
so they profess the Gospel, allow of the truth and doctrine thereof as
common men do, in all things that touch not themselves, that for the rest,
God is merciful, and they shall do well enough howsoever they live: yet let
them remember always the example of Esawe. He though not the excellency of
Gods calling to be as it was, in the time of his vanity, nor yet do they. He
wept for a blessing, and it may be some of them would gladly be saved: But
true repentance, Luc 24 47.
the way whereby it is had, was far from him, and who shall promise it unto
them? It may be, if the Lord do not convert them, they may have such a
repentance as Judas had, a sight of the righteous judgments of GOD and their
own sin: but such a power in their own souls, as may soundly apply the
free promises of God in Christ, and his whole righteousness unto them selves,
it is only from the Lord, and rests not in the power of any child of man,
as may well be seen in Esaw, who is said to have found no place to
repentance, though he sought the blessing with tears.

Again, seeing the Lord makes it known in some acceptable measure, who do
rightly profit in the profession of his name unto the assurance of his grace
and free discharge from al danger in the day to come. As does appear in the
visitation of the great City spoken of in Ezekiel. 9.4. commaundyng that all
they only shall be sealed to a sure escape, that mourn and cry for the
wickedness of men: How shall these impure Macheuilles, Atheistes, Papists,
Libertines, beastly professors, and carnal Gospellers be put in hope of the
favor of God, who are so far of from mournyng in their own souls for the
euilles of men, that their own life is nothing else, but a Sea of sin, and
daiely proceedyng in continual transgression against the Lord. And albeit it
is most true, that whom the Lord of glory has called from the death of
sin to the life of righteousness, and caused that they walk not as they did
before, Ephe. 2.2.
seueryng his people from the curse of the world, and the usual ways of men,
yet very few there are found, that make conscience of any change in them
selves into those ways which be according to the Lord. And though it be
infinitely urged unto the minds of men, that who soever is in Christ is a new
creature, ^. Cor. 5.17.
that is, begun to be changed in his whole soul and body, from corruption
and sin to the light and willing obedience of the will of God: Yet who may
not see that the most wilfully ignorant of this way, and that it is true in
experience, that the Prophet says, that, who so withdraws himself from
evil must be spoiled. For where are not they held commonly for the best me^,
that bear an outward face to the Gospel, while their lives are most full of
evil, that stick at nothing, but at that which is good. Who swear, lie, and
commit all abominations, and yet say they are good Christians, and of many it
is said of them, that, they are very good Protestants. But who so cares in
all his life, to yield unto the Lord the fruits of an acceptable obedience
from the ground of a pure heart, and to square his thoughts, words and works
after the rule of the word of God, is made a pray to the rest. And being
accounted as the skumme of the world, is set forth to the shame and reproach
of all men, whose unbridled lips and bloody hands do besoyle and waste
them from day to day: So that the poor Saints of the Lord, Psalm. 124.1.2.
may still renew the song of the Church in David's time: Except the Lord had
been on our side, they had long ago swallowed us up quick. And even as of
all the enemies that Judah had, the ten Tribes of Israel that were their
brethren, and gave an outward profession of the name of GOD with them, were
the greatest and most dangerous: Even so amongst all the enemies that Syon,
Gods Church has, the most vehement and bitter are the falsharted and
counterfaite Israelites, Papists, and other Heretics, and profane men. Yet
of all the rest, as one enemy within the City is more dangerous then ten
without, so careless professors and profane men as they have most power to
hurt, so are they furiously enraged against the truth of the ways of God,
and being set on fire to remain in their sin, and even sell them selves to
work wickedness: but in vain, for he that sits on hight shall laugh them
to scorn. Psalm. 2.4.
The Lord shall have them in derision. For can they make any accomptes, that
ever they that have been injurious to the Church of GOD, and to his people,
have escaped the just hand of the Lord? Genesis 4.10.11.
Did not Abels blood, unjustly shed by Caine when he thought him self to be
safe, cry vengeance on him and his posterity for ever? Gala. 4.29. Psalm.
137.7.
Did Jsmaell or Esawe go free, for their injuries done to the Lords servants?
Went the reproachful taunts for naught, that the old and evil world did use
against righteous Noe? 2. Pet. 2.5. 2. Pet. 2.8. Dan. 6.8.
Or Sodom for their sins and injuries against Lot? Or the Princes against
Daniell? Was there ever Nation, Kingdom, or People, so mighty in power, so
surpassing in policy, or wise in their generation, that have set themselves
against God, his truth and people, and have not tasted of his indignation in
due time, and can these time scruers, hypocrites, and profane men, persuade
themselves that they shall be the first? Do they not remember that the Lord
says to his Church, who soever in thee shall set himself against thee shall
surely fall? Are not Nimrod, Pharao, Ieroboham, Nabuchadnezer, Darius, and
Alexander, and many more gone, their Kingdoms laid waste, and their great and
famous names raised from the earth? Is not their Religion changed from evil
to worse, their Cities, Towns, and Temples made dens for wild beasts and
unclean birds, as the Lords Prophets told long before? Can they be more
cruel then Nero, Dioclesian, Domitian, or such like? Can they pass Iezabell,
Antiochus, or such beastly tormentors? And yet in spite of them all, and all
they could do, the Lord has defended his, and powered upon them the
recompense of their ways, in his due time. If the wicked that now live, could
pass all these in madness, and them selves in cruelty, yet shall this be
justly taken up against them: Psalm. 2.5.
Why do the heathen rage and the people murmr in vain? For he is infinitely
more strong that is with us, then any that can be against us. And though the
wicked bend them selves, and run together against the Lord and his
anointed: yet if we weigh the cause well, we shall ever find it most true,
that, 2. Kin. 6.16.
There are more with us the^ with them. Job. 19.29.
Let the ungodly therefore have their momentany joy that shall end with shame.
And let us strive to be minded as he, who said: Psalm. 62.7.18.2.
The Lord is my strength says my soul, therefore will I trust in him, and
under the shadow of his wings shall be my refuge, etc. For as the Lord our
most good and merciful father, does, according to his infinite wisdom and
endless compassion, prepare his people unto himself, triyng what they will
bear for his names sake, even so he does not assaie them above that he makes
them able to bear: ^ Cor. 1^.13.
but arms them beyond the thoughts of the heart of man, till he send them
full deliverance of all evil. In these miserable days wherein we live, as
God in great mercy has stayed the rage of our enemies, that they can not so
spoil and make waste of the bodies and lives of the godly minded, and such as
daiely labor and profit in the true fear of GOD, as is like they would: so
yet they remain themselves, even men vowed and given over to the will of
Satan, having their hearts set on those things that are evil, and their
feet swift to commit sin. Prou. 1.16.
What their bloody hands dare not attempt, their poisoned tongues spare not to
spue out where soever they come. Now that fire and faggot cease, their
slanderous liyng lips are opened wide, and their unclean mouths made
Brothelhouses of all untruth against the servants of the Lord. And where
they dare not openly blaspheme the doctrine for fear of shame, they secretly
seek to undermine it, by inueighyng against the teachers and true professors
thereof, railyng, liyng, and slaundering, without care or conscience what they
speak, so that they may do the mischief that they labor for. This kind of
persecution is not less grievous to a godly mind, then the other, and yet it
is ever true, Prou. 28.1.
the righteous are bold as a Lion, and a justified mind will turn it self
unto God, will bear his cross thankefully, James. 1.2. Phil. 1.29.
accompting it for exceedyng joy to be called out of the Lord, to stand in
his cause, and to suffer somewhat for his names sake, confessing that the
servant is not above his Lord. Math. 10.24.
If Christ our Lord escaped not the venom of such impoisoned tongues: Ihon.
8.48.
but they called him Samaritane, and said that he had a Devil, let no true
Christian look to be free. For if they have called the Master of the house
Beelzebub, Math. 10.25.
what will they call them of the household? David, Psalm. 52.2.
a pattern of the Church of God, felt those euilles, when he compared
slanderous tongues to Rasors and sharp swords, and when he prayed: Psalm.
120.2.
Deliver my soul O Lord from liyng lips and from a deceiptfull tongue. And
the Lord cut of all flatteryng lips, and the tongue that speaks proud
things. And as the Prophet has prayed, so will it come to pass to all such
as with unjust reproaches or otherways injury the Saints of the Lord, and
they shall one day approve it to be most true that is said of our Savior
Christ, that, It were better a Millstone were hanged about their necks and
they drowned in the depth of the Sea, Math. 18.6.
the^ that they should offend one of the least of them that believe in him.
For our own parts, we see into what condition we are come, that under
Popery we are tormented and persecuted with all extreme handling, and under
the Gospel we are slaundered and reviled: so that we may justly say with the
Apostle: Romans 8.36. Psalm. 44.22.
We are daiely accounted as Sheep appoincted to be slain. And yet beyond all
this, Satan has prevailed in an other evil, which is more uneasy to be
borne to a godly mind then all the rest is. And that is to see, that Papists
and other Heretics, the longer they have held and practiced their error, the
more forward and fervent they be in the way of sin, but many that seemed
to have well profited in knowledge of the Lords truth, have at once turned
out of the way, and as being in a dead sleep of security, flatter
themselves in a naked knowledge without all true zeal to quicken the gifts
that they have, to the honor of God and the good of his Saints. It is
accounted a notable poinct of exceedyng wisdom in this day with many, not to
show a face to the truth or to our brethren before men, but as the most
do, which is nothing at all. When we first began to be lightened with
knowledge of the truth, the Gospel it self was most sweet unto our souls,
and the fellowshippe of our brethren was most dear and profitable unto us:
but now Satan has besotted us with an imagination of knowledge, and almost
who does not think it folly to be fervent, and a poinct almost of extreme
madness to make more accomptes of men as they account of the Lord, and yet we
have the president of the Spirit of God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.3.
to comfort us in that way. True knowledge in deed, and right zeal for the
Lord, are joint companions, or rather Twins, that may not be sondered,
whereby the heart is lightened and stirred up to a cherefull and most ready
obedience of the will of God, with desire of his glory and the good of his
people before all things in the world. And what may we think of them that
be otherwise, that pamper them selves either in a blind zeal without care of
knowledge, the way to error, or in a bare knowledge thinking themselves wise
despise the way of the Lord, which is in true zeal and right knowledge of the
Lords ways according to his word. And their such proud account of nothing,
taking the very shadow of knowledge for true knowledge it self, makes them
secure, who of wise and zealous members of Gods Church, according to the
measure of their experience in that time, are now becomne unprofitable Drones,
and careless Epicures, and think them selves more wise (in their extreme
folly) then ever they were before. But it must needs be as the Lord has
foretold of the like, that they are either stony ground, Math. 13.5.6.7.
Luc. 8.6.7.8.
where the seed had no depth of earth, or that it is choked with thorns,
Math. 12.45.
even their hearts eaten up with the care of this world, whose end will be
worse, then the beginning.

Some others there are that take exceptions at whom they will, and albeit the
Lord has testified that there is no respect of persons with him, Act. 10.34.
Romans 2.11.
yet they fear not to uphold this imagination of their own, that in respect
of profityng and practice of true godliness, every one in their place, it is
more free for some men then for othersome, and for all men then for women. And
that their such dreaming may appear the more gross, they let not to say,
(with what purpose I leave to them selves) that a woman should not be more
religious then her housbande, forgettyng belike, the approved examples of the
Scriptures 1. Sam. 25.3. Luc. 8.3. Acts. 1.14. Romans 6.6.12.13. 2. Tim. 1.5.
Luc. 23.55.56. Luc. 24.1. Read Master Fox, and by name Anne Askewe, and
Prestes wife of Exceter.
And how many holy women are infinitely mentioned in the word, without any
mention of their housbandes fall, and holy Histories testify of very many,
that have ma^fully given their lives for the Gospel, when their housbandes
have been backesliders, and some of them have persecuted their poor wives.
And that they may be found to pervert the straight ways of the Lord, they
say a man should not take to wife (as the like) one that is more religious
then him self. I would ask these men whether a man may take a wife that is
more welthie then himself, if they grant that he may (as I trust they will
easily do) then shall they be enforced to say, either, that the things of this
world are more to be esteemed, then the heavenly blessings of the Spirit of
God, and the transitory things of the body, more worth then the gifts of
the mind, or that a man not only should: but also ought to make especial
choice, as there are excellent blessings in the inner man. Genesis 2.18.
And if the wife must be in all things a helper, then in the chief things it
were absurd to say she must be unapt to help. They may remember that the
Lords people have from time to time, been forbidden to match themselves with
the profane, Deuteronomy. 7.3. Jude. 3.7.
which necessarily intends the contrary. But they will except, that they
do not deny, but the wife should have some religion, but not more then her
housbande: But they should rather say it is shame worthy in the housbande,
who should be so far before, to come so far behind. I ask, when the
housbande has no religion, and the wife must not have more then he, or when he
does not labor for it, and she must not labor more then he: how much is then
left unto her, either of religion, or of means to attain unto it, none at
all. This is so far of from continuyng them unto all good duty unto their
housbandes, Ephe. 5.22. Collo. 3.18. 1. Pet. 3.1.
whereunto they are fast bound by the law of God: and such as in truth
fear the Lord, will I am right sure make conscience of: that it is to say
almost, that their salvation and the means of it, is not free, but at the
devotion of others, that God, his word and grace, with the glory of his name,
are quite out of sight, and the housbande must be in his place. Let no man
think that my meaning is to loose the realms of obedience in this case: for
my whole desire is quite contrary. First, that both the housbande, and the
wife, should obey the Lord, both as Christians, and in their several place:
they that are to govern, to govern in, and according to the Lord, Collo.
3.17.
and they that are to obey, to obey in, and according to the Lord. Acts. 4.19.
If any intend otherwise, their authority will be without the Lord, and
deserves to be so taken. Again I ask, seeing the Lord has appointed this
unto all his children, 1. These. 4 1.2.
that whatsoever they have gained of knowledge and practice in the word of
God, 2. Pet. 3.18. Psalm. 84.7.
they still grow and go forward to full perfection whether they be men or
women: who shall prescribe a sufficie^cie, or dare say that they have enough?
J wish we may in this clear light of knowledge leave winking, as it were, at
noone days, and tremble, thus to dally, or thus to deal unjustly with the
most holy truth of the Lord, and to press unjust injuries upon the souls
of our poor brethren, least in careless greeuyng the consciences of the
Lords anointed, we violently bring upon our selves the heavy wrath and
indignation of God.

If we in the truth of an humble soul do weigh the several testimonies of the
word of the Lord, to the right guiding of his servant to the assurance of
his grace in the obedience of his will, we shall easily be made able to meet
with all these mischeefes and many more, that might otherways prevail to turn
us out of the way. And as the Spirit of God has amongst infinite other
places of Scripture to that effect, by the Apostle Saint Ihon in his first
Epistle, proved that true justification and eternal life is only by Jesus
Christ, and showed further, that there is no assurance of this grace of the
Lord, where is not the effectual power of the Spirit of the Son of God in
the justified (who are united unto him as the members unto the head, and
receive of his fullness) to lead them in a continual true obedience of his
will revealed in his word, and in the truth thereof, that they might stand
out immouably unto the end, exhorted to beware of false teachers and all that
deceive, and reasoning from the effect to the cause, he proves the truth of
the love of God toward us, by our love to the brethren. Which being well
considered of us and applied to our several use in the direction of the
Spirit of Christ, will not only arm us against Satan in the former euilles:
but make us effectually wise in the way of life. And as the same Epistle of
Saint Jhon is most sweet and plentiful in it self, being full of plain
witness of the grace of God, and effectual testimonies who be his: So is it
most clearly and profitably opened and made plain by the reverend and most
worthy servant of Jesus Christ, M. Calvin, in his time. Which his labors,
in regard of the great good they might do to many fearing the Lord, that
want the knowledge of the tongue wherein he wrote: I have (as my other
occasions have given me leave) translated into the English tongue, and offryng
my poor labors therein to the Church of GOD, I have been bold to commend
the first fruits, as it were, unto you, right heartily praiyng, that whatsoever
the Lord shall therein open unto you, that may concern you through
conversion, continuance, or cherefull constancy in the Lord, that you will
apply it nere unto your souls, and that you may so always profit in the
same, as may more and more seal up unto your several consciences the
effectual assurance of the eternal grace of God in Jesus Christ, and make
you able to stand under the burdens that you do, or shall endure from time to
time, for the honor of his name. Master Calvin also upon Jude, and an Epistle
of his own written to a friend, J have, as I might, translated likewise, and
delivered withal to the Printe, praiyng that the one and other, may do that
good to Gods Church, and namely to your selves, that I heartily wish, and that
you may ever remain together in the unity of truth, and in all holy
fellowship among your selves, and with the whole Church of God, growing up from
strength to strength, to a full measure of perfection in Jesus Christ, to whose
mercies I shall not cease by his grace, to commend you and the whole Church of
God for ever.

Yours assuredly in the Lord. W. H.

THE COMENTAries of M. John Calvin, upon the first Epistle of John. The
Argument.
THis Epistle is most agreeable to his spirit, who before others was therefore
beloved of Christ, that he might make him familiar unto us. Further, it
contains Doctrine mixed with exhortations. It disputes of the eternal deity
of Christ, together also of the incomparable grace, which being made manifest
to the world he brought with him, and generally of all his benefits: and
chiefly it commends and extolleth the inestimable grace of the adoption of
the Lord. Thence it takes the occasion to exhort. Sometimes it does generally
admonish to religious and holy life, and again by name it gives precepts of
love: but none of these it does prosecute in continuance. For every where in
teaching and exhorting he is diverse, but especially he is plentiful in urging
to brotherly love. It also touches other things briefly: as of taking heed
of seducers and such other like. But every thing may be observed in his place.

CHAP. 1.
1 THat which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen
with our eyes, which we have looked upon, which our hands have handled of the
word of life.

2 And that life was made manifest, and we have seen and bear witness, and
do show unto you that eternal life, which was with the Father, and is made
manifest unto us.


He shows that in the beginning life was given unto us in Christ, which
thing as it is an incomperable good, so it ought to ravish and inflame all our
senses with a wonderful love and desire of it. Indeed this is spoken in few
and simple words. That life is made manifest. But if we do account how
miserable and horrible the condition of death is: and again of what
worthynesse the kingdom of GOD and his immortal glory is: we shall here
perceive some more excellent thing, then can be expressed with any words.
This therefore is the purpose of the Apostle, when he has showed the most
excellent good thing, yea, the chief and alone happiness, which GOD has
vouchsafed us in his Son, to lighten our minds. But because the greatness
of the maker did require that the truth should be certain and approved, he
tourneth much in this part. For all these Which we have seen, which we have
hard, which we have looked upon, etc. are effectual to establish the credit
of the Gospel. Nor indeed does he add so great a desire to affection
without cause. Seeing that our safety does consist in the Gospel, the
certainty thereof is a thing more then necessary. And how untoward we are
to believe, every one of us by his own experyence does know too well. I
call, to believe, not lightly to imagine, or in only assenting, to allow that
which is spoken: but to embrace it with a certain and undoubted persuasion, so
that we dare subscribe as to a known truth. By this occasion the Apostle does
multiply so many things here in confirmation of ye gospel.

1 That which was from the beginning. Because it is a broken and confused
speech, that the sense may be given more plain, so the words are to be
resolved. We declare unto you, the word of life, which from the beginning has
by all means, been truly testified unto us, how life was made manifest in it.
Or if you had rather otherwise, Whatsoever we show you of the word of life, it
was from the beginning, and it was openly showed to us: because life is made
manifest in it. But this member, That which was from the beginning, is
undoubtedly referred to the divinity of Christ, for God was not manifested in
the flesh from the beginning: but he who always was life, and the eternal
word of God, in the fullness of time became man. Again, those things that
follow of the beholding and feeling with hands, do more beelong to the humane
nature. But because two natures make one person, and that one is Christ, who
came out from the father, that he might take upon him our flesh, the Apostle
does worthily show forth in common together, that he has been always
invisible and afterward seen. Whereby is refelled ye rotten cavil of
Seruetus, that there is one nature and being of the deity with the flesh and
moreover that the word is transformed into flesh: because yt living word was
seen in the flesh. Let us remember therefore, that this doctrine of the
Gospel is avouched, that he who in the flesh did truly prove himself to be
the son of God, and was acknowledged for the son of God, was always the
invisible word of God. And yet he does not here assign the beginning of the
world, but ascends higher.

Of the word of life. The Genitive case is taken in the place of an Epithet
for quickening, because as he teaches in the first chapter of the Gospel, In
it was life: albeit this title does belong to the Son of God by a double
right, both because he has plentifully poured life upon all creatures, and
because he now repaireth life in us, which was put out and perished by Adams
sin. Yea, moreover the name it self of the word, may be expounded two manner
of ways, either of Christ, or of the doctrine of the Gospel: for by that also,
health is brought unto us. But, because the substance thereof is Christ, and
it does not contain any other thing, then that he at length was manifested
unto men, who always was with the Father: the first Exposition seems to me
more simple and more natural. Further that the wisdom which does remain in
God, is called the word, is evidently seen by the Gospel.

That which we have heard, That which we have seen. This hearing, was not of
any spread report, whereto small creditte uses to be given: but John
means, that of those things which he taught, he was first effectually
taught of his master, so that he set forth nothing rashly. And in truth, no
man shall be a profitable Teacher in the Church, who has not first himself
been a Disciple of the Son of GOD, and rightlye instructed in his School,
seeing that his authority alone ought to be of most force.

Whereas he says, that he Did see it with his eyes, it is not a Pleonasmos,
but a greater expressing for amplification sake. Yea, not being contented with a
simple sight, he adds, We ^ooked upon, and our hands have handeled. By
which words, he does testify that he taught nothing, which he had not
throughlye approved. Yet the approouing of the senses, seems smallye to be
profitable to the present cause: For the virtue of Christ cannot be
comprehended with eyes or hands. I answer that the same thing is spoken
here, which is in the first Chapter of his Gospel: We have seen his glory,
that is, glory worthy the only begotten Son of GOD. For the Son of GOD
was not acknowledged according to the outward form of his body: but by that
whereas he showed forth famous experiences of his divine power: so that in
him, as by a lively and express Image, did shine the majesty of the Father.
Whereas the words are of the plural number, and the matter does most
indifferently appertain unto all the Apostles, I do willyngly interpret it
of them: especially because the question is of the authority of the
testimonye.

But, no less frivolous, as I lately touched, and to be shamed at, is the
lewdness of Seruetus, who urges these words, whereby to prove that the
word of GOD has been visible and palpable. He does wickedlye either
destroy the two Natures, which is in Christ, or mingle them confusedly
together.

He therefore does imagine I wot not what lie, so deifying the humanity of
Christ, that he does utterly take from him the truth of man's nature, denying
in ye mean time that Christ is any other way the son of God, except because
he was conceived of his mother by the power of the holy Ghost, and taking from
him his proper abiding in God Whereupon it follows, that he is neither God
nor man, albeit he seem to forge a co^fused Mass of both. But because the
mind of the Apostle is undoubted unto us, let us pass by that Dog.

2 And the life was made manifest. This note of joining together is here put
in steed of showing plainly. As if he should have said, We do give witness of
the word that gives life, even as life were made manifest. Albeit the sense
may be double, either that Christ was given, who is life and the fountain of
life, or that life was plainly offered to us in Christ. And this later does
necessarily follow of the first. As much yet as does belong to the
signification of the words, these two differ between themselves, as the cause
and the effect. Where secondly he rehearses, We show eternal life. I doubt
not but yt he speaks of the effect: that is, that we attain unto life by the
benefit of Christ. Whereupon we ^ather that Christ cannot be preached unto
us, but the kingdom of heaven is opened unto us, that being raised from
death, we might ^iue the life of God.

Which was with the Father. This is true, not only since the world was made,
^ut also from the first eternity. For God was always the fountain of life,
but the power and ability of quickening was in his eternal wisdom, which
yet he did not show forth before the creation of the world. And ^ince God
began to give his word, that power which before was hid, has dispearsed it
self into the creatures. Now this was ^ome manifesting, but the Apostle
respects another thing, that is, that the^ life was made manifest in Christ,
when he being clothed with our flesh, did perform the parts of redemption. For
albeit the Fathers under the law were fellows and pertakers of the same life:
yet we know they were shut up under the hope, which afterward should be
revealed. It was of necessity unto them that they should seek life from the
death and resurrection of Christ. But the matter was not only far separate
from their eyes, but it was also hid from their minds. They therefore depend
upon the hope of the Revelation, which at the last in his time did follow.

They could not indeed obtain life, except by some means being made
manifest unto them. But betwixt them and us there is a great difference,
because whom they sought darkly in figures being promised unto them, we now
apprehend him, being given as it were with our hands. But the purpose of the
Apostle is, to take away the opinion of newness, which might impair the
dignity of the Gospel. By which occasion he says, That life did not now
begin of late, as if it had latelye appeared, because it has been for ever
with the Father.

3 That which we have seen and heard, do we show unto you: that you also may
have fellowshippe with us, and that our fellowship may be with the father, and
with his son Jesus Christ.

4 And these things we write unto you, that your joy may be full.

5 And this is the promise which we declare unto you, that GOD is light, and
in him is not any darkness.

6 If we say we have fellowshippe with him, and walk in darkness, we lie,
and do not the truth.

7 But if we walk in light as he is in light, we have fellowshippe one with
another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his son, does cleanse us from all
sin.


3 That which we have seen. Now he does the third time repeat his having
seen and heard, least any thing might be wanting to the effectual
certainetye of his Doctrine. And that is dilygentlye to be noted, that the
Preachers of the Gospel are chosen of Christ, who might be fit and faithful
witnesses of all those things which they should speak. Together also he
witnesses the affection of his mind: because he says he is not moved
with any other reason to write, but that he may provoke and incite them to
whom he writes, to approach to the fellowshippe of an inestimable good,
whereby it well appears, how much care he has of their salvation, which
avails not a little to procure other good and virtuous things, for we are
too too unkind if we refuse to hear him, who desires to communicate with us
part of that happiness, which he himself has gotten. He then expresses ye
fruit which is attained unto by the gospel, that is, yt we might be made at
one with God, and with his son Christ, wherein consists the chief goodness.

This second member ought to have been added, not only that he might make the
doctrine of the Gospel precious and delightful, but also that he might show
that he desired them to be his fellows, to no other end, but that he might
bring them to God, and so all might be one in him. For ye wicked also have
their mutual conjunction among themselves, but without God, yea, that they may
more and more estrange themselves from God, which is the uttermost point of all
the wicked. But this, as was said even now, is our only happiness, to be
received into favor of God, that we may be truly knit unto him in Christ: of
which John. 17. chapt. In conclusion, John pronounces, that like as the
Apostles are adopted of Christ to be his brethren, that being gathered into
one body, they may remain fast unto God: that so he with the rest of his
fellows in that business, does perform this, that of this sacred and blessed
unity there may be many copartners.

4 That your joy. By the name of full joy, he does more fitly express the
full and perfect happiness, which we attain unto by ye Gospel. He does withal
admonish ye faithful where they ought to have all their affections fixed. True
is that proverb, Where our tresure is, there is our heart. Mat. 6.21.
Whosoever therefore does truly perceive, of what worthiness that fellow (...)
is with God, he does wtall sufficiently satisfy himself with this alone, and
does not further boil with sundry desires. The Lord is my cup, says David,
and mine inheritance. The Lot is fallen unto me in pleasant places. Psalm.
16.5.6. After the same manner, Paul shows, that all things were unto him as
dunge, that he might possess Christ alone. Phi. 3.8. Wherefore in fine he has
profited in the Gospel, who esteeming himself happy in the fellowship of god,
does rest himself in it alone, and so prefer it before all the world, that
for it he be prepared to forsake all.

5 And this is the promise. I do no less allow that which the old
interpreter has yielded, This is the declaration. For albeit [Epaggeha] with
the Grecians does often signify a (...) promise, yet because John speaks
here of the testimony, whereof he had made mention a little before, the text
seems rather to require the other sense: except possiblye you may resolve it
thus, The promise, which we bring unto you, does draw this with it, or has
this condition knitte unto it. By this means we shall understand the mind of
the Apostle. Neither indeed does he here comprehend the whole doctrine of
the Gospel: but shows that this is required, if we will inioye Christ and
his benefittes, that we become like unto GOD in righteousness, and holiness:
like as Paul says. Tit. 2.11. That Grace of GOD which brings salvation to
all men has appeared, and teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and teaches us to live soberlye, iustlye, and godly, in this present
world. Except because he teaches by a Metaphore, that we must walk in the
light because God is light.

Further, whereas sometimes he calls GOD light, and sometimes says, He is
in the light, the words are not to be urged too much. Why Satan should be
called the Prince of darkness, it is evident enough. Therefore when GOD on the
contrary part is called the Father of light, and light it self, first we
may understand, that there is nothing in him, but that which is clear, pure,
and sincere: then, that he does so lighten all things with his brightness,
that he suffers nothing that is defiled or uneven, no blemishes or
uncleanness, no hypocrisy or deceit, nor any other evil to lie close or
hid.

Therefore this is the Sum: Seeing there is no agreement between light and
darkness, that while we walk in darkness, we are at enmity with GOD.
Therefore that that society which he mentioned cannot otherwise stand, then
if we also be accordingly pure, holy, and full of light.

In him there is no darkness. This manner and kind of speaking which is
here used, is very familiar with John, that he may amplyfie by a contrary
denial that which he has before affirmed. Therefore the sense is. That GOD
is such a light as that he admits no darkness at all. Whereupon it
follows that he does continuallye hate an evil conscience, and a defiled,
lewd, and wicked life and conversation, and whatsoever does savor of
darkness*

6 If we say. It is an argument of repugnaunces, whilst he gathers that
they are strangers from God, which walk in darkness, yet this whole
doctrine does depend upon a more high principle, that is, that GOD does
sanctify his children. For it is not indeed a bare precepte, whereby he does
require of us an holy life, but rather he shows that the grace of Christ is
also effectual unto this, that the darkness being driven away, it may
kindle the light of God in us. As if he should have said, whereas God does
communicate himself with us, it is no vain counterfeit, but it is of
necessity, that the power and effect of this society do show forth in our
life, or else the profession of the Gospel shall be counterfeit. Whereas he
adds, We do not the truth. It is as much as if he should have said, we do
not truly, or we have not in estimation yt which is true and right. And it is
that manner of speaking, which I noted first to be in plentiful use with him.

7 But if we walk in the light. Now he says that this is a certain mark of
our conjunction with God, if we be made like unto him, not that the pureness
of life do reconcile God unto us as the first cause: but the Apostle means,
that by the effect it is apparent that we are knit unto God, if his pureness
do shine in us. And indeed so is the matter, that wheresoever God does come,
all things are so fully replenished with his holiness, that wipeth away all
uncleanness: but without him we have nothing but uncleanness and darkness.
Hence it appears that no man lives well, except also he cleave fast unto
God. Where he says that we have fellowshippe one with another, it is not
simply referred to men, but he places God on the one part and us on the
other. Yet it may be demanded, what man can so express the light of God in
his life, that this likeness which John requires, may be apparaunt, for by
this means it must needs be, that he is altogether clean and without
darkness. I answer that these kind of speeches are to be fitted to the
capacity of men. Therefore he is said to be like unto GOD, that does aspire
unto his similitude, how far so ever yet he be from the same. And no example
is to be fetched else where, then from this present place.

He walks in darkness. Whosoever is not guided by the fear of God, nor in
a pure conscience respects this end, that wholly giving himself to God, he
does study to promote his glory. Therefore on the contrary, he that in the
sincere affection of his heart, conforming his life and all the parts of it to
the fear and obedience of God, does purely worship him, albeit he fail in
many things, and to moan under the burden of the flesh, he is taken to
walk in the light, because he holds the right way. It is therefore the alone
uprightness of conscience, which does discern between light and darkness.

And the blood of Jesus Christ. After he has taught of what manner is the
bond of our unity with God, he also shows the fruit that issues from
thence: that is, that then our sins are freely forgiven us. And this is that
blessedness, which David describes in the 32. Psalm. That we may know our
selves to be most miserable, until we being regenerate by the spirit of God, do
serve him in a clean heart. For what can be thought more miserable then man,
whom god has in hatred and abomination? Upon whom together does rest the
wrath of God and eternal death? This is a place worthy noting, whe^c^ we first
learn, yt then the satisfaction gotten by the death of Christ, does properly
belong unto us, when we embrace righteousness with a right purpose of heart. For
Christ is not a redeemer, but unto them who being turned from iniquity, do
lead a new life. Wherefore if we desire to have God merciful unto us, that he
may forgive our sins, we must not excuse our selves. Finally, from
repentance, remission of sins cannot be separate, neither can our consciences
have peace with god, where ye fear of God does not bear rule. Secondly, this
place does teach, that the free forgiveness of sins is not once only given
unto us, but that this benefit remains perpetually in the Church, and is
daily offered to the faithful. For the Apostle does here speak to the
faithful, as in truth there was never any, nor ever shall be, which can
otherwise please God, seeing all are holden with guiltiness before God. For
whatsoever kind of desire to do well be in us, we always go imperfectly to
the Lord. Further, whatsoever is an half part, deserves no praise with God.
We again in the mean time do reject our selves from ye grace of God, as much
as lies in us. So it comes to pass, yt all the Saints have need of daily
forgiveness of sins, because yt this only does continue us in ye household of
God,

Where he says, From all sin, he does signify, that by many means we are
guilty before God: as indeed there is no man that is not defiled with very
many sins. But he teaches that no sins do hinder the righteous and such
as fear God, whereby they may the less please God. He also shows the way to
obtain forgiveness, and the cause of our being made clean: that is, because
Christ has purged our sins with his blood. But he affirms that all the
godly shall undoubtedly be pertakers of this being made clean from sin. This
whole part of doctrine has been wickedly corrupted of the Schoolmen: for they
fain, that the free pardon of sins, is only given unto us in Baptism: they
do grant, that there only the blood of Christ is effectual. But after
Baptism they teach, that we are no otherwise reconciled to God, then by
satisfactions. And here they leave indeed some part to the blood of Christ:
but when they ascribe unto works, commendation and power to satisfy for
sins, and to please God, but in the least measure, they do wholly overthrow,
yt which John says here, For these will never agree between themselves, That
we are purged by the blood of Christ, and that works are cleansings from
sin: because John here assigns not the one half, but the whole to the
blood of Christ. This therefore is the sum, that the faithful do certainly
assure themselves, that they are accepted with God: because he is pacified
toward them by the Sacrifice of the death of Christ. Wherefore the power and
effect of all these, rests in the only blood of Christ. Whereby is refelled
the Papists most horrible invention of Indulgences: for, as if the blood of
Christ were not sufficient, they require also the blood and merits of Martyrs
to be an help. And yet this blasphemy amongst them spreads further: for
when their keys, in which they hold that remission of ^ins is included, are
coined, partly of ye blood and merits of martirs, and partly of ye works of
superrogation, with which every sinner ^oth redeem himself, there remains
to the^ no remission of sins, which does not derogate from the blood of
Christ. For if their doctrine should have place, then shall not the ^loud of
Christ purge us, but shall only con^urre as an help in part. And by this mean
^he consciences shall hang in doubt, which the Apostle commands here to rest
in a we^^ ^ssuraunce.

8 If we say, that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is
not in us.

9 If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just, that he may forgive
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

10 If we say we have no sin, we make him a lier, and his word is not in us.


NOW he commends that grace by necessity. For because no man is free from
sin: he shows that we are all cast away and without hope of remedy, except
ye Lord do help us by ye way of forgiveness. This is the reason why he so
vehemently urges, that no man is innocent: that all may the better know,
that they have need of mercy, which may deliver them from banishment, and so
they might the more be stirred up to the obtaining of this same so necessary a
good.

By the name of sin is noted not only a wicked and defiled inclination: but
the fault which does truly make us guilty before GOD.

Further, seeing the speech is general: it follows, that none of the Saints,
which are, which were, or which shall be, are exempted from this number.
Wherefore Augustine does exceeding fitly refell the cavil of the Pelagians
with this testimony, and does also wiselye weigh, that the confession of
guyltinesse is required, not for humilities sake: but lest in lying we deceive
our selves. When he adds, The truth is not in us. After his manner he
confirms the former sentence by rehearsing it again: albeit it is not a
simple rehearsing as other where, but he says they are deceived because they
glory in lying.

9 If we confess. Again, he promises the faithful, that GOD will be
favorable unto them, so that they acknowledge themselves to be sinners. For it
is a most excellent thing that we be certainlye persuaded, that there is a
ready and prepared Reconciliation for us with GOD, when we have sinned
otherwise we continually bear Hell shut up within us. Few indeed do weigh
this, how miserable and unhappy a thing the wavering and vnquietetnesse of
man's conscience is: But so the case stands with us, that hell does reign
where there is not peace with God. How much more ought we to embrace this
promise with all our heart, which offers assured forgiveness to all that do
confess their sins. Further, he teaches that it is founded upon the faith
and righteousness of God, because God who has promised is true and plain,
for they that think he is called just, because he does justify us freely, in
my judgment, do reason too subtly. For this justice depends of faith, but
each of them is anexed to the promise, for otherwise God may be just, and yet
deal with us in most high justice: but because he has bound himself to us by
his word, he will not be taken for just except he do forgive. But this
confession when it is referred to God, requires a sincere affection of the
heart, and ye heart cannot speak to God without newness of life. Therefore it
does contain in it true repentance. God indeed forgiueth freely: but so,
that his easines to mercy, be not an intisement to sin.

Shall cleanse us. The word of purging seems to be taken in another sense
then before. For he said we were cleansed by the blood of Christ, because by
his benefit our sins are not laid to our charge. But now after that he has
spoken of forgiveness, he adds also ye God does purge us from
unrighteousness, that this second member may be diverse from the ^^rst. So he
signifies that a double fruit does arise to us of confession, that God being
pacified with the sacrifice of Christ, does forgive us, and ye he does correct
and amend us. If any man object, ye while we are in this world, we are never
purged from all unrighteousness, as much as belongs to reformation, it is
true indeed: but John does not teach, what God does now perfect in us. He is
faithful, he says, yt he may make us clean yt is not to day nor to morrow. For
as long as we are compassed about with flesh, we must be in continual going
forward. But that which he has once begun, he does daily proceed to do, till
at the last he does perform it. So Paul says, That we are elect, that we may
appear before God without reproof. Ephesians. 1.4. and else where, yt the church is
cleansed, yt it may be without spot or wrinkle: Ephesians. 5.27. Albeit if any had
rather interpret this place otherwise, as if he spoke one thing twice, I leave
it free.

10 We make him a liar. He goes further, that they blaspheame GOD, which
claim pureness unto themselves. For we see how that every where he
condempneth all mankind of sin. Wherefore he enters battle with God:
whosoever seeks to shun this determination, and does reprove him of a lie,
as if he did press them that deserved it not. For confirmation sake he adds,
that His word is not in us. As if he should have said, that we cast aside that
his so excellent doctrine, which includes all under guiltiness. Whereupon we
gather, that then we have rightly profited in the word of the Lord, when we
are truly humbled, yt mourning under the burden of our sins, we learn to
fly to the mercy of God, and rest our selves no other where then in the
fatherly free mercy of God.

Chap. 2.
1 LIttle children, these things I write unto you, that you sin not, but if
any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.

2 And he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but
also of the whole world.


THis is not only a brief rehearsing of the former doctrine, but almost a sum
of the whole Gospel, That we abstain from sin: and yet because we are
always subject to the judgment of GOD, we are certain that Christ does make
intercession with the sacrifice of his death, that he may reconcile the Father
unto us. In the mean also he uses a predication, least any man should
think that he gives liberty to sin, when he preaches of the mercy of
GOD, and teaches, that it is set forth unto us all. He therefore joins
together two parts of the Gospel, which prepostrous men separating, do rend
and make lame the Gospel it self. Further, the doctrine of grace has ever ben
subject to the slanders of wicked men: when the forgiveness of sins is set
forth in Christ, then they brag that there is granted liberty to sin.
That the Apostle may meet with these mischifes, at the first he shows that
this is the end of his doctrine, that men should cease to sin. For when he
says, That you should not sin: He only means this, that they should
abstain from sin, as much as they are able for the imperfection of man. And
heereto tends that which I handled before of the society with God, yt we
might be made like unto him. Yet in the mean time he cease not to speak of
ye free forgiveness of sins, because ye albeit yt the Sky should fall, and all
things be confused together, yet this part of doctrine is never to be omitted,
but that ye office of Christ must be preched plainly and to the purpose, and
this it becomes us to do at this day. And because flesh is prone unto
looseness, men are diligently to be put in mind, that righteousness and
salvation is therefore gotten by the death of Christ, that we may be an holy
people of God. Yet howsoever it come to pass that many do wickedly abuse the
mercy of God, and also many dogs do slanderously speak evil of us, as if
we let loose the reins to wickedness: we must go forward constauntly in
auouching the grace of Christ, in which the glory of God does most notably
shine, and the whole salvation of man consist. These barkings (I say) of the
wicked, are to be despised, wherewith we see yt the Apostles were assailed. For
this cause, he straight adds ye second member, That we have an advocate, when
we have sinned: by which words he confirms that which he had before. Because
we are far from perfect righteousness, yea we daily increase our guiltiness:
that there is together a present remedy to appease God, if we fly unto
Christ. And this only is it, wherein consciences may quiet themselves, wherein
rests the righteousness of man, and in which is established ^he hope of
salvation. The conditional mem^er, If any man, must be resolved into a cau^all:
for it cannot be but we sin. Finallye, ^ohn shows, that we are not only
called from sin by the Gospel, because that there God does call us unto
himself, and offers ^he spirit of regeneration: but also that the wretched
sinners are comforted, as having God always merciful unto them: and that
their sins wherewith they are holden do ^ot let but that they are just
nevertheless, because they have a mediator, who does reco^^ile them to God.
Further, when he goes about to show how we become again in favor with God, he
says, that Christ is our aduo^ate. For in this he appears before the face of
God, that he may show forth the efficacy of his sacrifice toward us. To the
end this may be better understood, I will speak more plainly. The intercession
of Christ, is the continual applying of his death unto our salvation. Whereas
therefore God does not impute our sins, hence it is because he has respect
unto Christ, our earnest Intercessour.

But the two titles wherewith he afterward adorneth Christ, do properly
belong to the circumstaunce of this place. He calls him Just, and
Reconciliation: It behooves that he be endued with both, that he may bear
the office and person of an Advocate: for what sinner can obtain for us the
favor of God? For therefore we are all driven from having access unto him,
because no man is pure and void of sin. No man therefore is a fit high
Priest, but he that is innocent and separate from sinners, as also is
testified, Heb. 17. verse 26. Reconciliation is added, because without
Sacrifice, none is a fit high Priest.

Therefore under the Law, the Priest never went into the Sanctuary without
blood: and Sacrifice with prayer, as if a solemn seal were wont to be added
by the ordinance of GOD. By which token, GOD would have it known, that he
which should obtain favor for us, must be prepared with Sacrifice. For when
God is offended, the price of satisfaction to pacify him is required. Hence it
follows, that all the Saints which have been, and which shall be, have need
of an advocate: and that there is none sufficient to undergo this office but
only Christ. And in truth John has ascribed to Christ these two Epethytes by
name, that he might show him to be the only advocate. And as there comes
unto us thereby exceeding consolation, when we hear that Christ dyed not only
once, that he might pacify his Father toward us: but continuallye make
intercession for us, that the way might be open for us unto the father in his
name, that our prayers might be heard: so is it chiefelye to be taken heed
unto, least the honor that is appropriate and due to him alone, be transferred
to another.

But we know in the Papistrie, this office was ascribed indifferently to the
Saints. Now there be almost thirty years, since this excellent Principle of
our Faith was almost buried: That Christ is our Advocate. They confess in
deed at this day that there is one of many, but not alone. They that among
the Papists have some more modestye, deny not that Christ does excel above
all other Advocates whatsoever: but nevertheless afterward they associate
unto him, a great rabblement of companions. But the words of John in this
place do plainlye manifest, that he cannot in any wise be an Advocate, that
is not a Priest.

Further the Priesthood appertains unto none but unto Christ alone. In ye
mean time we take not away the mutual intercession of Saints, whereby among
themselves they exercise charity. But this is nothing to them that are dead,
who are separate from the fellowship of men, and nothing to those defenses which
they counterfeit to themselves, least they should only cleave to Christ. For
albeit that brethren pray for their brethren, yet without exception they all
respect one head defender. It is therefore no doubt, but the Papists do set
against Christ even so many Idolles, as they imagine Patrones unto themselves.
But if is to be noted by the way, that they err too grosely, which tumble
Christ at his Fathers knees, that he might pray for us. Such imaginations must
be taken away which derogate from the divine glory of Christ: and the simple
doctrine is to be held, that the fruit of his death do remain fresh and
perpetual for us, that by his intercession he reconcileth God unto us, and as
well does sanctify our prayers by the sweet smell of his sacrifice, as help
them by the favor of his supportation.

2 Not for ours alone. He has added this for amplification sake, that the
faithful may be assuredly persuaded, that the redemption gotten by Christ is
extended to al, which shall receive the Gospel in faith. But here is moved a
question. How the sins of all ye world should be done away? I omit the
dotages of such frantic fellows, who under the pretense of this, admit to
salvation all the reprobate, moreover Satan himself. Such a monstrous
fantasy, is not worthy the refutation. They that would escape this
absurdity, have said, that Christ suffered sufficiently for the whole world:
but only effectually for the elect. This solution has commonly prevailed in
the schools. Albeit that I grant that saying to be true, yet I deny that it
agrees with this place. For John had none other purpose, then to make this
good common to ye whole Church. Therefore under ye word All he does not
comprehend ye reprobate: but points out those which together were to believe,
and were scattered into diverse parts of the world. For then is the grace of
Christ made manifest as is meet, when he is preched to be the only saving
health of the world.

3 And in this we know, that we have known him if we keep his commandments.

4 He that says, I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and
the truth is not in him.

5 But he that keeps his word in him is the love of God perfect indeed. In
this we know that we are in him.

6 He that says that he abides in him, ought even so to walk as he has
walked.


3 AFter he has handled ye doctrine of the free remission of sins, he comes
again to ye exhortations annexed, and depends upon it: and first he
admonishes that ye knowledge of God, which is conceived by the Gospel is not
idle: but does of it self bring forth obedience. Afterward, he shows, what
God does especially require of us, what is ye chief in our life: namely, that
we love God. That which we read here of the effectual knowledge of God, the
Scripture does not every where repeat without cause: for there is nothing more
common to the world, then to draw the doctrine of godliness to vain
speculations. After this manner was divinity adulterated among the
sophistical Sorbonists, yt of all their knowledge, not so much as the least
spark of godliness could appear. And vain men every where do only learn from
the word of God, that which they may babble out for oftentation sake. Finally,
in all ages, this was too common an evil, to talk vainly of ye name of God.
John therefore chooses this principle, That the knowledge of God is
effectual. Whereupon he gathers, that they do not know God, that keep not
his commandments. Plato, though greping in the dark in Phaedro, and other
places denies, that that excellent beauty which he imagines can be known,
but that it will forceably carry a man into the admiration of it. Therefore how
may it be, that thou can know God, and be touched with no affection? Neither
indeed does this proceed only from the nature of God, that we immediatelye
love him whom we know: but the same spirit which does lighte^ our minds,
does like wise breath into our hearts an affection like unto our knowledge.
Albeit ye knowledge of God brings this with it, ye we fear and love him: for
neither can we acknowledge him as he shows himself to be Lord and father,
except we yield our selves again to him obedyent children and dutiful
servant. Briefly, the doctrine of the gospel is a lively glass, wherein we
beholding the image of God, are changed into it, as Paul teaches. 2. Cor.
3.18.

Wherefore where there is not present a good conscience, ye show of knowledge
cannot be but vain. This is to be marked when he says, That we know that we
have known. For he notes that obedience of God is so knit unto the knowledge,
that yet knowledge be first in order: as it is of necessity, that the cause
be before the effect.

If we keep his commandments. But there is no man, that does keep them in
every part. By that means then should be no knowledge of God in the world? I
answer, that the Apostle is not at odds with himself. When therefore he had
lately set all men in guiltines before God, he does not understand that they
keep the commandments, which satisfy the law in all points (which example
can no where be found in the world): but those which labor to conform their
life to the obedience of God, so much as in regard of man's infirmity they can.
For so often as the Scripture speaks of the righteousness of the faithful,
it is so far off from excluding the forgiveness of sins, that rather it
does take the beginning from it. Neither indeed is it to be gathered from
thence, that faith does lean upon works. For albeit that every one has the
witness of his faith, from works: yet it follows not that it is founded
there, seeing that this latter proof is added for a sign. The assurance
therefore of faith, rests in the alone grace of Christ: but godliness and
holiness of life discerns true faith from a counterfaite and dead knowledge
of God: because this truth is in Christ: as Paul says, to have put off the
old man, etc.

4 He that says, I know him. Whereby proves he that they lie, which boast of
faith without godliness? Verily by the contrary: because he had already
proved, that the knowledge of God is an effectual thing. For God is not known
by a ^a^e imagination* but when by his spirit he inwardly makes him self
known in our hearts. But because that many hypocrites do vainly pamper
themselves with the title of faith, the Apostle does convince such of a lie.
For that which he says should be superfluous, except the false and vain
profession of Christianity, did rule in the mouths of many.

5 But he that keeps. Now he shows which is the true observing of the law of
God: that is to wit, to love god. This place in my judgment, is evil expounded
of them, which understand that they truly please God, which keep his word.
Rather expound it thus: To love God with a sincere affection of heart, is to
keep his commandments. For briefly, as I have touched already, his purpose
was to show what god does require of us. The same also did Moses say, when he
gathered the sum of the law, Deuteronomy 10. Now Israel, etc. For ye law which is
spiritual, does not only give commandment of external things: but chiefly it
does commend unto us this, yt we love God with our whole heart. Because yt here is
no mention made of men, it is not to be taken for an absurd thing. For
brotherly love does always issue from ye love of God: as afterward we shall
see. Whosoever therefore desires to approve his life unto God, let him direct
all ye parts thereof to this end. If any object, yt there was never any man
found, yt so perfectly loved god. I answer, yt it suffices, so yt every one
for ye mesure of the grace ye is given him, do aspire unto this perfection. In
the mean time ye definition is manifest, yt the perfect love of God, is the
due observing of his word.

We know that in him He comes again to ye fruit of ye gospel, whereof he had
made mention: that is fellowship with God and with his son. And so he confirms
ye former sentence, by things yt follow. For if ye end of ye gospel be, yt we
may have fellowship with god: and there ca^ be no fellowship without love: no man ca^
truly profit in faith, but he ye cleueth to god from his heart.

6 He that says he abides in him. As before he proposed unto us ye light of
God as a pattern to follow: now also he calls us to christ, yt we may beco^e
folowers of him. Yet he does not simply exhort to ye imitatio^ of Christ: but
by ye unity which we have with him, he proves that we ought to be like him. The
likeness of life and works he says will prove us to abide in Christ. Further by
these words he makes himself an entrance unto ye love of our brethren, which
he will immediately add.

7 Brethren, I write no new co^ma^deme^t to you: but an old commandment, which
you have had from the beginning: this old commandment is that word, which ye
have hard from the beginning.

8 Again, a new commandment write I unto you, which is the truth in him, and
also in you: for the darkness is past, and that true light now shines.

9 He that says he is in that light, and hates his brother is in darkness
until this time.

10 He that loves his brother abides in that light, and there is none
occasion of evil in him.

11 But he that hates his brother, is in darkness, and walks in darkness
and knows not whether he goes, because that darkness has blinded his eyes.


7 AN exposttion of the former doctrine, that is, that to love God is to keep
his commandments. And he does not with mo words tarry in this without cause.
First we know that newnes is always hated or suspected. Then we do not easily
take up an unwonted work. Moreover, when we have embraced some certain kind of
doctrine, it is grievous unto us, yt any thing therein be changed or innouated.
For these causes John shows, yt he techeth nothing of love, but that which ye
faithful having heard from the very beginning, has waxed old in ye very use.
Others do expound oldnes otherwise: that is, that Christ prescribes now no
other rule of life in the gospel, then god did once under the law: and that is
most true. Neither do I gainsay, but in this sense a little after, he calls
the word of the gospel, ye old commandment. But now I take it, that he
means only this, That these are ye first rudiments of the gospel: yt they
have been so trained from ye beginning, yt there is no cause why they should shun
yt as unwonted, wherewith they ought to have been endued long ago. For it is,
plain yt ye relative is put in ye place of ye cause. Therefore he calls it
Old, not because before many worlds it was delivered to the fathers: but
wherein they were instructed immediately from their first entrance of Religion.

And that avails much to the confirmati^n of faith, because the readers ought
to take ^t to have proceeded from the same Christ, of whom they have the
Gospel.

The old commandment is. It is pro^able that the name of oldnesse in this
place ^s extended further. For the speech is more full when he says. The
word which you heard from the beginning, is that old commandment. And verily
in my judgment, it signifies that the gospel ought not to be taken as a
doctrine newlye sprung up, but which came out from God, and is his eternal
truth. As if he should have said, ye ought not to measure the antiquity of
the Gospel by the space of time, wherein it is brought unto you, for therein is
manifested unto you the eternal will of God. God therefore did not give unto
you this rule of godly life, when you were first called to the faith of
Christ, but the same was always firm and approved with him. And indeed this
finally ought to be accounted antiquity, and deserves account and reverence,
which has his beginning of God. For the counterfeit devises of men, by how
long prescription of years so ever, have not so much authority, that they
should overthrow the truth of God.

8 Again, a new commandment. The interpreters seem to me, not to have
understood ye Apostles mind, for he calls yt New, which g^^ by instruction
does as it were daily renew, ye faithful may all their life long exercise the^
selves therein, because they ca^ require nothin^ more excellent For ye
beginnings which children learn, afterward give place to higher more sound
doctrine. Co^trarily, John denies the doctrine of loving ye brethren is such,
yt i^ time waxes out of use: but yt it does perpetually flourish, that the
highest perfection be no^ less then the first entrance. Further, this wa^
needful to be added, because as men are more curious the^ is meet, a great part
do ever greedily desire some new thing. Hence comes yt irkesomnes of true
doctrine, yt it begets infinite wonders of errors, whilst every one gapeth a
fresh after new quiddities. But where this is once set down, yt the Lord
proceeds in one manner, yt in all our life he may hold us in yt which we have
learned: there is given a bridle to such desires: therefore who so desires to
rech to ye point of wisdo^e, because it belongs to ye right government of
life, let him profit in love.

Which is the truth. He proves that which he has said by reason: because in
this one commandment of love, which belongs to ye direction of life, the
whole truth of Christ does consist. Further, what other more great revelation
is to be waited for? For Christ is in truth the end and acco^plishment of al
things, therefore the name of truth has regard unto this, that they rest as in
ye point. For it is taken for the fullness or absolute estate. He joins
Christ unto them, as the head to ye members. As if he should have said, that
the body of the church has no other perfection, or that they shall be soundly
knit unto Christ, if an holy love do mutually flourish among themselves. Others
expound it otherwise. That which is truth in Christ, is also in you. But I see
not to what end it serves.

Because the darkness is past. He puts the time present in place of the
time past. For he notes that as soon as Christ has shined, we have the
brightness of understanding, not ye every of ye faithful understands ye
first day so much as he ought. For Paul also Phi. 3.11. says, yt he laboreth
to apprehe^d yt which yet he has not attained unto, but because ye knowledge
of Christ is sufficient to expel darkness, therefore daily goinges forward are
necessary, and every ones faith has first a beginning before it come to
perfection. But because GOD continues the tenor of the same doctrine, wherein
he bids us to increase: the knowledge of the Gospel is worthily called the
true light, where Christ the son of righteousness does shine. So ye way is
shut up to the malepeartnesse of men, who endeavor to corrupt the pureness
of the Gospel with their own counterfeit inventions: and with good warrantise
it is lawful to condemn with most bitter cursing the whole Popish divinity,
which does wholly darken this true light.

9 He that says he is in the light. He does prosecute his Metaphor. He has
said yt love is the only rule, whereby our life must be squared: he has
said that this law is appointed to us in the Gospel. Finally he has said
that there is as it were the noone light, which ought to continue our eyes in
the beholding thereof. Now of the contrary he gathers, that they are all
blind and do err in darkness, which are strangers from love. And whereas he
first set down the love in God, and now of brethren, there is no more
repugnaunce then betwixt the effect and the cause. Finally, they are so knit
together of themselves, that they cannot be separated. John will after say in
the third chapter, that we do falsely boast of the love of God, except we
love the brethren. And that is most true. But now he takes the love to our
brethren as a testimony whereby we prove that we love God. In sum, seeing
love does so respect God, that in God it comprehe^deth men: there is no
absurdity in that, that the Apostle disputing of love, does refer it
indifferently, sometimes to God, and sometimes to the brethren. And this is a
common use of the Scripture. Often times the whole perfection of life is placed
in the love of God. Again, Paul Romans 13.8. teaches, that he fulfilleth ye
law which loves his brother. And Christ shows yt these are ye principal
things of the law, Righteousness, judgment, and truth. Mat. 23.23. And both
is true, and does most fitly agree, because both the love God directs us to
ye love of men, and we do indeed witness our divine affection toward god by
loving of men at his commandment. Whatsoever it be, let this ever remain
firm, that love is the rule of the direction of life, which is so much the
more diligently to be marked, because all almost do rather choose any thing,
then this only commandment of God. To the same effect belongs that which
follows, That there is no offense, where is the desire of love, for he that so
frames his life shall never offend.

11 He that hates his brother. Again, he admonishes, that although thou make
an excellent show of virtue, yet there is nothing yt is not filthy where love
is absent. Confer this place with the 13. of the 1. Cor. and it shall need no
long exposition. But this doctrine is therefore obscure to the world, because
the greater part are astonished with I know not what maskes. So a counterfeit
holiness almost dazeleth all their eyes. In ye mean time love is neglected,
or else is rejected into some extreme corner.

12 I write to you little children, because your sins are forgiven you for
his names sake.

13 I write to you Fathers: because you have known him which is from the
beginning: I write unto you young men, because you have overcome that wicked
one.

14 I write unto you children, because you have known the Father. I have
written to you Fathers, because you have known him which is from the
beginning. I have written unto you young men, because you are strong, and the
word of God does abide in you, and you have overcome that evil one.


12 LIttle children. This yet is a general Sentence. And he does not speak
to them of young years, but generallye he understands by little Children,
men of all ages: as it is noted in the first Chapter, and in this also a little
after. This I say because sundry Interpreters do very ill to restrain it
to children. But John when he will speak of Children, he will call them
[Paidia] that is, By Infancy: which name agrees to the age. But he as a
spiritual Father calls old men as well as Children [Tecnia] by the name of
little Children. Immediatlye indeed he will apply several sentences to
every age. Yet they are not a little deceived which do begin from hence.
But rather least the former exhortation, might altogether darken the free
forgiveness of sins, this Doctrine which is proper to Faith, he does urge
again: As in deed this foundation ought always stedfastlye to be kept,
that eternal life is laid up for us thorough the only grace of Jesus
Christ. Holiness of life indeed must be urged, the fear of God must be
diligently taught, men must be vehemently provoked to repentance, the newnes
of life with his fruits must be commended, yet this must always be taken
heed off, that the doctrine of Faith be not strangled, which approves Christ
the alone author of salvation, and of all good things: but rather is this mean
to be kept, that faith may always hold the chief place. John does prescribe
us this order, when he has diligently preached of good works, least yet more
should seem to be attributed to them then is meet, he does so carefully recall
us to the grace of Christ.

Your sins are forgiven you. Without this trust the appearaunce of holiness
will be nothing else but inconstaunt and vain. Yea, they that setting aside
the forgiveness of sins, do rest in other duties, do build without a
foundation. In the mean time John does teach, yt there is nothing more fit to
stir men up to the fear of GOD, then while they are truly taught what good
they have received by Christ, as Paul Ph. 2.1. does beseech them by the bowels
of the mercy of God: By which appears how lewd is that slander of the
Papists, who say, that the desire of well doing waxes cold, while that is
extolled, which only makes obedient children to God. For thence he takes
occasion to exhort, because we know that God is so loving unto us, that he
does not impute our sins unto us.

For his name. The material cause is assigned, least we should feel other
means to reconcile us to God. For it will not be enough to hold, that God
forgiueth our sins, except we come rightly to Christ, and to that price which
he paid for us upon the cross. And that is so much the more to be observed,
because we see this way stopped up by the craft of Satan and vile inventions
of men: While foolish men go about to please God by diverse satisfactions, and
invent innumerable kinds of reconcilements to redeem the^ selves. For how many
means we bring in before God to deserve pardon, by so many stoppes are we
driven from his presence. Therefore John not content with this simple Doctrine,
that God forgiueth us our sins, adds by name, that he is favorable to us in
respect of Christ, that he may shut out all other means. And that we may
inioye this benefit, it is of necessity also that we pass by and forget al
other means, and embrace only the name of Christ.

I write to you Fathers. Now he comes to the reckoning up of the ages, that
he may show that that he teaches agrees to every one. For general speech
does sometimes affect ye less: yea, which is our untowardness, there are but
few which think that ye belongs to them, that together is directed to all.
Old men for the most part withdraw themselves, as if they were too old to
learn. Children as if they were not of ripe age, refuse to hear: Men of
middle age, because they are busied with other matters, they do not heereto
give their mind. Therefore least any should disburthen himself, he
applies the Gospel to every ones use. And he sets down three ages:
which pertition of the life of man is most vsuallye received.

From whence also that famous song of the Lacedaemonians had three degrees:
whereof the first song, That you are we shall be: the last, That which you are
we have been: but the middle sort, We are that which the one have been, and
the other shall be. John does distribute the course of man's life into these
three degrees, and he begins with old men: and says that the Gospel
does belong to them, because thence they may learn to know the eternal
son of God. The waywardness of old men is known: and especially because
they measure wisdom by the number of years, they are made unapt to be taught.

Furthermore, this lewdenesse Horace in the book of the art of Poetry, does
worthily note in them, that praising the time of their youth, they despise
whatsoever is done or said. John does wisely remedy this evil, when he says,
that in the Gospel is contained not only old wisdom, but that which
brings us to the very eternity of GOD. Whereon it follows, that there is
nothing here which they may disdain. Whereas he says, that Christ was from
the beginning. I refer it as well to his divine presence, wherein he is
coeternal with the Father, as to that power whereof the Apostle speaks to the
Hebrews. 13.8. Where he says he was yesterday as he is to day. As if he had
said: If oldnesse do like you, you have Christ, who exceeds all antiquity.
Wherefore be not ashamed to be his Disciples, who comprehends all worlds
in himself. In the mean time is to be noted, which is indeed the old
Religion, verily even that which is grounded in Jesus Christ. For otherwise
never so long a course of years shall be little worth, if it take the
beginning from error. I write to you young men. Albeit he uses a diminitiue
[Neaniscoi] young men. Yet there is no doubt but he directs his speech to all
men, which are in the good state and flower of their years. We know further,
that that age is so addicted to the vain cares of the world, that it thinks
little of the kingdom of God. For ye sharpness of wit and strength of body,
do as it were make them drunk: Therefore the Apostle does admonish them,
where true strength does consist, least according to their manner they boast in
the flesh.

Now says he, Are strong, because you have overcome Satan. For the note of
coupling is of equal force, as a particular causal, and indeed it is that
valiancie which men ought greatly to desire: that is to say, a spiritual. And
together he shows that it is no other where had, then of Christ. For he
puts in mind of those good things which we receive by the Gospel. He says
they have vanquished which are yet in the very act of war: But our estate is
far other, then these that were under the standard of men. For the battle
is doubtful to them, and the issue is uncertain. We are already conquerours
before we buckle with ye enemy, because our head Christ has already
vanquished for us the whole world.

14 I write to you children. Children need the government of another, therefore
the Apostle does gather, that the gospel does most fitly agree with children,
because there they may find the father. Now we see how diuellishe the
tyranny of the Pope is, which tyranously drives all ages from the doctrine of
ye gospel, which the spirit of God does so provoke them unto. But these things
which the Apostle has sorted into specialls, are indeed generals. For we all
flow out into vanity and come to nothing, except our strength do lean upon
the eternal truth of God. There is nothing more frail and fleeting then we,
unless ye power of Christ dwell in us: we are all children until we come to the
grace of adoption by the Gospel. What therefore he says of children, is also
common to old men: but yet he will apply to every one yt which is most
necessary for them, that he may show that all without exception stand in
need of the doctrine of the Gospel. The note [Oti] Because, may be two ways
expounded: but this sense which I have given is much better: and also will
better agree with the Text. I have written unto you. I take these repetitions
to be superfluous. And it is probable, that unskillful Readers thinking
otherwise then it was, that he spoke twice of childeren, have rashlye added
other two parts. Albeit it may be, that John himself inserted the second
time, the speech of young men for increase, for there he adds, that they were
strong: which he said not before, but they would unadvisedly make work for
the writer.

15 Love not the world, nor those things that are in the world: If any man
love the world, the love of the Father is not him.

16 Because whatsoever is in the world, (as the lust of the flesh, the lust of
the eyes, and the pride of life) are not of the Father, but of the world.

17 And this world passes away and the lusts thereof: but he that fulfilleth
the will of God, abides for ever.


15 He had said before yt this was the only way to live godly, To love God:
but because being occupied in the vain delighte of this world, we turn
all our senses to another end: this vanity must first be plucked from us, that
the love of GOD may reign in us. Until our minds be purged, the former
doctrine may be repeated an hundredth times without profit. No otherwise, then
if pouring water upon a round gloabe, thou shall not gather so much as one
drop, because there is no void place where the water may be kept. By the
name of the World, understand whatsoever belongs to this present life, when
it is separate from the kingdom of God, and the hope of eternal life. So it
does comprehend in it self all kind of corruption, and deapth of all
naughtiness and evils. In the world are pleasures, delights, and all
inticements wherewith man may be snared, to withdraw himself from GOD:
Furthermore, the love of the world is so vehementlye condemned: because when
we regard nothing but the earth, it is of necessity, that we both forget God
and our selves. And where such wicked desire does reign and bear the swaie,
and holds a man so snared, that he does not meditate of the heavenly life,
there is a beastlye sencelesnesse.

If any man love the world. He proves by an argument of contraries how
necessary it is to cast away the love of the world, if we will please God. And
that he does afterward confirm by an argument of repugnaunces: because those
things which be proper to the world be utterly at war with God. That must be
kept in mind which I said already, that here is noted a profane disposition
of life, which has no fellowshippe with the kingdom of God: where men so
grow out of kind, that being satisfied with this present life, they think no
more of the immortal life then brute beasts. Therefore whosoever does so
inbondage himself to earthlye desires, he cannot be the child of God.

16 That is, the lust of the flesh. The old interpreter says otherwise. For
of one sentence he makes two. The Grecians have done better, which read
together in one sentence, That whatsoever is of the world is not of God: and
in one continued speech are set down three kinds of concupiscences. For in
steed of explication, John has put in these as it were three examples, that
he might brieflye show what endeavors, and what kind of thoughts they have,
which live to the world.

Further it is no great matter, whether it be a full and whole partition.
Albeit thou shall not find a worldly man, in whom these de^ires do not
reign, or at the least some one ^f them.

It remains that we see, what he means by each of them. The first part
uses to ^e expounded generally of al wicked desires: because ye flesh
signifies ye whole corrupt nature of man. Albeit I would not contend, yet I
will not dissemble, that I approve of another sense. When Paul forbids,
Romans 3.14. that there should be thought taken for ^he flesh to fulfill the
lusts of it. He seems to me a good interpreter of this place. What is ^lesh
there? verilye the body and his increa^ings. What then is the desire of ye
flesh, but when earthly minded men, desiring to live at ease and daintely, are
only given over to their profit? The threefolde partition of an Epicure is
known by Cicero and others, whereby he discerns between desires: when he
makes some natural and necessary: others natural, yet not necessary:
others, neither natural nor necessary. But John, who knew the disorder of
man's heart, does safely condemn the lusts of ye flesh, because it always
intemperately breaks out and will not keep a mean. Afterward he ascends
by degrees to the groser faults: The lust of the eyes, in my judgment
comprehends as well unchaste looks, as the vanity which rangeth in pomp and
vain bravery. There follows lastly arrogancy or pride, whereto is joined
ambition, bragging, contempt of others, a blind love of it self, and a rash
presumption. The sum is, that so soon as the world offers it self, our
desires, as our heart is wicked, like unbridled beasts, are violently drawn
thither: so that diverse lusts do bear sway, which al are contrary to God.
For life it is in Greek [Bios,] that is the kind and manner of living.

17 But the world passes away. Because in the world there is nothing but
inconstant and as it were for a short time: he thereof gathers how evil and
miserablye they provide for themselves, who set their felicity here:
especially seeing God does call us to the blessed glory of eternal life: as if
he should have said, the true felicity which God offers to his children, is
eternal. It is therefore an unworthy thing, that we should be entangled with
the world, which will shortly vanish away with all his good things.

Concupiscence, I interpret here by a Metonimia, whatsoever is desired, and
inforceth the desires of men unto it self. The sense is, that whatsoever in
the world is held most precious, and chiefly to be desired, it is but a vain
shadow. When he says, that they abide for ever that do the will of God: he
signifies that they shall ever be happy, that labor to aspire unto God.

If any man object, that no man does that which God commands: the answer
is easy, that it is not meant here of ye absolute performance of the law,
but of the obedience of Faith, which howsoever it be not perfect, yet it is
nevertheless approved with God. The will of God is first showed unto us in
the Law: but because no man does satisfy the Law, no happiness can be hoped
for from thence. But Christ meets those that be without hope, with a new
supplye, who not only does regenerate us with his Spirit, that we may give
obedience and reverence to GOD: but causes also that our endeavor howsoever
it be weak, obtains the commendation of absolute righteousness.

18 Little children it is the last time, and as you have heard that Antichrist
shall come, even now also there begin to be many Antichrists, whereby we
know that it is the last time.

19 They went out from amongst us, b^^ they were not of us. For if they had been
of us they would verily have tarried with us: bu^ that it might have been made
manifest, tha^ they were not all of us.


18 IT is the last time. He confirms the faithful against offenses when with
they might have been troubled. Now were sprung up diverse sects, which did
cu^^ a sunder the unity of faith, and disperse the Churches. And ye Apostle
does not only fence the faithful, least they should stumble: but turns all
this into another end. For he does admonish them that the last time is at
hand, and therefore he exhorts them to the greater watchfulness, as if he
should have said. When diverse errors spring up, you ought rather to be
awakened then overwhelmed. For thence is to be gathered, that Christ is not
far hence. Therefore let us be diligent to wait for him, least he take us at
a sudden We ought at this day to be stirred up in like manner: and to lay hold
by faith ^f the coming of Christ which is at hand, when Satan sets all out
of order, to di^turbe the Church. For these are signs of the ^ast time. But so
many years which have pas^ed since the death of John, do seem to con^ince
this prophecy of untruth. I answer that the Apostle does show to the
faithful ac^ording to the usual manner of the Scripture, that there is nothing
remains further ^o be looked for, but that Christ appear for the redemption
of the world. But because he sets no certain time: he neither fed the men
of his time with vain hope, neither would he cut off the course of the Church
in time to come, nor ye succession of many years, wherein the Church has
continued in the world unto this day.

And indeed if the eternity of gods kingdom were always before our eyes,
there will be no such long time, which would not be like to a very moment. We
must regard the purpose of ye Apostle, because he calls that the last time,
wherein al things are so fulfilled, that there remains, but the last
revealing of Christ.

You have heard that Antechrist. He speaks as of a thing known. Whence it is
easy to gather, that the faithful were taught and admonyshed from the
beginning (...) the dissipation of the Church which was t^ come: both that they
might carefullye keep^ themselves in the faith which they have received, and
also that they might instruct th^^ posterity to beware. For so God would have
the Church to be tried, that none should b^^ deceived, except wittinglye and
willinglye, and that there should be no excuse of ignorance. But we see the
whole world almost to have been miserably deceived, as if there had never been
word spoken of Antichrist. Furthermore, in the Popedom, there is nothing more
of account and usual, then that Antichrist shall come. In the mean time they
are so besotted, that they epsy not his tirannie that is yoaked unto their
necks. The same thing in truth is come unto them, that was unto the Jews. For
albeit they hold the promises of the Messiah, yet are they further off from
Christ, then if they had never heard of his name: for the imagined Messiah
which they have fained to themselves, has utterly turned them away from the
son of God. And if any by the Law and the prophets go about to bring them to
the knowledge of Christ, he shall do nothing but loose his labor. The Papists
imagine an Antichrist, which shall vex the Church for three years and a
half. All the notes whereby ye spirit of God does point out Antichrist, do
evidently appear in the Pope: but that three years Antichrist does hold the
foolish Papists occupied, least in seeing they should see. Let us remember
therefore, that the spirit of God did not only show that Antichrist should
come, but together set down sure marks, by which he might be known.

Yea, even now there are many. This may seem to be added in steed of a
correction: as if they untruly supposed yt they should be some one kingdom:
but it is not so. They yt think that there shall be one only man, they are greatly
deceived. But Paul when he makes me^tio^ of ye falling away to come, does
plainly witness, that there shall be a certain body and kingdom. 2. The. 2.3.
First he foretells ye falling away, which shall spread it self over all the
church, yt it may be as it were a general evil: then he assigns ye general
head of ye Apostacy to be ye adversary of Christ: which shall sit in ye temple
of god, usurping divine honor to himself. Except we will be blind of purpose,
we may learn by this description of Paul to know Antichrist, which I have
expounded in his place: now it suffices to touch it a little. But how shall
this agree with the words of John, who says, that there are now many? I
answer, that John means nothing else, then that several sects begin to
arise, which were forerunners of the falling away. For Cherinthus, Basilides,
Martion, Valentinus, Ebion, Arrius, and the rest, were members of that
Kingdom, which the devil afterward set up against Christ. To speak properly,
Antichrist indeed was not yet come, but the mystery of his impiety did
priuelye work. 2. The. 2.7. But John uses this name, that he might the more
stir up the endeavor and care of the godly, to beat back their falsehoods.
But if the spirit of God command the faithful even then to watch continually,
when they did only see a far off the signs of ye enemy to come: much less
is it now a time of sleeping, when he oppresses the Church with most cruel
tyranny, and does openly set himself against Christ.

19 They went out from among us. He preuenteth another objection, that ye
Church did seem to have begotten those mischiefs, and for a time nourished
them in her bosom. For in truth it is of more force to trouble the weak, if
any one who has professed one faith with us do fall away, then if a thousand
that are without should conspire against us. He therefore so confesses that
they came out of the bosom of the Church, that he yet denies, that they were
ever of the Church. Further the way to deduce the objection, is, that the
Church is always subject to this evil, that is, constrained to bear many
hypocrites, which in truth have not Christ, howsoever with their mouth they
profess his name for a time. When he says, They went out from us, he
signifies yt they did first occupy a room in the Church, and were accounted
in the number of the godly. Yet he denies that they were of us, because they
did falsely pretend the name of ye faithful, even as chafe albeit it is
mingled with wheat in one floor, yet is not accounted to be of the wheat.

If they had been of us. He does openly pronounce that they were never members
of the church which fall away. And in truth the seal of God under which he
keeps his, remains sure, as Paul says. 2. Tim. 2.19. But here arises an
hard thing: For it often falls out, that many who seemed to have embraced
Christ, do fall away. I answer, that there are three sorts of them that
profess Christ. For there are, which do but counterfaite godliness, while
yet an evil conscience does inwardly convince them. The hypocrisy of others
is more deceiptfull, which do not only endeavor to make a vain show
before men, but shut their eyes, that they may seem to themselves to
worship GOD aright. The third have a lively root of Faith, and they carry
in their hearts firmly grounded, a witness of their adoption.

The two first degrees have not any thing of assurance, of the last John
speaks when he says, it is not possible they should be alienated from the
Church: nor can the seal which God has imprinted in their hearts, be taken
away. The incorruptible seed, that has taken root, can not be plucked up
nor abolished. And here the question is not of the constancy of men, but of
the constancy of GOD, whose election must needs be sure. Wherefore he
says not without cause, where the calling of GOD is effectual, that there is
a sure perseueraunce. In sum he means that they were never rightly endued
with ye knowledge of Christ, which fall away: but had only a light and
uncertain taste.

That they might be made known. He shows that examination is necessary and
profitable for the Church. Whereupon it follows on the contrary, yt it is no
just cause to be troubled at. Seeing the Church is like unto a floor, the
chafe must be fanned, that the wheat may remain pure. This does GOD when
he thrusts hypocrites out of the Church: for he does purge it from filth
and uncleanness.

20 And you have an annoyntment from that holy one: and know all things.

21 I have not written unto you, because you know not the truth: but because
you have known it, and because no lie is of the truth.

22 Who is a liar, but he which denies that Jesus is Christ? This is
Antichrist, which denies the Father and the Son.

23 Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father.


THE Apostle does modestly excuse it, that he did so carefully and
diligently admonish them: least they should think themselves to be
ouerthwartlye rebuked, as rude and ignorant of those things, which they ought
very well to know. So Paul yields wisdom to the Romans, that they might
be able and fit to admonish others. Romans 15.14. Yet together he shows that he
could not otherwise perform the duty that was enjoined him, except he did
admonish them.

And yet the Apostles do not flatteringlye speak so: but by this means they
do wisely foresee, least their doctrine should be rejected of any sorts of
men, while they show that it agrees and is profitable not only to the rude
people, but even to those that be learned in the Lords school. Experience it
self teaches, how disdainful the ears of men be. Indeed such irksomeness
must be far from the godly: yet it is the part of a good and wise teacher to
let pass nothing, whereby he may make all willing to hear him. And it is
certain that we receive with less heed and reverence that which is spoken,
if we suppose that he which speaks, does take from us the knowledge which
is given of the Lord.

The Apostle does together sharpen the readers with this process: because
they have the less excuse, which are endued with the gift of understanding,
except they go before others in profiting. The sum is, that the apostle
does not teach them as rude and such as learn but their principles, but he
brings to their mind the things which they already know: and then he
exhorts them to stir up the sparks of the spirit, that the full
brightness may shine in them. And he expounds himself in the next words,
denying that he wrote to them, therefore, because they knew not the truth, but
because they were well instructed in it. For if they had been ignorant and
nouises, they could not have understood this doctrine, And whereas he says,
They know all things, it must not be understood generally, but restrained to
the circumstances of the present place.

But whereas he says, they have an annoynting of that Holy one. I doubt not
but he alludeth to the old Figures. For out of the Sanctuary there was oil
taken to annoint the Priests. But Daniel. 7.24. shows that the coming of
Christ is the proper time of annoynting with the holy of holiest. For therefore
was he anointed of his Father, that he might pour forth upon us, much
plenty of his own fullness.

Hence it follows that men are not rightly wise by the sharpness of their
own understanding: but by the inlyghtening of the Spirit: and then that we
are no ways made pertakers of the Spirit but by Christ, who is the true
Sanctuary, and our alone high Priest.

21 And that no lie. He grants that they have judgment whereby they
discern truth from falsehood. And this proposition is not Logical, That a lie
differs from the truth, (as general Rules are given in Schools) but the
speech is applied to Use and Practice. As if he should have said, that they do
not only hold that which is true, but are armed also, against the subtiltyes
and deceyptes of the wicked, that they may wisely look to themselves.

Further, he speaks not of one or two kind of lies: but whatsoever craft
Satan goes about, or by what mean soever he set upon them, that the wisdom
to discern light from darkness, was always ready with them, because they
are guyded by the Spirit.

22 Who is a liar? He does not affirm, that they only are liars, who deny
that the Son of God is come in the flesh, least any should beyond measure
disquiet himself in dissoluing this doubt: but that they exceed all other.
As if he had said, Except this may be taken to be a lie, that there
cannot any other thing be taken so. As we use commonly to speak. If
unfaithfulness to GOD and men be not a fault, what else shall we call a
fault? And that which he had generally touched of false prophets, he now
applies to the state of his own time. For he does with the finger point
them out which troubled the Church. Whereas the old Writers thought, that
Cherinthus and Carpocrates were noted out, I easelye receive it. But the
denying of Christ stretches far. For it is not enough to confess in one
word that Jesus is Christ, except he be acknowledged to be such a one as he is
offered unto us of his Father in the Gospel.

Those two Heretykes whom I have before named, gave the title of Christ to the
Son of God: but yet they untruly held him to be only man. As there are
diverse others, as Arrius, who adorning him with the name of GOD, did
nevertheless spoil him of his eternal and omnipotent Divinity.

Martion dreamed that he was but the image of a man. Sabellius feigned that he
differed nothing from his Father. They all denied him to be the Son of God:
because none of them did rightly know the whole Christ: but falsifiyng his
truth as much as in them was, they have for Christ framed to themselves an
Idol. Then brake out Pelagius, who indeed moved no controversy of the being
of Christ, but granted that he was true God and man: but he translated
almost all his honor unto us. But this is to bring Christ to nothing, when his
power and grace is abolished. So the Papists at this day, setting free will
against the grace of the holy Ghost, placing part of our righteousness and
salvation in the desarte of works, fayning infinite Patrones to themselves, by
whom they may have God favorable, they have I wot not what counterfayte
Christ: but the lively and natural Image of God, which ought to shine in
Christ, they deface with their wicked inventions, they weaken his power, they
overthrow and pervert his office.

Now we see yt Christ is denied so often as those things yt are proper unto
him, are taken from him. And as Christ is the end of ye law and the Gospel,
and has in himself all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge: so is ^he the
very mark that all Heretics aim ^at, that thither they may direct all
their artillery. Wherefore the Apostle does not without cause make them the
chief of all deceivers, which fight against Christ, seeing that the full truth
is set forth unto us in him.

This is Antichrist. He speaks not of that Prince of falling away, which
should fit in the seat of God: but he puts them in that wicked rabblement,
whosoever strive to ouerturne Christ. And that he might increase their sin,
he says, that they deny no less the Father then the son: as if he should
have said, That they have no more religion, because they have utterly cast
away God, which he straight confirms by a reason added: because the Father
cannot be separated from the son. And this is a sentence of excellent
worthiness and deserves to be accounted amongst the chief principles of our
religion, yea, after we have confessed that there is one God. This second point
must necessarily be adjoined. That he is no other, but which is known in
Christ. Neither does the Apostle here cunningly dispute of the unity of
being. It is certain indeed that the son cannot be separated away from
the Father, because he is [Omousios] that is, One substance: but now there is
another thing in hand: namely, that the Father who otherwise is invisible,
has only made himself known in the son. Whereupon he is also called the
image of the Father: because he does represent and deliver unto us whatsoever
is profitable to be known of the father. For the alone majesty of God does
always darken our eyes with his infinite brightness. Therefore it is of
necessity that we look unto Christ. Here is access to the light, which is
otherwise worthily said to be unable to be come unto. I say again, that
here is not handled the exact disputation of the eternal being of Christ,
which only he has with the father. Indeed this place does plentifully suffice
to prove that: but John calls us to the practice of faith, yt is, yt because
God has given himself wholly unto us to be joined in Christ, it is in vain to
seek him else where. Or if any desire more plainelye: because in Christ
dwells all fullness of divinity, that without him there is nothing of God.
Wher^pon it follows, yt the Turks, Jews, and the ^ke, have for God a very
Idol. For with what ^itles so ever they adorn their God who^ they worship:
because yet they reject him, without whom none can come to God, and in whom God
^ath wholly made himself known unto us: what have they but their own creature
or counterfeit? Let them flatter themselves as much as they will in their
fancies, ye reason of divine matters without Christ: yet it is certain they do
nothing but play the fools, because they hold not ye head, as Paul says, Col.
2.19. Whereupon it is easy to gather, how needful the knowledge of Christ is.

Many books have a sentence contrary to this, He that confesses the son,
etc. But because I suppose it to be noted of some, rather to have crept into
the Text, I have not feared to leave it out. But if it seem good to be in,
the meaning of it will be, that there is not any other lawful confession of
GOD, then when the Father is acknowledged in his Son. If any man object that
many of those that were before thought rightly of God, who yet knew not of
Christ.

I grant yt the knowledge of Christ was not always so revealed, yet I do
affirm that that was ever true: even as the light of the Sun is spread
abroad unto us by beams so the knowledge of God is not communicated but by
Christ.

24 Therefore let that same abide in yo^ which you have heard from the
beginning, (...) that shall remain in you which you heard fr^^ the beginning,
ye also shall continue in the Father and in the son.

25 And this is the promise which he promised unto us: even eternal life.

26 These things I have written to you of them that deceive you.

27 And that anointing which you have received of him remains in you: and ye
have no need that any man teach you: but as that same anointing teaches you
of all things, and it is the truth, and is not lying, and as it taught you,
abide in him.

28 And now little children abide in him: that when he shall appear we may have
boldness, and not be ashamed at his coming.

29 If ye know that he is righteous, know ye that he that does righteously is
borne of him.


24 He coupleth an exhortation to the former doctrine: and to the end the
exhortation ^ay have ye more effect, he shows the fruit, which they shall
receive by obedience. There^^re he exhorts them to the constancye of ^ith,
that they keep it firmelye grounded in ^eir hearts which they have learned.
Fur^^er when he says, From the beginning, one^^ antiquity would not suffice
to confirm ^hatsouer doctrine: but because he has now ^hewed that they have been rightly instructed (...) the pure Gospel of Christ, he concludes, that
they ought of right to continue in it. And ^his order is to be well noted. For
if we will ^ot depart from that kind of doctrine, which we have once received,
of what sort so ever ^he same be: it will not be constancy, but a ^eeuishe
frowardness. Wherefore there is ^hoice to be had, that the warrant of our
faith may appear out of the word of God: then let there follow an inflexible
constancy. The Papists brag of their beginning, because they have drunk in
their superstitions, even from their infancy. Under this pretense they
imbolden themselves contemptuouslye to cast aside the plain truth. Such an
obstinacy ought always to teach us that we must always begin from the
assurance of the doctrine.

If it abide in you. This is the fruit of perseueraunce, that in whom ye truth
of God abides, they abide in God. Whereupon we gather what is to be sought in all the doctrine of godliness. Wherefore he indeed has excelle^tlie profited,
who has gone thus far, that he cleaves wholly unto God. And in whom so ever
the father does not dwell by the son, he is whollye vain and unprofitable,
what knowledge soever he have. Further, this is an excellent practice of sound
doctrine, because it joins us to God, and we find in it whatsoever belongs
to the true inioying of God. In the last place he shows us, that this is the
chief happiness if God dwell in us. The speech that he uses is doubtful:
either that this is the promise, whereby he has promised unto us eternal
life: or appositiuelye, that this is the promise which he has given us,
namely, eternal life. Because yet that whether way thou take it, the
meaning is all one: let the choice be free. The sum is, that there is no
other way for us to live, then if we nourishe continuallye to the end, the
seed of life received in our minds. John is plentiful in setting down this
point, that not only the beginning of an happy life is placed in the
knowledge of Christ, but also perfection. But no repeating of it can be too
much, seeing it is apparent yt this has always ben ye cause of destruction to
men, because not being contented with Christ, they have delighted to range beyond
ye simple doctrine of ye gospel.

26 These things I have written unto you. The Apostle does again excuse it,
that he admonishes them, who otherwise had knowledge and judgment. And this
he does that they may adioyne ye judgment of the spirit, least ye admonition
be fruitles. As if he should have said, I do those things that belong to me:
but it is of necessity in the mean time that the spirit of God do guide you
in all things. For in vain shall I beat your ear, or rather the air with the
sound of my voice, except he speak within. When we hear that he has
written of deceyuers, let us always mark that this charge does ever lie
upon a good and painful Pastor, not only that he gather together the
sheep, but also that he root out and drive away all ravening Wolves. For
what shall it avail to set abroad the pure voice of the Gospel, if we
wink at the manifest deceites of Satan. Therefore there is not any man that
can faithfully teach the Church, except he bind himself to repress
errors, if he see any cast abroad of the deceivers. Where he says, the
anointing Which ye have received of him, I refer it to Christ.

27 Ye have no need. John had been to be laughed at, as I said before, if he
had broched an unprofitable doctrine. He does not therefore ascribe unto them
so much knowledge, that he deny them to be Christ's Scholars. He only
signifies, that they are not so ignorant that they should be taught as of
things unknown: and that he did not propound any thing which the spirit of
God did not readily prompt unto them. Therefore mad men do wickedly abuse this
testimony, that they might shut out of the Church the use of the outward
ministry. He says that the faithful are taught by the office of the
spirit, to keep those things that he delivers, that they have no need to
learn them as things unknown. This he says to the end that he may procure
the more account to his doctrine: while every one finds his subscription
written in his heart with the finger of God. But, seeing that every one
understands according to the measure of faith, and that faith in some is
small, in some mean, and in none absolute: hence it follows that no man
knows so much, but that there is yet place to further going forward. And then
this is another profit of the doctrine, that where men hold fast that is meet,
yet we warn the^ and stir them up, that thereby they may have a greater
increase.

For in that John testifies that they are taught in all things by the spirit,
it must not be so generallye taken: but restrained to the circumstance of the
present place. In sum, he meneth nothing else, but to confirm their faith,
while he recalleth them to ye trial of the spirit, who only is a fit examiner
and approuer of the doctrine, while he seals up the same in our hearts,
that we may know of a truth that God speaks. For seeing yt faith ought to
look unto God, he only can be a witness unto himself, yt he may persuade
our hearts that ye proceeds from him which our ears receive. And that is the
meaning of those words, As it teaches you and is the truth. That is, that the
spirit is like a seal, whereby is witnessed unto us the truth of GOD. Where he
adds, It is not a lie. This pertycular notes out the other office of the
spirit, namely, that he governs us by judgment and discreation, least we
be deceived with a lie: least we depend uncertain and in doubt, least we
should be as it were never in uncertain things.

As he has taught you, continue. He had said yt the spirit remained in them:
Now he exhorts that they remain in his reuealation. And he notes out the
manner of the Reuealation. Abide, says he, in Christ, as the spirit has
taught you. I know it is commonly otherwise expounded, Abide in it: that it may
note out the anointing. But seeing the repetition which by and by follows,
can agree to none but unto Christ. I doubt not but here also he speaks of
Christ: and the course of the Text does require the same. For the Apostle
tarryeth in that point, that the faithful would keep sure the pure knowledge
of Christ, and that they strive not any other way to rome to God. In the
mean time he does clearly show, that the children of God are lightened of the
spirit to no other end, but that they may know Christ. But if they shall not
decline from thence, he sets forth the fruits of perseueraunce: namely,
that they shall have assurance not to be ashamed at his presence. For faith is
not a naked and cold apprehending of Christ, but a lively and effectual
feeling of his power, which begets assurance. Neither indeed could faith
otherwise stand out, while it is daily assailed with so many te^pests, except
it did both look to ye coming of Christ, and being vpholde^ by his power, did
bring a quiet state to ye consciences. Further, ye nature of co^fide^ce is most
fitly expressed, when he says: ye presence of Christ shall be borne without fear,
for they yt securely flatter themselves in sin: turn their back upon God: and
find peace no where else, but in ye forgetfulness of God. This is ye security of
ye flesh yt besotteth men: yt being turned from God, they neither loath sin,
nor fear death: in ye mean time they shun ye judgment of Christ: but an holy
trust disposes it self into the alone sight of God. Whereof it is yt the
godly do cheerfully look for Christ, and fear not to behold him.

29 If you know that he is righteous. He again proceeds to exhortations:
that he may after join them in the whole Epistle to the doctrine. By many
reasons he proves yt faith must of necessity be joined with an holy and a
clean life. The first is, that we are spiritually begotten into the similitude
of Christ. Whereupon it follows that no man is begotten of Christ, but he
that lives righteously. Albeit it is uncertain whether he mean Christ or
God, when he says, yt they which work righteousness are begotten of him.
Indeed it is an usual kind of speaking in the Scriptures, that we are
begotten of God in Christ, but this other also, there is an absurdity, that
they are begotten of Christ who are renewed by his spirit.

Chap. 3.
1 BEhold what love the Father has given us, that we should be called the
sons of God. Therefore the world knows us not, because it knows not him.

2 Beloved, now we are the sons of God, and yet it has not appeared what
we shall be: But we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like
unto him, because we shall see him even as he is.

3 And every one that has this love in him, puryfieth himself, even as he
is pure.


1 THE second Argument is from the dignity and excellency of our calling. Our
heavenly Father says he has vouchsafed to dignifie us with no small honor,
seeing he has adopted us to be his sons. This so great favor ought to
kindle in us the study of godliness, that we may be like unto him: and it
can no other way be done, except he which confesses himself to be one of
the sons of GOD, do purify himself. And the more vehement the exhortation
is, the more is set forth unto us the grace of almighty God. For whereas he
says that love is given us, he shows that this comes of mere
liberality, that God accepts us for his children. For whence become we of
such account, but by the love of God? Furthermore, his free love is here
manifestlye spoken of. It is indeed an improper kind of speech, but the
Apostle had rather speak vnproperlye, then not to express that which was of
necessity to be known. Briefelye, he signifies that the more plentiful
the love of GOD is showed upon us, the more we are bound unto him, as Paul
to the Romans the 12.1. beseeches the Romans by the mercies of God, that
they would offer themselves unto him an holy Sacrifice. In the mean time we
are taught, that as I said the adoption of all the godly is free, and
depends not upon any respect of works. For that which the School men say,
that they are adopted whom god did foresee to be worthy, is plainly made of
none effect by these words. For by this means the gift of God should not have
been free: This chief point of doctrine is principally needful to hold. For
seeing that the only cause of our salvation is adoption, and that the Apostle
witnesses that the same does issue from the mere and alone love of God, there
is nothing remains to our own worthiness or the desert of works. For why
are we sons? Verily because God has begun to love us freely, when we were
more worthy of hatred then of love. And seeing that the spirit is the pledge
of our adoption: hence it follows, that if there be any good thing in us, it
must not be so set against the grace of God, that rather it must be ascribed
unto it, as received from it. The Name whereof he speaks cannot be a vain
title. For it is God who pronounces us with his own mouth to be his sons:
as he gave a name to Abraham, according to the thing it self.

Therefore the world. This temptation does vehemently assail our faith, that
we should not so be accounted for the children of God, or have any note of
such excellency seen in us, yt rather the whole world almost does hold us for
a mocking stock. Therefore by the present condition it can hardly be gathered
that God is our Father: for the devil inuenteth all ways to darken his
blessing. He gives a remedy to this offense when he says, That it is not
yet known What manner of men we are, because the world knows not God:
therefore it is no marvel, if it contempne his children. Of which thing there
was a notable pattern in Isaac and Jacob. For when each of them was elected of
God, the one Ismael scoffed and iested at Genesis 21.9. and 27.41. the other Esau
persecuted wc threatenings and with sword. Therefore howsoever we seem to be
oppressed in ye world, our salvation remains nevertheless found and in good
state.

2 We are now the sons of God. Now he descends to every ones proper
feeling. For albeit the wicked do not entice us to cast away our hope, yet our
present estate is far from ye glory of ye children of God. For in respect of ye
body we are dust, and a thing of nothing: death is ever before our eyes, and we
are in danger of many miseries, and the soul is subject to infinite evils: so
yt we always find hell in our selves. How much more need is there yt al our
senses be drawn from ye beholding of things present, least the miseries
wherewith we are compassed, does drive us out of the hope of ye happiness that
yet appears not. For this is the Apostles counsel, that we shall do
foolishlye, if we measure what God has given unto us, by our present
condition, but that we must hold fast by an assured faith, yt which yet
appears not.

And we know that when we shall be made manifest. This condition must be
changed into an Aduerb of time where, or when. Further this word shall
appear, is taken otherwise then before. The Apostle said a little before, yt
it appears not yet what we shall be, since the fruit of our adoption is hid:
because our felicity is in heaven, and we are strangers far from thence in
the earth, and because this frail life that is subject to an hundredth deaths,
is far unlike to that eternal glory which belongs to the children of God:
because being shut up after a slauishe manner in the prison of flesh, we are
far distaunt from the free dominion of heaven and earth. But now he
refers this note to Christ, When he shall appear. For he teaches the
same thing that Paul does unto the Collos. chapter. 3. verse. 3. where he
says, Your life is hid with Christ: but when Christ which is your life shall
appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory. And indeed our faith
can no other way remain stedie, then while it looks unto ye coming of
Christ. For this is the cause why God does defer the manifestation of our
glory: because Christ is not yet made manifest in the power of his kingdom.
This I say, is ye only prop of our faith, that we may patiently wait for the
life that is promised us. So soon as any one does turn aside but a little
from Christ, it cannot be chosen but he shall faint.

By the word Know, he notes out the certainty of Faith, that he may
discern it from opinion. Neither is here noted a simple and universal
knowledge, but that which every one ought to apply to himself, that he may
know of a truth, that he shall once be made like unto Christ. Therefore
howsoever the giving forth of our glory is deferred to the coming of Christ,
yet the knowledge of it is most excellently assured.

Like. He does not mean that we shall be equal, but there must needs be
some difference between the head and the members: but we shall be like him,
because he shall make our vile body like to his glorious body, as Paul
teaches. Phil. 3.21. For the Apostle goes about to show yt this is the last
end of our adoption, that yt which by order went before in Christ, be at the
last fulfilled in us. Yet the reason that is added, seems to be weak. For
if the beholding of Christ shall make us like unto Christ, the wicked shall
have the same glory with us, who also shall see him. I answer, that this is
a familiar kind of beholding, which the wicked cannot bear, but be sore
amazed: yea over and besides that they shall horribly fear, and fly from the
sight of God: his glory shall blind their eyes even so that they shall be
amazed with confusion. For we see how Adam knowing his own evil, fled from
the presence of God Genesis 3.6. And God does pronounce that generally upon all
men by Moses, No man shall see me and live, Exodus 33.20. Because it cannot
otherwise be, but that the majesty of God as a consuming fire, do consume us
as stubble: such is the weakness of our flesh. And as the Image of God is
renewed in us, we have eyes prepared to the seeing of God. And now indeed God
begins to restore his image in us: but in how small a measure? Therefore
except we be disburdened of all the corruption of our flesh, we cannot see God
face to face. Which also is expressed in this note, Such as he is.

Neither does he now take from us all sight of God in this life: but so as
Paul says, 1. Cor. 13.12. Now we see as in a glass by a dark speaking. And
this kind of seeing with an eye beholdinge, he discerns else where. In
sum, God sets forth himself now to be seen of us, not such as he is,
but such as our small capacity can comprehend him. So is fulfilled that which
is set down in Moses, that we see him only as it were on the backpart. Exo.
33.23. Because in his face there is an ouer-passing brightness. It is further
to be noted that this reason which the apostle brings, is taken from the
effect and not from the cause. For he does not teach, that we shall be like
him therefore, because we shall inioye the sight of him: but he proves that
we shall therefore be pertakers of the divine glory, because except our
nature were endued with a spiritual, heavenly and an happy immortality, it
could never come so near unto God. And yet there shall not be such a perfection
of glory in us, that our sight shall comprehend God wholly. For there shall be
even then between him and us, a great distance of proportion. But when the
Apostle says, we shall see him as he is, he notes out a new and unspeakable
kind of seeing, whereof we are now ignorant. For so long as we walk by faith,
Paul teaches, that we are strangers from him. 2. Cor. 5.6. And so often as
he yielded himself to be seen of the fathers, he was not seen in his being,
but under certain marks. There then shall the majesty of God which now is
secret, be seen at the last in it self, when the veil of this mortal and
corruptible nature shall be taken away. I pass by other subtle reasonings.
For we see how Augustine does vex himself in them, and yet we see he does
not rid himself thereof, both in his Epistels to Paulina, and Fortunatus,
and also in his book of ye City of God. 22. and in other places. Yet yt which
he says there is worth noting, That in this inquisition the mean of seeing is
more excellent then of speaking: and that there must be heed taken, least
while by contending we seek how God can be seen, we leese the peace and
holiness, without which no man shall see him.

3 Every one which has this hope. Now he concludes that therefore the
indeauor of holiness ought not to wax cold in us, because our felicity
does not yet appear, for that hope suffices. Further we know that those
things are hoped for, which are hid. The meaning therefore is: Howsoever we
have not Christ yet present before our eyes, if yet we trust in him, that it
cannot be, but this hope will stir us up, and prick us forward to follow after
holiness: because being right it guides us to Christ, whom we know to be the
perfect example of holiness.

4 Whosoever does commit sin, does also commit iniquity, and sin is
iniquity.

5 Further ye know that he was made manifest, that he might take away our
sins, and in him there is no sin.

6 Whosoever abides in him, sins not: whosoever sins, has not seen him.


4 THe Apostle has before already showed how unkind we are toward God if
we lightly esteem the honor of our adoption, whereby he preuenteth us of his
own good will: and do not at the least render unto him love again. He has
together put in between that admonition, that our affection must not be made
less, because the happy estate promised is deferred. And now because men use
to flatter themselves in evils more then is meet, he corrects this wicked
cockering, pronouncing that they are wicked, and breakers of the law,
whosoever do sin: For it is very credible, that there were then such, as by
these flatterings did extenuate their sins, and make them seem less then
they were: It is no marvel if we sin, because we are men: but there is great
odds between sin and the breaking of the law. The Apostle drives from them
this vain excuse, when he defines sin to be ye transgression of the law.
For his purpose is, to set before them, the hatred and horror of sin.

The name it self of sin seems to some to be but a light thing: but
iniquity or tra^sgression of the law, cannot so easily be forgiven. But the
Apostle does not make sins equal, when he condemns all sinners of
iniquity, but he labors simplye to teach, that sin arises of the
contempt of God, and that by sinning the righteousness of the law is broken.
Wherefore this doctrine of John has none agreement with that doting Paradox
of ye Stoikes, Furthermore to sin, in this place does not signify to offend
in some work, nor is ye name of sin taken for every offense: but he calls ye
sin, when men run headlong into evil with ye whole affection of the heart. And
he does not mean ye others sin, except they which are addicted to sin. Neither
are ye faithful, who are still entangled with the affections of the flesh,
taken for wicked, albeit they are not clean and pure from sin: but because sin
does not reign in the^, John says that they sin not: as I will anon
express more at large. The sum of this sentence is, That their wicked life
who give themselves leave to sin, is abominable to god, and cannot be
endured of him, seeing it is contrary to his law. Hence it does not follow nor
can it be gathered, that the faithful are wicked: because they desire to be
subject to God, and they mislike with themselves because of their sins, and
that for every offense. And again, as much as in them lies, they frame their
lives to the obedience of the law. But where the desire or usual course of
sinning is with deliberatio^, there is ye tra^sgressio^ of ye law.

5 Further you know that he has appeared. He shows by another argument how
much sin and faith do differ. For it is Christ's office to take away sin,
and to this end he was sent of his father: and by faith we are made pertakers
of the righteousness of Christ. Therefore whosoever believes in Christ, it is
of necessity, that he be purged from sins. But whereas our Savior Christ is
said in another place to take away sins, because by his death he has
purged them, least they should be laid to our charge before God: John. 1.29. In
this place John means that truly and in very deed, as they say, Christ takes
away sins, because by him our old man is crucified. Romans 6.6. And his spirit
does mortify our flesh, with the corrupt affections thereof, by repentance.
Neither does the course of the text suffer to expound it of remission. For so,
as I have said he reasons, that they which cease not to sin, do make
frustrate the benefit of Christ: seeing he came that he might destroy the
kingdom of sin. And that is referred to sanctification of the spirit.

There is no sin in him. He speaks not here of Christ's person, but of his
whole body. Whether so ever Christ has shed out his power, he denies that
there is any more place for sin. Therefore he straight gathers that they
sin not which abide in Christ. For if by faith he dwell in us, he perfourmeth
that his work, that he may purge us from sin. Whereupon it appears what it
is to sin. For Christ does not renew us perfectly in one day or moment with
his spirit, but he continues the renewing that is begun in part all the life
long. It cannot therefore be but the faithful should be subject to sin, so
long as they live in the world. But forasmuch as Christ's kingdom does
flourish in them, sin is abolished. In the mean time, they are accounted off,
according to the principal part, that is, that they are called just, and said
to live justly, because with a sincere affection of the heart they labor after
righteousness. They are said not to sin: because albeit they fall by the
infirmity of the flesh, yet they do not consent unto sin: but rather strive
with grief of heart, that they may truly say with Paul, they do the evil
which they would not. Romans 7.19. The faithful he says do abide in Christ,
because by faith we are grafted into him, and are made one with him.

6 Whosoever sins has not seen him. He has according to his wont,
annexed the contrary part, that we may know that the faith and knowledge
of Christ, is falsely pretended, without newnes of life. For Christ is no where
idle where he reigns: but shows forth the power of his spirit. And it is
said already that it is his office to put sin to slight, no otherwise then
the Sun drives away ye clouds with his brightness.

And we are taught again by this place, how liuelye and effectual a thing the
knowledge of Christ is: which indeed does transform us into his Image. So by
Affection and Knowledge, there is no other thing meant then faith.

7 Little children let no man deceive you: he that does righteousness is
righteous, even as he is righteous.

8 He that commits sin is of the Devil, because the Devil sins from
the beginning. For this purpose was the son of God made manifest, that he
might loose the works of the Devil.

9 Whosoever is borne of God sins not, for his seed remains in him:
neither can he sin because he is borne of God.

10 In this are the children of God known and the children of the Devil.


7 HE that does righteousness. The Apostle teaches in this place, that the
newness of life must be made known by good works: and that the likeness
whereof he had spoken, which is betwixt Christ and his members can not
stand, except it bring forth the fruit. As if he had said, Seeing it
does become us to be like unto Christ, let the truth and witness of this
thing, appear in our life. This exhortation is all one with that of Paul's, in
the 5. to the Galathians vearse. 25. If you live in the Spirit, walk also in
the Spirit. For many would gladly persuade themselves that they have
righteousness hid in their hearts, while their feet, their hands, their
tongues, and eyes, are let loose to iniquity.

8 He that commits sin. Also, this word to Commit, is referred to the
outward deeds, that the meaning may be, that there is no life of God and of
Christ, where men behave themselves leawdly and wickedlye, but rather such are
the bond slaves of the Devil. By which speech, he more fully expresses how
far they disagree from Christ.

For even as first he had set forth Christ the Fountain of all
righteousness: so now also on the contrary, he assigns the Devil, to be
the head of sin. He denies that any man does belong to Christ, but he
that is righteous, and approoueth himself to be such a one by his works: now
he sends all other into the devils fellowship, and casts them under his
dominion: that we may know that Satan does exercise tyranny, where the
righteousness of Christ does not bear the swaye. And yet there are not to be
imagined with the Maniches two beginnings one against another, for we know that
the Devil is evil not by nature and creation, but by the iniquity of his own
falling away.

We know further, that he is not equal with God, that he should contend with
him in a like power: but that he is forced manger his teeth, that he cannot
do any thing, except at the will and assignment of his creator. Finally when
John says, Some are borne of God, and some are of the Devil, he faineth no
propagation as the Maniches did dream: but he means that the first are
governed by the Spirit of Christ: and the others are vyolently carried of
Satan, as God has given him this power against unbelievers.

Because the Devil sins from the beginning. Even as before he spoke not
only of Christ's person, when he said, he was righteous, but did assign him
to be the cause and Fountain of righteousness: so now when he says the
Devil sins, he comprehends his whole body, that is, all reprobates. As
if he had said, this is the devils property, that he force unto sin.

Whereupon it follows, that they are his members and are led of him,
whosoever delight in sin.

Further, this Beginning whereof the Apostle makes mention, is not of
eternity: as when he teaches that the word was from the beginning. For there
is great odds, between God and creatures. The beginning in God is without
time. Wherefore, seeing the word was ever with God, thou shall not find any
instant of time wherein it began to be: but it is of necessity that thou come
to very eternity it self. And here John means nothing else, but yt the
devil was an Apostata, immediatelye after the creation of the world, and from
thence has never ceased to spread abroad his poison amongst men.

For this purpose appeared the Son of God. He repeateth the same thing
again in other words, that he said before, That Christ came to take away
sin. Hence are two things to be gathered: That they can not be accounted for
the members of Christ, nor any way to appertain to his body, in whom sin
does reign. For wheresoever Christ shows his power, he puts the Devil
and sin to flight. Which also John adds immediatelye, for the next
sentence, where he says, That they sin not which are borne of God, is the
conclusion of those things, that went before.

The Argument is drawn from repugnaunces, as I said before: because the
kingdom of Christ, which of necessity brings with it righteousnnesse, can
not stand together with sin. But I have alredie touched before, what Not to
sin does signify here. For he does not make the Children of god utterly
free from all fault, but he denies that they can truly boaste of this title:
except such as from their heart endeavor them selves to frame their life unto
the obedience of God.

Indeed the Pelagians and Puritanes did once abuse this testimony: when they
imagined that ye faithful were endued with an Angelical purity in this
world. And in this time certain of the Anabaptists have renewed that dotage.

But whosoever dream of such a perfection, do sufficiently show what a
blockish conscience they have. And these words of the Apostle are so far off
from strengthening their error, that they suffice to refute them. He says,
They sin not, which are borne of God. Now rests to be seen, whether God
do regenerate us in one moment. But it is manifest that regeneration is so
begun in us, as the remnaunts of the old man remain even unto death. But if
regeneration be not full and perfect, it does free us from the bondage of
sin, but according to the measure thereof. Hence appears that it can not be
possible, but the Children of GOD are burdened with offenses, and do daily
sin, inasmuch as they have yet some remaynder of the old nature.

And yet this remains sure that the Apostle says, That this is the end of
regeneration, that sin may be done away: and that they therefore live iustlye
and godly, whosoever are borne of GOD: because the Spirit of GOD does
correct the desire of sinning.

And that the Apostle means, by the Seed of GOD. For so the Spirit of God
frames the hearts of the godly unto right affection, that the flesh with his
lusts preuayleth not, but is kept under, as being tamed under a yoke. In
conclusion, the chief effects in the elect, the Apostle ascribes to the
spirit of God, who by his power represseth sin, and does not suffer it to
flourish.

Neither can he sin. Here now the Apostle ascends higher. For he does
plainly testify, that the hearts of the godly are so effectually governed by
the spirit of God, that they follow his direction with an unchangeable
desire. But this is very far from Popish doctrine. The Sorbonistes indeed
confess, that the will of man cannot desire that which is right, except it be
helped by the spirit of God: but they imagine the motion of the spirit to be
such, as leaves unto us the free choice of good and evil. Hence they draw
merits, because we willingly obey unto the grace of the spirit, which it was
in our power to reject. Finally, they define this to be the only grace of the
spirit, that we be able to will well, if we list. John says far otherwise
in this place: for he does not only teach that we are able not to sin, but
that the motion of the spirit is so effectual, that of necessity it holds
us in a continall obedience of righteousness. Neither is this the only ^lace
of Scripture, which teaches that the ^ill is so framed, that it cannot be but
right. For God testifies, that he gives a new heart ^o his children, and he
promises that he will ^ause them to walk in his precepts. Ezech. ^6.26. Add
moreover, that John does only ^each how effectually God works in man, ^ut he
plainly affirms, that his spirit does continue his grace in us to the very
last breath, that inchaungeable perseverance may be joined with newness of
life. Wherefore let us not with the School men imagine some middle motion,
which is in a man's choice to follow, or to refuse: but let us know that our
hearts are governed of the spirit of God, that they may constantlye cleave to
the way of righteousness. Further, the absurdity which the School men
object, is easily refelled. They say, but falsely, that by this means Will is
taken from man. For will is of nature: but because the corruption of nature
brings forth only evil affections, therefore it is of necessity, that the
spirit of God do reform it, whereby it may incline to goodness. And again,
because men would easily fall from that which is good, it is of necessity,
that ye same spirit continue unto the end, that which he has begun. The
answer concerning desert is easy: for it is not to be held for an absurd
thing, if men deserve nothing: and yet works cease not to be accounted good,
which proceed from the grace of the spirit, because they are voluntary. They
have also reward, because they are freely accounted unto men, as if they were
their own. But here arises a question, whether so soon as any man is
regenerate by the spirit of God, godliness and the fear of God can never be
extinguished in him. For ye Apostles words seem to give this. They that think
otherwise, allege the example of David, who for a time was so overwhelmed
with a brutish sencelesnesse, that there appeared no spark to remain in him.
And moreover in the 51. Psalm. 12. he desires that it may be restored to him
again. Whereupon it follows, yt he was deprived of it. Yet I doubt not, but
that seed wherewith God does regenerate his elect, as it is incorruptible, so
it keeps the continual force. I grant it may be, that sometimes it be (as
it were) strangled, as it was in David. But yet at what time al godliness seemed
to be utterly put out in him, ye quick cole lay hid under the ashes. Satan
indeed goes about to pluck up whatsoever is of God in ye elect: but when ^e is
most of all let loose: ye secret root remai^eth, which afterward springs
forth at the ^^st. But John speaks here, not of one actio^ ^s they call it:
but of the continual course of ye ^fe. Certain frantike fellows dream of I
now not what eternal seed in ye elect, which ^^y always bring from their
mothers womb. But to this purpose they do more then vnfit^ wrest John his
words: For he disputes not ^f eternal election, but begins at regenera^^on.
There are also others twice mad, who under this pretense will have every thing
law^ul to the^ yt believe, because John says they ca^ ^ot sin. They will
therefore yt we follow without ^ifference, whatsoever our affection shall crave ^s:
so they give license to commit whoredom, ^o steal, and to kill, because there
can be no sin ^her ye spirit of God reigns. But ye Apostle means far
another thing. For the Apostle ^enieth that the faithful can sin, because God
^ath written his law in their hearts, as it ^s in the Prophet Iere. 31.31.

By this are known. In few words he con^ludeth, yt they do in vain challenge
to them^elues a name amongst ye children of God, which ^o not approve
themselves to be such by a godly (...) holy life: forasmuch as by this mark
they ^iffer from the children of the Devil.

Further, he does not so mean, that they (...) made manifest, that they may be
openly known to all the world: but this only he means, that the fruit and
effect of the divine adoption does always show forth in the life.

He that does not righteousness is not (...) God, nor he that loves not his
brother.

11 Because this is the preaching which you have heard from the beginning, that
we lo^^ one another.

12 Not of Caine which was of that wicked one, and slew his brother, and
wherefore slew^^ he him? Because his own works were evil, and his brothers
good.

13 Marvel not my brethren, if the worl^ hate you.


HE that does not righteousness. To do righteousness, and to commit sin, are
here set one against another. Therefore to do righteousness, is nothing else
then from the heart to fear God, and to walk in his precepts, as far as
man's frailty will bear. For albeit yt righteousness if it be taken precisely,
is no other thing then the full observing of the law, from which the faithful
are always far of: yet because God does not lay their ^^fences and faults
to their charge, this percel ^f obedience which they perform unto God, ^s
called righteousness. And John shows plainly that they are not of God,
whosoever ^ine not righteously: because whosoever God ^alleth, he does renew
the^ by his spirit. Therefore the newness of life is a perpetual witness of
Gods free election.

And which loves not his brother. He applies a general doctrine to his
purpose. For hitherto he has exhorted the faithful to brotherly love: Now by
the same he shows the sum of true righteousness, wherefore this part is
added in steed of an exposition. But I have said before after what sort whole
righteousness is comprehended under brotherlye love. The love of God indeed
has the first place, but because of that depends brotherly love amongst men,
oftentimes by a Sinadoch that is contained under this: and this again under
that. Therefore as every one is given to humanity and well doing, so he says
that he is just, and so accounted, because love is the fulfilling of ye law. He
confirms this sentence when he says, that the faithful have been so taught
from ye beginning: for by these words he shows, that this definition which he
gives, ought not to seem strange unto them.

12 Not as Caine. Another confirmati^^ is taken of ye contrary: because hatred
rai^^neth in the reprobate and children of the d^uell, and holds as it were
the chiefetie (...) their life: of which thing he sets dow^^ Caine as an
example. In the mean time (...) makes to their comfort, as he concludes at
(...) last: Marvel not if the world hate you. This exposition is to be
diligently noted: for in the manner of life men are always deceived: because
they place holiness in figured works, and while they torment themselves with
trifles, they think they are twice acceptable to God. Even as Monks do
proudly, term their kind of life, the state of perfection. And in Popery
there is not thought any other worship of God, then yt filth of superstitions.
But the Apostle does especially show that we are approved of God, if we love
o^e^ ^^other. Again, that the devil reigns, where hatred, grudge, envy,
and displeasures does reign. Yet it is together to be kept in memory that I
touched of late, that brotherly love, because it arises of the love of GOD as
the effect of the cause, is not separated from it, but rather is commended of
John for this cause, for that it is an approouing of our holiness before GOD.
When he says that Caine was by this cause enforced to the slaying of his
Brother, because his own works were evil. He means that which I have noted
already, that where wickedness bears the swaie, hatred possesses all the
parts of life. He makes mention of the just works of Abel, that we may
learn to bear it patiently, if the world provoked with no injury, do hate us
without cause.

14 We know, that we are translated from death to life, because we love the
brethren. He that loves not his brother abides in death.

15 Every one that hates his brother, is a manslayer: and you know that no
manslayer has eternal life abiding in him.

16 By this have we known love, because he laid down his life for us: and
we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.

17 If any man have this worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and
shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him.

18 My little children, let us not love in word and tongue, but in deed and
truth.


14 HE commends love unto us by an excellent speech: because it is a
testimony of our being delivered from death to life. Whereupon it follows,
that if we love our brethren, we are happy, and if we hate them, we are
miserable. There is no man that does not desire to escape and to be delivered
from death, therefore they must need be more then blind, who by fostering of
hatred do willingly pamper their own death. Further, when the apostle says,
that by love it is known that we have passed into life, he means not that
man is his own deliverer, as if by loving the brethren he delivered himself
from death, and obtained life for himself. For he does not dispute here of
ye cause of salvation: but seeing love is the principal fruit of the spirit,
it is also a certain note of regeneration.

Therefore the Apostle reasons from ye sign and not from the cause. For
because no man does truly love the brethren, except he which is regenerate by
the spirit. Hence it is rightly gathered, that the spirit of God which is
life, does dwell in them that love the brethren. But one should thereupon
preposterously infer that life is attained unto by love, seeing love by order
is ye later. This Argument should have more color, if love make us more
assured of our life: that then the assurance of salvation does consist in act.
But the answer thereof is also easy. For albeit that faith is confirmed by all
ye graces of god, as by helps, yet it cease not to have his foundation in the
only free mercy of God. For example, when we enjoy the light, we are sure
that the Sun shines: if the Sun give his beams into the place wherein we
are, we have a certain more clear sight: but yet albeit ye visible beams do
not pearce through unto us, in this same we are satisfied that the Sun yields
out the use of his shining unto us. So after that our faith is established in
Christ, certain things may come to pass, which may help it: yet in the
mean time it rests in the alone grace of Jesus Christ.

15 Is a manslayer. To the end he may stir us the more unto love, he
shows how detestable a thing before God, hatred is. There is no man but he
abhors man slaughter: yea, we al hold the very name to be execrable. And
the apostle shows that they are al manslayers which hate their brethren. He
could not speak any thing more bitterly, and yet this is not hyperbolical.
For who^ we hate, we could afford that he perished. And it is no matter, if
one keep his hands from the evil. For the very desire is condemned before
God as much as is the practice. Yea, also when we our selves do not desire to
do hurt, if yet we desire that some evil may come unto our brother from other
where, even then also we are manslaiers. Therefore ye Apostle does define the
matter, even as it is, where he gives the name of manslaughter to hatred.
Whereby is convinced the foolishness of men, because when they do even loath
the name, they make almost no account of the fault it self. And whence is
that? Even because the outward face of things does occupy all our senses,
before God the inward affection is regarded. Wherefore least any do any
more lessen so exceeding an evil, let us learn to call back our judgments
to the judgment feate of God.

16 By this we know. Now he shows what is true love. For it were not
inoughe to praise it except the power of it were known. And he sets forth
a perfect rule of love, in the example of Christ: because in not sparing his
own life, he made it known how much he loved us. Therefore he bids us
labor to this point. The sum is, that therein is our love commended, if we
transfer the love of our selves unto our brethren: So as every one after a
sort forgetting himself, take care for others. It is indeed most certain
that we are not far unlike unto Christ, but the Apostle does commend unto
us imitation, because albeit we attain not unto him, yet it is good that we
follow his steps a far off. Indeed when the Apostle gives counsel to
hypocrites, that they cast away vain boasting, which brag that they have
the faith of Christ, without brotherlye love, he does show, that except
this desire does prevail in our hearts, we have nothing to do with Christ.
Neither yet as I said does he so set before us the love of Christ, that he
requires an equal love of us. For what should that be else but a driving of
all at once to desperation? But so he will have our affections framed, that we
may desire to bestow both our life and death, first to the glory of God, and
then to the good of our neighbor.

There is another difference betwixt us and Christ, that there cannot be the
same power of our death For neither is the wrath of God pacified by our blood,
nor life attained unto by our death, nor the debt of others is paid. But the
Apostle by this comparison, did not respect what was the end or effect of the
death of Christ, but he only would that our life should be conformed to his
example.

17 If any have this worlds good. Now he preaches of the common offices of
love, which proceed from that chief fountain: that is, when we are prepared
to reach out our selves even unto death for our brethren. Albeit he seems to
reason from the more to ye less. For he that refuses to ease the want of his
brother with his good, while his life is not touched, much less will he
bestow his life. Therefore he denies that there is love in us, if we leave
our brethren destitute of our help. But he accompteth so highly of external
liberality, that together he shows most fitly what is the true way to do
well, and what kind of affection ought to guide the same. Let therefore this be
the first proposition: That no man does truly love the brethren, but he will
show forth ye same in effect, as often as occasion does require. Another, how
much riches any man has, accordingly he is bound to relieve ye brethren,
because ye Lord by this means does minister unto us matter to exercise our
love. The third, yt every ones necessity is to be considered: because as
every one needs meat, drink, or any other thing, whereof we have store, he
does even so crave our duty. The fourth, yt there is no liberality does
please god, except it be joined [Te Sumpatheia] to a compassion, many seem to
be liberal, which yet are not any whit touched with the miseries of their
brethren. But the Apostle bids us to open our bowels: which is done when
we put upon us almost ye same feeling yt we may bewail together ye evils of
others, no other ways, then as our own.

The love of God. Hear the question is of the love of brethren. Therefore why
does he name ye love of God? Verily ye principle must be kept, that it cannot
be but it is the love of God, should beget in us the love of our brethren.
And by this means God takes an experience of our love toward him, while he
commands us to love men for his sake: as it is in the 16. Psalm. My doing
well extends not unto thee: but my will and my desire is unto the Saints
which are in the earth.

18 Let us not love in word. There is a granting in this first part For we
cannot love only with the tongue: but because many do fasly boast of this,
the Apostle gives the name of the thing, to their dissimulation, as uses
often to be done Albeit in the other part he reproves their vanity, when he
denies yt it is ye truth, except it be in deed. For thus the words are to be
resolved: let us not profess with tongue that we love, but let us approve it
by deed: because this is the right condition of love.

19 And by this we know that we are of the truth, and shall persuade our hearts
before him.

20 But if our hearts accuse us, truly God is greater then our hearts, and
knows all things.

21 Beloved, if our hearts accuse us not, we have trust toward God.

22 And if we ask any thing, we receive it of him: because we keep his
commandments, and do those things that are pleasant before him.


19 HE takes the name of Truth here in another sense: but it is an excellent
giving of a name, that if we love our brethren truly, we have hereby a
testimony that we are borne of God, who is the truth, or that the truth of God
has place in us. But let us always remember that we have not that knowledge
which the Apostle speaks of from love, as if from thence were to be fetched
the assurance of salvation. And indeed from no other where do we know that
we are the children of God, but because he seals into our hearts his full
adoption by his spirit, and we by faith embrace the assured pledge thereof
offered in Christ. Love therefore is an increase or inferior help, to the
strengthening of faith: and not the foundation whereon it stands. Why then
says the Apostle, We shall persuade our hearts before God? Verily he shows
by these words, that faith stands not without a good conscience. Not that our
assurance arise from thence, or depends thereon: but because the^ we are
persuaded truly of our coniunctio^ with god, when ye efficacy of ye holy ghost
does show forth it self in our love. For it shall always be profitable to weigh
what ye apostle handles. For because he condemns in us a fained profession
of faith, he says yt we ca^ have a sound persuasion before God no other way,
then if his spirit do bring forth in us the fruit of love. And albeit yt a good
conscience ca^ never be separate from faith, yet no man shall thence rightly
gather, yt we must look to our works, that our persuasion may be firm.

20 But if our heart condemn us. He^ proves by the contrary, that they have
the name and show of Christians in vain, who have not the testimony of a good
conscience. For if any man be guilty in his own knowledge, and is convinced in
the proper feeling of his own soul, much less shall he escape the judgment
of God. It follows therefore that faith is subverted with the disquiet of an
evil conscience. He calls, God greater then our heart, in respect of
judgment, that is, because he sees much more cleerelye then we, and searches
more sharp, and judges more straightly. In which sense Paul says, that
albeit he knew nothing by himself, yet he was not thereby justified. 1. Cor.
4.4. For he acknowledges, that albeit he be carefully given unto his duty,
yet that he offends in many things, and that he does forgive himself by
unadvisedness, those sins which God does see. This therefore is the mind
of the Apostle, that it cannot be that he should escape the judgment of God,
whom his own conscience does accuse and convince. To the same end belongs
that he by and by adioyneth, that God sees all things. For how should those
things be secret, which we are driven to see, who in respect of him are
blockish and blind? So therefore expound it, God in that he sees all things,
is much greater then our heart. For to take the word yt coupleth together in
steed of a particular causall is not strange. Now the sense is plain, that is,
that seeing the knowledge of God pearceth further then ye sense of our own
conscience, that no man can stand before him, except he whom uprightness of
conscience sustaineth. But here is objected a question: It is certain that
the reprobate are sometime drowned of Satan in such a Lake of feeling, that
they feel not their evils at all, and without all grief or fear, as Paul
says, they run securely into their destruction. Ephesians. 4.19. And it is
certain also that hypocrites are wont to flatter themselves, and proudly to
contemn the judgment of God, because that being dronke^ with a false opinion
of righteousness, they are not touched with their sins. The answer is easy,
That hypocrites are deceived because they shun the light: and that the
reprobates feel nothing, because they go away from God. Yea, there is no
security to an evil conscience, but in lurking corners. But here the Apostle
speaks of consciences, which being brought out into light, GOD brings to his
tribunal seat, and exercises with the feeling of his judgment. Albeit yet
this is also generally true: that we never have any sound peace, except that
which the spirit of God does give unto pure hearts those whom we have said
to be astonished, feel yet oftetinmes blind prickings, and are tormented in
their drowsiness.

21 If our heart accuse us not. I have expounded already, that this does
neither belong to hypocrisy, nor to ye gross contempt of God. For howsoever
the ways of reprobates do please themselves, yet the Lord tries the heart
says Solomon, Pro. 21.2. This exquesite ballaunce of GOD causes by his
trial, that none can boast himself that he has a clean heart. Therefore
the Apostles words has this meaning, that then we come only with a quiet
conscience into the sight of God, when being of a sound purpose in our selves,
we bring with us the witness of a right and good heart. That saying of Paul
is indeed true: That we have entrance to GOD with boldness by faith, which
rests upon the grace of GOD. Ephesians. 3.12. Again, that by faith we have
peace, that our consciences may be quiet before God. Romans 5.1. But betwixt
these sentences there is no odds. For Paul shows the cause of boldness:
but John only makes mention of an inseparable accident, which is necessarily
anexed, though it be not the cause. Yet here arises a greater hardness,
because there seems no assurance to be left in the whole world. For who is
there to be found whom his heart cannot accuse in any thing? I answer,
that the godly are so reproved, as they together do ease themselves: for it
is indeed necessary, that they should inwardly be touched effectually with
their sins, that fear may instruct them to humility: but by and by they
fly to the sacrifice of Christ, where they have assured peace. Albeit the
Apostle does say that they are not accused in any other sense, because
howsoever they acknowledge themselves to fail in many things, yet they are
relieved with this testimony of conscience, because they do truly and from
the heart fear God, and desire to submit themselves to his righteousness.
Whosoever are endued with this godly desire, and in the mean time know that
their endeavors, how much so ever they want of perfection, do yet please
GOD: are worthily said to have a quiet and peaceable heart: because there is
no inward pricking, which should disturb their quiet cheerfulness.

22 And if we shall ask any thing. Because assured trust and calling upon God
are things joined together: even as before he had taught that an evil
conscience was contrary to assurance: so now he shows, that god cannot be
called upon, but of them which fear him and worship him a right in a pure
heart. This latter follows of the first. There is another general principle of
Scripture, That the wicked are not heard of God, but rather that there
sacrifices and prayers are abominable. Therefore the way is here shut up
against hipocrites, least they should rush into the presence of God with his
contempt.

In the mean time he does not intend that a good conscience must be brought,
as if it did great acceptance to our prayers. Woe be unto us if we lean unto
works, which have nothing in themselves but matter of trembling. Therefore the
faithful come to the throne of God, no other ways then trusting in the
mediation of Christ.

But because the love of God is ever joined with faith, to the end that ye
Apostle may the more dazzle the hypocrites, he depriueth them of this singular
privilege, which God ^ouchsafeth his children: that is least they should
think to have entrance to God with their prayers. When he says, Because we
keep his commandments, he does not mean that our confidence in praying is
grounded upon our works: but this only he urges, that godliness and the
sincere worship of God cannot be separate from faith. And it ought not to
seem absurd that he uses a causall note, albeit he does not reason of ye
cause: for an inseparable accident uses sometimes to be put for the cause. As
if one should say, because the Sun at noonetide does shine above us, that
there is then more heat, yet it does not follow, that heat arises of the
light.

23 And this is his commandment, that we believe in the name of his son
Jesus Christ: and love one an other as he gave us commandment.

24 He that keeps his commandments abides in him, and he in him. And by
this we know that he abides in us, by the spirit which he has given us.


23 ANd this is his commandment. Again he applies a general sentence to his
purpose. The effect is, that we are at such disagreement with God, that we
are driven from his presence, except we are knit together by brotherly love
among our selves. Albeit he does not here commend love alone, as before: but
he joins it as a companion and handmaide of Faith. The schoolmen deprave
these words with their own devices: as if we obtained freedom to pray, partly
by faith, and partly by works. Where John requires this to the right manner of
praying, that we keep the commandments of God: and after teaches, that this
perfourmaunce stands in faith and Love, they gather that the assurance of
praying. must be gathered of these two. But I have sundry times already showed,
that here is not handled from whence or by what means men get this unto
themselves, that they dare call upon God. For here the question is not of the
cause or dignity, John only shows, that God vouchsafes the honor and
privilege of his conference to none but to his children, and those that
indeed are regenerate by his spirit. Therefore this is the course of speech,
where the reverence and fear of God does not bear the swaie, it cannot be ye
God should hear us. But if our purpose be to obey his precepts, we must
consider what he commands. But he does not separate faith from love: but he
requires each of us as if it were in one fellowship. And this is the reason
why he has put Commandment in the singular number. But this place is very
excellent: because he shows as plainly as briefly, wherein consists the
whole perfection of an holy life. There is no cause why we should allege
hardness, when God does not carry us about by long by walks: but sets down
unto us simple and in one word, what pleases him. Add moreover, yt in this
shortness there is no darkness, because he shows us plainly ye beginning
and end to live well: and because here is only mention of brotherly love,
passing by ye love of God: the reason is (as we have said else where) yt
brotherly love, as it issues from the alone love of God, so is it a certain
and true proof thereof.

In the name of his son. The name has respect to ye preaching: and this
relation is to be noted, because few understand what it is to believe in
Christ. By this speech is easy to gather, yt this only is a true faith which
imbraceth Christ for such a one as he is preached in the Gospel. Whereon also
it comes to pass, that there is no faith without Doctrine: as Paul also
teaches, Romans 10.14. And this also together is to be noted, that ye Apostle
includes faith in the knowledge of Christ. For he is ye lively image of the
father, and in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
Wherefore so soon as ever we decline from him, we can do nothing but
wander in error.

23 He that keeps his commandments. He confirms that which he had said
before. That the fellowshippe which we have with God is manifest by that
means, if we love one another. Not that the fellowshippe begins there, but
because it cannot be idle, and without his effect, whersoeuer it does begin to
have a being. And he proves that by a reason annexed: because God does not
abide in us, except his spirit do dwell in us. But his spirit wheresoever he
is, it is of necessity that he show forth his force and power in working.
Whence it is easy to gather, that no other remain in God and are united unto
him, except such as keep his commandments. When therefore he says: And in this
we know. And, the note of coupling together, for that it is put for the
rendering of a cause, is as much as, for, or because. But ye circumstaunce of
the present cause must be weighed. For albeit this sentence agree in words with
that of Paul Romans 8.15. where he says, that the spirit bears witness in
our hearts, that we are the Children of God, and that by him we cry Abba
Father: yet in the sense there is some difference. For Paul speaks of the
assurance of free adoption, which the Spirit of God seals up in our
hearts: and John here has respect to the effects, which the spirit dwelling
in us, does bring forth. As Paul also himself, when he says, that they are
the Children of God, which are led by the Spirit of God. For there also he
disputes of the mortifieng of the flesh and newness of life.

This is the effect, that thereby it is manifest whether we are the Children of
God, if his Spirit do rule and govern our life. In the mean time John
teaches, whatsoever good works is in us, that it comes from the grace of
the Spirit: and that this Spirit is not gotten by our own righteousness, but
is freely given unto us.

Chap. 4.
1 Beloved, believe not every spirit: but try the spirits whether they be of
God or no: because many false Prophets are gone out into the world.

2 In this know ye the spirit of God, every spirit which confesses that
Jesus Christ, is come in the flesh, is of God.

3 And every spirit which confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is not of God: and this is of that Antichrist, of whom ye have heard
that he should come, and even now he is in the world.


HE comes again to the former doctrine which he had handeled in the second
Chapter. For many, as uses to be done in new matters, did abuse the name of
Christ to spredde their errors. Others professed Christ but in half part. In
the mean time, while they had place amongst those of the householde, they had
ye more ability to do harm: Especially Satan himself, took occasion to
disquyet the Church in Christ himself. For he is the stone of offense,
whereat all must needs stumble, which hold not the plain way, as God has
set forth the same unto us.

Further, this whole reason of the Apostle stands on three members. For first
he shows the evil, whence danger came to the faithful, and by this means
he exhorts them to take heed. He sets down the manner of heed taking,
that they judge between spirits. And this is the second member. At the last
he shows one special from whence was their greatest peril. He forbids
therefore to hear them, which deny that the son of God is manifested in the
flesh. Now let us handle every one in order. And albeit this reason follows
in the text, That many false Prophets have gone out into the world, yet it
shall be good to begin there. For this sentence contains a profitable
admonion: because, if even at this time Satan had filled many, which should
spread their falsehoods under the name of Christ: the like example ought not to
discourage us at this day. For this is the perpetual state of the Gospel,
that Satan busily go about to infect and to corrupt the purity thereof by
diverse errors.

This our age has brought forth certain horrible monsters of sects. By
occasion whereof many stand amazed, and not knowing whether to turn them, do
cast away all care of godliness. For they find not any more speedy way to
rid themselves from the danger of error. That is altogether foolish: for in
flying from the light of the truth, they cast themselves willyngly into the
dungeon of errors. Wherefore let this cleave fast in our minds, that there
have been false Prophets immediately since the Gospel has begun to be
published. And let this doctrine also arm us against that offense. The
auncientnesse of errors holds the most as if it were so bound, that they
dare not go out thence. But John shows here, the deadlye danger of ye
Church, That if even then deceivers were mixed with the Apostles, and other
faithful Teachers, what marvel is it, if the doctrine of the Gospel long
ago being oppressed, many corruptions be spread abrod in the world? There is
therefore no cause why antiquity should hinder us, that we should the less
freely discern the truth from falsehood.

1 Believe not every spirit. Many as is said when the Church is vexed with
discords and contentions, being amazed, depart from the Gospel. But the
Spirit prescribes a far other remedy: that is, that the faithful receive
not any doctrine without choice. We must therefore take heed, least being
offended with variety of opinions, we renounce the teachers together with the
word of God. But let this moderation suffice, that all are not to be heard a
like.

The name of ye Spirit, I take to be by a Metonimia for him that boasts,
that he is endued with the gift of the spirit, to undertake the office of a
Prophet. For when it is granted to no private man that he speak in his name,
nor is there credit to be given to them that speak, but so far as they are
the instruments of the holy Ghost: the more authority the Prophets should
have, God adorneth them with this title, as if he should take them out of the
common sort of men.

They therefore were called Spirits, which only giving their tongues to the
Oracles of the holy Ghost, did after a sort bear the person of his ministry:
they set forth nothing of their own devising, nor came they forth in their
own name.

And heeretoo belongs so honorable a title, least any thing might fail of
the reverence of the word of God, for the contempt of the minister. For God
always would have his word received from the mouth of men, no other ways, then
if he himself had plainly appeared from heaven.

Here Satan has crept in as a mean: and when he fained in false teachers to
adulterate ye word of God also gave them a name under which, they might the
better deceive. So the false Prophets used always proudly and with full mouth
to arrogate to themselves whatsoever honor God had bestowed upon his servants.
And the apostle seems to have used this name, least they might deceive us
with their false pretenses, which falslye pretend the name of God: even as we
see at this day very many to be amazed with the bare name of the church, that
they had rather auowe themselves into the eternal destruction of the Pope,
then to take from him any or the least part of authority.

Therefore this granting is to be noted. For the Apostle could have said,
that every one is not to be believed: but because false teachers did so belie
the title of the spirit, he so leaves the same unto them, that together he
shows that it is frivolous and triflyng, except they do indeed perform
what they pretend, and that they are to be accounted as fools, who being
amazed at the very noise of an honorable title, dare not inquire of the matter.

Prove the Spirits. Because all Prophecies be not true, the Apostle says
here that they must be brought to the trial. And he speaks not only to the
whole body of ye church: but also to every faithful man. But it is asked
whence we have such a discretion? They which answer, that the word of God is
a rule whereby every thing must be tried, which men do publicly set forth,
they neither say nothing nor the whole. I grant that doctrines are to be
proved by the word of God: but except the spirit of wisdom be present, it
will little or nothing profitte to have the word of God at hand, whose
interpretation we shall not know. Even as, for example, gold is tried in the
fire, and with the touch stone: but of them that have skill. For unto the
unskillful, neither the touchstone nor ye fire can be profitable. Therefore that
we may be fit judges, it is needful that we be endued with the spirit of
discretion. And because the Apostle should command us this in vain, except
we had power to discern, it is for a certainty to be held that the godly shall
never be destitute of the spirit of wisdom, so far as shall be expedient,
so that they ask it of the Lord. But so then ye spirit shall lead us to a true
discerning, if we submit all our senses to ye word. For it is (as is said) like
unto a touchstone: yea, it ought to be of much more price unto us: because that
only is true doctrine which is taken from thence. But here arises a hard
question: because if every one have right and ability to discern, there can
never any certainty be determined: but rather ye whole state of Religion shall
be uncertain. I answer, that there is a double trial of Doctrine, private
and publyke. Private, whereby every one does establish his own faith, that he
may rest safely in that doctrine, which he knows to have come from God.
Neither shall consciences find other where safe and quiet resting place then
in God.

The publyke trial belongs to the common consent and good of the Church. For
because there is peril least fantastical men should rise up, which might
rashly boast them selves, that they were endued with ye spirit of God: this
remedy is of necessity, that the faithful come together, and seek the mean
of an holy and pure consent.

But seeing that that old Proverb is too ^rue, How many heads, so many wits:
it is certain that this is the singular work of God, that al ouerthwarting
being mastred, he makes us to think all one thing, and to grow into an holy
unity of faith. And whereas under this pretense whatsoever things are at any
time decreed in counsels, ye Papists will have to be taken for true Oracles,
because the Church did once prove them to be of God: that is too childish. For
howsoever that be an ordinary way to seek a consent, to gather a godly and
an holy counsel, where the controversies out of the word of God may be
determined: yet God has never bound us to the decrees of every counsel. Nor
yet so soon as an hundred or more Bishops are come together into one certain
place, it by and by follows that they have rightly called upon God, and asked
at his mouth what was ye truth: yea, there is nothing more apparaunt, then that
they have often gone a side from the sincere word of God. Therefore here also
ought the trial which the Apostle prescribes to be of force, that the spirits
might be tried.

2 In this know ye. He annexeth a special mark, whereby one may better
discern true Prophets from false. Albeit he here only repeateth that we had
before, that is, that Christ as he is the mark whereto true faith nimeth, so he
is the rock at whom all Heretics do stumble. Therefore so long as we
remain in Christ, the matter is safe: but when we go aside from him, faith is
peryshed, and all truth is made void. But, we may remember what this
confession contains. For when the Apostle says, that Christ is come: hence
we gather that he was with the Father before: whereby is showed his eternal
Deity. When he says, That he is come in the flesh: he signifies that in
putting on the flesh, he is made a very man, of the same nature with us, that
he might be our brother, save that he was free from all sin and corruption.

Finally, when he says he is come, we must consider the cause of his
coming: for he is not sent of his Father in vain. Heerevppon depends the
office and power of Christ. Therefore even as the old Heretics have erred
from this faith, partlye denying the divine nature, and partlye the humane
nature of Christ: even so do the Papists at this day, albeit they do
confess Christ to be GOD and man, yet they hold ^ot this confession which the
Apostle requy^eth, because they spoil Christ of his power and authority: for
when they have esta^lished their free will, their merits of ^orkes, their
fained worshippes, satisfac^ions, and the supportations of Saints, ^owe small
a remainder is left to Christ? This therefore means the Apostle, see^ng that
the knowledge of Christ compre^endeth in it self all the Doctrine of
god^ynesse, therefore we must fix and cast our eyes thither, least we be
deceived. And in truth Christ is the end of the law, and the Prophettes.
Neither learn we any other thing by the Gospel, then his power and grace.

2 And this is the Spirit of Antichrist. This the Apostle adds, to the end
that he may make the sleyghtes which seduce us from Christ, to be the more
detestable: For we have said that the Doctrine of the kingdom of Antichrist,
is usual and well known: that the faithful being admonyshed of the
dispearsion of the Church which was to come, might carefully take heed to
themselves.

They did therefore worthelye abhor the name as infamous and unlucky. Now^
the Apostle says, they are members of thi^ kingdom, whosoever withdraw from
Christ* But he says that the spirit of Antichri^^ should come and was now in
the world, in a diverse meaning. For he meant that he was then in the world
already: because the mystery of his wickedness began to work. 2. These.
27. And yet because that the truth of God was not as yet overwhelmed with false
and untrue assertions, superstition had not yet prevailed to ye corruption of
the worship of God, the world had not yet fallen from Christ by a wicked
distrust, the tyranny set against the kingdom of Christ, did not yet
manifestly show it self: therefore he says yt he was to come.

4 Little children ye are of God and have overcome them, because he is greater
that is in you, then he that is in the world.

5 They are of the world: therefore they speak of the world, and the world
hears them.

6 We are of God. He that knows God hears us. He that is not of God hears
us not. In this we know the spirit of truth and ^^e spirit of error.


4 You are of God. He had spoken of one Antichrist: now he makes mention of
more, ^ut the plural number is referred to the false Prophets, which even then
had come abroad, before the head was extant. Further, the purpose of the
Apostle is, to give courage to the faithful, that they might resist the
deceivers strongly and without fear. For much cheerfulness fails, when
there is striving with a doubtful success. Further, it might cause the godly
to fear, because that when ye kingdom of Christ was scarce sprung up, they
saw the enimyes even then ready prepared to ouerwhelme it. Therefore
howsoever they must strive, he yet says, that they have ouercommed: because
they shall have an happy issue. As if he should have said, yt in the midst
of the conflict they are without danger, because they shall prevail. And this
doctrine ought to be carried further. For whatsoever striuings we endure
against the world and the flesh, yet it is joined with a sure victory. Indeed
sharp and hard conflicts remain for us, and one follows after another: but
because we fight in the power of Christ, and are prepared with the armor of
God, in striving and laboring we get the victory. As much as belongs to
the circumstaunce of this place, it is an excellen^ consolation, that with
whatsoever sleyghte^ Satan set upon us, yet we shall stand i^ the truth of
GOD. But the reason that he adds straight way, is to be noted: because he
is greater, yt is stronger which is in us, the^ he that is in the world. For
that is our infirmity, that before we join battle with the enemy, we are
ready to faint. For we are even wrapped in ignorance, and therefore set
forth to all sleyghtes: and Satan is exceeding cunning to deceive. If we
endure for one day, yet a doubtfulnesse creeps upon our minds, what shall
come to pass to morrow: and so we are always doubtful. The Apostle
therefore shows that we are strong, not in our own strength, but in the
power of God. Whereupon he gathers, that we can no more be vanquished, then
god himself, who has armed us to the end of the world with his own power.
And in our spiritual warrefare this cogitation must be settled in our hearts,
that we should utterly be undone, if we should fight in our own strength.
But because that when we do nothing god confounds the enemies, the victory
is most certain.

5 They are of the world. This is no small comfort, that they which dare
encounter with God in us, are only strengthened with worldly helps. Further,
the Apostle understands the world, as Satan is the Prince of it. Together
is added another comfort, when he says, that ye world imbraceth in false
Prophets, that which it does acknowledge for their own. We see how great ye
readiness of man is to vanity. Therefore false doctrines easilye enter by and
by, and spread far and wide. The Apostle denies that there is cause why we
should therefore be troubled: because there is nothing new or unwonted, if
the world which is whole a lier, do willingly hear a lie.

6 We are of GOD. Albeit this agrees unto all the godly: yet properlye it
belongs to the true and faithful ministers of the Gospel. For the Apostle
by the assurance of the Spirit rejoices, that he and his fellows do
sincerely serve GOD, and that they have received of him whatsoever they
deliver. It may also be that the false Apostles may boast themselves of the
same, (as it is their manner under a masking visour, as it were of GOD, to
deceive:) but faithful teachers differ much from them which speak nothing of
themselves in words, that they do not perform in deed. Yet we must always
remember what cause he handles here. There was a small number of the godly:
and unbelief almost possessed all things: few did truly clean to the
Gospel: ye greater part was prone to error. Hence came the occasion of
offense: which that John might meet withal, he bids us be contented with the
fewness of the faithful: because all the children of God do give honor to
him, and submit themselves to his doctrine. For the contrary member he
opposes immediatlye after, that They which are not of God, hear not the pure
doctrine of the gospel. By which words he signifies, that that great
multitude, to whom the Gospel tastes not, do not therefore hear the
approved and lawful servant of God, because it is a stranger to God himself:
and that therefore nothing is diminished from the authority of the Gospel,
while it is rejected of many. But to this doctrine is anexed a profitable
admonition, that by the obedience of faith we prove our selves to be of God:
There is nothing more easy, then to boast that we are of God: and therefore
there is nothing amongst men more common. As the Papists at this day do
proudly boast that they are the worshippers of God: and in the mean time they
do no less proudly cast aside the word of God. For albeit they counterfeit
that they believe the word of God: yet when it comes to the point, they have
their ears shut. But this is the only testimony of the fear of God, to
reverence his word. And ye excuse which many use to pretend has here no
place. That they therefore fly from the doctrine of the gospel, when it is
set forth unto them, because they are not able to judge. For it cannot be but
ye he know God in his word, whosoever fears him, and obeys him from his
heart. If any object, that many of the elect do not by and by come to the
faith, yea, that they do very frowardlye kick against it at the first. I
answer, that at that time they are not in our judgment, to be taken for GODS
children. But, this is a mark of one that is a reprobate, when he does
obstinatly reject the truth. It is also to be noted by the way, that that
Hearing, whereof the Apostle makes mention, is understood of the inward and
earnest hearing of the heart, which stands in faith.

In this we know. The Relative In this, contains the two members before, as
it he should say, that thereby truth is known from falsehoode, because some
speak from God, some of the world. And whereas by the Spirit of truth and
error, some think that the hearers are noted: as if he should say, that
they which give themselves to be seduced of the deceivers, are borne to
error, and have in them the seed of lying: and that they which consent unto
the word of GOD, are showed by this testimony to be true: I do not allow of
it. For when the Apostle here takes a Metonimia of the Spirit, for the
teachers and Prophettes, I take it that he means nothing else, then that the
trial of the Doctrine is to be reduced to these two, whether it be of God,
or of the world. Yet in so speaking he seems to say nothing. For it will be
easy for every one to except, that he speaks not but from God. So at this
day, the Papists boast with an imperial pride, that all their deuyses are
the Oracles of the Spirit. Nor so much as Mahomet but he gives out that he
received his dotages from no other where, but from Heaven. And also the
Egyptians forged, that those stinking dotages wherewith they besotted
themselves and others, were revealed unto them from Heaven. But I answer, that
we have the word of God, which before all things we must ask counsel at.
Therefore when deceiuable Spirits pretend the name of God, it is good to
search by the Scriptures, whether the matter be so or not. So that we add a
godly endeavor with humility and modesty: the Spirit of discreation will be
present, which may expound himself speaking in the Scriptures, as a faithful
interpreter.

7 Beloved, let us love one another, because love is of God: and every one
that loves is borne of God, and knows God.

8 He that loves not knows not God, because God is love.

9 In this appeared the love of God to us ward, because he sent his only
begotten son into the world, that we might live by him.

10 In this is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his
son a redemption for our sins.


7 HE comes again to ye exhortation, which he handles almost in all this
Epistle. We said it was mixed with the doctrine of faith and exhortation to love.
He so continues in two heads, that from one he goes immediatlye to the
other. When he commends mutual love, he does not mean that we have done
al our duty if we love our friends again, because they love us? But because
he speaks in common to the faithful, he might not speak other ways, then
that they might love one another. He confirms this sentence by a reason
aleadged sometimes already: that is, because no man shall approve himself to
be the child of GOD, except he which loves his brethren: and because the
true knowledge of God works in us of necessity the love of God. He opposes
also after his manner the contrary member, That there is no knowledge of God
where love is not in his strength. And he takes a general principle, because
God is love: that is, because his nature is to love men. I know that many do
subtillye play the Philosophers: and especially that the old writers have
abused this place, that they might prove the Godhead of the Spirit. But the
simple meaning of the Apostle is: Because God is the fountain of love, that
this affection flows and is powered out from him, wheresoever his knowledge
comes.

Like as before he called him light, because there is nothing dark in him,
but rather he lyghteneth all with his brightness. He speaks not therefore
here of the being of GOD: but only shows what a one he is to be
perceived of us. But, there are two things to be noted in these words of the
Apostle, that this is the true knowledge of GOD, which does regenerate us and
frame us a new, that we may become new creatures: then that it cannot be,
but that it make us conformable to GOD. Let go therefore that foolish
invention of faith unformed: because if any man separate faith from love, he
does even as if one should go about to take heat from the Sun.

9 In this has appeared. By many other witnesses also we have the love of
GOD toward us approved. For if it should be asked why the world was
created, why we are placed in it to hold the Lordshippe of the Earth, why we
are preserved in this life, that we may inioye infinite and innumerable
blessings, why we are created to the hope of a better life, why we are
endued with light and understanding? there can be showed no other cause of
all these, then the free love of GOD toward us. But the Apostle chooses the
principal witness in this place, and that which far excels all others.
For this love of God was not only infinite, that he spared not his own son,
that by his death he might restore us to life: but the goodness is more then
marvelous, which ought to ravish our minds with admiration. Christ therefore
is such an excellent and singular agreement of the love of God toward us, that
so often as we behold him, he does plainelye confirm this doctrine unto us,
that God is love. That he calls him Only begotten, it serves to
amplification. For in that he shows more clearly, how entirely he loved us,
in that he gave his only son to death for our sake. In the mean time he
that is one son by nature, makes many by adoption and grace: Even whom so
ever he grafteth into his body by faith. He shows the end why Christ was
sent of his Father, that we might live in him. For without him we are all
dead. But at his coming, he brought life unto us. And except our own unbelief
do hinder, we feel this effect of his grace in our selves.

10 In this is love. He sets forth the love of God more largely by another
reason: that is, because he gave his son for us, what time we were enimyes:
as Paul also teaches, Romans 5.6. But he uses other words, that GOD being
provoked by no love of men, has loved them freelye of his own accord. By
which words he meant to teach, that the love of God toward us was without
deserving Albeit the meaning of the Apostle is to set God before us to follow:
yet the doctrine of faith is not to be neglected, which he joins together.
God has loved us freely, why? because we were sinners or ever we were borne:
then because in this corruption of our nature we have an heart that is turned
from him, and is not inclinable to right and holy affections. If the subtlety
of the Papists should have place, that every one is elected of GOD so far
as he foreseeth him worthy of love: this Doctrine should not stand, That he
loved us first. For then our love toward GOD should have the first place by
order, although that it should be the last in time. But the Apostle does
take a granted Rule of the holy Scripture, which these profane Sophisters
do not know, that we are borne so wicked and corrupted, that then is as it
were bred in us an hatred of god, that we desire nothing but that which does
displease him, that every affection of our flesh does hold continual war
with his righteousness.

And he sent his son. Therefore Christ with all his benefits is proceeded
unto us, from the alone goodness of God, as from a fountain. And as it is
needful for us to know this, that therefore we have salvation in Christ,
because our heavenly Father has loved us of his own accord: so when we are to
seek the sound and full assurance of the love of God toward us, it is
convenient that we look no where but upon Christ.

Wherefore they dote to their own destruction, whosoever passing by Christ,
do seek what is determined of them in the secret counsel of God. Further,
he shows again the cause of the coming of Christ, and his office, when he
shows that he was sent therefore, that he might be a propitiation for our
sins. And indeed we are first taught by these words, that we were all
strangers from God by sin, and that this separation remains, until Christ
come in betwixt, who may reconcile us. Secondly, we are taught, that this is
the beginning of our life, that God being pacified by the death of his son,
receives us to favor. For in that that ^he is called A reconciler, this
properly belongs to the sacrifice of his death. We perceive then, that this
belongs only to Christ, that he put away the sins of the world, and so
take away the hatred that was betwixt us and God. But here may arise some show
of contrariety. For if God did love us before that Christ did offer himself
to death for us, what need was there of a new reconciliation? So the death of
Christ might seem superfluous. I answer, when Christ is said to reconcile
his Father to us, that this is referred to our capacity. For as we are guyltie
of evil in our selves, we cannot conceive God but to be angry and deadlye
displeased, until Christ abolish sin by his death, until he deliver us with
the price of his blood from death. Again the love of God requires
righteousness. Therefore, that we may be assured that we are beloved, it is of
necessity that we come to Christ, in whom only we find righteousness. Now
we see the variety of speaking, which is usual in Scripture, according to
diverse respects, that it is apt and most fitly profitable to faith.

God did therefore put his son betwixt, to reconcile himself unto us, because
he loved us: but that love was hid, because in the mean time we were enemies
to God, daily provoking his indignation. Then the fear and terror of an evil
conscience, did take from us all taste of life. Therefore inasmuch as
pertains to the feeling of our faith, God begins to love us in Christ. And
albeit the Apostle do here entreat of the first reconciliation, yet let us
know, that this is the perpetual benefit of Christ, that by putting away our
sins, he might make God at one with us. And this the Papists also in some
part do grant: but afterward they lessen this grace, and almost bring it to
nothing, in bringing in feigned satisfactions. But if men redeem themselves
with the price of works, then Christ shall not be an only reconcilement, as he
is called here.

11 Beloved, if God have so loved us, we ought also to love one another.

12 No man has seen God at any time. If we love one another, God dwells in
us: and his love is perfect in us.

13 In this we know that we abide in him, and he in us: because he has given
us of his spirit.

14 And we have seen and do bear witness, that the father has sent his
son the savior of the world.

15 He that confesses that Jesus is the son of God, in him dwells God, and
he in God.

16 And we have known and believed the love that God has in us.


11 NOw the Apostle applies to his purpose, that which he lately spoke of the
free love of God: that is, that by the example of God he might exhort us to
brotherly love As also Paul sets Christ forth unto us who offered himself
unto his father a sacrifice of a sweet smell, that every one of us might
bestow our selves to our bretherens good Ephe 5.2. And John does admonish us,
that our love must not be for reward, when he bids us love our brethren,
as God loved us. For that must be repeated, That we were loved freelye. And
in deed when we respect our own private commodite, or render to our friends
and acquaintance like for like, it is certainly self love, and cannot be
accounted for true charity, that of the Apostle is here required.

12 No man has seen God. The sam^ words are had in the first chapter of the
gospel ver. 18. But John Baptist respects no^ the same end altogether in
that place: for he only shows, that God cannot otherwise be known, then he
has manifested himself in Christ. The same doctrine the apostle does here
extend further, that we comprehend the power of God by faith and love, that we
may know that we are his children and that he dwells in us. Yet he first
speaks of love, when he says, That God dweleth in us, if we love one
another: because it is perfect, that is, his love truly approved in us: as if
he should say, that God does show himself to be present, when by his spirit
he frames our hearts to the love of our brethren. In ye same sense he
repeateth that, which he had said once already That we know by the spirit
which he has given us, that h^ dwells in us. For it is a confirmation of the
next sentence: because love is an effect of the spirit. Therefore this is the
effect, seeing love is of the spirit of God, we cannot truly and with a
sincere heart love our Brethren, but the spirit shows forth his power. By
this means he is testified to dwell in us. Further God dwells in us by his
spirit.

Therefore by love we shall prove that we ^aue God dwelling in us. Again,
whosoe^er boasts that he has God and does not ^oue the brethren: by this
one testimony his ^anitie is confuted, because he pulls God from himself.
When he says, And his love ^s perfect, he takes the note of coupling together
in steed of a particular causall. And the ^oue of God may be taken two ways:
either wherewith we love him, or which he inspireth into us. That God has
given us his spirit, and given us of his spirit, is all to one effect, for we
know that the spirit is given to every one by measure.

14 And we have seen. Now he expounds the other part of the knowledge of
God, which we have touched: that he communicates himself with us in his
Son, and offers to be inioyed. Whereupon it follows, yt he is perceived of
us by faith. For heereto is the Apostles purpose, that we are so united to God
by faith and love, that he dwells truly in us, and by the effect of his power
does after a sort show himself visible, which otherwise cannot be seen. When
he says, We have seen, and testify: he sets out himself and other
Apostles: and he means not every seeing, but that which is joined to faith,
whereby they acknowledged i^ Christ the glory of God: as also it follows,
That he was sent to be the savior of the world, which knowledge proceeds from
the inlightening of the spirit.

15 He that shall confess. He that repeateth that general rule, That we are
united to God by Christ, and that we cannot be joined to Christ, except God
abide in us.

And faith and confession, are put without difference in the same sense. For
albeit that hypocrites do most falsely brag that they have faith: yet the
apostle does here acknowledge none in the order of such as confess, except
such as do indeed and from the heart believe

Further when he says, That Jesus is the Son of God, he comprehends the
whole sum of faith in these few words. For there is nothing needful to
salvation, which faith finds not in Christ. But after he has spoken in
general, that men are so grafted into Christ, that Christ does join them to
god, he adds a reason, which they had seen themselves: that he might
apply the general sentence to them, unto whom he writes.

Then follows an exhortation, that they may love others, as they themselves
are loved of God. Wherefore this is the order, and this is the continuance of
his speech, The faith of Christ causes that God abides in men. But we are the
pertakers of this grace. Further seeing God is love, no man can abide in him,
except he love his brethren. Therefore it is good that love do raygne in us,
seeing God has joined himself unto us.

16 We have known and have believed. It is, as if he should have said, We
have known by believing. For such a knowledge is not had but by faith. But
hence we gather, how much a wavering and doubtful opinion differs from
Faith. Further, albeit he goes about in this place to apply the next sentence
to the Readers, as I have said already, yet he defines the substance of faith
diversely. First he had said, Whosoever believes that Jesus is the son of
God. And now he says, By Faith we know the love of God toward us. Whereby it
appears, that the fatherly love of God is apprehended in Christ: and that
they know not any thing at all in Christ for certain, except it be only
such, as acknowledge themselves by his grace to be the children o^ God. For
therefore the Father does set forth his son unto us, that he might adopt us
in him.

God is love. It is as it were the less proposition in the syllogism: because
he reasons from faith to love, after this manner, God dwells in us by
Faith: but God is love: therefore, wheresoever God remains, there love must
needs flourish. Heerevpon it follows, that love is necessarily knit unto
faith.

17 In this is love perfect in us, that we might have boldness in the day of
judgment: that, as he is, we also are in this world.

18 There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out all fear: because
fear has painfulnesse in it. And he that fears, is not perfect in love.


17 THere are two members of this speech: that then we are made pertakers of
the divine adoption, when we so resemble god, as children do their father, and
then that this boldness is an incomperable good, because that without it, we are
most miserable. Therefore in the first place he shows upon what condition god
has embraced us in love: and how in effect we inioye this grace which he has
given us in Christ. Therefore the love of god toward us is here to be
understood. He says it is Perfect, because it is poured out in full measure,
and performed so throughlye, as if it were absolute on all parts. But he
affirms that there are none pertakers of this good, except such as being
conformable unto God, do approve themselves to be his Children. The argument
therefore is of those things, which be joined together.

That we may have boldness. Now he begins to show the fruit of the love of
God toward us: albeit he will afterward show it more clearly by the
contrary. But yet this is inestimable felicity, that we dare stand boldly
before God. For by nature we fly from the ^ight of God, and worthily. For
seeing he is the Judge of the world, and our sins do press us with
guiltiness, it is of necessity, that together with God, death and hell come
into our mind. Hence is the fear which I spoke off, that men fly from God,
as much as lies in them.

John denies that the faithful are afraid, when there is mention made to them
of the last judgment: but rather to come bold and cheerful to the judgment
seat of God: because they are assuredly persuaded of his fatherly love.
Therefore, so much has every one profited in the faith, as he is rightlye
prepared in mind to wait for the day of judgment.

As he is. By these words as I said already, he does mean again, that this
is required of us, that we resemble the image of God. Such therefore as God is
in heaven, such does he command us to be in this world, that we may be
accounted his children. For the image of God, when it does appear in us, it is
as a seal of his adoption. But so he seems to place part of our trust in
works. Therefore here the Papists do stroute themselves, as if John denied
that trust, to have an assured confidence of salvation by the alone grace of
God, except works did help together. But they are deceived in that, that they
weigh not that the Apostle does not here fetch his Argument from the cause:
but the place is of things joined together.

And we willinglys confess, that no man is reconciled to God by Christ,
except together he be reformed and made agreeable to the Image of God: and
that they are so conformable, that they cannot be separated the one from the
other. The Apostle therefore says this most fitlye, for he does drive all
them from the assurance of Grace, in whom there is not seen any likeness of
God. For it is most certain that such are utterly strangers to the Spirit
of GOD, and to his son Christ.

Neither also do we deny, that the newness of life avails to the
confirmation of an assurance: but that I may speak so, that it be taken as a
second help. But in the mean time it behooves us to be grounded upon only
grace. Neither indeed otherwise should John's doctrine agree with it self.
For common experience does show, and the Papists themselves are constrained
to grant, that there is always a cause of fearfulness in the respect of
works.

Wherefore no man shall ever come with a quiet and persuaded mind to the
judgment seat of GOD, except he determine first with himself, and
willynglye confess that he is of him even freelye beloved.

But there is no cause that any man should marvel, that ye Papists taste
none of these things, seeing the miserable men know no faith, but that which
is full of doubting. And further, that hypocrisy does over spread them with
darkness, least they should earnestlye bethink, how fearful is the Judgment
of God, where Christ is not present a mediator. Others pass by the
resurrection, as if it were a tale: but that we may go forth glad and
cheereful to meet Christ, it does behoue us to have our faith fixed in his
grace alone.

18 There is no fear. Now by contraries he commends the excellency of that
good: for he says, that we are continuallye tormented, until God do deliver
us from that miserable torment, with the remedy of his love toward us. The
effect is, seeing nothing is more miserable, than to be vexed with continual
disquiet, that we attain unto this love of God toward us being known, that
we may quietlye rest without fear. Whence appears, how singular a benefit
it is, that God does vouchsafe us worthy of his love.

Further, of this doctrine he will immediately raise an exhortation. But before
he exhort us to our duty, he commends this guifte of God to us, which by
faith takes fear from us. I know that all this place is other ways
expounded of many: but I respect what the Apostle means, not what others
think. They say, That there is no fear in love: because when of our own
accord we love God, we are not constrained to his obedience by force and fear.
Therefore, according to them, a servile fear is here opposed to a voluntary
reverence. Whence also is risen the distinction of servile and childly fear. I
grant indeed that that is true, when we willyngly love God as a Father, that we
are no more urged with the fear of punishment: but that doctrine has no
agreement with this place. For the Apostle does only teach, that when the
love of God is perceived and known unto us by Faith, peace is given unto our
consciences, least they be any more disquieted.

Yet it may be asked, when perfect Love casts out fear: because being
endued with some taste only of the love of God toward us, we are never
altogether delivered from fear. I answer: that albeit that fear is not
perfectly done away, yet when we fly unto God, as unto a quiet haven, safe
and free from all danger of shipwreck, fea^e is truly done away, because it
gives place to Faith. Therefore fear is not so cast out, but that it does
move our minds: but it is so cast out, that it may not molest nor hinder our
peace, which we perfectly obtain by Faith.

Fear has painfulnesse. Here also the Apostle does set out the greatness
of the grace whereof he speaks. For seeing it is almost miserable condition
to suffer continual torments, there is nothing more acceptable, then with a
quiet conscience and peaceable mind, to present himself into the sight of
God. Where others say, that servants fear, because they set before their
eyes, punishment and scourges, and do not their duty but constrained, it is
nothing to the Apostles meaning, as is said already. So in the next part,
when they ^pounde, that he is not perfect in love which fears: because he
submits not himself willinglye to God, but would rather rid himself out
of bondage.

Which does not agree with the text. For the Apostle does rather teach, that
this is a mistrust, whereas a man fea^eth, that is, has an unquiet mind:
because the love of God being well known, does quiet the minds.

19 We love him, because he loved us first.

20 If a man say I love God, and hate his brother, he is a liar. For he that
loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God, whom he has
not seen?

21 And we have this commandment of him, that he which loves God, do love
his brother also.


19 THis word [Agappoumen] that is, we love, may be read as well in the
indicative mood, as in the imparatiue, yet the former sense does far better
agree. For the Apostle in my judgment does repeat the former sentence,
because GOD does prevent us with free love, we do yield unto him our
duty: that he may straight way gather that he is to be beloved in men, or
the love which we ought of duetye to yield unto him, is to be testified by us
toward men.

Yet if any man like the imparatiue mood, the speech shall have the same
sense, Because God has loved us freely, let us now love him again. But that
love cannot be found, except it bring forth a brotherly love among us.
Therefore he says, that they do lie, who brag that they love God, when as
they hate their brethren. But the reason which he adds seems to be weak,
for it is a comparison of the less and the greater. If (says he) we do not
love our brethren with whom we live, much less can we love God, who cannot be
seen. There is a double exception at hand. For both the love wherewith we
love God does spring of Faith and not from sight, as it is 1. Pet. 1.8. And
also there is a far other respect to be had of God, then of men, because when
as God does draw us of his great goodness to love him, men are often worthy
to be hated. I answer, that the Apostle (which no doubt ought to be amongst
us) does take here as a thing confessed, that God does offer himself unto
us in men, which do expressly bear his Image: and that he does require of
us that we perform those duties toward them which he himself does not
stand in need of, as we read in the Psalm. 16.1. My goodness has not reached
unto thee O Lord, my love is toward the Saints which are in earth. And truly
the fellowshippe of the same nature, the use of so many things, the mutual
^ommunication would entice us unto love, ^nlesse we were very hard hearted. But
John ^eant nothing else, but that it is a deceitful ^oasting, if a man say
that he loves God, and neglects his image which is before his ^yes.

21 And this commandment. A stron^er argument from the authority and
doc^rine of Christ, for he does not teach of the ^are love of God: but
commands also to ^ue our brethren. Wherefore we must so ^egin with God,
that together there may be (...) proceeding unto men.

Chap. 5.
1 Every one that believes that Jesus is Christ, is borne of God: and every
^ne that loves him which begot, loves him ^lso which is begotten of him.

2 In this we know that we love the chil^ren of God, if we love God and ^epe
his com^aundements.

3 This is the love of God that we keep ^is commandments: and his
commandments are not grievous.

4 Because all that is borne of God, doet^ overcome the world: and this is the
victori^ which overcomes the world: even yo^^ faith.

5 Who is he that overcomes the world, but he which believes that Jesus is
the sonn^ of God?


1 BY another reason he confirms, that faith and brotherly love are things
joined together. For seeing God does regenerate us by faith, it is of
necessity that we love him as a Father. But that love comprehends all his
children. Therefore faith cannot be separated from love. The first sentence
is, That they are borne of God, whosoever believe that Jesus is Christ. Where
thou feast again, that Jesus alone is set forth to be the scope of faith:
even as it finds in him righteousness, and life, and whatsoever good thing
can be wished, and God wholly. Wherefore this is the right way to believe,
when we direct our minds unto him. But to believe that he is Christ, is to
hope for from him; whatsoever things are ^romised of the Messia. For indeed
the bare ^tle of Christ is not attributed unto him in ^his place: but rather
the office which is in^oyned him of the Father. And like as in the ^awe, the
full restoring of all things, righte^usnes and felicity is promised by the
Mes^ia: so at this day all the same is more ^leerely expressed in the Gospel.
Therefore jesus cannot be received as Christ, but that ^aluation be asked of
him, seeing that to this ^nde he is sent of the Father; and daily of^ered unto
us. Whereupon the Apostle does worthily pronounce all them to be borne of God,
which do truly believe: For faith is ^et far above the capacity of the wit of
man: that it behooves us to be drawn of the hea^enly Father unto Christ:
because that never any of us could of our own endeavor ascend unto him. And
this is that which the ^ame Apostle teaches in ye first chapter of his gospel,
That they are not borne of blood, neither of flesh, which believe in the name
of the only begotten. And Paul says, yt we are not endued with ye spirit of
this world, but with ye spirit which is of God, that we may know what things
are given unto us of him, because neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard,
nor understanding conceived what rewar^ is laid up in store for them that love
God but only the spirit has attained to that s^crete. Again, forasmuch as
Christ is given unto us for our sanctification, and does brin^ also with him the
spirit of regeneration. Fina^ly, forasmuch as he does ingrafte us into h^^
body: this also is another reason, wh^ no man can have faith unless he be
borne (...) God.

Does love him which is begotten. Augustine and certain other of the old
writers did draw this unto Christ: but falsely. For under the singular number
the Apostle n^teth all the faithful. And the Text doet^ plainly show, that he
has no other purpose but yt he may derive mutual love towarde^ the brethren
from faith, as from ye fountain. And the argument is taken from the common
order of nature. But he transferreth yt unto God, which is seen in men. And it
is to be noted, that the Apostle does not therefore speak of the faithful
only, passing by them which are without, because they only are to be beloved,
and that no care or consideration is to be had of the other: but he does teach
us by this instruction to love al men without exception, seeing he does bid
us to begin ^ith the godly.

2 In this we know. In these words ^e briefly shows what is true love, to
wit, that which is referred unto God Hitherto he ^ath taught, that the true
love of God is no ^here, but where the brethren are loved al^o: because this
is a perpetual effect. And now ^e teaches that men are loved aright, and in
^rder, when as God has the first place. And ^his definition is necessary. For
it comes ^ften to pass, that we do love men without God, as profane and
carnal friendship does ^end to no other end, then to private commo^itie, or
other vain respects. Therefore as before he urged the effect, so now he
urges ye ^ause. For his meaning is, that mutual love ^^e so had in account
among us, that God be preferred. He joins with the love of God, the
observation of the law: and worthily. For seeing we love God as the Father and
Lord, it cannot be but that reverence be joined with love. Further, God cannot
be separated from himself. Therefore seeing he is the fountain of all
justice and uprightness: it is necessary that he which loves him, do frame
all his affections to the obedience of righteousness. Therefore the love of
God is no idle thing. But we gather also out of this place, what is the true
observation of the law. For if we obey God in keeping his commandments,
enforced only by fear, we are far of from true obedience. Therefore this is
first, that our hearts do auow themselves unto God in a free reverence: and then
let the life be framed unto the rule of the Law. This is the meaning of
Moses, Deu. 10.12. When in gathering the sum of the law, he says: Israel,
what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but that thou love him, and obey
him.

3 His commandments are not grievous. This is added, least the hardness (as
it comes to pass) do disable or diminish our endeavor. For they which
enter a godly and holy life with a cheerful mind, and great zeal, and
after having experience of their own inabilitie, do wax slow. Therefore John
that he may stir up our endeavors, denies that the commandments of God
are grievous. But it may be objected on the contrary, that we have experience
of a far other thing: and the Scripture does also witness, that the yoke of
the law is not to be borne. Act. 15.10. The reason also is manifest. For
seeing the denying of our selves, is as it were an entrance to keep the Law,
shall we say that it is an easy thing for a man to deny himself? Yea rather,
for as much as the law is spiritual, as Paul teaches Romans 7.14. and we are
nothing but flesh, there must needs be a great strife betwixt us and the law
of God. I answer: that this hardness is not of the nature of the Law, but of
the fault of our faith, which Paul also plainelye expresses: because after
that he said that it is impossible for the law to give us righteousness, he by
and by lays the fault upon the flesh. This answer does very well reconcile ye
sentences of Paul and David, which in show do seem much to differ. Paul
makes the law ye minister of death he says it works nothing but the wrath
of God. 2. Cor. 3.7. yt it was given yt sin might increase. Romans 4.15. that
it lives that it may slaie us. Romans 7.10. and 13. David contrarily says, that
it is sweeter unto him then honnie, and more to be desired then gold. Psalm.
19.9. Among other praises thereof, he sets these, that it cheereth the
hearts, it conuerteth unto the Lord, and quickneth. But Paul compares the
law with the corrupt nature of man. Hence is that great conflict. But David
teaches, how they are affected whom God has begotten again with his
Spirit. Hence is that sweetness and delight, whereof the flesh tastes not.
Neither truly has John ouerpassed this distinction. For least any should
take this generally, that the commandments of God are not grievous, he
restrains it to the children of God. Whereby he signifies, that this is
brought to pass by the power of the spirit, that it is not grievous unto us
nor troublesome to obey God. Yet the question seems not as yet to be
altogether answered. For the faithful howsoever they be governed by the spirit
of God, yet they abide a hard co^bat with their flesh: and although they
sweat, yet they scarce frame themselves unto their duty by the half part.
Yea, rather being set, as it were between the sacrifice and the alter (as the
saying is) they do almost faint under the burden. We do see how that Paul
does sigh, that he is holden prisoner, and does cry out that he is unhappy,
because he cannot serve God freely. I answer, that the law is called easy,
forasmuch as being endued with heuenlye virtue, we do overcome the desires of
the flesh. For howsoever the flesh does rebel, yet the faithful do feel
that they are delighted so much in no other thing, as that they may follow
God.

Moreover, it is to be noted, that John does not speak of the bare law which
contains nothing besides the commandments: but that he joins with all the
fatherlye kindness of God, whereby the rigor of the law is mittigated.
Therefore seeing we know that we are mercifullye pardoned of the Lord, if
our works do not satisfy the law, that does make us a great deal readyer
unto obedience, as it is in Psalm. 130.4. There is mercy with thee that thou
may be feared. Hence then is the easiness of the keeping the Law, that the
faithful staide up by forgiveness, if in any point they fail, do not
despair. In the mean time the Apostle warns us, that we must strive that
we may serve the Lord. For the whole world does stand against us, least we
should go forward whether God calls us. Therefore he in effect shall
keep the Law, which shall stronglye resist the world.

4 This is the victory. Because he said that all they which are borne of God
do overcome the world. He expresses also the mean to overcome. For it
might be as yet demanded, whence is the victory. Therefore he placed the
victory of the whole world in faith. An excellent place: because although
Satan do daily give hard and fearful assaults: the spirit of God
pronouncing that we are without danger, does encourage us to strive stoutly,
seeing fear is taken away. And the time past is of more force, then the
present, or the time to come. For he says that he has overcome, that we may
be even so assured as though the enemy were now put to flight. It is true
indeed, that our warrefare lasts all our life, that we have daily
conflictes, yea, that we have every moment new and sundry battails on
every side with the enemy, but because God does not arm us only for one day,
and faith also is not for one day, but a continual work of the holy Ghost.
We are now no other ways conquerours, then if we had given the overthrow in
the battle. Neither yet does this trust bring retchlesnesse, but that we be
always carefully bent unto the battle. For the Lord bids his to be
assured in such sort, that yet he will not have them careless. Yea rather, he
does therefore say, that they have overcome, to the intent that they might
fight the more courageously and more stoutly. The name of the world is here
taken largely, for it comprehends whatsoever is contrary to the spirit of
God. So the wickedness of our nature is part of the world, all lusts, all the
sleightes of Satan, and finally, whatsoever does draw us from God. In so
plentiful a band of men, a great weight of the battle lies upon us: and we
should even now before the conflict be overcome, and daily to be ouercommed an
hundredth times, but that God did promise us the victory. But GOD on this
condition does exhort us to the conflicte, that first he promises the
victory. But as this promise does arm us continuallye with the invincible
power of God: so on the contrary part, it brings to nothing the strength of
men. Neither indeed does the Apostle here teach, ye God does only help us,
that being aided by his help, we may be able to resist: but he places the
victory in faith only. And faith receives from another, whereby it may
overcome. Therefore they take from God ye which is due unto him, which ascribe
the victory to their own strength.

5 Who is he that overcomes the world? A reason of the former sentence,
namely, that we therefore overcome by faith, because we borrowe strength of
Christ. As also Paul says* I can do all things in him which does
strengthen me. Phil. 4.13. Therefore he in fine shall overcome the devil and
the world, neither shall he yield unto his own flesh, who mistrusting
himself, shall lean upon the only strength of Christ. For by the name of
faith, he understands a liuelye taking hold of Christ, which does apply
his strength and office unto us.

6 This is he which came by water and blood, Jesus Christ, not in water only,
but in water and blood. And it is the Spirit that bears witness: for as
much as the Spirit is truth.

7 For there are three which bear witness in Heaven, the Father, the Word,
and the holy Ghost: and these three are one.

8 And there are three which bear witness in Earth, the Spirit, Water, and
Blood: and these three argee in one.

9 If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater, because
this is the witness of God which he has witnessed of his son.


6 THis is he which came. That our faith may rest safely in Christ, he
says, that the whole substance of the shadows of the Law do consist in
him. Neither indeed do I doubt but that he does allude to the old rites
of the Law in the words of Water and Blood. Further, the comparison has this
purpose, not only that we do know, that the law of Moses is done away by
the coming of Christ. But that we should seek in him the fulfilling of those
things which the ceremonies in times past did signify. And although there
were many figures, yet the Apostle does note under these two the whole
perfection of holiness and righteousness. For all uncleanness was washed
away with water, that men should not come unto God, but pure and clean. In
Blood was the purging and pledge of a full reconciliation with God. But the
law did only shaddowe by outward signs that which was to be performed
soundly and indeed by the Messia. Therefore John does fitly prove that Jesus is
the anointed of the Lord, promised before, because he has brought with him
wherewith he may sanctify us in all points. And truly touching the blood
wherewith Christ has pacified GOD, there is no doubt but it may be demanded
how he came by water. For it is not probable that this is referred to
Baptism. Truly I think that John does here express the fruit and effect of
that thing which he declares in the history of his Gospel. For whereas there
he says, that water and blood did issue out of the side of Christ, no doubt
it is to be accounted for a miracle. I do know that some such thing does
naturally come unto ye dead: but it came to pass by the determinate counsel
of God, that the side of Christ should be a fountain of blood and water: that
the faithful might know that true cleanness (whereof the old Baptismes were
figures) is assured unto the^ in him: that they might know also that it is
fulfilled which all the sprinklings of blood did in times past promise.
Wherefore, this short division has an excellent grace, because it shows
briefly whereto the old ceremonies did chiefly endeavor: to wit, that men
being purged from defilings, and fr^^d from all offenses, might have God
merciful, and might be consecrated unto him. Furthermore, that ye truth was
showed in Christ: because the law had nothing but the visible shadows. Of
which thing we have spoken more in the 9. and 10. Chapter to the Hebrews.

It is the Spirit that bears witness. In this member he shows how the
faithful may feel that strength of Christ, namely, because the Spirit does
certify them: and least their faith should waver, he adds, that the full and
sound assurance does consist in the witness of the Spirit. For the Spirit is
called truth, because the authority thereof is undoubted, and ought
sufficiently to content us.

7 There are three in heaven. All this has been left out by some, Hierome
thinks that that was done of malice rather then of error: and truly of the
Latins only. But seeing that neither indeed the Greek copies do agree
between themselves, I dare scarce affirm any thing: yet because ye the text
does run very well, if this part be added, and I see that it is had in the best
and most allowed copies: I do willingly receive it, and the sense shall be, ye
god to the end he may more plentifully confirm our faith in Christ, does by a
three fold means witness, that we must rest in him. For as our faith does
acknowledge three persons in one being of God, so it is called unto Christ by
so many means, that it may rest it self in him. Whereas he says that three
are one, it is not referred unto ye being, but rather unto the consent. As if
he should say, that the Father, and his everlasting word, and the Spirit,
do with one consent equallye approve Christ. Therefore some books have [Eis
En] that is, Into one. But, although thou read [En Eisen] that is, Are one,
as it is in other Copies, yet there is no doubt, but that the Father, the Word,
and the Spirit, are said to be one, in the self same sense, in which
afterward, Blood, Water, and the Spirit. But whereas the Spirit, which is
one witness, is twice rehearsed: the repetition seems to be unfit. I
answer: Seeing he does witness diversely of Christ, that a double place of
witnessing is fitlye given unto him. For the Father, with his everlasting
wisdom and the Spirit, does pronounce from heaven as by his absolute power,
yt Jesus is Christ. Therefore in ye place the only majesty of his divinity
is to be considered of us: and because ye spirit dwelling in our hearts is the
earnest, pledge, and seal, to seal up that decree: by this means he speaks
again in earth by his grace. But because it may be, that all men will not
receive this reading: I will so expound those words that follow, as if the
Apostle had named these only witnesses on earth.

8 Are three. He applies now that sentence of water and blood, to his
purpose, namely, that they have no excuse which refuse Christ: forasmuch as he
has proved with sufficient strong and plain witnesses, that it is he which
was promised long before. For blood and water, seeing that they are pledges and
effects of salvation brought by him, do truly witness that he is sent of God.
Further the Holy Ghost is added as a third witness, whom notwithstanding has
the first place: because otherwise water and blood should have issued without
profit. For it is he which does seal up in our hearts the witness of water
and blood: it is he, which brings to pass by his power, that the fruit of
the death of Christ does come unto us: yea rather, that blood being shed for
our redemption, does pearce even unto our souls: or, (that I may speak all
in one word) it causes that Christ with all his benefits is ours. So Paul
Romans 1.4. After yt he had said that Christ was showed to be the son of God,
by the power of his resurrection, does immediately add by the sanctifieng of
the Spirit. Because whatsoever tokens of the heavenly glory does shine in
Christ: they should be never the less dark unto us, and should be far
from our sight, unless the spirit did open unto us the eyes of faith. Now the
readers do understand, why John has brought the spirit as witness with
water and blood: namely because it is the proper office of the Spirit, to make
clean our consciences by the blood of Christ: and to cause, that the
cleansing brought by him, is effectual in us.

Of which thing there is something spoken in the beginning of the first Epistle
of Peter, chap. 1. verse. 22. where Peter uses almost the same speech: to wit,
that the holy Ghost does purge our souls by the sprinkeling of the blood of
Christ. But by these words we may gather, that faith does not take hold of
Christ bare or naked: but with all his quickening power. For what profit were
it that Christ, was sent into the earth, unless he had pacified God by the
sacrifice of his death? unless the office of cleansing had been enjoined him
of his father? yet it may be objected that the distinction is superfluous,
which is here set down, because Christ by putting away sin, has made us
clean. Therefore the Apostle names one thing twice. I grant indeed, that in
the putting away of sin, there is also included a washing.

Therefore I have not set a difference of water and blood, as though they were
diverse things. But if every one of us do weigh his own weakness, he shall
easelye acknowledge, that blood is not in vain or without cause discerned from
water.

Further, as it has been already said, the Apostle alludeth unto the Rytes
of the Law. But God did in times paste institute, not only Sacrifice but also
washings because of the weakness of man. The Apostle would plainelye express
that the truth of both parts was offered us in Christ. By which reason, he
said a little before, Not in water only. For he does signify that not
only some part of our salvation is found in Christ, but also all parts
full, so that nothing more is to be sought otherwhere.

9 If the witness of men. He reasons from the less to the greater, how
unthankful men are, if they refuse Christ approved from heaven, so as he has
said. For, if in men's affairs we do rest in the words of men, which can lie
and deceive, how unseemly shall it be, that God has loss credit with us, in
his own matters, wherein he is the chief Judge? Therefore only iniquity
does let, that we receive not Christ, when as he gives creditte to his power
by a lawful proof. Further, he calls the witness of God, not only that
which the Spirit does give into our hearts, but that also which we have from
water and blood. For that power of purging and putting away sin, was not
earthly but heavenly. Wherefore the blood of Christ is not to be esteemed after
the common manner of men: but we must rather respect the purpose of God,
wherein it was ordained to put away sin, and that heavenly power, which
has flowed from thence.

Further, this is the witness of God, which he has testified of his son.

10 He that believes on the son of God, has the witness in himself. He
that believes not God, has made him a liar: because he believed not the
witness which god has testified of his son.

11 And this is the witness, that God has given us eternal life. And this life
is in his son.

12 He that has the son, has life. He that has not the son of God has
not life.


10 THis is the witness. The note [Oti] does not note here a cause, but is
only taken in the way of exposition. For after that the Apostle had taught
that God does deserve much more credit then men: now he adds that we can
give no creditte unto God, but by believing in Christ: because God does set
him only before us, and does stay us in him. Hence he gathers that we do
believe in Christ safely and with quiet minds, because God does establish our
faith by his own authority. Neither does he say that God does speak
outwardly, but that every one of the godly does feel him the Author of his
faith inwardly in himself. Whereby it appears how much an inconstant opinion
which hangs upon some other thing, does differ from faith.

10 He that does not believe. As the faithful have this commodity, yt they
know themselves to be without danger of error, because they are grounded
upon God: so he makes the ungodly guilty of great blasphemy, because they
accuse God of a lie. Truly nothing is more precious unto God then his truth:
wherefore no greater injury ca^ be done unto him, then when he is spoiled of
this honor. Therefore yt he may stur us up to believe, he takes an argument
from the contrary. For if it be an horrible and cursed wickedness, to make
God a liar: because then, that which is most proper unto him is taken away:
who would not fear to abase the credit of the gospel: wherein God will
especially be accounted true and faithful? This is dilligently to be noted.
Some marvel why God does so much commend faith: why unfaithfulness is so
sharply condemned. But here the infinite glory of God is in question. For
seeing he would give forth a special show of his truth in the Gospel, they
leave him nothing, whosoever refuse Christ therein offered. Wherefore that we
may grant that some man may in some other parts of his life, be equal unto
an Angel: yet his holiness is devilish, so long as he rejects Christ. As
we see certain in the Papacy much to flatter themselves with I know not what
visor of holiness: when as yet they resist the Gospel most obstinatly.
Therefore let us hold, that this is the beginning of godliness, obediently to
embrace that doctrine which he has so faythfullye avouched for a witness.

11 That he has given eternal life. Now he allureth us to believe, by
setting before us the profit thereof. This reverence indeed is due unto GOD,
that whatsoever he says to us, it be by and by without controversy. But
whereas he offers us life freelye, it is an unthankfulness intolerable, if
we do not receive so loving and sweet a doctrine with a most steadfast and
ready faith.

And truly the words of the Apostle have this drift, that we must not only
reverently obey the Gospel, least we do iniurye unto God: but also that it
is to be beloved, because it brings unto us eternal life. From whence also
we do gather, what is chiefly and most of all to be sought for in the
Gospel of Christ, to wit, the free gift of eternal redemption and salvation.
For seeing God of his goodness does there exhort us unto repentance and
fear, it ought not to be separated from the grace of Christ. And that the
Apostle may stay and detain us whollye in the eternal grace of Christ, he
repeateth unto us again, that everlasting life is contained in him alone: as if
he should have said, that there is no other means at all set down unto us
by GOD the father to obtain life. And indeed the Apostle has briefly here
comprehended three things, to wit that we are all appointed unto death, until
God of his free goodness do restore us to life. For he plainly says, that
life is given by God. Whereby also it follows that we are disappoynted of it,
and that it cannot be gotten by deserts. Further he teaches that this life is
given unto us by the Gospel, because there is laid open the goodness and
fatherly love of God toward us. Lastly he says, that we are by no other
means made pertakers of that life, then when we are ingrafted into Christ by
faith.

12 He that has not. It is a confirmation of the sentence going before. Indeed
that ought to suffice, that God has placed life no where else but in Christ,
that it may be sought for from thence. But least any man should decline
another way, he shuts out all men from the hope of life, which seek it not
in Christ. We know what it is to have Christ: for he is possessed by faith.
Therefore he depriueth all men of life, which are not of the body of Christ.
But this seems not to agree with reason. For histories do show, that there
have been excellent men, and endued with noble virtues, which notwithstanding
have been altogether strangers from Christ. And it seems unfit, to give no
honor unto so great excellency. I answer: that we are far deceived, if we
think that whatsoever does excel in our eyes is allowed of God. Yea rather,
as it is in Luke 16.15. that which is excellent in the sight of men, is
abhominatio^ before God. Foe because the uncleanness of the heart is unknown
unto us, we are content with the outward show. But God does see most filthy
wickedness lying hid under the same. Therefore it is no marvel if those
virtues which bear an outward show, do stink before him, which both proceed
from an unclean heart, and also tend not to a good end. Further, whence is
the cleanness of the heart, whence is a good endeavor of godliness, but from
the spirit of Christ? Then nothing is worthy of praise, but in Christ.
Although there is another reason, which takes away al doubt. For the
righteousness of men, consists in the forgiveness of sins. If thou take
away this, the undoubted curse of God, and everlasting death, remains for us
all, and it is only Christ, which reconcileth the father unto us, as he has
once pacified him by the sacrifice of his death.

Whence it follows, that God is merciful to man, but in Christ: and that
there is no righteousness but in him. If any man object Cornelius, who^ Luke
witnesses to be acceptable unto god, before that he was called to the faith of
the gospel: I answer briefly, that God does sometimes so work in us, that
the seed of faith, does not by and by the first day appear. Cornelius had
not a clear and plain knowledge of Christ: but seeing he was endued with
some feeling of the mercy of God, he must withal hold some thing of the
mediator. But, because God has secret and wonderful means to work by, let
us, passing by the shows that profit not, hold fast only the plain way to
salvation which he shows us.

13 I have written these things unto you, which believe in the name of the
son of God, that ye may know that you have eternal life, and that you may
believe in the name of the son of God.

14 And this is the trust which we have in him, that if we shall ask any
thing according to his will he hears us.

15 And if we know that he hears us, when we shall ask any thing: we know
that we have the petitions that we have asked of him.


13 I Have written these things unto you. Because there must be a continual
going forward in faith, therefore he says, that he writes to them which have
already believed, that they may more steadfastly and certainly believe: and so
may enjoy the full assurance of eternal life. Therefore, this is the use of
the doctrine, not only that he may begin the ignorant in Christ, but also
yt he may more and more co^firm those, which are alredie taught. Therefore we
must every day diligently endeavor to learn, that our faith may increase all
our life long. For both many remnaunts of unbelief do as yet remain in us,
and also our faith is so weak, that even this that we do believe, is not yet
to believe soundly, unless there come a greater confirmation. Furthermore it is
worth the labor to note, what is the true means to confirm faith, to wit,
when the office and power of Christ is declared. For the Apostle says, that he
did write these things: namely, that eternal life is not to be sought any
where else but in Christ: yt they which are now faithful may believe, that is,
may profitte by believing.

Wherefore it is the duty of a godly techer, that he may confirm his hearers
in the faith, to set forth as much as he can the grace of Christ, that being
content therewith, we desire nothing else. Seeing ye Papists do hide and abase
this by all means: they do bewray by this one thing sufficiently, that they
have care of nothing less, then of the right doctrine of Faith. Yea for this
cause, their schools are more to be avoided, then al rocks or quicksands:
because a man can scarce enter into them, without undoubted shipwreck of faith.
Moreover, the Apostle teaches in this place, that Christ is the proper scope
of faith: and that the assurance of salvation is joined with the faith which we
have in his name. For this is the end of believing, that we may be the
children, and heirs of God.

14 This is the trust. He commends the faith whereof he spoke, by the fruit:
or he does show wherein our trust does chiefly consist: to wit, that the
godly are bold to call upon God with a bold courage, as Paul also speaks,
Ephe. 3.12. That by faith we have access unto God with boldness. And Romans
8.15. that the Spirit does open our mouths, that we doubt not to cry Abba
Father. And truly if we be kept from coming to God, nothing is more miserable,
then we. Again, so this sanctuary may be opened for us, we shall be
nevertheless blessed in all our miseries. Yea, this one thing makes all our
miseries happy, that we are certainlye persuaded, that God will be our
deliverer, and trusting in his fatherly good will toward us, we fly unto
him. Let us therefore hold this sentence of the Apostle, that calling upon
God, is the especial trial of our faith: and that God is not called upon a
right, neither according unto faith, but when as we are persuaded that our
prayers shall not be in vain. For the Apostle does deny, that they are
endued with confidence, which hang in doubt. Whereby it appears, that the
doctrine of faith, is buried and almost quenched in the Papacy, where all
certainty is taken away. Indeed they murmr many prayers there, and they
prate much of calling upon God: but they pray, and bid to pray with doubtful
and wandering minds: yea, they condemn this trust, which the Apostle does
necessarily require.

According to his will. By this note he would briefly teach, what is the true
rule to pray: to wit, when men submit their prayers unto God. Neither indeed
when as the Lord did promise that he would do, whatsoever his should require,
did he grant unto them an unbridled liberty to ask whatsoever came into
their mind: but he gave the^ withal a law to pray aright. And truly there
is nothing more profitable for us, then this bridle: because if it be lawful
for every one of us to ask whatsoever he list, and God do favor our
prayers, we shall be very ill provided for. For we know not what is profitable:
yea, we do boil with wicked and hurtful desires. But God does give a double
remedy, that we pray not otherwise then according to the precise rule of his
will: because he does both teach us by his word, what he will have us to ask,
and also he does appoint his spirit our guide and governor, which may stay
our affections, and not suffer them to wander without their bounds. For we
know not, says Paul what and how we ought to pray: but the spirit helping our
infirmities, does stir up in us unspeakable sighings, Romans 8.26. In the
mean time also we must ask at the mouth of the Lord, that he will direct our
prayers. For God in his promises does set down unto us the lawful means to
pray, as has been said.

15 And if we know. The repetition is not needless, as in show it seems.
For the Apostle now specially affirms, that which he generally pronounced of
ye success of prayer, that the godly do wish or desire nothing of God, which
they do not obtain, and when as he says, that all the prayers of the
faithful are heard, he speaks of sound and modest prayers, and which are
framed according to the rule of obedience. For the faithful do not run
headlong with loose raines or grant themselves any thing: but they always in
their prayers regard what God commands. Therefore this is the applying of the
general doctrine to the spiritual and private use of every man: that the
faithful do not doubt that they have God favorable in all and every their
prayers, that they may with quiet minds wait until ye Lord perform those
things which they have prayed for: and so being eased of all grief and care,
they cast their cares upon God.

Neither yet this quietness and assurance, ought to quench in us the zeal of
prayer: that he which is assured of an happy success, should therefore
abstain from calling upon God. For the certainty of faith does not bring
forth untowardness or slacknes. But the Apostle only means that every man
be quiet minded in his necessities, when he has laid down his gronings, in
the bosom of God.

16 If any man shall see his brother sin a sin not unto death, let him
ask, and he shall give him life. I say to him that sins not unto death.
There is a sin unto death. For that I say not that a man should pray.

17 Every unrighteousness is sin. And there is a sin not unto death.

18 We know, that whosoever is borne of God, sins not: but he that is
borne of God keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not.


16 THe Apostle now extends further the fruit of faith, whereof he had made
mention, that our prayers also be available for our brethren. That was a
great matter, that so soon as we are in distress. God does lovingly call us
unto himself, and is ready to give us help: but in that he vouchsafes to
hear us praying for others also, there arises no small confirmation unto our
faith, that we may be assured that in our own cause we shall never take the
repulse. In the mean time the Apostle does exhort us, that one of us be
mutuallye careful for the safety of another. And again he wills, that the
falls of our brethren, be unto us prouocations to pray. And in truth, this
hardness were passing great, to be touched with no sense of compassion, when
we see the souls which are redeemed with the blood of Christ, perish. And he
shows that there is a remedy at hand, whereby brethren may help their
brethren He shall give life he says, to him that is ready to perish, that
shall pray for him.

Albeit the word, He shall give, may be referred to God: as if it had been
said, God shall grant the life of our brethren to our prayers. But the sense
shall be one still, that so far forth the prayers of the faithful are
available, that they may deliver a brother from death. If thou do
understand it of man, that he does give life unto his brother, the speech
will be hyperbolicall: yet it will contain no unseemly thing. For that which
is given unto us by the free grace of god: yea that which for our sake is
granted unto others, we are said to give unto others.

So great a profit ought not to move us a little, to pray that our bretherens
sins may be forgiven them. And when the Apostle commends unto us [Sumpathian]
a compassion, he does withal admonish, how much we are to take heed of
cruelty in condemning our brethren, and too much sharpness in despairing of
their safety.

A sin not unto death. Least immediately we cast away all hope of their
safetye which sin, he shows that God does not so severely punish their
faults, that therefore he does utterly cast them off. Whereupon it does
follow, that we must take them for brethren, seeing the Lord does receive
them in the account of children. But he denies that they are sins unto
death, not only wherein the Saints do daily offend: but also if at any time
it come to pass that they grievously provoke the wrath of God. For so long as
there remains place to forgiveness, death does not yet wholly reign. And
yet ye Apostle does not here distinguish betwixt venial and deadly sin, as
afterward was commonly done. For that distinction which prevailed in the
Papacy, is most unsavory. The Sorbonnists acknowledge almost no sin to be
deadly, except wherein there appears such gross uncleanness, that it may be
felt with hands. So amongst venial sins they account the most horrible
filthiness, which lurketh in the mind. Finally, all the fruits of original
sin, so that they break not out into external act, they think to be done
away with a light sprinkling of holy water. And what marvel when they do not
account the blasphemous doubtings of the grace of God, and whatsoever lusts and
concupiscences to be sin, so that the consent be not withal? If the mind of
man be shaken with unbelief, if impatience do provoke him, that he murmr
against God, how much soever monstrous lusts do move him: all this is lighter
with the papists, then that he be overtaken in sin, at the least after
baptism. Therefore it is no marvel if of grievous offenses they can make venial
sins: for they weigh the^ with their own and not with ye balance of god. But
among the faithful this principle must be undoubted, yt whatsoever is contrary
to ye law of god, is sin, and that deadly by his own nature. For where ye
tra^sgressio^ of ye law is, there is sin and death. Then what shall be the sense
of the apostles words? He denies those sins to be deadly, which albeit they
are worthy of death, Yet God does not so severely punish them, Therefore he
does not weigh the sins in themselves, but he judges of them according to
the fatherly kindness of God, which pardons the guiltiness, where yet there
was offense. Finally, he does not give the^ over to death, yt God has
restored to life by raising them again, albeit they let not why they should
not have been shut out from life.

There is a sin unto death. I have said already that sin is called so,
whereto there is left no hope of forgiveness. But it is demanded what manner
of sin that is. For it must needs be very grievous, which God so severely
punishes. It may be gathered by the course of the text, that the fall was not
in part, as they say, nor the transgression of one precept: but a general
falling away, where by men do utterly estraunge themselves from God. For ye
apostle adds afterward, that the sons of God do not sin: that is, that
they forsake not God, and give over and imbondage themselves whollye unto
Satan.

It is no marvel if such a falling away be a deadly sin. For God does
never so deprive his children of the grace of his spirit, but that they
receive some spark of godliness. Therefore they must needs be reprobates,
and given over unto death, who so fall away, that they cast away the fear of
God. If any ask whether the way of salvation be shut up against their
repentance: The answer is ready, That seeing they are given over unto a
reprobate sense, and destitute of the holy Ghost, they can do no other thing,
then run headlong into worse, and add sin unto sin. Further, seeing
sin or blasphemy against the Spirit, does continually draw with it such a
falling away, there is no doubt but it is noted here. But it is asked again
by what marks we may know that the fall of man is deadly. For except there
were certain knowledge of that thing, the Apostle should except in vain, that
we must not pray for that kind of sin. Therefore it shall be lawful
sometimes to determine whether he be past hope that has fallen, or that there
be yet place to recovery. I grant indeed that that is true: and it is proved
without controversy by this place. But because this comes but seldly to
pass, and god commending the infinite riches of his grace, commands us by his
example to be merciful: the judgment of eternal death is not rashly to be
given upon any man: rather love does incline us to hope well. But if the
desperate wickedness of some men do appear unto us no otherwise, then if the
Lord did point it out with the finger, there is not why we should strive with
the just judgment of God, or desire to be more favorable then he.

17 Every unrighteousness. This place may be expounded diversely, for if thou
resolve it into the contrary part, the sense shall not be amiss thus, Albeit
all, unrighteousness is sin, yet there is some sin not unto death. Another
sense would also likewise agree, Because sin is all unrighteousness:
therevppon it follows, that there is some sin not unto death. Others take
All unrighteousness for whole unrighteousness: as if the Apostle should have
said, that the sin whereof he speaks, is an heap of unrighteousness. Yet
I do more willingly allow of the first or second exposition: and because they
fall both to one end, I leave the judgment free to the readers, which of them
be more fit.

18 We know that whosoever is of God. If thou take the children of god to be
altogether clean and free from sin, as fantastical men do feign, the
Apostle shall be contrary to himself, for by this means, he should take
away from amongst brethren the endeavor of praying. Therefore he says they
do not sin, which fall not utterly away from the grace of God. And hence he
would infer, that we must pray for all the children of God: because they
sin not unto death. The proof is added, Because every one that is borne of
God, keeps himself, that is, does keep himself in the fear of God: and
suffers not himself so to be with violence carried away, that the sense of
godliness being extinguished, he whollye gives himself to the devil and to
the flesh. For when he says, That he is not touched of that wicked one. It is
to be referred to the deadly wound. For the children of GOD are not free from
the wounds of Satan: but they so beat back his strokes with the shield of
faith, that they pearce not to the very heart. Therefore the spiritual life is
never extinguished in them. This is that Not to sin, when the godly do
indeed fall thorough the infirmity of the flesh: but they mourn under the
burden of sin, they are displeased with themselves, they cease not to fear
God.

Keeps himself. That which is proper to God, he applies unto us. For it
every of us be the keeper of his own salvation, it will be a miserable defense.
Therefore Christ prays his father that he will keep us. John. 17.11 signifieng
that this is not in our power. The defenders of free will snatch up this
speech, that they might thereby prove, that we are delivered from sin, partly
by the grace of God, and partly by our own power. But they do not observe,
that the faithful have not of themselves the keeping whereof the Apostle
speaks. Nor indeed does he here publish their strength, as if they did
keep themselves by their own power: but only he teaches that they resist
Satan, that they be never deadly wounded with his darts. And we know that we
are never prepared to battle with any other armor then the armor of God.
Let therefore the faithful keep themselves from sin, even as they are kept
of God.

19 We know that we are of God, and the whole world lies in wickedness.

20 But we know that the son of God is come, and has given us a mind to
know him, which is true: and we are in him which is true: in his son Jesus
Christ. This is true God, and life eternal.

21 Little children keep your selves from Idols. Amen.


19 WE are of God. By the former doctrine he takes occasion to exhort, for
that which he had said in common of all the children of God, he now applies to
them unto whom he wrote: and that, that he might prick them forward to avoid
sin, and encourage them to withstand the assaults of Satan. Let the
readers note, that this indeed is true faith, which applies (that I may speak
so) the grace of God unto us. For the Apostle does not acknowledge any other
to be faithful, except such as assemble themselves into the order of the
children of God. Neither indeed does he allege, a probable conjecture, as the
schoolmen speak, for trust. For he says, That we know. The sum has this
drifte, Seeing we are borne of God, that we must endeavor our selves, that
being separated from the world, we may prove by holiness of life, that we
are not in vain called to so great dignity. And this admonition is very
needful to all ye godly. For whether soever they turn their eyes, Satan has
ready enticements, whereby he may draw them from God. Therefore it would be
hard for them to hold a right course, except their calling were more of
account with them, then all worldly lets. Therefore that we may be rightly
armed to strive, these two must be held: That the world is wicked: and that
our calling is of God Under the name of the World; there is no doubt but ye
Apostle to ^^prehendeth all mankind. When he says, It lies in wickedness.
He places it under the government of Satan. There is no cause therefore, why
we should doubt to shun the world, which contemning God, does gave it self
into the bondage of Satan: there is not, why we should fear the disagreement
thereof, because it is a stranger from God. Finally, seeing corruption
possesses the whole Nature, the faithful must study to deny themselves.
Seeing that in the world there is nothing seen but iniquity and wickedness,
(...) is of necessity, that they give the farewell to flesh and blood, that
they may follow God. Yet that other must together be added, That it is god who
has called them, that they may set his aid against all the ^^^gins of ye world
and of Satan.

20 But we know that the son of God is come. Because the children of God are
assailed every way, he does as we have said encourage and exhort them by this
means to a constant resistaunce, because they fight under the conduct of God,
and do certainly know that they are governed by his spirit. And now he
shows, from whence that knowledge is chiefly to be fetched. He says
therefore, ye God is so made known unto us in Christ, that now there is no
cause of doubting. The Apostle does not rashly incline into this part. For
except our faith were soundly grounded in God, we shall never remain constant
in the conflict. For this cause the Apostle teaches, that by the benefit of
Christ we have attained unto an assured knowledge of ye true God, that we waver
not vnstaide. The True God, he understands not him that is true, but him who
in very deed is God: that he may discern him from all Idols. For it is,
[Alethinos,] not [Alethes.] As John. 17.35. This is life eternal, that they
know thee the very true God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, that he
may lighten our minds to the knowledge of God For seeing he is the very image
of the invisible God, seeing the only interpreter of the father, seeing the
only giver of life: yea life, the light of ye world, and truth, so soon as we
depart from him, it is of necessity yt we vanish away in our own inventions.
But Christ is said, To have given us understanding, not only because he
shows by the doctrine of the Gospel who is the true God, and does also
inlighten us with his spirit: but because we have in Christ him self God
manifested in ye flesh, as Paul says. Even as all fullness of the Godhead
does dwell in him, 1. Tim. 3.16. And all the treasures of knowledge and
wisdom are hid, Col. 2.3. and 9. So it comes to pass, that the open face
of God, after a sort does shine unto us in Christ. Not that there was none,
or a doubtful knowledge of God before the coming of Christ: but because now
he has manifested himself more fully, and as it were in a marvelous
cleerenes. And this is yt which Paul says. 2. Cor. 4.6. That god who in time
past commanded the light to shine out of darkness, in the creation of the
world, has now shined in our hearts by the light of the knowledge of his
glory in the face of Christ. And we must note, that this gift is peculiar to
Gods elect only. Christ indeed has indifferently set forth to al, the light
of his gospel, but al have not seeing minds to behold: but rather Satan does
spredde the veil of blindness before the eyes of many. Therefore the apostle
understands ye light which Christ kindles within the hearts of his children,
and which once being kindled is never put out, albeit at some times it come to
pass in some that it be hindered for a time.

We are in him which is true. By this word he does teach, how effectual that
knowledge is, whereof he has made mention: that is, because by it we are
grafted into Christ, and made one with God. For it has a liuelye root, and
truly settled in our hearts, whereby it comes to pass, that God lives in us,
and we in him. Because he says without note of coupling together, We are in
him that is true, in his son, he seems to express the manner of our
conjunction with God: as if he should have said: That we are in God by Christ.

This same is very God. Albeit the Arrians have gone about to abuse this place,
and certain at this day subscribe unto them: yet here we have an excellent
witness of the divinity of Christ. The Arrians refer this to the Father, as
if the Apostle should again say that he were true God. But the repetition
should be too fruitless. He had twice already testified yt he was the true
God, who appeared unto us in Christ: to what end should he by and by add,
This is true God? But it agrees fitly unto Christ. For after that he had
taught that Christ was the guide by whose direction we were led unto God: now,
for amplification sake he affirms, that Christ is that God, least we should
think, that he is to be sought a far off. And the Epethite, Of eternal
life, confirms the same. Indeed he speaks both of one and the same that
he is true God, and eternal life. I o^mit, that ye relative [Outos] he uses
to be restrained to ye next person. This I say, that Christ is properly called
eternal life; and it cannot be denied, that this manner of speaking is usual
with John The sum is, when we have Christ, that we enjoy the true and
eternal God: because he is no other where to be sought. Then that we are so
made pertakers of eternal life, because being bid in the father, it is
offered us in Christ. The father indeed is the beginning of life: but the
fountain from whence we may draw it, is Christ.

21 Little children keep your selves from Idols. Albeit it is a several
sentence, yet it is that which hangs upon the former doctrine. For the
quickening light of the gospel, must not only scatter and drive away the
darkness, but also all clouds out of ye minds of the godly. And the Apostle
does not only condemn idolatry, but he commands that they take heed unto
themselves of the idols themselves. Whereby he signifies, that the sound and
sincere worship of God cannot be kept, so soon as men begin to haunt images.
For so is superstition bred in us, that every least cause does infect us with
the poison of it. Dry wood will not so soon burn, being laid upon the
coals, as idolatry will soon infect and possess the minds of men, when
occasion is offered them. Who sees not that Images are sparks? Why do I call
the^ sparks? Yea rather firebrarnds, which may suffice to set the whole world
on fire. Albeit the Apostle does not speak only of images: but he
comprehends the altars, and all instruments of superstition. Further, the
Papists are ridiculous, who wrest this to the pictures of Jupiter and Mercury
and such like: as if indeed the Apostle does not generally teach, that it is a
corrupting of godliness, where there is unto God imagined a bodily shape, or
where images and pictures are set up to worship. Let us therefore remember, that
we must so careful continue in ye spiritually worship of God, that we drive far
away from us, whatsoever may bend us to gross and carnal superstitions.

FINIS.
The Come^taries of M. Jhon Calvin, upon the Epistle of Jude. The Argument.
ALthough the Old writers have diversely contended concerning this Epistle, yet
because it is profitable to be read, neither does it contain any thing,
contrary unto the foundenesse of the doctrine of the Apostles, and has
received authority of long time among all good men, I do willyngly number it
among the rest. Further, the shortness thereof does not require any long
treatise of argument: and the whole some almost does agree with the second
Chaper of the last Epistle. For, ij. Peter. ij.
because that wicked unthrifts had crept in, under the name of Christianity,
whose whole delight was to draw light and weak men, into a profane contempt
of God. Jude does first show, that the faithful ought not to be daunted with
such engines, with which the Church has always been assailed: And yet he
exhorts them, that they do carefully take heed of such plagues, and that
he may make them the more hated and abhorred, he does sharply denounce
against them, the punishment of God at hand, such as their wickedness
deserves. Now, if we consider what Satan has gone about in this our age
also, from the beginning of the Gospel: with what subtilties he does yet
busy him self to overthrow the Faith and fear of God: That warnyng which
was profitable for the time wherein Jude lived, is more then necessary for our
time. But all this shall be better learned, by the readyng of the Epistle.

Upon the Epistle of Saint Jude.
1 Jude a servant of Jesus Christ, and brother to James, to them which are
called and sanctified in God the Father, and kept in Jesus Christ.

2 Mercy unto you, and peace and love be multiplied.


HE calls him self the servant of Christ, not as this name does
indifferently agree unto all the godly, but in respect of his Apostleship.
For they are specially accounted the servants of Christ, to whom he has
appointed some public office. And we know to what end, the Apostles use to
dignifie them selves with this title. He does not rightly arrogate to himself,
the right and authority of teaching who soever is not called. Therefore, their
calling is a witness unto the Apostles, that they do not thrust in
themselves, of their own private brain. Although this alone were not
sufficient of it self, that they are placed in office, unless they did behave
them selves faithfully in the same. And truly he comprehends both, which
says, that he is the servant of God: to wit, that he has GOD the aucthour
of the function, which he exercises, and also that he does faithfully
execute that which is enjoined him. And because very many do falsely
pretend this title, and do falsely boste them selves to be that, which they
are most far from, we must always see whether the thing it self do
agree with the profession.

Brother of James, He adds a name, which was more known and renoumed to the
Church. For although the credit and authority of doctrine, does hang upon
no mortal man, yet this is a great stay unto faith, when as the soundenesse
of the man is known unto us, which is the teacher. And that the authority of
James, is not here pretended, as of some private manne: but because that among
all men, he was taken to be unto the Church one of the cheef Apostles of
Christ. And he was the Son of Alpheus, as I have said in an other place.
Yea, this place makes for me against Eusebius and others, who write that a
Disciple, I know not who called Oblia, was he of whom Luke speaks in the
Acts 15.13. and 21.18. which was more excellent then the Apostles in that
Church. But there is no doubt, but Jude does call him here his Brother,
because he was famous amongst the Apostles. Therefore it is likely that it was
he, unto whom Luke tells, that there was special honor given by the rest.
To the which are called in God. He notes all the faithful by this name,
because that the Lord has separated them unto him self. But because calling
is nothing, but the effect of the eternal election, it is sometimes taken for
it. In this place in skilleth little, whether way thou do expound it. For in
deed he commends the grace of God, whereby he vouchsafes to choose the^ unto
himself for a peculiar people.

And he signifies that men do not prevent God, neither at any time do come
unto him, until he draw them. He calls them also sanctified in God the
Father, which we may translate by God the Father. Yet I have kept that form
of speech, that the readers might have their free judgment. For, this also
may be the sense, that being profane in themselves, they have sanctification
in God. Further, the manner of Sanctification is, When he does regenerate us by
his Spirit. The other readyng that the common interpreter has followed, is
somewhat harder, (...), that is to say, to the beloved in God the Father.
Therefore I judge that it is corrupted, and truly it is found in five books.
He adds further, that they are kept in Christ. For we should be always
Satan's, subject to Death, in so much as he would catch us an hundredth
times, every momente, as a ready pray, unless we were safe under the
defense of Christ: whom the Father has therefore given unto us to be our
keeper, that none of those things should be lost, which he has received
into his Faith and Defense. Therefore Jude does here show a threefold
benefit of God in all the godly: That he has made them pertakers of the
Gospel by his calling, that he has regenerate them into newness of life by
his Spirit, and that he has kept them by the hand of Christ, that they
should not fail of their Salvation.

2 Mercy unto you. The name of Mercy does signify almost the same, which
the name of Grace does signify in the salutations of Paul.

If any man desire to have a more curious difference, Grace is properly the
effect of Mercy: because that God does embrace us with his love, not for
any other cause, but because he has respect unto our miseries. Love may be
understood as well of God toward men, as of men among them selves. If thou
refer it to God, the sense shall be, that the trust of the love of God does
increase in them, and is established every day more and more in their hearts.
Yet that other sense does not il agree also, that God do then kindle and
confirm in them mutual love.

3 Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you, of the common
salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you to exhort you, that you
should earnestly contend for the maintenance of that faith, which was once
given unto the Saints.

4 For there are certain men crept in which before of old were ordained to
this condemnation: ungodly men they are, which turn the grace of our God
into wantonness, and deny God the only Lord and our Lord Jesus Christ.


3 WHen I gave all diligence. I have translated the Greek (...) vsyng
diligence, it sounds word for word to do diligence. Further, many
interpreters do open this sentence thus: That an earnest endeavor did enforce
Jude to write. As we are wont to say, that they which do burn with some
earnest desire, can not stay them selves, therefore according to them, there
was a necessity in this, that the desire to write, did not suffer Jude to be
silent.

But I rather think that there are here two several members. That when
otherways he was ready enough, and carefully given to write, necessity also
did constrain him. He signifies therefore, that he writes freely and
desirouslie unto them: but yet that he was urged also with necessity that he
should do it: Because in deed (as it follows in the course of the text)
they being assaulted of the wicked, were to be instructed to the battle.
Therefore in this first place Jude testifies, that he had so great a care of
their Salvation, that he desired to write of his own accord, and that in
deed withal his heart. Then, that he might stir up their attentiveness, he
says together that the matter did require it should be so. For necessity
gives sharp spurs. Except they had been premonished, how greatly
needful this exhortation would be unto them: They might have been slow and
careless to read. But when he foretells that he does write, by mean of
their present necessity, it is as if he should sound a retire, to shake of
their drowsiness.

Of the common Salvation. Certain copies add yours, but amiss, in my
judgment. For he makes salvation common to them with him self. And this
sort of doctrine, which is to be published, gives not a little effect, when
one speaks of his own feelyng and experience. For the speech will be but
bablyng, if we reason of Salvation amongst other men, whereof we our
selves have no feelyng. Therefore Jude professes him self to be a teacher,
conning in practice, when in the number of the godly, he does assemble him
self into the fellowshipp of the same Salvation.

That I might exhort you to strive. It is word for word. Exhortyng you. But
when he notes the end of his counsel, the speech must be resolved thus.
Whereas I have translated by striuyng to help the Faith, it is as much, as to
endeavor to keep the faith, and to endure strongly, the contrary assaults of
Satan. For he teaches that to the end, they may remain steadfast in the
Faith, they must undergo many conflictes, and that continual trouble waits
upon them. He says The Faith once given. That they may know, that they have
attained to it upon this condition, that they never faint, or fall away.

Creptein. Albeeit that Satan is always malicious against the godly, and
therefore does not cease to provoke them: yet he admonishes them to whom he
writes, of the present necessity. Now, he says, Satan does especially
set upon you, and provoke you. You must therefore take Armor to resist him.
Here we gather, that a good and faithful Pastor must wifely foresee, what
the present state of the Church does require, that he may thereto apply his
doctrine. The word (...) which he uses, does note a sinister and secret
creepyng in, whereby the ministers of Satan deceive the ignorant. For in the
night, and when the Housbandmen sleep, Satan does scatter his Tares, that he
may corrupt the pure feed of the Lord. And together he touches that this is
a dangerous evil. For hear also is the craft of Satan: to raise up to do
hurt, those that be of the flock, to the end they may the easelier fall in.

Condemned before. He calls the Judgment, either damnation, or a reprobate
sense, whereby they are carried to peruerte the doctrine of goodlinesse. And
that can no man do, but to his own destruction. Further, this Metaphour is
taken from thence, whereby the eternal counsel of God (by which the
faithful are ordained to Salvation) is called a book. And when the faiethfull
hear, that they are auowed to eternal death, they ought to take heed to
themselves, least they endanger themselves with the same destruction. Albeit
Jude means also to meet with a peril, least the strangeness of the matter
might move or trouble any. For, if they were of old ordained it follows that
the Church is not exercised, but by the assured counsel of God.

The grace of our God. Now he shows more plainly, what manner of mischeef it
was. For he says, that they abused the grace of the Lord, that they might
give over them selves and others to an impure, and profane liberty to sin.
But the grace of God has appeared far to an other end, that is, that we
should deny ungodliness, and worldelie lusts, and live soberly, justly, and
godly in this present world. Let us therefore know, that there is nothing
more pestilent then this kind of men, which by the grace of Christ, prete^de
a liberty to sin. Because we teach that by the free mercy of GOD, we
obtain Salvation, the Papists accuse us of this fault. But what auailes it
to refell their impudency with words? when every where we urge Repentance,
the fear of God, and newness of life: and they do not only corrupt the
whole world with most vile examples, but also they take from the world, by
their wicked doctrine, true holiness, and the right worship of God? Albeeit I
think that they of whom Jude speaks, were like to the Libertines of our
time, as it will more plainly appear by the course of the text. God which is
only Lord. Certain old Copies have, Christ, which is only God and Lord.
And in deed in the second Epistle of Peter, there is only mention of Christ,
and there he is called Lord. He means that Christ is denied, when they who
were redeemed with his blood, do again embondage them selves to the devil,
and make void, as much as lies in them, that inestimable price. Therefore,
that Christ may retain us in his own possession: let us remember that he
therefore died for us, and rose again, that he might rule over our life and
death.

5 J will put you in remembrance, for as much as you know this, how that
after the Lord had delivered his people out of Egypt, he destroyed the^
afterward which believed not.

6 And the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitatio^: he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day.

7 As Sodom and Gomorrha, and the Citees about them, which in like manner as
they did, committed, and followed strange flesh, are set forth for an example
and endure the like vengeance of eternal fire.


5 To put in mind. He either excuses for modesty sake, least he may seem
to teach them, as rude people of things, which they know not: or in deed
(which likes me better) for the more vehemency, he testifies that he does
not bring them any thing, which they had not heard of before: To the end that
that which he was to speak, might have the more credit and authority. He
says, I only bring to your remembrance those things, which you have
learned already. But as he does attribute unto them knoweledge, to the end
they may be the more watchful to take heed: So least they might think the
labor, which he undertook toward them to be needelesse, he says they
have need of admonitions.

For this is not only the use of the word of God, that we may learn those
things, which we were never taught, but also that it may stir us up to
meditate earnestly those things, which we know already, and may not
suffer us to be drousie in fruitless knowledge. And this is the effect, that
after we are called of God, we must not scarcely boste of his grace: but
rather walk carefully in his fear. Because if any do mock God after this
sort, the contempt of his glory shall not go in vain. He shows this by
three examples. For first he calls to mind the punishment, which God
executed upon the unbelievers whom being redeemed by his power, he had chosen
to be his people. Almost the like comparison is in Paul, in his first to the
Corinths, the tenth Chapter. The effect is: Those whom God had adorned with
greatest benefits, whom he had advanced into the same degree of honor,
which he vouchsaueth us at this day, he afterward severely punished.

Therefore, they in vain boast of the grace of God, who soever do not answer
unto his calling. The name of People is honorably taken for an holy and
chosen Nation. As if he should have said, that it did not profit them that
they were taken into the Covenant by a singular Privilege. When he calls
them unbelievers, he notes the fountain of all euilles. For from thence,
says Moises, did proceed all their sins, that they did not yield
themselves to be guided by the word of God. For where the obedience of faith
is it is together of necessity, that there remain obedience toward God, in
every part of this life.

6 Jf not the Angels. An argument from the more to the less. For the condition
of Angels was of more account then ours: and yet God punished that falling
away, for a most horrible example. Therefore, he will not spare our
unfaithfulness, if we fall away from the grace, whereunto he has called us.
In deed this punishment, which was laid upon the Citizens of Heaven and
such excellent Ministers of God, ought to be daiely conversant before our
eyes: least at any time we be carried into the contempt of the grace of GOD,
from whence we violently fall headlong into destruction: (...) in this place,
^i^^ie fitly be taken as well for the beginning, as for cheeflie. For Jude
notes that they were therefore punished, because despising the goodness of God
they fell from their first calling. And the Exposition follows immediately,
when he says that they left their first habitation. For no other ways then
uses to be done with runnaway soldiers, they left their place wherein they
were set. The greeuousnesse of the punishment is also to be marked, which the
Apostle shows. Not only free spirits, but heavenly Principalities, are now
held bound in perpetual chains. They did not only enjoy the glorious light
of God, but his brightness did shine in them, that from thence as it were, he
might power out himself, as by beams into all parts of the world: Now they
are plunged under darkness. Further, we are not to imagine a place wherein
the Deuilles are shut. For the Apostle meant to teach plainly, how miserable
their condition is, since by their falling away, they are deprived of their
dignity. For whether soever they go, they draw their chains with them, and
remain overwhelmed in their darkness. In the mean time, their extreme
punishment is deferred, unto the great day.

7 As Sodom and Gomorrha. This example is more general. For he shows that
God (no sort of men excepted) did indifferently execute punishment upon all
the wicked. And Jude himself does after make mention, that the burning
wherewith the five Cities perished, was a figure of eternal fire. Therefore
God did then appoinct an excellent instruction, which might keep men in fear
to the worlds end. Whereupon it comes that there is so often mention
thereof in the Scriptures. Yea, so often as the Prophet would set forth some
notable and fearful judgment of God, setting it forth under the figure of
fire and Brimstone, they allude to the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha.
Wherefore, Jude does not without cause implie a terror to all worlds, by
setting before them such a spectacle. When he says, that the neighbor Cities
went a whoryng in like manner with them, I refer not this to the Israelites
and Angels, but mutually to Sodom and Gomorrha Neither does it hinder, that
they pronounce (...), these, is the Masculine gender. For Jude rather had
regard to the Inhabitaunts then to the places.

To follow strange flesh. He has put, for to be violently carried unto
monstrous lusts. For we know that the Sodomites not content with a common
liberty of uncleanness, were defiled with more execrable and preposterous
filthiness. It is to be noted, that he makes them subject unto eternal fire.
For hence we gather that that fearful spectacle which Moises describes, was
only the image of a greater punishment.

8 Likewise, these deluded with dreams, do in deed defile the flesh and
despise government, and speak evil of them that be in authority.

9 But Michaell the Archangest, when striuyng in judgment, he disputed about
the body of Moises, durst not blame him with cursed speaking, but says. The
Lord rebuke thee.

10 But these speak evil of those things which they know not. But what
soever things they know naturally, they know as brute Beasts, in them they
are corrupted.


LIkewise these etc. This Similitude is not to be precisely urged, as if he
compared those, of whom he speaks to the Sodomites, or to ye Angels which
left their saite, or to the vnbeleeuyng people, in all things. He only
shows, that they are vassalles of wrath ordained to destruction: and that
they can not escape the hand of God, but that in his time he will set the like
example upon them. For his purpose is, to withdraw the godly, least they
entangle themselves in their fellowship. Further, he begins in this place
more clearly to describe these deceivers. And first he says, they do as it
were in dreaming defile their flesh, by which words he notes, a sottishe
shamelessness: as if he should have said, that they are given over to all
uncleanness, which the very worste did abhor, except drowsinesse did take
from them all shame and feelyng. The speech therefore is Metaphorical,
whereby he notes that they are so blockishe, that they give over them selves
to all filthiness without any shame. But ye Antithesis is to be marked, when
he says, they defile the flesh, that is, that which has less excellency,
they dishonest: and yet despise as ignominious, that which does most excel
amongst men. By this second member it appears that they were outrageous men,
which sought to be without government, that being freed from the fear of
law, they might sin more freely. And these two are mostly always joined
together, that they that are let loose to wickedness, together desire that all
order were abolished. Further, albeit this was their drift, to play the wild
Coltes with out yoke, yet it appears by Iudes words, that they used to
speak leudly and co^temptuously of those that were in authority. As at this
day fantastical fellows do not only grind their teeth, that they are
restrained by the authority of Gouerners: but they furiously wrestle against
all government: they cry, that the right of the sword is profane and
contrary to godliness. Finally, they proudly abandon out of the Church of
GOD Kings and all Magistrates. He calls Dignities, degrees endewed with
excellency, and they that excel in honor.

9 But Michaell the Archangell. Peter comprehe^deth this argument more breefly,
and in general, that the Angels which far exceade men, yet dare not give
railyng sentence. Further, because they have thought that this History, is
taken out of an Apocriphall book, thence it is that the Epistle should be of
less account. But seeing the Jews had many things by the Traditions of the
Fathers, I see nothing to be absurd, if we say, that Jude reported that,
which was delivered by hand many years before.

I know in deed, that many foolish things have been received under this
pretense, as the Papists at this day reckon in this account, every
senseless dotage of the Monks. But this does not let, but that they had
certain histories which were not written. This is out of controversy, that
Moses was buried of GOD, that is, that his burial was hid by the assured
Counsel of God. And it is not unknown to any, why his place of burial was
hidd, that is, least the Jews should draw his body into an occasion of
superstition. What marvel then, if Satan endeavor to bring to light, the body
of the Prophet, that was kept secret by the will of God? But the Angels
withstoode it, as their ministry is always at hand with God. And in deed
we see, that almost in all worlds, Satan has used this devise, that the
bodies of the servants of God might be Idols to so many foolish men.

Wherefore, for this testimony, although it be not found in Scripture, this
Epistle ought not to be called into doubt. Whereas Michaell alone is alleged
to dispute with Satan, it is no new thing. We know that the thousands of
Angels are always at hand to serve the Lord: but he applies with choice to
the performaunce of things, this or that, as it pleases him.

That which Jude reports that Michaell spoke, is also had in Zachary. 3.1.
God rebuke thee or repress thee, Satan. It is, as they call it, a comparison
of the more and ye less. Michaell durst not more bitterly curse Satan, who
yet was a reprobate and damned, then that he might commit him to God to be
suppressed. But these fear not, to speak evil of (with extreme reproaches)
the powers whom God adorneth with singular honor.

10 Which they know not. He signifies that they savor nothing but that
which is gross and beastly: and therefore not to perceive what is worth of
honor: yet that they are so impudently mad, that they fear not to condemn
those things which are beyond their capacity. Again, that they are toyled
in an other evil, that when after the manner of beasts they run headlong to
those things which offer them selves to the outward senses, they keep no
modesty in them: but they do utterly plunge themselves, no other ways then
the Swine tumbleth himself into the filthiness of mire.

The Aduerbe naturally, is set against reason and judgment. For the only force
of nature rages in brute beasts: but reason ought to guide me^, and to bridle
their affections.

11 We be unto them: for they have followed the way of Caine: and are cast
away by the deceit of Balaams wages, and have perished in the gainsaiyng of
Core.

12 These are blottes in your love feasts, feastyng among them selves, and
feedyng them selves without fear, clouds without water, carried about of
winds: corrupt trees without fruit, twice dead, and plucked up by the roots.

13 Raging waves of the Sea, fomyng out their own shame: they are wandering
Stars, to whom is reserved the blackenesse of darkness for ever.


11 WOe be unto them. It is marvel why he does so sharply inueigh against
them, seeing he had said of late, that an Angel had not liberty, to give
railyng sentence against Satan him self. But his purpose was to set down a
general rule: He only shows breefly by Michaels example, how intolerable
the rage of these fellows is, whilst they peeuishely rail upon that which
God does honor. It was in deed lawful for Michael, to thunder upon Satan
with extreme cursyng. And we see how vehemently the Prophets do sometimes
enueigh against the wicked. But seeing Michael abstaineth from extreme
sharpness, otherways lawful, how outrageous is it to keep no mean against
the Creatures which excel in glory? But when he does pronounce upon them,
he does not so much wish evil unto them, as premonishe, what end they
shall have.

And that he does, least they might carry any with them to destruction
unawares. He says they are the followers of Cain, who being unkind to God,
peruertyng his worship with an evil and a wicked heart, did bereave him self
of the birtheright. He says they were deceived with reward as Balaam,
because they corrupt the doctrine of godliness for filthy lucre sake. But the
Metaphor which he uses, expresses somewhat more. He says they are cast
away: That is, because their intemperatnesse is cast away, as water that is
spilte. Thirdly he says, that they follow the gainsaiyng of Chore: Because
they trouble the good estate of the church. 12 Blottes in your louefeastes.
They which read, emongst your Charities, do not, in my judgment express the
natural meaning sufficiently. For he calls (...) Feasts, which were used
amongst the godly, for to testify their godly unity. He says that such
bankettes are defiled of unclean men, which dissolutely after cramme
themselves. For there was great sparyng and moderation. It was not therefore
meet, that raueners should be admitted thither, which afterward should
intemperatlie cramme their paunche otherwhere. Many copies have ba^kettyng
together with you. Which readyng if it be better like, the sense shall be, that
they were not a reproach, but grievous and troublesome, as, they that should
without fear stuff their Bellies, of the common charges of the Church.

Peter says somewhat otherways, who writes that they are fed in error,
and that they eat together with the company of the faithful. As if he should
have said, that they do unadvisedly, who nourishe such dangerous Serpents:
And that they are twice fools, which pamper their excessive riot.

And at this day, I would God there were more judgment in some good men, who
while they delight to be too favorable toward the wicked, bring great hurt
to the whole Church.

Clouds without water. The two similitudes which are in Peter, yet to one
end he knitteth into one. For, each nippeth the boasting. Because these
varletts, albeit they promise many things, yet they are barraine, and empty
within. As the Clouds that are driven with the storms give hope of rain, but
by and by they wast to nothing. Peter adds a similitude of a dry and empty
Fountain. And Jude coupleth diverse Metaphors to one end: that Corrupt trees:
as at gatheryng time the strength of trees decreaseth: After he calls them
Trees without fruit, plucked up by the roots, twice dead. As if he should
have said, there is no juice within, how soever the leaves appear.

13 Rageyng waves of the Sea. It may more plainly be gathered by the words
of Peter, why this was added: that is, because being puffed up with pride, they
bluster out or rather spue out proud words in a lofty style. In the mean
time they do so bring nothing that is spiritual, that they rather cast men
down to be as void of feelyng as brute beasts. Such, as is already said,
are at this day those fantastical fellows, who term them selves
Libertines. Thou would say they do nothing but thunder. For despising the
common order of speech, they feign unto themselves I wot not what strange
far fetched form of vtteraunce. After they have seemed to lift their
Disciples above the Skies, they suddenly fall into beastly errors. For they
imagine that that is the state of innocence. When there is no difference
between that which is filthy and clean. They imagine that that is a
spiritual life, while fear being set a part, every one does securely
flatter himself: that we become Gods, because God wholly takes our spirits
departing out of our bodies. For which cause the simplicity of the Scripture,
is with more diligence and reverence to be esteemed, least more finely plaiyng
the Philosophers the^ is convenient, we approache not to Heaven, but rather
be overwhelmed in manifold incomberaunces. He therefore calls the^ wandryng
Stars, because they dazzle ye eyes with a vanishyng show of light.

14 And Enoch the seventh from Adam did before Prophecy of them, saying:
Behold the Lord comes with thousands of his Saints.

15 That he might give Judgment against all men, and might rebuke all the
ungodly among them, of all their wicked deeds, which they have ungodly
committed, and of all their cruel speakinges, which wicked men have spoken
against God.

16 These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts: and their
mouth speaks proud things, having men's persons in admiration for advantage.


ANd before. out of the Apochripha Books. For it may be that they of old
time did commend this saying to their posterity, as a thing worthy the
remembryng. If a man ask (seeing there be many like sayings every where in
the Scriptures) why he did not cite this testimony written out of some one of
the Prophets, the answer is ready: that he would repeat from the furthest
antiquity what the Spirit has pronounced of them. And this is the meaning of
the words. For he says by name the seventh from Adam, that he may commend
the antiquity of the Prophecy: namely, that it has been already in the
former world. And whereas I have said, that this Prophecy was known unto the
Jews by report: if any man think other ways I do not strive: as neither of
the Epistle also, whether it be Iudes, or some other man's. Only I follow
that which is likely in things doubtful.

Behold the Lord came. The time past is put for the time to come, after the
manner of the Prophets. He says that he shall come with thousands of Saints:
under which words he notes as well the faithful as the Angels. For both
shall set forth the tribunal seat of Christ, when he shall come down to
judge the world. He says thousands, even as Daniell also 7.10. does say
millions of Angels: least that the multitude of the ungodly, should as a
ragyng Sea carry away the children of God, whilst they think that it will
come to pass that the Lord will at length gather his together, of which
part dwelling in heaven, is now hidden from our eyes, and part lies hidden
under a great heap of chafe. But the punishment that hangs over the
reprobate, ought to stay the elect in fear and watchfulness. He speaks of
deeds and words: because these corrupters did not only much hurt by their
wicked life, but by their lewd and unclean speech. And he calls them hard
speeches, for the shameless boldness wherewith being puffed up, they do
malepertly thrust in them selves.

16 These are murmurers. Because they flatter them selves in wicked affections,
they are withal hard and froward, that they are never satisfied: hence it
comes that they always murmur and complain, although good men do bear
themselves kindly toward them. He nippeth their proud speaking, because they
boast them selves proudly. But in the mean while he shows that they are of a
vile disposition: because they slauishly abase them selves, for advantage. And
this uneven dealing is commonly seen in such varlets. Where there is no man
which may stay their Pride, or there is no respect which may let it, their
Pride is intolerable: they challenge any thing unto themselves so imperiously.
But they vilely flatter those, who^ they flatter, or of whom they hope for some
gain. He takes persons, for the outward greatness or power.

17 But ye beloved remember the words which were spoken before by the Apostles
of our Lord Jesus Christ: to wit,

18 That they told you, that there should be mockers in the last time, which
should walk after the lusts of their own ungodliness.

19 Those are they which separate them selves, fleshly, not having the Spirit.


But ye. but their own belly Epicures which despise God, who quite castyng a
side all reverence, do furiously scoff the whole doctrine of godliness as a
tale.

19 Which separate. Many Greek Copies have a Participle absolute. Others add
(...): but almost in the same sense. For he understands that they make a
departure from the Church, because they can not bear the yoke of discipline,
as which being given to the flesh, do abhor a spiritual life. The flesh
here is set against the Spirit, that is, the grace of regeneration: and
therefore it does signify an evil disposition, such as is in men not yet
borne a new. For in this nature which goes out of kind, which we draw from
Adam, is nothing but a gross and earthly thing: that no part of us does
aspire unto God, till we be renewed with his spirit.

20 But ye, beloved, edifiyng your selves in your most holy faith, praiyng in
the holy Ghost.

21 Keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ unto eternal life.

22 And have mercy on some, putting difference:

23 And others save through fear, pullyng them out of the fire, hatyng also
the garment spotted by the flesh.

24 Now to him that is able to keep you free from sin, and to present you
faultlesse before the presence of his glory with joy,

25 To God only wise our Savior be glory, and majesty, and dominion, and
power, now, and for ever, amen.


But ye etc. 20
He shows the way whereby they may ouerturne all the engines of Satan, to
wit, having love so joined with faith, as though they did watch in a Hold
until the coming of Christ. But as he is much and usual in borrowed
speeches, so here also he has his manner of speech which must breefly be
noted. He commands in the first place that they build themselves in faith.
Whereby he signifies that the foundation of faith must be held fast: but that
the first instruction is not sufficient unless they strive daily to go
forward, which have already laid the foundation in a right faith. He
calls their faith most holy, that they may rest soundly upon it, and
leanyng unto the strength thereof, may never waver. But for as much as the
whole perfection of man does consist in faith, it seems to be an unseemly
thing that he bids to build an other buildyng, as though faith did only
begin a man. The Apostle answers this question, when he adds by and by,
that men are builded upon faith, love being joined withal. Vnleast it may be
that some man had rather take it thus, that men are builded in faith, so far
as they profit therein. And truly they daily going forward in faith, do
cause that it rises into a full buildyng. By this means the Apostle would
teach, that we must grow in faith, that we must be earnest in prayer, and
that we must hold fast our calling in love.

Praiyng in the Spirit. This is the way of continuance, if we be instructed
with the power of God. Therefore, as often as we speak of the constantnesse
of faith, we must fly unto prayer. And because we commonly pray slaighlie,
he adds, in the Spirit: as if he should say, that there is so great
slacknesse, and so great coldness of our flesh, that none can pray a right,
unless he be stirred up with the Spirit of God, that we are so ready to
mistruste and fearfulness, that no man dares call God Father, except the same
Spirit do teach him. For, from hence comes carfulness, hence heat
andearnestnesse, hence cheerfulness, hence hope of obtainyng, hence finally
come those unspeakable gronynges, of which Paul speaks. Romans 8. Therefore,
Jude teaches not without cause, that no man can pray as he ought, except the
Spirit be his guide.

21 Keep your selves in Love. He places Love as the keeper and guide of our
life: not that he may set it against the grace of God, but because this is the
right course of our calling, if we go forward in Love. And because many
things do entice us to backsliding, that it is hard to keep our selves
sound unto God unto the end, he recalleth the faithful unto the last day.
For the very waityng for that day, ought to stay us up, that we never
fainte. Otherways we must needs quail every moment.

And it is to be noted, that he will not have us to hope for eternal life,
but from the mercy of Christ. For, he shall so be our Judge, that he holds
the free benefit of Redemption, purchased by him, as a rule to judge by.

22 And have compassion on some. He joins an other exhortation, how the
faithful ought to behave them selves in correctyng their brethren: that they
may bring them unto the Lord.

And he teaches that they are diversely to be dealt with, to wit, every
manne, according to his disposition. For, toward the gentle, and such as are
willing to be taught, we must use gentleness. Others are more hard:
therefore, to be brought under with fear. This is the puttyng of a difference
which he spoke of. The Participle (...), that is puttyng difference, I know
not why Erasmus should rather choose to translate it Passiuelie, seeing it is
doubtful: and the Active signification, does far better agree with the
text. Therefore the sum is, that, if we will provide for the safety of them
that do fall. We must consider the inclination of every manne: that they which
are gentle and tractable, be gently called back into the way, as worthy of
compassion: but if any be stubberne, let him be corrected more sharply. And
because sharpness is almost hurtful, he excuses it by the necessity,
because they cannot otherways be preserved, which do not follow good
counsels of their own accord. Further, he uses an excellent borrowed
speech. For, where there is no danger of burning, we doubt not with
violence to pull him, whom we desire to have safe: neither in deed were it
enough to beeken with their finger, or gentely to reach out the hand. So also
their safety is to be provided for, which would not come unto God, vnleast
they were hardly drawn.

The old interpretation does far differ: which readyng is yet found in many
Greek copies. Reprove them that are judged, says the old interpreter. But
that former sense does better agree: and in my judgment it is true and
natural. The word to keep, is translated unto men: not that they are
authors of safety, but Ministers.

23 Hatyng. This place, which otherways does seem darcke, shall have no
hardness, the borrowed speech being well expounded. He wills that the
faithful do not only take heed of the touching of vices: But that no
infection do fasten upon them, he teaches that whatsoever is nere and alied,
be avoided. As if we speak of in chastity, we will say that all
prouocations to lust must be taken away. That shall be yet made more plain,
if the speech be made full: to wit, that we hate not only the flesh, but
the garment which is defiled with the touching of it. For this note (...) i.
and, serves to amplification. Therefore, he does not so much permit evil
to be nourished by sufferaunce, that rather he bideth all preparations, and
all additions as they call them, to be cut of.

24 And to him that is able to keep. He shuts up his Epistle, with the
praise of God: in which he shows that our exhortations can do nothing,
neither our endeavors, except the effect proceed from the power of God.

Some copies have (Them) which readyng if we receive, the sense shall be, in
deed it is your part to endeavor, that they may be safe: but it pertains
to God only to perform the same. Yet the other readyng pleases me better: in
which also there is an alludyng unto the former sentence. For after that he
has exhorted the faithful, to save that which was lost: to the end that
they might know, that al endeavors will be to none effect, except God
work: He does in deed witness that they can not otherwise be saved, then
by the power of God. Albeeit in this last part, there is an other Verb, that
is to say, (...), which sounds to keep. So he should have respect to that
former member, where he said, Save, or Keep your selves.

FINIS.
An Epistle of M. Ihon Calvin, containyng diverse necessary poinctes of
knowledge tendyng to constancy in the truth in the time of affliction:
written to a Friend. Calvin. N.S.D. To certain controversies of godly
Brethren.
THE calamity of ye Church N. does not a little grieve us: but because God
does now seem to loose the races of Satan and the wicked, that he may
exercize those that be his, we must patiently bear our estate. In the mean
time he is to be entreated, that for his mercies sake he will spare ye
weakness of his tender and little flock. But who so thinks that it goes
miserably with the Church, so often as it is assailed with the fury or
cruel violence of enemies, do not yet know the very ground of Christian
warfare. Hence is that doubtfulnesse that has crept into the minds of many,
and now does possess them. Whether it be lawful for the godly to have
secret meetings, and in the night. For we see that judgment is chiefly
given by the success, then the which, there is nothing more out of order. Of
late when without danger they might come together, they also thought that
without all controversy their obedience was acceptable to God: now when
trouble is sprung up, do they dispute whether they suffer punishment for their
rashness? By this means will shortly be condemned the confession of faith,
which does more kindle the rage of the wicked. Finally, according to these
Iudgers it will not be good to follow Christ, except in prosperity. Paul did
not without cause, Galat. 4.29.
place the scoffings of Israel in the highest degree of persecution: because
therein is more danger by deriding, and reproaches, then by armed cruelty. If
the wicked see us pressed with adversity, they triumph at our afflictions.
Here if our constancy does begin to quail, they hurt more grievously with
their words then with sword. But that saying of Paul was to be held: because
we trust in the living God, we must not only suffer persecution, but
slanders. Let us therefore call to remembrance the example of Christ, whom
Satan labored to wound with his venomous Darte. He trusted in God, let him
deliver him if he will, least we stumble so often as we seem to be given unto
the desire of the enemies. But if at the first pushe the Brethren be either
feared or disquieted, it is your duty to stay them up, least they fall
down, or also to raise them up, that they may again recover their strength:
and not therefore to fail from their godly endeavor, because it gave the
wicked an occasion to be cruel. For if the matter be weighed by it self, the
answer will be plain, that their private and secret meetings, were not
laid to the Apostles charge for a fault. The malicious enemies might then also
object, that men and women could not come together in the night and secretly
without suspicion. And there is no doubt but they were burdened with many
slanders: and when a Garrison of Soldiers kept watch at Jerusalem, this might
seem to be contrary to the public peace. And yet they ceased not for all
that. Act. 12.12.
We see that when Peter was taken prisoner, they were gathered together in the
house of a widow. Neither is it needful here to gather examples, because it
is known to have been in daiely use with them: as Histories witness, that the
godly Martirs have had caves for their Churches. All be it this was subject to
no small reproof, that they might be suspected either of theft, or of some
other wickedness: yet because necessity did so enforce, they despised with
valiant minds the reproaches which they knew to be commonly spread. So now
our brethren are armed with a most excellent defense, if Magistrates will
suffer them freely and openly to call upon the name of God, that they will
then gladly come abroad, nor will they do any thing in secret: but because
by their tyranny they are forbid, yet that they follow that mean which is
most far from tumulte. The same is to be thought of Matrimony, whose
blessyng (as they call it) in the Papacy is mere profanation. And yet in
respect of political order, it can not be called a secret Marriage, whereof
there is a Regester kept. But that ye holiness thereof should be polluted and
defiled with superstitions, is by no means to be suffered. All be it night
Burialles are not without cause condemned by the Laws: yet in vain do they
cloak their delicateness, who in the Burialles of their friends, do wrapp and
entangle them selves with old Sacriledges. The same reason ought to hold in
Baptism. For all be it there be before them a most present danger, yet will
not that therefore be lawful, which God does manifestly forbid. We know
that in the Papacy Baptism is corrupted with many defilynges, and is almost
adulterated. If no fear hinder, it will easily be agreed unto among all the
godly, that it is not lawful for Fathers to offer their children to a defiled
Baptism. Therefore, to take an excuse by the danger is too frivolous, as if
the matter it self should thereby change the nature thereof. For we know
that the testimony of Godliness is more worth before God, then that it ought
to give place either to threatninges, or terrors, at the least where fear
does urge us to dissimulation, which is a secret approving of that which is
evil. Wherefore, as for charities sake we lament together with our Brethren:
so it is not in our power to free them from the insoluble law of God, which
by no means may be broken. Exodus 1.17.
And if the Iewishe women in times past did not fear in Egypt, to deliver the
children of other men from the sword of Pharao, to put their own lives into
danger, it is foul for parents to be amazed with fear, that so much as in
them lies, they defile the souls of their children. These things I have
breefly written to you according to the judgment of our company, good sir,
and right reverend Brother, the Lord guide you always with his Spirit,
bless your holy labors, and keep you in safety with the Church committed
to your charge. My fellow laborers also do heartily salute you. At Geneua.

FINIS.

