AN ABRIDGEMENT OF THE INSTITVTION OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION written by M. Ihon
Calvin.

WHEREIN BRIEF AND sound aunsvveres to the objections of the adversaries are
set down.

By William Lawne minister of the word of God.

Faithfully translated out of Latin into English by Christopher Fetherstone
Minister of the word of God.

ANCHORA SPEI
printer's device of Thomas Vautrollier (1562-87) with anchor and motto

1. PET. 3.15 Be always ready to answer every one that demands a reason
of the hope which is in you, with lenity and reverence.

Imprinted at Edinburgh by Thomas Vautrollier. 1585.

CVM PRIVILEGIO REGALI.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian reader, it is a common proverb that many hands make light work.
But I have had experience in this work, that many hands have made long
work, or rather no work. This book at the first publishing thereof, for
more expedition was delivered to four to be translated. In whose hands it
has lain dispersed, partly done, partly undone, for the space almost of these
three years. VVherby the publishing thereof has been hindered. At length I was
requested to take in hand the tra^slating of the whole work, which through
Gods merciful assistance I have accomplished, going in truth through the
whole work, except that which I my self before had done. which I make
known (gentle Reader) not as hunting after praise, but to let thee understand
that I have not published other men's doings under mine own name, but mine
own labors, as touching the translation. And for thy more ease in reading
this work, and for the better understanding thereof, I thought good to note
thus much, that where in reading thou shall find this mark (*) it directs
thee unto the marge^t, shevving where thou may read that more largely,
which is there briefly noted. Again where thou shall find, Object. it
signifies an objection, whereby the matter in hand is contraried by the
adversary, where An. it signifies an answer to the same objection. Which
things I thought good to note for thy greater ease. And thus beseeching God to
bless thee in reading these my labors, I conclude.

Thy brother in Christ Christopher Fetherstone.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL M. RICHARD MARTIN MASTER OF HER Majesty's mints,
and Alderman of the most famous city of London, grace and peace.
THE institution of Christian religion written by John Calvin seems to me to
challenge to it self by good right (right worshipful) that which being uttered
by men most wise and of singular experience, is common almost in every man's
mouth, that good things must be repeated again and again. For seeing that in
things necessary and profitable the same things are spoken again and again:
or things ten times repeated do please, neither is that spoken and repeated too
often, which is never sufficiently learned, undoubtedly all those which are
studious of sound divinity, do acknowledge long ago that the commodities of
this writing are diverse and manifold, not only to learn but also to teach:
and not only to the sowing, watering and new digging, but also to gather in the
fruit of the filled of the Church. And for these causes, when at such times as
the harvest began to wax white in France in times past, I was called back
from the course of physic which I had alredie ended, addressing my self to
the practice thereof, unto the entrance of divinity, and to take upon me the
ministry, I made choice of that work especialy, next to the holy Bible, to
be read and remembered by me. And as those which go into a garden bedect with
infinite variety of flowers, are wont to make a nosegay of all those which
either their sight or smell shall most allow, that it may resemble and
represent unto the^ the garden after they become out of it. So I feeling in
that pleasant garden of divinity, wonderful smells of heavenly things,
gathering out of every section of the chapters, as from the knottes and borders
of paradise such things as did best like me, have framed this Abridgement, that
it might never suffer so great pleasure to depart from mine eyes, mind, and
remembrance. And seeing there be always slaves of Satan ready, whereby he
goes about to corrupt the truth with falsehood, and so consequently to thrust
her out of her place, and in her seat to set lying whose Father he is, I have
set down most short answers, which are set against the objections of the
adversary, whereby the Christian champion may know that the darts which the
enemies of christians do shake and bend against the most strong fortress of
the truth it self are but blunt and britle: and that he may proceed not only
out of this treasure house garnished with most precious gemmes, being more
wealthy, to enrich those which are desirous of heavenly pearls, or out of this
storehowse being better furnished to feed the flock of Christ: but also as
out of an Armorie, being better armed to discomfite all the enemies of the
truth with whom he shall meet, and to beat down the Monsters of heresies.
And seeing that this my labor such as it is, seemed in the judgment of some
godly pastors neither to be misliked, ne yet to be unprofitable, or unworthy
of the light, but that it might come abroad for common profit, I thought good
not to be against it: especially seeing fruits not to be repented of, may be
hoped from thence without any man's hinderance. But if any man think that this
little garden is cast in lesser knots and strayter alleyes then is meet, I let
him not but that he may freely, when he will, walk in the broad field at his
pleasure. And whereas (Right worshipful) I have platted a garla^d of the
dignity of your name for the head of this little book, that it might allure
the readers to vewe and peruse the whole work, these reasons did especially
move me: First because, I would have this simple testimony of my thankful
mind to be extant for that your unwearied study in bestowing benefits, which
I have often tried. Again seeing that you will have your gorgeous house to
stand open to all the godly as a common Inn, seeing that you make that
authority which you have gotten by virtue, more firm, by brideling the evil,
by releeuing the oppressed, by exercysing justice: and seeing that your most
loving wife, a most excellent woman, whose bountifulness many do try, of
whose courtesy many mo do speak, at whose godliness all do wonder, is ready
as it were at your elbowe happily to attempt so great things: finally seeing
that your whole family does breath out a smell of Christianity: I say seeing
these things are so, if I seek to this your Inn as to a refuge for my
labors I seem to ascribe that to my self, which is most proper to the thing
it self. Accept therefore I beseech you (Right worshipful) this most assured
pledge and token of a thankful mind. God in rich with his most liberal hand
both you and all yours with his gifts, and preserve you long in safety to the
Church and common wealth. At London the 18 of February. 1583.

Your worships most bounden WILLIAM LAWNE.

A GENERAL TABLE OF THE WHOLE INSTITVTION OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION,
COMprehending briefly the principal poincts.
We have added to the notes of the books and chapters for the more easy
finding out of every part.

True wisdom is placed in the knowing of God 1. The Creator, out of the
first book That when we shall see that all things are created for our sakes.
That the gifts wherein we excel are not of our selves. That the good things
which we use daily do come down from the heaven unto us. And that we have our
being in God. We may be brought as it were from the streams unto the fountain.
2. The Redeemer, by the Son, wherein we must consider 2. Book. 1. The fall
of man 1. From that excellency wherein he was created that he might be like to
God. 2. Unto that most miserable estate, that he may be like the devil.
2. The restoring of man: the material cause whereof is Christ: wherein we must
consider three things 1. How it is given unto men 1 In the Law. 2. In the
Gospel.
2. How it is received. 3 Book. 1. By the power of the holy Spirit. 2. By
faith, as by an hand.
3. How God does keep us in the society of Christ, namely by government which
is double 4. Book. 1. Ecclesiastical. 2. Civil.



The knowledge of God the Creator is Engendered in us naturally Chap. 1. 1. The
end whereof ought to be Chap. 2. The worship of God rightly ordered. The
reverence of his name with Chap 3. Fear and Love.

2. But such seed is corrupted Chap. 4. Through ignorance whence comes
superstitious worship. Through wickedness whence comes Servile fear. Hatred
of the godhead.


Gotten by some other means, namely by 1. The whole frame of the world: which
teaches Chap. 6. 1. Of what sort the 1. Goodness 2 Power 3. Justice 4. Wisdom
of God are 1. In creating 1. Heavenly things. 2. Earthly things
2 in preserving the same by his admininistratio^ which is 1. Ordinary. 2.
Extraordinary: wherein gods providence does more plainly appear.


2. What our need is: that we may learn 1. To repose our confidence in his
Goodness Power. Providence.
2. To obey his commandments Willingly, as sons. Not resisting, as servants.
3. To run unto him in our necessity as unto the fountain of all good
things. 4. To acknowledge that we have received all those gifts which we have
at Gods hands, and to thank him for them.

2. By the Scriptures. Chap. 6. Read the next Table under the letter A.


A God the Creator is also known by the Scriptures, wherein we must consider.
Chap 6. 1. Of what sort they are, to wit. True as proceeding from the holy
spirit of God which is proved. Chap. 78. 1. By the testimony of the holy
Ghost. 2. By the efficacy thereof. 3. By their antiquity. 4. By the truth of
the prophesies. 5. By the marvelous preservation of the law. 6. By the calling
and writtings of the Apostles. 7. By the consent of the Church. 8. By the blood
of many Martyrs shed in testimony thereof.
Whereby it does easily appear that those brainsick fellows do overthrow all
the principles of godliness who casting the Scripture behind them do fly to
revelation. Chap. 9.10.11.12.
2. What they teach, to wit, of what sort the nature of God is Chap. 13. In it
self Infinite. Whereupon we conclude that. They err who do attribute unto God
a visible shape as do the idolaters. Invisible. Whereupon we conclude that. They
err who do attribute unto God a visible shape as do the idolaters. Eternal.
Whereupon we conclude that. They err who do attribute unto God a visible shape
as do the idolaters. Omnipotent. Whereupon we conclude that. They err who do
attribute unto God a visible shape as do the idolaters.
Of one essence which contains in it self three persons, of Chap. 13. 1. The
Father. 2. The Son. 3. The holy Ghost.


In the Creation of 1 Heavenly things, as of Angels. Chap. 14. Good: to the
defense of the godly. Evil: of Devils, and they are such, not by creation,
but by corruption. Chap. 14.
2. Of earthly things as of man, whose Cha. 14.15 1. Perfection is taught in
his Soul Body.
2. His fall is set down concerning which look the table of the second book.

In the Administration, read the table following A.

A Gods administration or government is, C. 16. Universal Whereby God does
govern all creatures according to that property which he has given to every
one of them, when he created them.
Particular, which is considered in respect 1. Of things Having life So that if
any man fall into the hands of robbers. Or among wild beasts. Or wandering
through a wilderness do find remedy for his thirst. Or being tossed with
waves do come into some haven. We must ascribe all these events to God being
Prosperous. Unprosperous.

Without life Which though they have their property given them naturally: yet
do they not show forth their force save only so far forth as they are
directed by the present hand of god

2. Of time Past: that we may know that all things come to pass through Gods
appointment by working 1. By means. 2. Without means 3. Against means.
The fruits; all things turn 1. To the faithful to good. 2. To the
unfaithful to evil.

To come Whereunto appertain men's deliberations. Which teaches us that we
must use lawful means, (for that providence whereto we lean has his means.)

The fruits, that we may know assuredly Chap 17 1. That god cares for 1. All
mankind. 2. His Church chiefly.
2. God does 1. Contain by his power All things. 2. Govern by his beck All
things. 3. Moderate by his wisdom All things.
3 That he has power enough to do good because He has in his power Heaven and
Earth.
All creatures do obey his beck.
4. That nothing comes to pass by chance: but by the will of God which is
double Chap. 17. Hidden Which we can not search out but we adore the same
reverently.
Expressed in the Law. Gospel.





The knowledge of God the redeemer appears. Chapter 1. 1. The fall of man wherein
we must consider. 1. What he owes, and to the end we may do this, let us see.
Chap 1. 1. What he has received. 1. He was created after the image of God,
being partaker of Wisdom. Justice. Innocence. Power.
2. Therefore he did owe unto God the perfect keeping of his co^mandeme^ts,
because he was perfect in Soul. Body.

2. How he lost it. The causes are 1. Nigh 1. Satan. 2. The Serpent. 3. The
woman. 4. The apple.
2. Far of 1. Infidelity. 2. Ambition. 3. Unthankfulness. 4. Stubbornness.

3. The effects. The image of God was blotted out and man became 1.
Unfaithful. 2. Unrighteous. 3. Subject to death


2. What he is able to do. Chap. 2. 1. In soul Ch 3 1. In understanding 1. In
divine things 1. In godliness 1. In the knowledge of God. He is blinder then
moals. 2. In the true worship of God. He is blinder then moals.
In good works as in 1. Inuenting them. 2. In doing them.

2. In humane things as in the Arts. 1. Liberal. Nothing. 2 Manual. Nothing.

2. In will. Chap. 4.5. 1. In heavenly things. He wills that only which is
evil 2. In earthly things. He wills that only which is evil

2. In body That follows the corrupt appetites of the soul Through many
infirmities it is at length subject to death.
Whereupon it follows that man being lost must seek redemption in Christ the
Mediator because 1. The first adoption of the elect people Did depend upon the
grace of the Mediator always. 2. The preservation of the Church. Did depend
upon the grace of the Mediator always. 3. The deliverance of it in danger.
Did depend upon the grace of the Mediator always. 4. Restoring after
scattering abroad Did depend upon the grace of the Mediator always. 3. The
hope of the godly. The Law was given for that cause, that it might cause the
minds of men to wait until the coming of Christ which appears by Chap. 7.
1. The remembrance of the free covenant often repeated. 2. The ceremonies. 3.
The sacrifices. 4. Washings. 5. The end of adoption. 6. The right of the
priesthood.



2 The material cause of redemption, concerning which, read the next table.

Christ is the material cause of our redemption in whom we must consider three
things Chap. 7. 1. How he is offered unto men Lib. 2. In the Law Chap 8. 1.
Ceremonial 1. The use whereof was abrogated. 2. The effect is perpetual.
2 Judicial, whereof there are two parts 1. The first which appertains unto
godliness, and belongs to all men 2. The other was proper to the Jews, and
is abolished.
3. Moral whose use is 3. fold: The first shows our 1. Weakness Not that
we may despair. But have recourse unto Christ. 2. Iniquity Not that we may
despair. But have recourse unto Christ. 3. Damnation Not that we may despair.
But have recourse unto Christ.
The second 1. That those who are not moved with promises: 2 May be kept back
with fear of threateninges.
The third 1. That we may know what the will of God is. 2. That we may think
upon it to obey it. 3. That our minds may be confirmed thereunto. 4. That we
may be brought back from that which is slipperie.

The sum is comprehended in a Proheme wherein is noted 1. The power of God,
that he may bind the people with necessity to obey. 2 The promise of grace
wherein he professes that he is the God of his Church. 3. The benefit, wherein
he accuses the Jews of unthankfulness unless they be answerable to his
goodness.
In two Tables look A.

In the Gospel Look B.
2. How he is received of men concerning which read C. out of the third
book. 3. How God does retain us in the society of Christ. Look D. out of
the fourth book.

There be 2. Tables of the Law Chapter 8. The former, which appertains unto the
worship of God, is contained in four commandments In the first commandment
God will excel alone amongst his people. Therefore we owe unto God alone 1.
Adoration. 2. Hope. 3. Invocation. 4. Thanksgiving.

Of the second commaudeme^t the End is, that God will not have his worship
profaned with superstitious rites and ceremonies. Parts 2. 1. The first
bridleth our liberty lest We make God subject to our senses. Or represent him
by any shape
2. The second forbids us to worship any images for religions sake therefore
he brings forth 1. His power which he will not suffer to be diminished 2. His
emulation: because he can abide no partner. 3. His vengeance, upon the fourth
generation. 4. His mercy to the true worshippers.


The third commands three things 1. That that smell of his excellency
whatsoever Our mind conceiueth. Our tongue speaks.
2. That we do not rashly abuse His holy word By Ambition. Covetousness.
His reverent mysteries By Ambition. Covetousness.

3. That we do not Speak against His works but speak of them with the titles
of Wisdom Power. Justice. Goodness.
Slander His works but speak of them with the titles of Wisdom Power.
Justice. Goodness.

The name of God is profaned 3 manner of ways 1. By periarie. 2. By
superfluous oaths though true. 3 If we put in Gods place Saints or other
creatures Living. Without life.


Of the 4. commandment the End is, that being dead to our own affections
and works we may think upon the kingdom of God. In it we must consider
three things 1. The Spiritual rest 1. Whereby the faithful may keep holy day
from their own works. 2. That God may work in them.
2. That there may be a certain day to 1. Call upon God. 2. Hear the Law. 3.
To do the ceremonies.
3. That servants may have rest from their labor.


The latter is declared in the Table following.

In the later table of the Law which contains the duties of love, there are
five commandments Chap. 8. Of the fifth commandment The end is Because the
observing of the order which God has appointed does please him. The degrees of
honor which he has appointed are not to be broken.
Therefore we are forbidden to diminish any which of the dignity of
superiors by Contempt. Contumacie. Unthankfulness.
And the parts of honor are Reverence. Obedience. Thankfulness.

Of the sixth the End is Because God has knit together mankind by a certain
unity. The safety of all men is committed to every man.
Violence is forbidden. Good will is commanded.
Of the seventh the End is Because Godloueth cleanness, let us avoid all
uncleanness.
Therefore he forbids us to commit fornication In mind. In word. In work.

Of the viij. the End is Because unrighteousness is an abomination unto God.
He will have us to give every man his own.
Theft is committed either by Violence. Wicked deceit. Craftiness. Flattering
etc.

Of the ix. the End is Because God who is truth hates lying. He commands
us to speak truth without deceit.
Therefore he forbids that We do not defame any man with slanders and
false crimes. Or to hinder any man in his goods by lies. But in defending the
truth let us defend the integrity of the Name Of every man and Goods Of
every man


Of the tenth the End is this Because God will have the whole soul to be
possessed with the affection of integrity. He will have us to banish out of
our minds all desire that is contrary to love.
Therefore all desire which turns to all other man's hinderance is forbidden.


B Christ is also offered unto men in the Gospel concerning which is declared
Chap 9. How with the old testament 1. It agrees which is in three things
Chap. 10. 1. Because there was the same hope of immortality. 2. The same
covenant placed Not in men's works. But in Gods mercy.
3. The same Mediator of God and men Christ.
It disagreeth in five things Chap. 10. 1. Because the heavenly inheritance
was showed under earthly things. Now our minds are straight way directed unto
it.
2. It did only show a shape in figure of the truth being absent. This
shows the truth being present.
3. That by reason of the Law was the ministry of damnation and death. This
of righteousness and life.
4. That of bondage, which may cause fear in the minds. This of liberty,
which may lift them up unto hope.
5. The word was only assigned unto the nation of the Jews. It is now preached
to all nations.


The sum of doctrine which is to teach 1. What Christ is Chap. 12. God: that he
may give unto his Righteousness. Sanctification. Redemption.
and Man: because he was about to pay man's debt.
2. To what end he was sent to wit that he might execute the office of a Chap.
15. 1. prophet 1 In foretelling things to come. 2. In fulfilling the
prophecies. 3. In Doing The will of his Father. Teaching The will of his Father.

2. King 1. In governing The Church. Every member thereof.
In defending his from every injury of the adversaries.
3. Priest 1. In offering his body for sins. 2. In reconciling God unto us
by his obedience. 2. In making prayers continually for his.

3 How he has fulfilled all the parts of our redemption Cha. 16.17. 1. In
dying for our sins. 2. In rising for our justification. 3 In openinge unto us
the heavens by his ascension 4. By sitting at the right hand of the Father 5.
Thence he shall come to judge the Living and Dead.




How Christ is received 1. By the power of the holy Ghost who joins us unto
Christ: Therefore is he called the spirit of Sanctification Adoption. The
earnest and seal of our salvation. Water. Oil A fountain. Fire.
2. By faith as by an hand receiving salvation: whose Cha. 2. Office which is
1. Common is to subscribe unto the truth of God How often It speaks.
Whatsoever It speaks. How soever It speaks.
2. Proper to respect in Christ, Gods Will Into the certainty whereof the holy
Ghost does Illuminate our minds. Confirm our hearts. Mercy Into the certainty
whereof the holy Ghost does Illuminate our minds. Confirm our hearts. Promises
of grace Into the certainty whereof the holy Ghost does Illuminate our minds.
Confirm our hearts.
Thence is set the definition, that says is a firm and certain knowledge of
Gods good will toward us, which being grounded in the truth of the free
promise in Christ, is both revealed to our minds by the holy Ghost and sealed
in our hearts by him.
Effects are these 1. Repentance which is double 1. True, which consists
upon two parts 1. Mortificatio^ which proceeds from 1. Knowledge of sin.
2. The true feelinge of the judgment of God.
2 Vivification whose fruits are 1. Godliness toward God. 2. Love toward our
neighbor 3. Hope of eternal life. 4. Holiness of life.

2. False and Papisticall whose parts are 1. Contrition of heart for the
acknowledging of sin. 2. Confession of the mouth Private which is made 1. To
God alone. 2. To the minister 3 To a faithful friend.
Public 1. Of the whole Church. 2. Of one. 3 Of many Before the Church

These two parts may be referred to true repentance. 3. Satisfaction of the
works the fulfillinges whereof are 1. Indulge^ces in this world. 2. Purgatory
after death.
These are set against the free forgiveness of sins:

2. Christian life. Look A. 3. Justification. Look B. 4. Prayer. Look C.



A 2 Christian life whereof there are two parts 1. Love of righteousness, that
we may be holy Chap. 6. Because God is holy Because we are joined unto him,
and are reckened among his people.
2. That there be a rule appointed us, which may not suffer us to err in the
study of righteousness that we may be made like to Christ There is a
pattern thereof set before us, the form whereof we must express in our life
in Word. and Deed.
Here unto are added the benefits of God, whereunto if we do not answer it
shall be a point of great unthankfulness.
The sum of a Christian life is the denial of our selves, whereof there are
four ends 1. That we may consecrate our selves to God to be a lively
sacrifice. 2. That we may seek not the things that be our own, but those
which are Gods. Our Neighbors
3. That we may bear the cross patiently the fruits whereof are that Chap. 8.
1. Our weakness may the better appear. 2. That our patience may be tried. 3.
Our faults may be corrected. 4. That being humbled we may the m^re earnestly
call upon God. 5. We may the more earnestly meditate upon eternal life.
4. That we may know how to use this life and the helps thereof Chap. 10. 1.
For necessity, wherein we must observe four things 1 That we possess all
things as possessing nothing. 2 That we suffer Penury patie^tly Abundance
moderatly.
2. That we know to Have enough. To be hungry. To want, patiently.
3 That we have respect of our neighbor. Because we must give an account of
our stewardship.
4. That all things be answerable to our calling.
2. For delectation, that We may have the greater cause to praise God his
goodness.




3. Effect of faith is justification: here consider Chap. 11. What it is to be
justified He is justified who by the judgment of God is Judged lust. and
Accounted lust.
He is justified by works Whose life is pure and free from reprehension. There
was never any such.
He is justified by faith Who being excluded from the righteousness of works
lays hold upon the righteousness of faith. Such are the faithful.

What follows thereupon Chapter 13.14. Great consolation Because in steed of a
cruel judge we have a most gentle Father. That being sanctified we may think
upon holiness.
Christian liberty: which consists in three things Chap. 19. 1. That the
consciences of the faithful may lift up them selves above the Law, and forget
the righteousness of the Law. 2. That their consciences being free from the
yoke of the Law, they may willingly obey the will of God. 3. That they may not
be holden with any religion of indifferent things before God. Yet we must take
heed of two inconveniences That we do not abuse the gifts of God to our lust
That we avoid offense which is double Given. Taken.





C Prayer is the fourth effect wherein we must consider and mark the Chap. 20.
Fine fruits The first Whilst that we accustom our selves to fly unto God our
heart is enflamed with a more earnest desire to Seek Him. Love Him. and Worship
Him.

Second No evil concupiscence or desire may come into our heart, whereof we
are ashamed to make God a witness.
Third That we may receive Gods gifts with thanksgiving.
Fourth That having gotten a gift we may the more earnestly think upon his
goodness.
Fifte That the use may confirm unto us the Goodness Of God. Providence Of
God. Truth Of God.


4. Laws The first That we be so framed as those who enter in to speak unto
God: therefore let 1. Our hands be be lift up. 2 Our heart be moved. 3 Let us
persevere.

The second is that We feel our necessity.
The third That we dispoyle our selves of all thinking upon our own glory,
giving God the glory wholly.
The fourth Lyinge prostrate let us encorage our selves with a sure hope to
obtain, having 1. The commandment. 2. The Promise.


They err who call upon Saints: 1. Because the Scripture teaches that we
must call upon God alone 1. Who alone knows what things we need. 2. He will
be present: because he has promised. 3. He is able: because he is omnipotent.
2. Because he will be called upon by faith which leans to the word alone.
3. Because faith is corrupt if it depart from the word: in calling upon
Saints No word therefore no faith. No promise. They can neither Hear nor
Help.


The sum is contained in two tables. Concerning which look the next Table
under C.

C The sum of prayer, is comprehended. Cha. 20. In a Proheme wherein appears
1. The goodness of god, because he is our father whereupon follows. 1.
Therefore we are his children to seek help of any other were to cast God in
the teeth. Poverty: or Cruelty.
2. Our sins shall not hinder us from craving mercy of God humbly. 3. We must
one love an other like dear brethren.
2. The power of God: because he is in heaven whence we gather. 1. That God is
spread abroad through all things. Therefore when we seek him: let us be
lifted up above the sense of our body and soul. 2. That he is free from all.
Corruption. Alteration.
3. That he comprehends and governs the whole world by his power.

In two tables. The former is appointed wholly for the glory of God and it
contains three petitions The first requires that the Name of God that is
his. Power. Goodness. Wisdom. Righteousness. Truth.
May be sanctified, that is, that Men may not without great reverence neither
Speak Of God. nor Think Of God.


Of the second petition. The end is that God. 1. May amend with the power of
his spirit all the wicked lusts of the flesh. 2. May frame all our senses unto
the obedience of his government. 3. May defend his children and bring to naught
the endeavors of the wicked.
The use 1. It draws us from the corruptions of the world 2. It kindles a
desire to mortify the flesh. 3. It teaches us to bear the cross.

The third entreats. Not of the secret will of god: But of that which is
revealed in the scriptures: whereunto answers willing obedience.

The latter concerning which, look the table following under the letter A.


A The latter Table of prayer contains 3 petitions which respect us and our
neighbor. Chap. 20. The first petition. Craves all things which the use of
the body, needs under the elements of this world. We commit our selves unto
God and commend our selves to his providence, that he may Feed us. Cherish us.
Keep us.

In the second. We ask (as in that which follows) those things which serve
for the spiritual life. Remission takes away satisfaction. Let us forgive
being hurt in Word. in Deed.

In the third. We crave that we may be furnished with weapons, and defended,
that we may get the victory. Temptations differ. in Cause. For God. Do Tempt.
Satan. Do Tempt. the world. Do Tempt. The flesh. Do Tempt.
Matter. Upon the right hand, in respect of Riches. Honor. Beauty, etc.
On the left in respect of Poverty. Contempt. Affliction.

In the end. For GOD tempts his for their good. Satan, the flesh, the
world unto evil.




These effects of faith do lead us unto the certainty. 1 Of election: whose
Chap. 21. 2. Of rising again. Cause. Efficient, is the mere liberality of
God, that we may Give thanks. Be humbled.
Final: that being sure of salvation, because we are in the hand of God we
may glorify him.
Effects are some times of Chapter 22.23. An whole. Country. and that In loving
some. In rejecting others.
House. and that In loving some. In rejecting others.

Of one: because whom Chap 24. 1 He knew before. 2. Called. 3. Justified. 4
That he may at length glorify them. 1. By the preachinge of the word 2. By
the lightning of the holy ghost.


1. Because we can by no other means be glorified 2. Because Christ rose in
our flesh. 3. Because God is almighty.


D God does hold us in the society of Christ, namely by administration or
gouernmente Chap. 1. 1. Ecclesiastical wherein are considered. 2. Civil
concerning which look ** Chap. 20. 1. Which is the church. Chap. 12. 1.
Invisible and Catholic, which is a Communion of Saints. 2. Visible and
particular, wherein is salvation. Which is known. 1. By the pure preaching of
the word. 2 By the lawefull administration of the Sacraments, concerning which
look B. Chap 14.

2. How it is governed, where consider. Chap 3.4. 1. Who bear rule. Not
Angels, But men wherein 1. God shows unto us his great f^uour 2. We have a
very good exercise unto 1. Humility. 2 Obedience.
3. A very good bond to love one another.

2. Of what sort they be 1. Prophets. 2 Apostles. 3. Evangelists. 4. Pastors.
5. Doctors.
3. What their calling is 1. Internal when he that is called does only seek.
The glory of God. The edifiyng of the Church.
2. External wherein mark four things 1. What manner persons are to be chosen
1. Of good behavior. 2. Of sound doctrine.
2. How they are to be chosen, to wit 1. Fasting. 2. Prayer.
3 By whom they be chosen. 1. Immediate: by God. Proph. Apost.
2 Mediat the word being our guide by the 1. Bishop. 2. Elders. 3. People

4. by what rite. 1. By laying on of hands the uses are 3. 1. That the dignity
of the minister may be commended. 2 That he may know that he is co^secra. to
god. 3 That he may believe that he shall not want the holy ghost.




3. What power it has Look. A. 4. Their office. 1 To preach the word 2. To
minister the sacraments. 3. To execute Discipline.
The state of the old church was diuid. into Chap. 5. 1 Bishops. 2. Elders. 3.
Deacons who divided the goods. 1. To the Bishop. 2 To the Clergy. 3. To the
Poor. 4. To repair the Churches.





The power of the Church is considered in respect. 1. Of Doctrine Chapter 9 1.
Touching the delivery of the opinions of faith. 1. That none be delivered
without the word of God. 2. That all be referred unto the Glory of God The
edifiyng of the church.

2. Touching the expounding of them.
2. Of making of laws C. 10. 1. In commandments which ought necessarily to
be kept. Divine. That they be agreeable to the word. Humane. That they be
agreeable to the word.
2. In precepts indifferent wherein mark 1. What things are to be followed.
Have respect of circumstance.- Places. Persons Times.
Let Order be kept. Comelines be kept.

2. What things be to be fled: least in steed of the true worship of God they
be exhibited, such are popish constitutions. 1. Are accounted for the true
worship of God. 2. Do bind the conscience with precise necessity. 3. Do make
the word of God to be of none effect. 4. Are unprofitable and foolish. 5. Do
oppress the consciences with multitude. 6. Do bear a show of the boasting
of Stage plaiers. 7. Are accounted as propitiatory sacrifices. 8. Are turned
to gain.


3. Of the Jurisdiction. C. 11. 1. Proper to the clergy of which it was
entreated in the Synodes. Chap. 12. Provincial. General.
2. Common to the clergy and the people whose. End is double. 1. That
offenses may be prevented. 2. That an offense begun may be abolished.
The practice consists in Admonitions. 1. Private 2. Public.
Excommunication: whose ends are three 1. That the name of the Church be not
evil spoken of. 2. That the good be not corrupt through the company of the
evil 3. That through shame they may begin to repent.

Furthermore facts are commended in respect of the time, Look. A.



A Furthermore in respect of the times. Facts are commanded wherein we must
consider. Chap. 12. 1. The end thereof. 1. Thar the flesh may be tamed. 2.
That we may be the more apt to pray. 3. That it may be a testimony of
humility and obedience.
2. Wherein it consists namely, in 1. Time. Of meats. 2. Quality. Of
meats. 3. Quantity. Of meats.
3. What things are to be avoided. 1. That we do not rent our garments, and
not our hearts as hypocrites. 2. That we do not think it to be done for a
meritorious work. 3. That it be not more streightlie required as necessary to
salvation.

Vows are made wherein must be considered Chap. 13. 1. To whom the vow is
made, namely, to God, whereupon follows that we must assay nothing without
the word, whereby we are taught what, Pleases. God. Displeases. God.
2. Who voweth, namely, man. Therefore we must take heed 1. That we neglect not
our liberty. 2. That we promise not that which Passes our strength. Is
contraie to calling.

3. What vow we must have respect of the time. 1. Past: as is the vow of 1.
Thanksgiving. 2. Repentance.
2. To come. 1. That we may be more wary hereafter. 2. That we with pricks
be pricked forward to our duty.

Hereby appears what manner vows the vows of the Papists be.


B In exposition of the Sacramets we must consider Chap 14. 1. What a
Sacrament is. 1. To wit, an outward sign, whereby God does seal unto our
consciences, the promises of his good will toward us, to uphold the
imbecilitie of our faith. 2. On the other side, we do testify our godliness
toward him.
2. What things be necessary in a Sacrament. 1. The sign. 2. The thing
signified. 3. The promise. 4. The general participation. Therefore laying on
of hands is not reckoned amongst the Sacraments.
3. How many there be. 1. Baptism whose. Chap. 13. 1. Sign is water. 2. Thing
signified, is the blood of Christ. Promise is eternal life. 4 Partakers are 1.
Men grown, after confession of faith. 2. Infants. Cha. 16 1. Because baptism
did succeed Circumcision for the 1. Mystery. are all one. 2. Promises. are all
one. 3. Use, are all one. 4 Efficacy. are all one.
2. Remission of sins pertains unto them: therefore the sign also.

5 End is double. The first that it may serve for our faith toward God. 1.
Because it is a sign of our washing by the blood of Christ. 2 Of the
Mortificatio^ Of our flesh in Christ. Regeneration Of our flesh in Christ.
3. Being joined to Christ we believe that we shall be. 1. Partakers of all
his good things 2. There shall be no condemnation to us.

The second that it may serve for confession toward our neighbor: because 1
It is a token that we would be reckoned amongst the people of God. 2. We
testify that we confess Christ his religion together with all Christians.
3. That all our things may show forth the praise of God.





A The Supper. Chap. 17. 1. What. It is a spiritual banquet, whereby we are
preserved in that life, whereinto God has begotten us by his word.
2. The end that 1. It may serve to confirm our faith toward God 2. For our
confession before men. 3. For exhortation unto love.
3. We must beware. 1. Least in extenuating the signs, we put them too much
from their mysteries, whereunto after a sort they are knit. 2. Least that in
exhorting the same immoderatelie, we seem to darken the mysteries themselves.
4. The parts thereof. 1. The spiritual truth wherein we must consider. 1. The
signification in the promises. 2. The matter, Christ by his 1. Death. 2.
Resurrection.
3. The effects. 1. Redemption. 2. Justification.

2. The visible signs. 1. Bread. 2. Wine.

The Mass is contrary to the supper. Chap. 18. 1. Because it blasphemeth
Christ. 2. It burieth the cross. 3. It causes his death to be forgotten. 4.
It takes away the fruits thereof. 5. It weakeneth the Sacraments, wherein the
memorial of his death is left.
And these are falsely counnted Sacraments. Chap. 17. 1. Confirmation. 2,
Repentance 3. Extreme unction. 4. Orders. 5. Matrimony. 1. Lesser of 1.
Clerks. 2. Dorekeepers. 3. Readers. 4. Acoluthes. 5. Exorcists.
2. Greater, of 1. Pristees. 2. Deacons. 3. Subdeacons.




Civil administration does appertain to the external justice of manners
wherein are to be considered Chap. 20. 1. The magistrate in whom we must
observe. 1. Who he is The Vicegere^t of God: Therefore he is so called. The
father of the country: Therefore he is so called. The keeper of the law:
Therefore he is so called. The minister of justice: Therefore he is so called.
The foster father of the church: Therefore he is so called. 1. That he might be
stirred up to his duty, and that he may show before men. Integrity. Wisdom.
Continency. Innocence. Prudence.
2. That with singular comfort of his office he might ease the difficulties of
the same.

2. How many kinds. 1. Monarchical. 2. Aristocraticall. 3. Democraticall.
3. What is his office. 1. That he may heal and not wound. 2. That he keep
humanity 3. That he may represent the image of God.

2. The laws wherein thou shall observe. 1. The constitution in respect Of
God. Of men
2. Equity in respect of circumstances. Of times. Of places. Of nations.

3. The people, who owes to the Magistrate. 1. Reverence, as to the messenger
of God, and that with a mind. Sincere. Not compelled.
2. Obedience. Whether we must obey his word. Pay tribute. Or sustain the
public. Offices. Punishments.

3. Love whereby he may commend their prosperity to God by Prayer.


AN ABRIDGEMENT OF THE INSTITVTION OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION WRITTEN BY JOHN CALVIN.
Of the knowledge of God the Creator.

CHAP. I. That the knowledge of God, and of our selves, are things joined
together, and how they be lincked together.
THE whole sum of our wisdom consists in two parts: 1 The parts of true
wisdom.
in the knowledge of GOD, and of our selves. But forasmuch as they be knit
together with many bands, it cannot easily be discerned whether of these two
is former: forasmuch as no man can behold himself, but he must turn his
senses unto the beholding of God, in whom he lives and moves Act. 17.28.
. For it is a plain The effects of the knowledge of our selves.
yea, that even that which we are, is nothing else but a subsisting in one God.
Secondly,

The effects of the knowledge of God.
2 Again, it is evident that man does never come to the perfect knowledge of him
self, unless he have first beheld the face of God, and so come down from
beholding the same, to view himself. For (such is our natural pride) we do
always seem to our selves righteous and holy, Natural pride.
unless we be convict with manifest arguments of our unrighteousness and
impuritie. And we are not convict if we do only look into our selves, The
true rule of the knowledge of our selves.
and not into the Lord also, who is the only rule whereby the judgment must
be tried. Therefore if we begin once to think upon God, and to weigh with our
selves what a one he is, and how exact the perfection of his righteousness,
wisdom, and power is, according to the rule whereof we must be fashioned: that
which was before in us delightsome under a false pretense of righteousness,
shall forthwith wax vile as most great iniquity.

Effects of the presence of God.
3 Hence issued that horror and amazednes wherewith holy men were taken, so often
as they perceived the presence of God. Hereof proceeded these speeches, we
shall die, because the Lord has appeared to us. Iud. 13.22. Ios. 6.5. Job. 9, 4.
* Therefore also the history of Job does always draw a most firm argument
from the discriptio^ of the wisdom, power, and purity of God to throw down
men with the conscience of their own foolishness, imbecillitie, and
uncleanness. Genesis 28.27.
Abraham does the better know and acknowledge himself to be earth and dust,
the nigher he draws to behold the glory of God. Notwithstanding howsoever
the knowledge of God and of our selves are knit together with a mutual knot,
yet the order of right teaching does require, that we entreat first of the
knowledge of God, and that then we come to handle the knowledge of our selves.

CHAP. II. What it is to know God, and to what end the knowledge of him does
tend.
1 AND now I mean the knowledge of God God is not properly known where there
is no religion. What godliness is.
but also we learn and understand that which is behoofull for us to know
concerning him: which is profitable for his glory: and finally which is
expedient. For to speak properly, we cannot say that God is known, where
there is no religion nor godliness. The feeling of the powers of God is unto
us a fit scholemaster to teach us godliness, whence religion does spring. And I
call godliness a reverence conjoined with the love of God, which the
knowledge of his benefits does work. Furthermore, Causes of invocation.
he defends him by his aid: but because there shall no where be found any
drop either of wisdom, or light, or sincere truth, which does not come from
him, and whereof he is not the cause: that we may look for, and also beg at
his hands all things: and acknowledge with thanksgiving that we have
received them at his hands.

Curious men.
2 Therefore they toy in cold speculations, who are determined to stand about
this question, what God is? Seeing that it is more behoofull for us to know
what a one he is, and what is agreeable to his nature. For to what purpose is
it to confess with Epicurus, Epicurus his judgment of God,
that there is some God, who casting off all care of the world does only
delight himself in idleness? Finally, what does it help to know such a God,
with whom we may have nothing to do? Yea The end of the knowledge of God. What
true religion is. Effects of godly fear.
having the same for our guide and schoolemistres: Lo what pure and true
religion is, to wit, faith joined with the true fear of God: so that fear may
contain in it both a voluntary reverence, and also carry with it a lawful
worship, such as is prescribed in the law. And this is the more diligently To
worship and to reverence differ.
whiles there is every where great ostentation in ceremonies: but the
sincerity of the heart is rare.

The knowledge of God is naturally ingraffed in us.
3 Surely those which judge vprightlie will always hold this for certain,
that there is some feeling of the Godhead engraven in the minds of men, which
can never be blotted out. Yea, that even this persuasion is in all men
naturally, that there is some God, and that this is thoroughly fastened as it
were in the very marowe, witnesses evidently the stubbornness of the
wicked, Atheists.
who though they struggle never so much, yet can they not wind themselves out
of the fear of God. Although Diagoras and such like do make a mock of all
that which has been believed throughout all ages concerning religion:
Diagoras.
although Dionysius do scoff at the celestial judgment: yet this laughter is
but from the teeth forward: because the worm of conscience does inwardly bite
those, being worse then all hot fearing yrons.

CHAP. III. That the knowledge of God is naturally planted in men's minds.
1 SVRELIE if any where the ignorance of God be sought for, we can no where
have a more apparaunt example thereof, then among the blockishest people, and
such are farthest from humanity. Cicero de natura Deorum.
But there is no nation so barbarous (as even the very Heathen man says) no
country so savage, which have not this persuasion remaining in them, that
there is a God. And even those who in other parts of their life seem to
differ but a very litttle from beasts, do yet notwithstanding continually
retain some seed of religion. Idolatry natural.
Idolatry is an ample testimony of this conceit.

2 Ob. Religion was invented by the subtlety and craft of a few men, that by
this policy they might keep the simple people in their duty: whereas
notwithstanding those which were to others authors of the worship of God, did
believe nothing less then that there was a God.

Natural wisdom.
An. I grant indeed that crafty men did invent and devise many things in
religion, that they might thereby breed a reverence in the common sort, and
also make them afraid, that they might have their minds more obedient. But
they could never have brought that to pass, unless men's minds had first been
possessed with that constaunt persuasion concerning God: Whence inclination to
religion does come.
whence as from seed springs all inclination to religion.

Ob. Many deny that there is any God.

Atheists.
An Maugre their heads they do now and then feeele that whereof they are
desirous to be ignorant. No man did more boldly contemn God than Caligula:
Caligula.
and yet no man was taken with greater fear when any token of Gods wrath was
showed: he did quake for fear of God inwardly, whom outwardly he studied to
despice.

CHAP. IIII. That the same knowledge is either choked, or else corrupted partly
through ignorance, and partly through malice.
1 AND as experience does witness that there is some seed of religion sown in
all men: so there can scarce one be found among an hundred, Superstitious
ignorance.
neither is there any found in whom it waxes ripe: so far off is it that the
fruit appears set purpose malitiouslie revolt from God: yet al do degenerate
from the true knowledge of him. Whereby it comes to pass that there remains
no true godliness in the world.

2 Ob. David witnesses that many do think in their heart, that there is no
God. Psalm. 14 3.
*

An. That is restrained unto those wicked and foolish ones, Good intent.
who having choked the light of nature do of set purpose make blind themselves
that in seeing they may not see.

3 Ob. Any light study of religion how preposterous soever it be, is
sufficient to salvation. The true rule of religion.


An True religion must be framed according to the will of God, as by a
perpetual rule. Therefore superstitious me^ do worship their own dotings, Gal.
4.8.
which set up to God newly invented worshippings. Such the Apostle said did
serve those which were no Gods: Ephesians. 2.12.
and in another place, that they were without God. Ephesians. 2.12.
For there is no true religion but that which is conjoined with the truth.

4 There is also another offense, that they neither have any respect to God,
but against their wills: neither do they draw near to him, until they be
drawn, being unwilling and hanging back: neither have they even then any
voluntary fear, Fear is double.
which flows from the reverence of the Majesty of God: but only a servile
and constrained fear, which the judgment of God wringeth out of the^: which
because they cannot escape, they quake for fear thereof, yet so that they do
also loath and abhor it. That seed remains in deed, A similitude.
which can by no means be plucked up by the roores, to wit, that there is
some Godhead: but yet it is so corrupt that it brings forth none but most
badde fruits of it self.

CHAP. V. That the knowledge of God does shine in the making of this world,
and in the continual governing thereof.
The end of man's life.
1 MOREOVER because the last end of blessed life consists in the knowledge of
God, Psalm. 104.2.
And the Apostle calls the ages of the world the spectacles of invisible Heb.
11.3:


Ordinary works are natural testimonies of the wisdom of God.
2 Furthermore there be infinite proofs both in heaven and also in earth which
do testify the wonderful wisdom of God: not only those which are more
hidden, for observing whereof, Astrology, Physic, and all natural Philosophy
are appointed, but

3 For which reason Paul, after that he had declared that God may be found by
groping, even of those which are blind, adds forthwith, that he is not far
to be sought: because all men do feel undoubtedly within themselves the
heavenly grace wherewith they are quickened. Act. 17 27.


Unthankfulness of men.
4 And here is discovered the filthy unthankfulness of men, which while they
have within them a noble shop furnished with innumerable works of God, A
similitude.
and also a warehouse stuffed with inestimable plenty of riches, do so much
the more swel and are on ye other side puffed up with pride: yea the earth does
bear at this day many monstrous spirits, which doubt not, ne stick to
corrupt all the seed of the godhead which is sown in ma^s nature, to
suppress the name of god, and to put nature in his sted: What nature is A
godly meditation from the creatures to the creator.
whereas rather nature is an order prescribed by God. Therefore in matters of so
great weight, and whereto singular reverence is due, to inwrap God confusedly
with the inferior course of his works is hurtful and wicked.

5 Therefore let us remember so often as every one of us does consider his own
nature, that there is one God, who does so govern all natures, that he will
have us to have respect to him, and that our faith be directed toward him, and
that we worship and call upon him: because nothing is more disordered then to
enjoy such excellent gifts which savor of divine nature in us, and to neglect
the author which does give us the same freely.

Quest. But for what cause was God moved, both to create all these things once,
and with what cause is he moved to preserve the same now?

An. His only goodness both was and is the cause, The goodness of God the
only cause of the creation.
which ought to be sufficient to allure us to love him: forasmuch as there is
no creature, upon which his mercy is not poured out Psalm. 145.9.
.

6 Also in the second sort of his works, which happen Extraordinary works.
there appear as evident arguments of his powers. For in governing the
society of men he does so temper his providence, that although he be infinite
ways bountiful and beneficial toward men: Mercy.
yet notwithstanding Judgment.


Why God does suffer the wicked to triumph for a time. Whence the judgment of
God is gathered.
Quest. Why does God oftentimes suffer the wicked to triumph unpunished for a
time, and does permit the good to be tossed with much adversity, and also
with the malice of the wicked?

An. When as he punishes one wickedness with a manifest judgment of his wrath,
we must know that he hates all wickedness: when he lets many go
unpunished, we must know that there shall be another judgment wherein they be
deferred to be punished. In like sort, how great matter does he minister unto
us to consider his mercy when as he oftentimes shows mercy without being
weary toward miserable sinners, Clemency.
until he have broken their frowardness with doing good to them, in calling
them home with his more then fatherly tenderness?

7 To this end when the Prophet sets down that God does at a sodeine and
contrary to their expectation help miserable men when their affairs are past
hope, Psalm. 107.9. and 113.7.
he gathers at length that those which are counted fortunate chances, are as
many testimonies of the heavenly providence of God, and especially of his
fatherly clemency: and that hereby the godly have matter of joy ministered unto
them: What matter of joy the godly have.
and that the mouths of the wicked are stopped.

The knowledge of God comes by the event of things.
and kiss his wisdom. Therefore we see that there needs no longer nor
laborious demo^stration to set out those testimonies which serve to set forth
the majesty of God, whereby we are invited to the knowledge of God, not that
which is content with a vain speculation, and does swim about only in the
brain: but that which shall be sound and fruitful.

9 Secondly such knowledge ought not only to Worship. Hope of eternal life.
but also to awake and lift us up to hope for the life to come. For when we
consider that the tokens which the Lord shows both of his clemency, and
also of his severity, are only begun and half full: without doubt we must
consider that he does herein only make a show of those things, the
manifestation and full deliverance whereof is deferred unto another life Aug.
lib. 1. de cruitate Dei. Cap. 8.
.

10 But how clearly so ever he represent both him self and also his
immortal kingdom in the mirror of his works (such is our blockishnesse) we
stand always amazed at such evident testimonies so that they pass away
without doing us any good. Man's blockishnes.
For as touching the framing of the world how many be there among us who
whiles they either look up toward heaven, or cast their eyes aside upon
diverse countries of the earth, do refer their mind unto the remembrance of
the Creator, and do not rather stay in the viewing of the works created,
passing over the Creator? Extraordinary works.
And as touching those which come to pass besides the order of the natural
course, where is there one that does not rather

11 Hence came that huge sink of errors wherewith the whole world has been
filled and overwhelmed. Whence natural idolatry does come.
For every man's wit is to him self as a maze, so that it is no marvel that
all nations were brought into diverse devises. And not that only, but also that
almost every several man had his several God. For so soon as rashness and
wantonness were joined to ignorance, Rashness joined with ignorance has
brought forth idolatry. Stoics.
and darkness, there was scarce any one found which did not frame to him
self an idol or fancy in steed of God.

12 And if so be it the most excellent men did wander in darkness (such as
were the Stoics, and the mystical divinity of the Egyptians, who doting
with reason feigned to the^ selves more Gods) what shall we say of the
scourings of the people? Paul pronou^ceth that the Ephesians were without God
Ephesians. 2.12 Idolaters are without God.
until they had learned out of the Gospel what it was to worship the true
God. And to the end the Scripture may make place for the true and one God, it
condemns all falsehood and lying whatsoever godhead was worshipped in old
time among the Gentiles Romans 1.21.
. The Samaritanes wist not, says Christ, what they did worship Heb. 2.10.20.
. Whereupon it follows that we do always worship at all adventures (which
notwithstanding is no small fault) unless God do witness of him self from
heaven: and declare to us by his word what he will have done.

Natural lights being lighted for the knowledge of God.
13 Therefore so many burning lamps do shine in vain in the edifice of the
world, to set forth the glory of the author: which do so shine round about us,
that yet notwithstanding they are not able to bring us into the right way of
themselves. They raise indeed some sparkles, but they are choked before they
show forth any perfect light. The invisible godhead is I grant represented
by such spectacles Heb. 11.13.
: but we have no eyes to see the same Romans 11.19.
, unless they be lightened by the inward revelation of the spirit through
faith.

Why we are not excused before God.
14 Object. If we want natural power, so that we can not clime up unto the pure
and manifest knowledge of God: we shall be holden excused if we worship not God
as we ought.

An. All color of excuse is cut of: because the fault of so great dullness is
within us, neither can we so pretend ignorance, but that even our very
conscience shall always convince us both of sluggishnesse and unthankfulness.

CHAP. VI. That a man has need to have the Scripture to be his guide, that he
may attain to the knowledge of God the Creator.
1 THerefore although that brightness which The creation.
yet God has given another and a better The word of God is given to salvation.
that he might thereby be known to salvation. And this prerogative did he
vouchsafe to bestow upon those whom he would gather nigher and more familiarly
to him self, to wit upon the Jews. 1. Jews. 2. Gentiles.
Notwithstanding he did afterward make the same benefit common to all nations.

2 But whether God did make him self known to the fathers by oracles and
visions, or he did inform them by the ministry and diligence of men, of that
which they should afterward deliver to their posterity He revealed himself to
the fathers by oracles and visions.
yet it is out of all doubt that the firm certainty of that doctrine was
engraven in their hearts, so that they were persuaded and did understand that,
that which they had learned came from God. The certainty of the prophetical
Scripture.
For God did always make undoubted

3 And because man's mind is very much inclined to forget God, Natural
forgetfulness. Error
because it is wonderfully bent toward all manner errors, and because the lust
thereof to forge new kinds of religion is great: we may see how necessary
such enrolling of the celestial doctrine Boldness.
lest either through forgetfulness it should

4 Therefore after that the Prophet had said that the heavens declare the
glory of God Psalm. 19.1.
, and that The school of Gods children.
which alone leads them unto the true knowledge of salvation, and without
which we shall always orre.

CHAP. VII. Of the authority of the Scripture.
1. THerefore, because we have not oracles daily from heaven and the Scriptures
alone are extant, whereby alone it pleased the Lord to have his truth
continually kept in remembrance, the same Scriptures are of full authority
with the faithful by no other means, then when they be persuaded that they
came from heaven, as if the lively voices of God were heard there.

Object. The Scripture has as much authority and weight, as is granted unto
it by the consent of the Church. The Scripture rests not upon man's authority.


An. The eternal and inviolable truth of God, rests not upon man's pleasure.

2 Moreover the Apostle says, that the Church is builded upon the foundation
of the Prophets and Apostles Ephesians. 2.20.
.

Quest. How shall we be persuaded that it came from God, unless we fly unto
the decree of the Church?

An. The Scripture shows in it self apparent sense of her truth, The first
argument drawn from the testimony of the holy Ghost.
which the Spirit of God does seal in our minds, being firmly imprinted
therein.

3 Object. Augustine says: I had not believed the Gospel unless the authority
of the Church had moved me Lib contra epist fundamentalem Chap. 9.
.

An. He had to deal with the Manichees, which would have men to believe the^
without any gain saying, when they were persuaded that they had the truth, but
could not show it. He demands what they would do if they should light on a
man which does not believe even the Gospel? In the forth chap of the same
book.
After that he adds: and I truly would not believe the Gospel, etc.
signifying that at such time as he was a stranger from the faith, he could by
no means be brought to embrace the Gospel as the certain truth of God,
until he was overcome by the authority of the Church.

Quest. Why then does he oftentimes urge the Manichees with the consent of the
whole Church, when he will prove the same Scripture which they refused?

An. He does no where aim at this, to teach that the authority which we
grant the Scriptures to have, does depend upon the determination or decree of
men: but does only (which was of great importance in the cause) bring forth
the judgment of the whole Church, wherein he had the upper hand of his
adversaries.

4 Therefore if we will well provide for our consciences, that they be not
continually carried about with an unstable doubting, or that they do not waver,
ne yet stay at every small stop, we must fet a persuasion further then either
from man's reasons, or judgments, or conjectures, to wit from the secret
testimony of the Spirit.

Quest. By what reasons can it be proved that Moses and the Prophets were
inspired by God to speak?

The testimony of the holy Ghost is more excellent then any reason.
An. The testimony of the Spirit does surpass all reason (though there may
many arguments be alleged, whereby it may appear, that if there be God in
heaven, the Law and Prophecies, and Gospel came from him.) That does I say as
witness, saying, my Spirit which is in thee, and the words which I have put
in thy mouth and in the mouth of thy seed shall not fail for ever Isay.
51.16.19 21.
. For the Spirit is the earnest and seal to confirm the faith of the godly 2.
Cor. 1:22. Ephesians 1.13
because until he lighten their minds, they do always waver amidst many
doubts.

There is no true faith without the illumination of the holy ghost.
5 Therefore let this remain firm, that they whom the holy Ghost has taught
do rest soundly in the Scripture, and that that alone is the true faith which
is sealed in our hearts by his seal Isay 54.13.
.

CHAP. VIII. Humane proofs which serve to establish the authority of the
Scripture.
2. Argument from the efficacye thereof.
1. FVrthermore we see how great force the truth of the Scripture has, seeing
there is no writing of man how finely soever it be polished, which is of such
force to move us, although the high mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, be
delivered under a contemptible baseness of words.

2 Object. Eloquence.
Some of the prophets did use an elegant and fine kind of speech.

An. The holy Ghost meant to show by such examples that he wanted not
eloquence, when he used in other places a plain and homely style.

Object. Satan does craftily sow wicked errors in a rude and almost
barbarous speech, that he may more easily deceive silly men.

An. Satan is a counterfaytor of God in many things, Satan a counterfayter
of God.
but all those who are endued with mean understanding do see how vain and
filthy that curious counterfaiting is, if they confer man's inventions and
the word of God together.

3 Besides those whereof I have already spoken, 3. Argu. drawn from antiquity.
the very antiquity of the Scripture has no small weight: forasmuch as there
is no monument of religion extant, which does not come far short of the age
of Moses. Neither does Moses invent any new God, but does set down concerning
the eternal God, that which the Israelites had from their fathers as delivered
from hand to hand in long process of time.

4 Object. The antiquity of the religion of the Egyptians.
The Egyptians did extend the antiquity of their religion unto six thousand
years before the creation of the world.

An. Even profane men did always scorn their vain babbling.

Ob. Moses his authority is not void of suspicion. Moses his authority. Genesis
49.5.9.


An. Unless he had been inspired with the holy Ghost he would never have
marked with the eternal infamy in the person of Leui* the family whereof he
descended by his auncetors almost three hundredth years before, neither does he
refuse to incur envy among his kinsemen, whom no doubt this did grieve.
Neither would he have made mention Nu. 12.1.
. Furthermore for as much as his authority was great, he would at

5 And now so many and such excellent miracles: are as many establishmentes
of the Law which was given by him, and of the doctrine which Exodus 24.29.
.

Moses his miracles.
Object. That is to take that for a thing which all men grant, which wants
not some to gainsay it.

Exodus, 19 and 40 34.
An. Forasmuch as Moses published these things in the hearing of the open
assembly, what place had he to invent any thing of his own head, Number. 16.14
and 20.10 and 11.9.
among those who were eye witnesses of the things which were done?

6 Object. Such miracles are to be ascribed to magical arts.

An. He did so abhor that superstition, that he commanded those to be stoned,
which did but ask council of sorcerers and southsayers Leuit. 20 6.
. A deceauer does seek to win him self a name among the common people by
iugglings. Exodus 10.7.
Moses cried out that The nature of a deceyuer.
What enchantment could bring to pass that ma^na should reign from heaven?
How could he have 4. Argument drawn from the truth of the prophecies


7 Furthermore we have the truth of the prophecies, which does sufficiently
show, Genesis 49.10.
that both Moses (who assigns the principality to the tribe of Judah Deuteronomy.
32.2.
, four hundred years before it came to pass: and also foretold that the
Gentiles should be adopted together into the covenant of God, when almost two
thousand years did pass afterward Isay. 45.1.
.

8 And other Prophets also, (which foretold things to come Ier. 25.12.
, as if they had been present:) did speak by the Spirit of God.

9 Quest. Dan. 7.4.
Who has certified us that these things were written by Moses and the Prophets
which we read under their names? yea, was there ever any Moses?

An. But if any man should call it into question whether there were ever any
Plato, or Aristotle, or Cicero, who would not say that such madness were
worthy to be corrected with stroks or stripes? Also we see that the Law of
Moses was rather wonderfully preserved by the heavenly providence, then by
man's industry and diligence, 5. Argu. drawn from the preservation of the law.
Antiochus commanded the books of holy Scripture to be burned
against the furiouse assaults of the enemies of the truth.

10 Quest. Seeing Antiochus commanded all the books of the Law to be burned,
whence came those copies which we have now?

An. It does not follow that his commandment did take effect. Which thing the
Greek interpretation does witness which did follow forthwith, and was
published throughout the whole world.

Object. They were forged books. 6. Argu. drawn from Christ's sermons, the
calling and writings of the Apostles.


An. No man durst at any time object that to the Jews.

11 Furthermore the plainness of speech used by the three Evangelists: the
speech and Gospel of John thundering from on high with grave sentences: the
heavenly majesty which shines in the writings of Peter and Paul: the unlooked
for calling of Matthew from the table of his gain: of Peter and John from the
fish boats to preach the Gospel: the conversion and calling of Paul an enemy
unto the Apostleship, are signs of the holy Ghost speaking in them.

7. Argu. from consent of the Churches 8. Argu. from the godly conversation of
the godly 9. Argu. from the shedding of the blood of Martires.
12 Neither is that without great weight, to wit, the consent and agreement of
so many ages, of so diverse nations, and so contrary minds, to embrace the
Scripture. Furthermore it purchases great authority, when we look into the
godliness of those, who do so agree together: not of all indeed, but of those
whom the Lord would have to shine as lights in his Church.

13 And now how safely ought we to give our names to that doctrine, which we
see established and testified by the blood of so many holy men?

The voluntary death of the heathen.
Object. Many heathen men did confirm their sayings with voluntary death.

An. Such were led rather with frantike madness then with the zeal of God.
Therefore let us conclude that the authority of the Scripture does depend upon
God and not upon men.

CHAP. IX. That fanaticall men overthrow all principles of godliness, which
forsaking the Scripture run to revelations.
1 Moreover those who forsake the Scripture, and imagine I wot not what way to
come to God, whiles that they make bost of the Spirit, and run to
revelations, are to be thought not so much to be holden with error, as to be
tossed to and fro with madness.

2 Whereby we do easily understand that we must diligently apply our selves
both to read and mark the Scripture*, Reading and hearing of the Scripture is
necessary. 2. Tim. 3.14.
if we list to take any use and fruit of the Spirit of God.

Object. It were no meet thing that the Spirit of God (to whom all things are
subject) should be in subjection to the Scripture.

An. It is no reproach to the holy Ghost to be every where like to him self:
to be constant: never to change.

Object. But by this means he is brought to trial.

An. I grant: but yet to such trial that he would have his majesty
established thereby among us, and lest the spirit of Satan should creep in
under his title, he will have us to know him in that image of his, which he
has engraven in the Scriptures.

3 Object. The letter kills, 2. Cor. 3.6.
but the spirit gives life*.

An. Paul contendeth in that place against the false Apostles, who commending
the Law without Christ, did call away men from the benefit of the new
Testament, wherein the Lord does covenant that he will ingraue his Law in the
bowelles, and that he will write it in the hearts of the faithful. Therefore
the letter is dead, and the Law of the Lord does kill the readers thereof, but
when it is pulled away from the grace of Christ, and when it does only sound
in the ears the heart being untouched.

Object. Therefore the word it self should not be much assured to us, unless
it should be confirmed by the testimony of the Spirit.

An. God has coupled together by a certain mutual knot the certainty of his
word and of his Spirit.

CHAP. X. God is set against idols.
1 Now it is good to consider, whether the Lord does represent him self in
the Scriptures to be such a one as we saw him to be depainted out to be befote
in his works. 1. The goodness of God by the Scripture. 2. His severity.
Surely his fatherly goodness and ready will to do good is every where
extolled: and there be set down examples of his severity, which show that he
is a just revenger of wickedness Ex. 34.5.
.

2 God pronounces in Jeremy what a one he will be known to be Psalm. 145
. Let him that rejoices, Ier. 9 24.
says he, rejoice in this, that he knows me to be the Lord, which do mercy,
justice, and judgment in the earth. Assuredly these three things are very
needful to be known. Mercy wherein our salvation consists: 1. Mercy. 2.
Judgment. 3. Justice.
judgment which is exercised upon the wicked: justice whereby the faithful
are preserved. Furthermore that knowledge of God which is set before us in the
Scriptures is appointed to none other end, then that which does shine in the
creatures being imprinted in them: to wit, first it inuiteth us to fear God:
1. The fear of God. 2. Confidence in him
and secondly to put our whole trust in him: to wit, that we may learn to
worship him both with perfect innocence of life, and with unfeigned obedience:
and also to depend wholly upon his goodness.

3 Also we must mark, that the Scripture, to the end it may direct us to the
true God, does plainly exclude all the gods of the Gentiles: because religion
was corrupt every where almost in all ages.

CHAP. II. That it is wickedness to attribute any visible form to God, and
that they fall from God generally, who so ever they be which set up to them
selves idolles.
1 But seeing that this beastly blockishnesse did possess the whole world,
Beastly blockishnes to make a figure of Cod.
to desire visible figures of God, and so to make and frame to them selves gods
of wood, stone, or other matter: we must hold fast this principle that the
glory of God is corrupted with wicked falsehood, The glory of God is corrupted
with pictures.
so often as any shape is feigned to represent him. Therefore after that God
has in the Law once challenged to him self the glory of the godhead, he
adds forthwith, Thou shall make thee no graven image, neither any similitude
Ex. 20.4.
.

2 That may easily be gathered out of the reasons which he adioyneth unto the
prohibition: Thou heardest a voice, thou saw no body. Therefore take heed
to thy self, lest peradventure being deceived thou make thee any similitude
Deuteronomy. 4.15
etc. He sets his voice against shapes. The voice of God is set against
figures.
Therefore those men forsake God, which desire to have visible forms Ios. 40.17
and 41.7.
.

3 Object. God has sometimes given a presence of his godhead, so that he was
said to have been seen face to face:

An. Those things did plainly teach men concerning the incomprehensible
essence of God. Not that he offered him self to be known in them as he is.
Because it was said to Moses, That no man can see God and live Exodus 33.13.
.

Object. The holy Ghost appeared in likeness of a dove Mat. 3.16.
.

An. When he vanished away forthwith, the faithful were admonished by that
token of short continuance, that they must believe that he is invisible, that
being content with his power and grace they might not invent to them selves
any visible shape.

God appeared in likeness of a man.
Object. God did sometimes appear in the shape of a man.

An. That was a foreshewing of the revelation which was to come in Christ.
Therefore it was not lawful for the Jews so to abuse this pretense, that they
might erect them selves any token of the godhead under the shape of man.

Why the Cherubims were made. Exodus 25.17 and 28.21.
Object. The Cherubims which with their outstretched wings did cover the
mercy seat, were made in honor of God * and why may not we make images of
God and of Saints?

An. Those small images did import nothing else but that images cannot fitly
represent the mysteries of God: forasmuch as they were made to this end, that
they might shadow with their wings the mercies seat, and so keep back not
only the eyes of men, but al their senses from beholding God, that by this
means they might correct their boldness. Moreover it were an absurd thing to
bring in shadows seeing we have the truth it self.

Quest. What mean the Seraphims which were showed to the Prophets in visions*?
Why the Seraphims were showed to the Prophets. Isay. 7.2.


An. Inasmuch as their faces were covered, they signify that the brightness of
the glory of God, was so great that even the Angels them selves are kept from
the direct beholding thereof.

4 And the Prophet gathers by the matter, that the images of the Gentiles are
not gods, Psalm. 115, 4 and 135.15.
but only the works of men's hands *. For that cause the holy Ghost thundreth
out a cruel and sharp curse: Let them be made like to them which make them, and
whosoever they be which put any confidence in them.

5 Object. Images are lay men's books says Gregory. Images lay men's books.


An. Jeremy calls images a doctrine of vanity * and a falsehood. Ier. 10.3.
Haba. 2.18.
Therefore all that is vain and false whatsoever men have learned by images,
concerning God.

Ob. Those are reproved of the Prophets which do abuse images unto
superstition.

An. I grant, and yet they do always set images against the true God, as
contrary things.

6 Augustine without doubting pronounces that it is wickedness not only to
worship images, Lib. 4. de ciuit. cap. 9 and 32.
but to set them up to God * and that by this means the fear of God is
diminished, or else taken away.

7 And what other things are those pictures and images which they dedicate unto
saints, but patterns of most wicked riot and filthiness?

8 Furthermore as touching the beginning of idols, that is received almost by
common consent, The beginning of Idols.
which is written in the book of wisdom, * to wit, that those were the first
authors of the^, Wise. 14.15.
which gave this honor to the dead, superstitiously to worship their memory:
Genesis 31.19.
but idols were in use before that time Exodus 32.2.
the mind begat the idol, and the hand brought it forth.

9 Worshipping did follow such forged invention. There is some god head
ascribed to the images.
For seeing men did imagine that they beheld God in the images, they did also
worship him there.

Ob. The images are not counted the gods themselves.

An. Neither were the Jews altogether so ignorant that they did not remember
that it was God by whose hand they had been brought out of Egypt, before
they made the calf: neither were the Heathen men so blockish that they did not
understand that God was some other thing then wood and stone.

10 Object. That visible thing is not worshipped but that which is represented.

An The Gentiles had the like starting holes. Then why do they kneel before
the images? To what end serve pilgrimages? Why do we turn our faces toward the
images when we are about to pray, the like whereof we have at home, etc.

11 Object. That worship which is given to images, is Idolodouleia or the
service of images, and not Idololatreia or worshipping of Images.

It is a lighter matter to worship then to serve.
An. As if it were not a lighter matter to worship than to serve, by this
means they should worship God, and serve images.

Quest. Are then no images tolerable?

What images are tolerable.
An. Those only are condemned which are made to be worshipped.

Quest. Is it not expedienr to have those images in churches which represent
histories, famous facts or men's bodies?

When images were set up in Churches
An. The authority of the ancient church ought to move us, wherein for the
space almost of 5. hundted years, wherein religion did as yet more (flourish) the
temples of Christians were commonly void of images. But they were brought in
when the sincerity of the ministry did degenerate. This seems to be the
cause why John would have us to abstain not only from worshipping of images,
but also from the very images themselves. 1. Ioh. 5.21.


14 Object The Nicene council which was holden by the commandment of Irene,
The Nicene counsel.
did decree that images should not only be had in churches, but also
worshipped.

An. Whosoever he be which shall read the refutarie book, published in the
name of Carolus the great, wherein are rehearsed the opinions of the bishops
which were present, and the arguments which they did use, he shall find such
filthy and unsavory follies, that I am ashamed much to report them.

15 As if all those reverend fathers did not discredit themselves either by
handling the scriptures so childishlie, or by renting them in pieces so
wickedlie.

It is a wonder that so great monsters of ungodliness were by them spued out:
and it is twice strange that they were not cried out against.

CHAP. XII. That God is distinguished from idols, that he alone may be wholly
worshipped.
1 SO often as the scripture affirms that there is one only God, it strives
not for the bare name, but does also command that that be given to no other
which belongs to the Godhead. Whereby appears what difference there is
between pure religion and superstition. What difference there is between
religion and superstition
God to the end he may challendge to himself his own right, does cry out
that he is a ielous God, and a severe punisher if he be coupled with any
vain forged God. Exodus 20.


2 Therefore the distinction of latreia, or worship and douleia or of service
was invented in vain, to the end divine honors might seem to be freely
ascribed to angels and dead men.

Object. Many of the old fathers did use such distinction.

An. It is not therefore to be any whit more allowed: for no man does doubt,
but that it were an hard matter often to serve him, whom thou would not
refuse to worship.

Men worshipped. Worshipping put for civil honor.
3 Object. We read that men have been worshipped oftentimes.

An. That was a civil kind of honor, but religion has another respect which so
soon as it is joined with worshipping, draws with it a profaning of the
divine honor.

CHAP. XIII. That the one essence of God does contain in it three persons.
1 THAT which is taught in the scriptures touching the infinite and spiritual
essence of God, does not only serve to overthrow the dotings of the common
people, but also to refute the subtilties of profane philosophy. What God is.
One of the old writers said sincerely, that, God is all that which we see,
and which we do not see.

2 And God does so declare himself to be one, that he does distinctlie
propounde and set forth himself to be considered in three persons, which
except we hold, there does only the bare name of God swim about in our
brain, without the true god.

Whether the word person be found in the Scriptures.
Object. That word person, is not found in the scriptures, but it is invented
by man.

An. When the Apostle calls the son of God the engraven form of his
fathers person,* undoubtedly he assigns some being to the father wherein he
differs from his son: Heb. 1.3:
the same reason is in the holy ghost: because we shall prove by and by that he
is both God and yet that we must needs think that he is another then the
father.

3 Object. It were better for us, to keep not only our meanings, but also our
words within the compass of the scriptures, then to spread abroad quaint
words, which may breed dissension and strife.

An. I grant that we must with no less reverence speak of God then think of
him. We must with no less reverence speak of God then think of him,
But when the thing is all one, though the word be not found in the same
syllables in the scriptures, it ought in no case to be rejected: otherwise all
preaching and interpreting of the scriptures must be taken away. With like
necessity is the Church enforced to use the word Trinity.

4 And such quaintnes or newness of words (if we must so call it) does then
chiefly come in use, Why the word Trinity was invented.
and stand in steed, when we must avouch the truth against slaunderers and
cauillers. So against Arrius, the son was called Consubstanciall, and against
Sabellicus it was proved, The son consubstantial.
that the Trinity of persons did subsist in one God.

5 Therefore if the words be not invented in vain, we must beware that in
refusing the same we be not thought to be proudly bold. A caution
Would God they were buried, so that all did agree together in this faith,
that the father, son, and holy ghost are one God: The persons are
distinguished by properties.
and yet that neither the son is the father, or the holy ghost the son, but
that they are distinguished by a certain property.

6 But omitting to dispute of words, let us now speak of the thing it self: I
call a person a subsistence in the essence of God, What a person is.
which being referred unto the rest, is distinguished by a certain
incommunicable property, or which is not common to the other. A subsistence is
an other thing then an essence. For if the word were simply GOD and had
nothing proper severally to it self, What a subsistence is.
then had John * said amiss in saying, Ioh. 1.1.
that it was always with God. Where he adds forthwith that that word was
God.

7 And before I go any further, I must prove the 1. Division. The godhead of
the son.
it were an absurd thing to imagine only a fading or vanishing voice, which
being uttered in the air, does come forth without God himself, when as the
word is rather meant to be the perpetual wisdom of God, 1. Argu. oracles
and prophecies came from the spirit of Christ.
resiant with God, from which both oracles and also all Prophesies did
proceed. For as Peter does witness, Pet. 1.11.
the old prophets did no less speak by the spirit of Christ, then the
Apostles, and whosoever they were, which after them had the administration of
the celestial doctrine. And because Christ was not as yet revealed, we must
needs understand the word begotten of the father before all worlds. The word
was begotten before al worlds.
And if so be it that spirit was the spirit of the word, whose instruments
the Prophets were, we do undoubtedly gather that he was very God. 2. Argu.
from the creation of the world
Which thing Moses does teach plainly enough in the creation of the world,
Genesis 31.3.
when he sets that word as in the middle.

Object. The word is taken in that place for bidding or commandment.

An. The Apostles are better interpreters, Heb. 1.2.
who teach that the world was made by the son, and that he bears all
things by his mighty word. To the same end tends the saying of Christ, My
father and I do work until this day. Ioh. 5.17.


8 Object. The word began to be then, when God did open his holy mouth in
the creation of the world.

An. That is too unadvisedly to imagine an innouatio^ of the substance of God.
For if there should have bin in him any thing coming from elsewhere, that of
James should fall to the ground, Iam. 1.17
There is with God no change or shadow of change.

Object. God spoke then first of all, therefore there was in him no speech at
all before that time.

An. I conclude otherwise, In the very moment wherein God said, Let light be
made, Genesis 1.3.
the power of the word appeared, therefore it was long before.

9 Hereby we ought to be fully certified that Christ is that word being clad
with flesh. Whereupon the prophet says, Psalm. 45.7. 3. Argu. from his throne.
Thy throne O God is for ever.

Object. The word Elohym is also applied to the angels and chiefest powers. To
whom the word Elohym is applied


An. But there is no where in the scriptures any such place extant as
ascribes an eternal throne to a creature: neither is he only called God, but
also Exodus 7.1.


Object. Moses gave that name to the altar which he builded Isa. 42.8.
: and also Ezechiel to the city of the new Jerusalem. Ezech. 48.36. and 17.15.


An. The altar was built for a monument that God is the exalter of Moses, The
Altar. Why Ierusallem has the name of Cod given it.
and Jerusalem has the name of God given it, to testify the presence of God.
For thus says the Prophet, the name of the city shall be from that day: The
Lord is there: and Moses built the altar after this sort, and called the name
thereof, The Lord mine exaltation.

Object. Jeremy refers this self same title unto Jerusalem in these
words, Ier. 33.16.
This is the name wherewith they shall call her, The Lord our righteousness.

Christ Jehovah.
An. Christ is the true Jehovah whence flows righteousness: seeing the Church
perceives this in deed, it does for just causes rejoice in this name.

4. Argument, an Angel for the Lord. Iud. 11.12. and 7.4.
10 If these things do not satisfy the Jews, let the^ look why Jehovah or the
Lord is so often presented in the person of an Angel.*

Object. This is spoken in respect of the person which he presents.

An. But the servant in suffering sacrifice to be offered unto him should take
from God the honor due to him: Iud. 7.16 and 13.16.
which is an absurd thing, yea he does afterward prove * that he is that
Jehovah in deed. Therefore Mannah and his wife gather by this sign, Mannah.
that they have not only seen an angel, but God.

Object. God was never openly showed to Abraham, Seruetus.
and to other of the fathers, but in steed of him they worshipped an angel.

An. The sound Doctors of the Church did well and wisely interpret the word
of God to be the Prince of Angels or the chief Angel, Christ under the person
of an Angel does execute the office of the mediator. Oseas. 12.5
who began even then as by a certain entrance or preparation to execute the
office of a mediator. The same meaning has Oseas, who after he has reckoned
up the cumbat of Jacob with the Angel,* The Lord says he, the God of hosts,
Jehovah worthy of memory is his name.

Object. God did bear the person of an Angel.

An. The confession of the holy Patriarch does From the confession of the
Patriarch. Deuteronomy. 32.29.30
when he says, I saw God face to face: 1. Cor. 10:4.
and hence came that of Paul also, that Christ did guide the people in the
wilderness.



12 And if so be it we esteem his Godhead by his works which are ascribed to
him every where in the scriptures, The godhead of Christ is proved by his
works.
it shall as yet more evidently appear by them. For when he said that he
wrought since the beginning with his father, the Jews which were most dull to
understand his other sayings, did yet perceive that he took upon him the
divine power.

13 And it appears most euide^tlie in miracles. From miracles


Object. Both the Prophets and also the Apostles did equal and like miracles.

An. These men did distribute the gifts of God according to their ministry,
but he did exercise his own power.

Object. Why did he use prayer then, Christ's prayer.
if he were able to do that of himself?

An. That he might give the glory to his father: but we see for the most part
his own power showed to us. And how can he choose, but be the author of the
miracles, who by his own authority commits Because there is salvation in
him,
Furthermore if there be no salvation, no righteousness, no life without God,
and Christ contains all these things in himself, surely he is showed to be
God.

Object. All these things are powered out by God into him. Act. 4.12.


An. He is not said to have received salvation, but to be salvation himself,
Mat. 19 17.
and also goodness, righteousness, Ioh. 1.3.
light. In him we believe, 1. Ioh. 14.1.5 10.
upon him do we call. The godhead of the holy ghost is proved.
Whereby it does necessarily appear that he is God.

14 Also we must fet proves to prove the Godhead of the holy ghost, chiefly
from the same fountains. That testimony of Moses is evident enough that the
spirit of God was stretched out upon the depthes.* Also Isaias says, The
Lord sent me and this spirit. 1. Ar.
Because he co^municateth or imparteth his power in sending his prophets, Genesis
1.2.
with the holy Ghost: Isa. 48.16.
whereby appears his divine majesty. Being 1. Cor. 11.
he justifies, 1. Cor. 11.11.
he is our sanctification, truth, grace, and whatsoever good thing can be
invented. Whereby appears that the spirit has divine power, and that he is
personally resident in God.

Blasphemy against the spirit.
15 Last of all, if blasphemy against the spirit be not forgiven either in
this world or in the world to come, seeing he does obtain pardon which has
blasphemed the son, by this is his divine majesty plainly proved which to
hurt or diminish, Mat. 12 31
is a fault vnperdonable. Mar. 3 29. Distinction of persons.
Fet more testimonies out of the Institution.

16 Paul to the Ephesians speaks most plainly of the distinction of the
persons Ephesians. 4.5.
But Christ speaks more plainly when he commands to baptize in the name
of the father, 2. Pars. The son is of the father
and of the son, and of the holy Ghost. Mat. 28.19.


17 That of Nazianzene likes me well. I cannot think upon one, but I am by
and by compassed about with the shining brightness of three: neither can I
discern three, but I am at a sudden referred unto one.

Object. That distinction had his beginning when the son was incarnate,

An. The only begotten son was in the bosom of his father before. Ioh.
1.18.
But the holy Ghost is dist^nguished, because he proceeds from the father.
Ioh. 15.26 and 16.7.


18 That is also greatly available unto such a distinction, The spirit is of
the father
because the scripture attributes to the father the beginning of working: to
the son wisdom and counsel: The father is the beginning of doing, the
son of wisdom, the holy Ghost of power.
to the holy Ghost power and efficacy. Therefore we consider first God: that
done the wisdom rising out of him: last of all the power whereby he executes
the decrees of his council.

19 By this testimony is signified that they have relation one to another, and
not the very substance whereby they are one.

20 Therefore when we profess that we believe in one God, The name of God
comprehends three persons.
under the name of God we understand the one only and simple essence wherein
we comprehend three persons.

21 But and if that distinction which is in one Godhead of the father, son,
and holy Ghost, do troublesome wits more than is expedient, A caucat.
let them remember that men's minds do enter into a labyrinth when they favor
their curiosity too much: and so let them suffer themselves to be guided by
the heavenly oracles, howsoever they cannot comprehend the highness of the
mystery.

22 Ob. A person is nothing else but a visible form of the glory of God.
Seruetus.


An When John pronounces that the word was God before the world was made,
What is to be understood by the word person.
he does make him to differ much from a conception of form. Ioh. 11.
The same must we think of the spirit, when Moses says, that that mass and
lump being without form was sustained in him.

23 Ob. Christ is every where called the son of God: therefore there is no
other God properly besides the father.

An. Although the name of God be common to the son also, yet by reason of
pre-eminence it is sometimes ascribed to the father, because he is the
fountain and beginning of the Godhead.

Ob. If Christ be truly the son of God, then ^s he the son of a person,
which is absurd.

An. Both these are true: He is the son of God, because he is the word
begotten of his father before all ages: and yet for declarations sake we must
have respect of the person, that the name of god may not be taken simply, but
for the father.

24 Object. Unless the father alone were the true God, he should be his own
God.

An. For degree and order he is properly called God, who did not only beget
his wisdom of himself, but is also the God of the mediator.

Object. So Christ was exalted in the flesh, wherein he was humbled: and in
respect of the flesh, all power was given him both in heaven and earth.

Phi. 2.6.7.
An. Paul does best decide this controversy, when he teaches that he was
equal with God, * before he humbled himself in the person of a servant.

Object. Christ was God in his father.

An. In respect of order the beginning of the Godhead is in the father,
notwithstanding that is a detestable invention, that the essence is proper to
the father alone, as if he were the Godmaker of his son: because by this
means there should either be more essences then one, An absurdity.
or else we call Christ God only in name.

Object The son of God: but nex after the father.

An. Therefore the essence should be begotten and formed in him, which is in
the father unbegotten and unformed.

25 Object. Every one of things undivided have a part of the essence.

An. There is one only God essencially: and therefore the essence both of the
son, and also of the holy ghost is unbegotten.

Object There should be a quaternitie, seeing three persons be derived from
one essence.

An. We do not draw the persons from the essence, but though they remain in
it, we put in a difference. Otherwise there should be a trinity of gods not of
persons.

Ob. Therefore the Trinity shall be without God?

An. No, because unless the father were God he should not be the father: and
the son is no otherwise the son but because he is God.

Object. So three things meet together, the essence, the son, and the
spirit.

An. Yea by this means the essence of the son, and of the holy ghost should
be destroyed: which cannot be.

26 Object. If Christ be God, he shall not be the son of God.

An. There is a comparison made between the persons: neither is the name of
God taken indefinitelie, but it is restrained unto the father, inasmuch as he
is the beginning of the Godhead.

Quest. What? in making of essence?

An. No: but in respect of order.

27 Object. S. Ireneus does affirm that the father of Christ is the only and
eternal God of Israel.

An. He had to deal with mad fellows, which did deny that the father of
Christ was that God, that spoke in times past by Moses and the prophets, but
I wot not what ghost brought out of the corruption of the world. Therefore he
stands wholly upon this, to make it plain that there is no other god set
forth in the scripture but the father of Christ.

Object. Ireneus thinks that the father alone is the God of Israel.

An The same writer does plainly teach, Lib. 3. chap. 18,
that Christ is all one and the same: as also he refers unto him the
prophecy of Abacuck, Hab. 3.3.
God shall come from the South.

28 Object. Tertullian says that the son is the second or next to his father.

An. That he may distinguish the persons.

Object. He says that the son is visible.

An. It is true in as much as he is man: but he is invisible inasmuch as he is
the word.

Object. He calls the word and the spirit the portion of the whole.

An. That is not referred unto the substance, but unto the distinction of
persons.

29 Object. S. Hillarie teaches that eternity is in the father.

An. Does he it to this end that he may take the essence of God from the son?
Therefore let us conclude that there were from everlasting three persons in God.

CHAP. XIIII. That in the very creation of the world and of al things the
scripture does distinguish by certain marks the true God from false Gods.
1 ALSO God would have the history of the creation to be extant that the
faith of his Church might rest thereupon, and not seek any other God, but him
who is set forth by Moses to be the Creator and maker of the world. And
because our nature is too much inclined to vanity, first the time is set down
that by the continual course of years the faithful might come to the first
beginning of mankind and of all things. Time of the creation.


Quest. Why did it not come into Gods mind before to create heaven and earth,
Curiosity
but being idle did suffer that to pass an infinite space, which he could have
done many thousand years before?

An. It is neither lawefull to enquire after that neither yet expedient,
because if man's mind strive to pearce so far, it shall faint by the way.

Quest. What did God before the creation?

An. He made hell says a certain godly old man, A curious question.
for curious men.

2 For like reason is it, that Moses declares, Goodness of God.
that the work of God was not finished in a moment but in six days. For even
by this circumstance we gather, how fatherly the love of God was toward
mankind, in that he did not create Adam before he had enriched the world with
all plenty of good things.

3 But before I come to speak more fully of the nature of man, I must first
say something of ye angels. Of Angels.


Ob. Moses made no mention of Angels among things created. Why Moses made no
mention of Angels among things created.


An. Because he applied himself to the rudeness of the common people, he
recites none other works of God in the history of the creation, but such as we
see with our eyes: and yet afterward he brings in the angels as the ministers
of God.

Object. There be two beginners: God of good things, the devil of evil
things.

An. Nothing is more proper to God then eternity, which whosoever does
attribute to the devil, they give him the title of the Godhead. And thereupon
it might also be concluded that God is not almighty, which is absurd.

Object. There is none evil nature in the world
It is wickedness to ascribe the creation of any evil thing to a good God.

An. That does not hurt the true and sound faith, which does not admit that
there is any evil nature in the world.

Quest. Then whence came the frowardnes and wickedness of men and of the
devil?

An Not from nature but from the corruption of nature.

4 Quest. When were the angels created?

A curious question.
An. Such a question is curious. And we must beware that we do neither speak,
or think or desire to know any thing concerning obscure things, but that which
shall be taught us in the word of God: Moses says that the earth was finished,
and the heavens were finished with all the host of them: Genesis 2.1.
* to what end is it to enquire upon what day, besides the stars and planets,
other heavenly bodies began also to be.

5 We read every where in the scripture that the angels are heavenly spirits,
whose ministry God uses to execute all things which he has decreed. The
ministry of Angels. Psalm. 103.20.
Thence comes their name: they are called hoasts Col. 1.16.
powers, Col. 1.16.
principalities, Col. 1.16.
dominions, Col. 1.16.
Thrones: Col. 1.16.
because after a sort the glory of God rests in them. Luke. 2.13.
Dan. 7.10,


6 But the scripture stands chiefly upon that point which may make most to
our consolation, and the confirmation of our faith: to wit, that the Angels are
stewards and ministers of Gods bountifulness toward us.*

7. Quest. Has every one of the faithful a particular angel? Psalm. 91.11.
and 34.8.


An. Genesis 16.6. etc.
Surely when Daniel makes me^tio^ of the angel of the Persia^s and Grecia^s,
he signifies that there are certain and particular angels appointed to realms
and provinces as governors. Dan. 10.13.
Mat. 18.14.
Christ says the angels of children do always behold the face of the father.*
So it is said of the Angel of Peter Act. 12.15
. But we must hold this as undoubtedly true that not only one Angel takes
care for every particular person: but that they al with one consent do watch
for our safty*

8 But as touching the multitude and orders of Angels we must not curiously
define. Luke. 15.7 and 16.23.
Michaell is called a great prince Iud. 9.
, and an Archangell 1. These. 4.16.
, Dan. 12.1
one is called Gabriell Tob. 3.21
: another Raphaell Mat. 26.55
: and finally there be many legions of Angels*. It is enough.

9 Object. By Angels is meant nothing else but motions wherewith God does
inspire men, or those tokens of his power which he shows.

An. All the whole Scripture is against this: because it is said of them that
they be many*: Mat. 26.55.
they rejoice Luke. 15.7.
: that the Law was given by their hands Gal. 3.19.
: that the elect shall be like to them, etc. These things could not be
attributed to the Angels unless they had a true nature and essence.

10 But though the brightness of the majesty of God do shine in them, That the
Angels have a true nature.
and they be unto us the ministers and giuers of good things, and we be most
bent unto superstition, yet we must beware that we do not give to the^ those
things which are due to none but to God. For they are not sufficient for them
selves, A caveat that we worship not Angels.
but they fet from the same fountain, from whence we draw things, whereof we
stand in need. For which cause the Angel answers John: Take heed thou do it
not: I am thy fellow servant: worship God*. Apoc. 19.10.


11 This danger shall we avoid: if we consider that God uses them, not of
any necessity, as if he could not be without them, but to the comfort of out
imbecillitie, that we may lack nothing which may be available either to erect
to good hope, or to keep in safety and quiet our minds.

12 For these helps are prepared for us of the A great help to our confidence.
as if it could prevail against his power: but that we may fly to that saying
of Eliseus, that more are for us, then against us 2. Kin. 6.17.
.

Of the Deuiles and why their power is described to us.
13 Those things which the Scripture teaches concerning devils tend in a
manner wholly to this end, that we be circumspect to prevent their subtlety,
Ioh. 12.21.
and prince of this world Luke 11.22.
, the spirit which has power of the air, a roaring lion 1. Pet. 5.8.
, etc. These descriptions tend to this end that we may use circumspection:
that when we know the power of our enemy, and are on the

14 And to the end we may be the more stirred up to do that, the Scripture
tells us, that there is not one, or two, or a few enemies, but great troops
which make war against us Mat. 12.42.
.

Mar. 16.9.
15 This ought also to inflame us to make continual war against the devil,
Luke 8.42.
that our adversary

16 Object. But he was created of God, who is good.

An. This malice and evil which we attribute to his nature, comes not by
creation, but from corruption: Ioh. 8.44.
because he stood not in the truth*. The devils were created Angels, but by
growing out of kind they destroyed them selves, and are made to others
instruments of destruction 2. Pet. 2.4. Iud. 6.
.

Quest. But why does not the Scripture set forth their fall, the cause, manner,
time, and kind thereof?

An. The holy Ghost does only teach those things which are necessary to
salvation. Of the discord between God and Satan. Satan can do nothing unless
God be willing.
It was not meet for the holy Ghost to feed our curiosity with vain
histories without fruit.

17 But as concerning the fight and discord which we say is between God and
Satan, it must be so understood, that that do nevertheless remain firm, that
he can do nothing unless God be willing, which appears by the history of
Job*, Achab, Saul*, and others*.

18 And now because God turns the unclean spirits whither he will, he does
so temper this government that they exercise the faithful by fighting, and do
sometimes wound them, Ioh. 1.6.
1. King. 22.20.
but they never overcome them nor oppress them: 1. Sam. 16.14. and 18.10.
but as for the wicked they draw them after them having subdued them: and abuse
them as bondslaues to all wickedness. Thereby it comes to pass that the
faithful are known by this to be the children of God, because they bear his
image: and the wicked are properly counted the children of Satan by his image
whereunto they are degenerate.

19 Object. The children of God. The children of the Devil.
The devils are nothing else but evil

An. Seeing the unclean spirits are called Angels Apostataes Iud. 6.
, are said to sin from the beginning Ioh. 8.44.
, to have fought with Michaell the Archangell Iud 9
, to have appeared before God Job. 1.6. and 2.1.
, it is manifest enough that they be not affections of men's minds, but rather
indeed spirits endued with understanding and sense.

2 Therefore, that in this beautiful theater we may take a godly delectation,
and by true faith lay hold upon that which is behoofefull for us to know
concerning God, The history of the creation of the world must be known
it is very good for us especially to know the history of the creation of
the world. For thereby we shall learn that God by the power of his word and
Spirit did create heaven and earth of nothing: and although all things be
subject to corruption, yet has he provided that every kind may be kept safe
until the last day. And when he had adorned the world with most absolute
variety of all things, The creation of man is a most excellent example of all
the works of God.
as an house replenished with abundance of household stuff, he fashioned man
after his own image, and did furnish him with so many and so great gifts as
a most excellent example of his works.

21 Neither is it to be doubted but that the Lord A godly meditation.
that when we know and see those infinite richesse of his wisdom, justice,
goodness, and power in all his creatures as in mirrours, we may not only
lightly and glauncingly run over them, but stay long in that cogitation,
ponder the same earnestly and faithfully in our minds, and oftentimes call the
same to remembrance.

22 There remains the other part which comes All things are created to
salvation.
and when we do also feel and perceive in ourselves, and in so great good
things which he has bestowed upon us, his power and grace, we do thence and
thereby rouse up our selves to trust in him, to call upon him, to praise him,
and to love him.

CHAP. XV. Of the creation of man.
1 NOw must we speak of the creation of man: The knowledge of man is double.
because as we said in the beginning, we cannot know God as we ought to know
him, unless we do also on the other side know our selves. And the

2 Furthermore it is out of question that man consists upon soul and body.
The division of man.
And we understand that the essence of the soul, which is the more excellent
part of man, is immortal and yet created.

Object. Of the soul.
The soul or spirit of man is only a breath or power inspired or poured into
the body, which notwithstanding is without essence.

An. That the soul has a true essence
Seeing that so many excellent gifts wherein man's mind excels do cry that
some divine thing is therein engraven, there be so many testimonies not of a
vanishing breath, but of an immortal essence. To what end should Paul exhort
the faithful to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of the flesh and of
the spirit, unless he did make two parts, wherein the filthiness of sin
does rest*? 2. Cor. 7.1.
And also to what end should Peter call Christ the pastor of souls 1. Pet.
2.15.
.

3 Why is man said to be created after the image of God? Though in the outward
man appears the glory of God, yet the proper place of his image is in the
soul.

Ob. The Father, Osiander.
Son and holy Ghost did place their image in man: because though Ada^ had
remained in his first estate, yet should Christ have become man.

An. I grant that in the person of the Mediator shines the glory of the
godhead: but how shall the eternal Word be called the image of the Spirit
before whom he goes in order? And forasmuch as that speech, Let us make man
after our own image or similitude, is common to the person of the Son, it
should follow that he is the image of him self.

Object. Man was created only after the form and figure of Christ as he was
man, so that that form out of which Adam was taken, was Christ.

An. But the Scripture does teach that man was created in the image of God.

Object. Adam was created in the image of God, because he was like to Christ,
who is the only image of God.

How the image of God is in man.
An. That is subtly to play the philosophers about words. In the thing there
is no doutfulnes, but that man is called the image of God, because he is like
to God.

Object. Not a part of man, nor the soul with her gifts is the image of God:
but the whole Adam which had his name given him of the earth from whence he was
taken.

An. This is frivolous. For when the whole man is called mortal, the soul is
not therefore subject to death: neither where he is called a reasonable
creature, it is thereby meant that the body has reason. Therefore though the
soul be not man, yet is it no absurd thing that he should be called the image
of God in respect of his soul. Although the image of God do appertain unto
the whole excellency wherein man's nature excels all living creatures. The
image of God
Furthermore by this word is signified that perfection of integrity, wherein
man was created. Repayring of nature.


4 That may be more easily known by the reparatio^ of corrupt nature, which
we have by Christ, who is for this cause called the second Adam 1. Cor. 15.45
Why Christ is called the second Adam. The end of regeneration.
, because he has restored us to true and perfect integrity. For the end of
regeneration, is that Christ may fashion us again to the image of God: which
is, that we may bear the image of God in true godliness, righteousness,
pureness, and knowledge.

Object. The similitude of God consists in the government given to man:
because he was made heir and possessor of all things.

An. The image of God must be sought properly within him and not without him:
yea it is an inward good thing of the soul.

Object. The Manichees. Seruetus.
God breathed into the face of man the breath of life*, whence we must gather
that the soul did convey into man the substance of God.

An. If that were true it should follow that the nature of God is not only
subject to change and passions, but also to ignorance, Whether the soul do
conueye into man the substance of God.
to evil concupisce^ce and to all manner vices: then which nothing can be more
absurd.

Object. An absurdity.
Paull says that we be the generation of God Act. 17.28.
.

An. In quality not in substance: to wit inasmuch as he has endued us with
divine gifts. For the creation is not a pouring of one substance into another,
but the beginning of an essence of nothing.

Object. The soul is given by God, Creation. Osiander.
and when it departs out of the flesh it returns to him: therefore it was
taken out of his substance.

An. As if God were not able to make us like to himself by the inestimable
power of his Spirit, unless Christ should pour out him self substantially
into us.

What the soul is.
6 And it appears by the Scripture that the soul is nothing else, but a
substance without body, and yet put into a body, and that it dwells there
as in an house not only that it may give life to all parts of the body, and
make the organes or instruments fit and profitable for their actions, but also
that it may bear the chief sway in governing man's life: and not only touching
the offices of the earthly life, but also that it may raise us up to worship
God.

The parts of the soul.
7 And it has two parts, understanding and will: understanding discerns
between objects or things set before it, as each of them shall seem meet
Understanding
or rejects and flies from that which it misliketh. Will.


How great man's excellency was in his creation.
18 When man was first created he had all these excellent gifts, as reason,
understanding, wisdom, judgment not only for the government of the earthly
life, but also to clime up even unto God Election.
and to temper all the isntrumental motions: and so his will might be
altogether conformable to reason. Free will.
In this perfection man did excel in free will, whereby if he would he might
have attained eternal life. Man fell of his own accord.
For he fell only of his own accord and will. Man received indeed to be able
if he would: but he had not will to be able: A note.
because steadfast perseverance should have followed this will.

CHAP. XVI. That God does cherish and defend the world which he has created by
his power, and that he governs all parts thereof by his providence.
1 FVrthermore to the end we may the more easily attain to the knowledge of
the fall of man, it is requisite that our faith pearce higher, God is the
creator and governor of all things.
to wit, that whom it has learned to be the creator of al things, it may also
forthwith gather to be the perpetual

2 Therefore if a man light among thieues, or wild Things having life are
subject to the providence of God. We must ascribe nothing to fortune. Mat.
10.30. Things without life.
if another wandering in the wilderness do find a remedy for his thirst,
another being tossed by waves upon the seas do come to an haven, we must not
ascribe all these things whether prosperous or otherwise to fortune, but to
the providence of God, to whom even the hairs of our head are numbered*. And as
for things without life, though every one of them have naturally his
property, yet they do not show forth their force save only in as much as they
are directed by the present hand of God: as that the sun stood still two
days at the prayer of Joshua*, and that the shadow thereof went back for
Ezechias his sake*. Ios. 10.13. 2 King 20.11.


3 The vigilant, effectual, and working almighty power of God, which does
also work continually shines more clerly therein, The watchful and effectual
omnipotency of God.
from whence we gather a double fruit: first that he is of sufficient power and
ability to do good to us, who has in his possession heaven and

Whether there be in God only a bare foreknowledge.
Object. There is in God only a bare foreknowledge.

An. His providence works continually.

Object. His providence shall not keep a man from turning him self whither he
will by the free power of his will.

An. That is to make a division between God and men: so that God does inspire
by his power motion into man, whereby he may work according to that nature
which is given him: and man does govern his own actions by voluntary counsel:
which is absurd.

4 Object. God turns over and carries about the frame of the world with the
parts thereof with a general motion, but he does not direct the particular
actions of every creature.

An. That is to make God the governor of the world only in word and not in
deed, if you take from him that which is the chiefest thing, God directs
every thing to his end. Whether any thing come by chance.
namely to moderate all things, and to direct every thing to this end by his
incomprehensible wisdom.

5 Object. The beginning of moving is in the power of God, but all things are
carried either of their own accord or else by chance, whither the inclination
of nature does enforce them.

Absurdities.
An. Then the days which succeed the nights, the months months, and years
years, should always keep one measure in equal proportion; so that by this
means there should be no place left either for the fatherly favor of God in
helping his: neither for the judgments of God in punishing the wicked.

Object. God is beneficial enough to mankind, because he gives the heaven
and earth an ordinary force and strength, whereby he gives food.

An. He does often pronounce in the Law and Prophets, that so often as he
waters the earth with dew and rain, How God directs particular things.
Deuteronomy. 28.1
he gives testimony of his grace and favor: and that when he makes the
heaven as brass by his commandment, it is a sure token of his special
vengeance Leuit. 26 4.
.

6 Also Jeremy the prophet cries out Ier. 10 23.
, I know Lord that man's way is not his, neither is it in man to direct his
goings: and Solomon says, The goinges of man are of the Lord, and how shall a
man order his own goings*? Pro. 20.24.


Object. Man can do nothing without the power of God.

An. Power, choice, appointment are attributed to God.

Quest. Does any thing come by chance?

An. Though a bough being broken of from a tree do fall upon one that passes
by, and do kill him, Nothing by chance.
the Lord says that he has delivered him into the hand of the slayer Exodus
21.13.
.

Quest. What? do not lots fall by chance?

An. God does challenge to him self the judgment thereof. Lottes fall not by
chance. Pro. 16.33


7 Whereupon we will conclude that particular events are testimonies in general
of the singular and particular providence of God. No wind rises without the
special providence of God. Ex. 19.13.
Whereupon Moses says, God raised a wind in the wilderness, that it might
bring to the people a multitude of birds Ex. 19.13.
.

Object. This came to pass extraordinarily.

An. But yet I gather thereby that there never rises any wind, but by the
special commandment Whereby is gathered that not only his general providence
is of force in his creatures, that he may continue the order of nature: but
that it is applied unto a certain and proper end, by his wonderful counsel.

Destenie differs from Gods providence.
18 Object. That is the opinion of the Stoickes touching destiny.

An. They did attribute such necessity to nature and not to the will of God.

Quest. Does any thing come to pass by chance?

An. Not in respect of God, but of our selves, who are often deceived by the
event of things.

Lib. 8. 3. quest. and tit. de Trin. 3. cap. 4.
Object. Augustine does often make mention of sufferance*.

An. He proves that the will of God is the chief and first cause of all
things: Sufferance is al one with commandment.
because nothing does come to pass but by his commandment or suffera^ce.

Quest. Why does the Scripture often make mention of chance?

Chanceable things are often read of in the Scriptures.
An. How soever all things are ordered by the counsel of God, yet are they
said to be unto us chaunceable, because the order, reason, and necessity of
those things which fall out, do for the most partly hid in the counsel of God,
and are not comprehended by man's opinion.

CHAP. XVII. Fruits of Gods providence.
1 FVrthermore it shall be expedient here to note to what end the Scripture
does teach that all things are ordered by God: The end of Gods providence
and first of all we must note, that we must consider the providence of God as
well for the time to come as for the time past: secondly that it does so order
all things, that sometimes it works by means, and sometimes without We must
mark the end of things. A note.
if we will be quiet, that God has a right good reason for his purpose.
Therefore let us reverence the secret judgments of God.

2 But although the will of God be comprehended in the commandments of the
Law, The law is the rule of justice.
the rule of all justice and equity, yet we say that his judgments are a
great deapth*, Psalm. 36.7
by which we reverence the other will of God which is hidden from us: whereof
Paull also speaks, O the depth of the wisdom and riches, and knowledge of
God Romans 11.33. There is in God a revealed will and a secret will.
.

Object. We must content our selves with the Scriptures, wherein the will of
God is most fully declared unto us: for there is none other will in the secret
counsel of God.

An. I grant there is but one only will in God, and yet because of the
imbecillitie of our wit we consider a double will, one comprehended in the
Law, and in the Gospel, which is the way wherein we do

Deuteronomy. 29.29. Touching things to come
3 Object. If God have assigned the point and very time of our death, we can
not escape i^: and therefore it is vain to use any circumspectio^. Therefore
Touching things past.
he has executed the purpose of God: some man has committed theft or
whordome, he is the minister of his providence.

An. But as touching things to come, Solomon does easily reconcile together the
providence of God and man's deliberations, Deliberations touching things to come
do agree with the providence of God. Pro. 16 9. We must use means.
the heart of man, says he, does invent his way, and the Lord directs his
goings*: Therefore we are not let by the decree of God, but that we may
provide for our life. For he which has appointed the bounds and limits of
our life, does also minister cautions and remedies for preserving thereof.

Fatal dangers.
Object. No danger shall hurt unless it be fatal or come by destiny, which
can not be prevented by any remedies.

An. But what if danger be not fatal with God, because he has assigned the
remedies to overcome them?

Ob. We shall escape danger without any circu^spection, if it be not fatal or
appointed by destiny.

An. But the Lord does therefore enjoin thee to take heed, because he will not
have it fatal to thee: the arts and skill of taking council and heed are
inspired of God, that they may serve his providence: Gods providence is
garnished with her means.
God does hide from us things to come, that we should prevent them as things
doubtful. For the providence of God does not always show it self naked, but
after a sort clothed with her means.

5 The events of the time past do altogether depend upon it. Of things past.


Object. Therefore neither theft, nor murder, nor adultery are committed, Why
sinners are punished.
but the will of God comes between. Why shall they be punished then?

An. That man obeys God, who being taught by his word touching his will, does
strive to come thither whither he is called by him. Therefore cutthrotes do not
serve God, but they do rather obey their own wicked lust.

Object. But unless he would, the theft should not be committed. God does use
evil instruments well.


An. But it is not committed that he may be obeyed: and yet by doing evil we
serve his just ordinance: because through the infinite greatness of his
wisdom, he knows how to use evil instruments well, to do good.

Object. Then God wills evil.

An. Not as it is evil. For all the evil is found in us: there is nothing in
him but the lawful use of our wickedness.

Ob. But God works by those which are evil.

An. As stink in a dead carcass is caused by the sun beams, and yet they
them selves stink not: A similitude.
so in an evil man the matter of evil is abidinge: what pollution shall God
draw to him self if he use his ministry at his pleasure?

6 But to the end we may thereby gather most All things come to pass by the
disposition of God.
let us be assuredly persuaded that all things come to pass by the disposition
of God, and that nothing happens by chance. Therefore let us always have an
eye to him as to the principal All things fall out for the best to the
faithful. Psalm. 55.23. Zach. 2.8. Psalm. 91.1. etc.
Secondly let us not doubt that the singular providence of God does watch for
our preservation, which will suffer nothing to come to pass, but that which
may turn to our good and safty*.

Exodus 3.21.
: or their wickedness must be restrained, as of Achab 1. King. 22.22.
, Achitophell 2. Sam. 17 6
etc. After this knowledge ensues thankfulness of mind in the prosperous
success of things: in adversity patience: and incredible security against
the time to come.

Joseph. Job. Genesis 45.8. and 50 20.
8 So Joseph turned back his mind unto God, the cause of all things having
forgotten the injury of his brethren*. So Job does not turn him self unto the
Chaldeans, but does comfort him self on this wise Job. 1.21.
, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away*.

9 And yet we must not wink at the inferior causes. Inferior causes ought not
to be contemned.
as the principal author, and will honor men as his ministers. If he suffer
any loss either through negligence, or want of skill, he will think their
aid, Ioab.
but yet he will principally commend and commit himself to the wisdom of
God as did Ioab, 2. Sam. 10.12.
that by the governance thereof he may be directed unto the right mark.

10 Thence comes the inestimable felicity of a godly mind. There be
innumerable evils, We are beset on every side with dangers.
which beset man's life, which threaten as many deaths: amidst so many straites
man shall be the most miserable of all, who being half dead in life does draw
forth a careful and languishing breath, A similitude.
even as if he had a sword continually hanging over his neck.

11 But when that light of Gods providence does once appear to a man that is
godly, he is now not only acquitted of, and delivered from that extreme
carefulnes and fear wherewith he was oppressed before: but he is also eased of
all care. For he understands, that the father of heaven does so

12 Object. But the counsel and purpose of God is not firm and stable, but it
changes according to the condition of inferior things. Genesis 6.6.
For it repented him that he had made man, 1. Sam. 15.11
and that he had advanced Saul unto the kingdom, etc.*

An. Repentance is no more in God then ignorance, or error, or weakness.
Repentance can not be in God. 1. Sam. 15.29
He is not man that he can repent.*

Que. What is meant the^ by the word repentance?

13 An. Even the same which is meant by all other forms of speaking, which
describe God to us after the manner of men, that they may submit and apply
them selves to our capacity. For they do paint out GOD to us, not such a one
as he is in himself, but such a one as he is perceived of us. Therefore he
prosecuteth with one continual course that which he had foreseen, Note. No
variablenes in God.
allowed, decreed, from eternity, howsoever there appear in the sight of men
a sudden change.

14 Neither does the holy history, when it reports that that destruction
which was already denounced, was remitted to the men of Niniuie:* and that the
life of Ezechias was prolonged after that it was told him he should die Isa.
38.5.
show that the decrees of God were abrogated. Ioh. 3.10.
For God would not their destruction: but their amendment, that they might
not be destroyed. Therefore though the denunciations do simply affirm,
Threatninges are conditional.
yet nevertheless it appears by the end it self, that they might contain
in themselves notwithstanding a secret condition. Let us conclude with
Iesaias, The Lord of hosts has determined, and who shall be able to undo it?
Isa. 14.26.
His hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it away?

CHAP. XVIII. That God does so use the service of wicked men, and does so turn
their minds to execute his judgments, that he himself remains pure from
all spot.
Whether sufferance be without the will of God. Job. 1.22.
1 Ob. GOD will not evil, but does only suffer the same to be done?

An. Yea Job says, 2. Kin. 22.10.
The Lord gave, the Lord has taken away: as it pleased God so is it come to
pass. God sent a liyng spirit to deceive Achab. Ier. 50.25.
Nabuchadnezer is called the servant of God, etc. Therefore whatsoever is done
it comes from God.

2 Furthermore the secret motions of the mind are turned to and fro, as it
pleases God. The motions of the mind are ruled by God. Pro. 21.2.
Ezech. 7.26.
Therefore is it truly said, that God takes the lip from the true speakers,
and wisdom from the aged: Ex. 8.15.
He hardened the heart of Pharao,

Object. God suffers the reprobate to be blinded by Satan, not that he
wills or commands it. The cause of hardening is both of God and also of
man.


An. The will of God is set down to be the cause of hardening the heart, which
does justly strike men with blindness and madness.

Object. It is said in another place, that Pharao himself did harden his own
heart.

An. These two agree very well together, Note.
but in diverse respects: God would have the heart of Pharao to be hardened,
that his people might be delivered with greater glory. The will of Pharao came
between, so that he is without excuse, neither can he seek for the cause of
this evil any where else but in himself.

3 Object. If nothing come to pass unless God be willing, there shall be two
contrary wills in him: There be not two contrary wills in God. Note.
because he decrees those things in his secret counsel, which he has openly
forbidden in his law.

An. Neither is God contrary to himself, ne yet is his will changed, neither
does he feign that he will not that which he will: but whereas it is one and
simple in him, it appears to us to be manifold, because by reason of the
imbecillitie of our mind we do not comprehend how he will not have, and will
have, one and the same thing to be done after a diverse manner.

4 Object. If God do not only use the service of the wicked, but also govern
their counsels and affections, he shallbe the author of all wickedness: and
therefore men are unworthily condemned if they execute that which God has
decreed: because they obey his will.

God is not the author of wickedness.
An. It is evil done to mix the will of God with his commandment, which does
greatly differ from it, as appears by infinite examples. For although God
meant to revenge the adultery of David when Absolon did lie with his father
wives, * yet did he not command the wicked son to commit incest.

2. Sam. 16.22. The will of God must be distinguished from his commandment.
Ose. 8 4.
Quest. How do these things agree, that Jeroboam reigned not by God, * and
that he was appointed by him to be governor of the kingdom?*

An. Jeroboam did not reign by God, because the people could neither revolt
from the family of David, but they must shake of the yoke laid upon them by
God: Ose. 13.11.
neither yet was God robbed of his liberty, but that he might by this means
punish Salomons unthankfulness. Therefore we see how God in not willing false
breach of allegiance, 1. Kin. 12.15.
will yet justly (to another end) falling away:* and how in one work as well
the fault of man does bewray it self, as the justice of God does appear and
shine cleerelie.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE INSTITVTION OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION.
Of the knowledge of God the Redeemer in Christ, which was revealed first to
the fathers under the law, and then afterward to us also in the Gospel.

CHAP. I. That by the sin and falling of Adam all mankind was subject to the
curse, and did degenerate from the first estate where original sin is
handeled.
1 THE knowledge The knowledge of our selves consists in two things.
first, that considering what was given us in creation, and how bountifully
God contynueth his grace toward us, we may know how great ye excellency of
our nature should be, if so be it should continue sound, and that we may
therewithal think upon this, that we have nothing of their own, but that we
hold at the pleasure of another, all that which God has bestowed upon us,
that we may always depend upon him. Secondly, that we may call to mind
our miserable estate after the fall of Adam, the perceauing whereof, may truly
humble us being confounded, Our miserable estate after the fall of Adam.
in whom every one of us may recover those good things, whereof we are found
altogether empty and

The end of the knowledge of our selves. The fruit of this knowledge is the
submitting of our selves. Ambition is natural.
2 The truth of God truly requires this knowledge, which may both call us far
away from all confidence of our own power, and may bring us to submission
being destitute of all matter of boasting. Which rule we ought to keep, if
we will come to the right mark both of being wise and also of doing.

3 And because all of us are led generally with vain ambition, neither do we
freely confess the miserable want of our own powers, hoping that to be
enough, if having proclaimed war against vices, Note.
and what ones we be at this day, that it may more easily appear The image of
God.


4 By that which goes before it is evident that Adam was created after the
image of God, namely, partaker of the wisdom, righteousness and power of
God, Infidelity the first cause of misery.
But when he did rather believe the inticements of Satan, then God, from whose
subjection he fell being unfaithful, not fearing the denunciation of fearful
death, he was quite stripped out of all the gifts of Gods grace: not
gluttony, Man stripped out of the gifts of grace. Infidelity: Ambition
Unthankfulness Stubbornes.
but infidelity was in him the root of falling away. Hence issued ambition
and pride, whereto unthankfulness was annexed. Thereby the gate was set open
for ambition, which was the mother of stubbornness, that men having cast from
them the fear of God, might run headlong, whither lust did carry them. Romans
8.22.


5 It is no marvel if all mankind were corrupt: that is, did degenerate from
his first estate, and became subject to the curse through the fall of Adam,
seeing other natures do groan being after a sort deformed. This was called by
the old writers, Original sin. Pelagius. Imitation Corruption is naturally in
us. Psalm. 15.7.
original sin.

Object. The sin of Adam passes into his posterity by imitation, not by
propagation.

An. It is proved by testimonies of scripture, that we bring corruption with
us from our mothers womb: Job. 14.4.
For who can give a clean thing of that which is unclean?*

6 Therefore the uncleanness of the parents is sent over into the children, that
al without any exception may be polluted at their beginning. Because Ada^ was
not only the progenitor, Adam the root of man's nature.
but also as it were the root of man's nature. That appears, first, by the
comparison of Adam and Christ. * Secondly because Romans 5.12
* last of all because that is flesh which is begotten of flesh.*

7 Object. If the infection be resident principally in the soul, Ephesians. 2.5.
Ioh. 3.6.
then the father begets the soul. Whether the Father beget the soul.


An. The Lord committed to Adam those gifts which he meant to bestow upon man's
nature. Therefore when he lost them after he had received them he lost them not
only for himself, but for us all. Who will stand about the conueiance of the
soul, when he shall hear that Adam received no less for us, Note.
then for himself those ornaments which he lost?

Pelagians
Object. It is not likely that the children draw corruption from godly
parents, seeing they ought rather to be sanctified by their pureness. 1. Cor.
7.14 Whence regeneration comes.
*

An. They descend not of their spiritual regeneration, but of the carnal,
whereby comes, giltinesse: but sanctification comes from supernatural
grace.

Original sin what.
8 Therefore original sin is the heritable corruption of our nature powered out
into all parts of the mind, which makes us first guilty of the wrath of God,
What be the works of the flesh. Gal. 5.19.
and then afterward it brings forth in us the works which are called in the
scriptures the works of the flesh.*

Object That is the bond of another man's sin. For we through the sin of
Adam are made subject to the judgment of God.

An. We do not bear the blame of Adams fault being innocent, but we bear the
blame of our own. For the punishment did not only range from him to us, We
bear the blame for our own fault.
but the infection being dripped in from him, is resident in us, whereto the
punishment is due by good right.

All parts of the soul are corrupt.
9 For all the parts of the soul were possessed by sin, after that Adam fell
away from the fountain of righteousness.

Object. That corruption appertains unto the inferior appetite, Lombardus.
Romans 7.18
and only unto the sensual motions: because Paul says that it is resident in
the flesh.*

An. Not properly, but because it does more appear in the flesh. Yea Paul
himself teaches that nothing is clean from the deadly infection thereof,
either in the understanding, or in the will. Which appears more plainly by
the renewing, Ephesians. 4.13.
which comprehends a perfect reforming of all the parts. Romans 12.2 Romans 87.


10 Object. God might have provided better for our salvation, if he had
prevented the fall of Adam. Our fall is of our selves


An. Godly minds must loath such bold curiosity. Our fall must be imputed
to the corruption of nature: which the preacher did diligently note. This I
know that God made man righteous: but they have sought to themselves many
inventions. Ecclesiast. 7.30.
*

11 Therefore we say that man is corrupt through natural corruption, Sin is a
certain quality cumming from some other thing Ephesians. 2.3.
yet such as did not flow from nature. For it is rather a quality coming
from some other thing which happened to man, then asubstantiall property which
flowed from the beginning. Whereupon we conclude with Paul, * that all we are
by nature the children of wrath.

CHAP. II. That man is now spoiled of freedom of will, and subject to
miserable bondage.
1 NOW it rests that we do more narrowly discuss, How far we be robbed.
whether we be dispoiled of all liberty, since we be brought into this
bondage: and if any A Caution.
We must deal wisely here: for if we say that man is deprived of all
righteousness, he will forthwith The Philosophers hold that there be three
powers of the soul as understanding


2 Therefore let us consider, (seeeing that we said a little before, that the
powers of the soul were placed in the mind and heart, as understanding and
will) what they both are able to do. The Philosophers make three powers of the
soul, Sense Will.
understanding, sense, and will or appetite, and they think that

3 Moreover some of them brake out into such licentiousness, that they did
boast, that it is indeed the gift of the Gods that we live: but our own that
we live well, and holily. They erred greatly therein.

Deuines.
4 The Ecclesiastical writers, though they drew nearer to the truth, did
notwithstanding speak too Philosophicallie touching this matter, What free
will is.
attributing to man Freewill, which they do commonly define thus, that it is
a power of reason to follow that which is good: being assisted by grace: and
evil when it cease.

5 And they are commonly wont to make subject to free determination
indifferent things, which, do nothing appertain unto the kingdom of God and
to refer true righteousness unto the special grace of God, and spiritual
regeneration. Therefore they reckon up a manifold will: the first sensitive,
the second natural, the third spiritual: they teach that the two former are
free for man, and that the third is the work of the holy ghost in man.

6 Wherein they gave too much to man's power, and also they took too much from
the grace of God which they divide into grace working and working together. The
grace of God is double working and working together.
By the former we will that which is good effectually: the latter follows
the good will of man and helps it.

7 Man is said to have Freewill thus, We do evil willingly not by constraint.
not because he has free choice of good as well as of evil, but because he
does evil willingly without constraint. That is very well, but to what end
was it to give so proud a title to so small a matter? The fathers.


8 But and if the authority of the fathers do move us: they have in their
mouths continually this word, but they declare therewithal what account
they make of the use thereof.

9 For sometimes they teach that man being spoiled of the strength of
freewill, does fly to grace alone: sometimes they furnishe him with weapons of
his own.

10 But to omit the opinions of other men, if we shall more narrowly seek for
the truth in considering man's nature, as every man is thrown down with the
feeling of his own calamity, poverty, nakedness, reproach, so he has best
profited in the knowledge of himself, Who has best proficed in the knowledge
of himself. True humility.


11 Furthermore, that shall be true humility, when he does in deed perceive
himself to be such a one, as has no refuge but in humility.

12 But that the order of our speech may proceed according to that distinction
whereby we divided What we can do by understanding.
let us in the former place discuss the force of understanding.

13 We see what it can do either in earthly Earthly things
but are contained within the bounds of this life: as policy, government of
household, Heavenly things.
all manual sciences, liberal arts: I call the pure knowledge of God, the
order of true righteousness, and the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven,
heavenly things: as also the knowledge of the will What man's understanding ca^
do in heavenly things.


14 We may see that in liberal arts and manual,

We have a certain aptnes to learn the arts. Natural force.
15 And yet let us not in the mean season forget that these are most excellent
good things of Gods spirit, which he bestows upon whom he will to the
common good of mankind.

Exodus 32.2. and 35.30.
16 For if it were requisite that the knowledge which was necessary for the
garnishing and framing of the temple should be instilled into Beseel and Oliab
* by the spirit of God, no marvel if it be said that the knowledge of those
things which are in man's life most excellent (as law and physic) be
imparted to us by the spirit of God.

Quest. What fellowship have the wicked with the spirit which are altogether
strangers from God? For the spirit of God dwells in the faithful alone.

The spirit of sanctification. is in the faithful alone.
An. That must be understood of the spirit of sanctification, whereby we are
consecrated to be temples to God himself. And yet nevertheless, he
replenisheth, moves, quickens all things by the power of the same spirit,
and that according to the property of every kind, which he has given to it
by the law of creation.

17 Object. But some excel in quickness of wit, some surpass in judgment,
some have a more nimble mind to learn this art or that.

An. In this variety God sets forth to us his grace, The gifts of God are
divided.
least any man challendge to himself as being his own, that which flows
from his mere liberality. Thereby we see some marks of the image of God
remaining in man, which distinguish him from other creatures. Certain gifts
remain in man.


18 Now we must declare what man's reason does see, when he is come to the
kingdom of God, to that spiritual sight: which consists principally in
three things: to know God: to In spiritual things
and the way to frame the life according to the rule of the law. In the first

19 John teaches this most excellently, John. 1.4. Ioh. 15.1.
* when he writes that life was in God from the beginning, and that life
which was the light of men: that this light shines in the darkness, and the
darkness comprehends it not. It was the especial revelation of the father,
Mat. 16.17.
that Peter knew Christ.

20 Therefore when Moses hitteth the people in the teeth with their
forgetfulness, he notes notwithstanding therewithal, that they could none
otherwise be wise in the mysteries of God, Deuteronomy. 19.2.
save only through his benefit and goodness. Thine eyes, says he, have
seen these signs, Man understands the mysteries of God by reason of his
illightning.
and these huge wonders: and the Lord has not given thee an heart to
understand, neither ears to hear, nor eyes to see. Whereupon we do easily
conclude, that man has as much power to understand the mysteries of God, as
he shall be illuminate by his grace.

21 Object. God provides for this blockishnesse or ignorance, when by the
doctrine of his word, he directs man's understanding thither, whither it
could not come without a guide.

An. David had the law wherein all wisdom is comprehended, and yet being not
therewith content, Psalm. 119.18.
he desires to have his eyes opened, that he might consider the mysteries of
the law. *

22 The knowledge of ordering the life aright remains: Ordering of the life.
though by the law of nature we can somewhat discern good from evil, yet it
shall come to pass thereby, that man's mind being guilty before God, Romans
2.14.
may be made without excuse.*

23. Because we see those things which are good and we allow them, we follow
the things which are worse.

2. Cor. 3.5. Will.
24 We must conclude with Paul, that we are not fit of our selves, to think any
thing of our selves, as of our selves.*

25 The weakness of man's reason is so great.

Sect. 6. c. 4. lib. 2.


Phil 2
because it is proper to God alone to give both to will, and also to finish.

Object. Paul says that he would good, but he cannot accomplish it. Romans 7.15.
Therefore man has of himself to will that which is good.

An. Paul speaks not of the natural man, but of him that is regenerate. For
he adds, I am delighted in the law according to the inward man: but I see
another law in my members resisting the law of my mind. Romans 7.22
*

CHAP. III. That there comes nothing from the corrupt nature of man, but that
which is damnable.
1 THEREFORE it appears plainly by the titles which the scripture gives
man, The whole man is corrupt. Ioh. 3.6.
that he is corrupt in both parts: because he is said to be flesh borne of
flesh, Romans 8.6
and the affection of the flesh is death. *

Object. The word flesh appertains only to the sensual and not to the
superior part of the soul.

An. Christ's argument is otherwise, that man must be borne again, because he
is flesh, Ioh. 3.6. Regeneration according to the mind
* he did not command him to be borne again according to his body, but
according to the mind.

2 Therefore in vain we do seek for in man either integrity, or
understanding, or fear of God.

3 Object. But in all ages there have been some which during their whole life
have been bent unto virtue, having nature for their guide.

An. God brideleth by his grace the evil affections of men, Who have bin bent
to virtue having nature for their guide Why God bridleth the evil.
so much as he sees expedient for preservation of the generality of things.
Hereby some are kept back with shame, some with fear of laws, least they
break out into many sorts of filthiness.

4 Object. The doubt is not yet answered. For we A Dilemma.


An. The special grace of God gave that to the one which it denied to the
other. 1. Sam. 10.6.
We see that in Saul whom God made a new man.*

The slavery of sin.
5 Therefore because the will is holden fast bound by the slavery of sin, it
cannot move it self to that which is good, much less apply it self thereto.
For such a motion is the beginning of turning to God, The beginning of
conversion comes of God Ier. 31.18. Note.
which is wholly attributed to the grace of God in the scripture,
notwithstanding the will remains which makes have unto sin, with a most
earnest affection. This is well set down by Bernard that it belongs to man
to will: to corrupt nature, to will that which is evil: to grace, to will that
which is good. We do evil of necessity not being constrained.
Whereupon it follows that men are drawn unto evil by necessity of will,
and yet they are not constrained to commit it.

16 It appears more plainly by the contrary remedy of Gods grace, how
great the corruption of our nature is. An argument drawn from regeneration.
For seeing the Lord does of his pure grace give us what good thing soever is
in us: it follows that man's mind is in his own nature deuoid of all
goodness. For that cause it is said, that he which has begun in us a good
work, will finish it until the day of Jesus Christ. Ph. 4.6. and 2.13
*

Object. The Lord begins that which is good, because the will being of it
self weak, is helped.

An. The spirit says otherwise, I will give you, says he, a new heart: I
will put a new spirit in the midst of you: and I will take away the stony
heart out of your flesh, and I will give you a fleshie heart, and I will put my
spirit in the midst of you, and I will make you walk in my commandments.
Ezech. 35.26
*

7 Object. Will being turned away from goodness by nature, is couerted by the
power of God alone, but being prepared it has an office and part in doing.

Ad. Bonifa. ep. 106
An. Augustine teaches that grace goes before every good work, but so that
will does accompany it, not lead it: that it comes after as a waiting man and
not as a foregoer. Therefore he attributes no praise of good works to man's
will.

Object. Grace can do nothing without will, neither can will do any thing
without grace.

An. As if the will it self did not work by grace, Note.
For the Lord preuenteth him that is unwilling, that he may be willing: and
follows the willing that he may not will in vain.

8 Therefore there can no will be found which is inclined to good save in the
elect. Election.
But the cause There is no will unto goodness save only in the elect.
whereby it is proved, that man has not of him self a right will but that it
flows from the same good pleasure, whereby we are elect before the creation
of the Faith.
it follows that it is of mere grace, when we begin to will that which is
good, being inclined and bent naturally to evil.

9 Thence come the prayers of holy men: let him incline our heart unto him
self, says Solomon, that we may keep his commandments*. And David
beseeches God to create a clean heart in him*. Romans 8.58. Psalm. 51.12.


Object. Such prayer is a sign of a godly and holy affection.

An. Though David had already repented in part yet he compares his former
state with that sorrowful fall, which he had tried. Therefore taking upon him
the person of a man estraunged from God, he does for good causes desire to have
those things given him, which God gives to his elect in regeneration.
Therefore being like to a dead man, he desires to be created a fresh.
Christ teaches that manifestly by the similitude of a vine, A similitude. Ioh.
15.1.
where he concludes, without me ye can do nothing.

Object. The juice is now included in the branch, and also force to bring forth
fruit, and therefore it takes not all from the earth, or from the first root,
because it brings some thing of her own.

An. But Christ means nothing else, but that we be dry wood and nothing
worth, when we be separate from him.

10 Object. God moves the will, but it is afterward in our choice either to
obey, or to resist the motion.

An. Yea he moves it so effectually, that it must needs follow.

Object. Chrysostom says, whom he draws, he draws him being willing.
Therefore God reaches out his hand and waits to see if it may please us to
be helped by his help.

An. Such was the state of man whiles he stood: but after his fall, the
doctrine of Christ is true*, No man comes to me, Ioh. 6.45.
unless the Father draw him.

Perseverance is the gift of God.
11 As touching perseverance it is not to be doubted but that it ought to be
counted the free gift of God.

Object. It is given according to desert, as every man has showed him self
not unthankful to the first grace: because it is in our hand to choose or
refuse grace when it is offered.

An. God heapeth upon his servant new graces, because when he likes the
work which he has begun in them, Gods liberality. Phil. 2.13.
he finds in them somewhat whereon to bestow greater graces, whence that
does come. To him that has shall be given*. Also God works in us both to
will and to accomplish, after his good pleasure.

Object. God works, we work together. Because after that we have given place
to the first grace, our endeavors do work together now with the grace
following.

An. That is, after we be once tamed, How we work together.
and brought by the power of God to the obedience of righteousness, we go on
willingly, and we are bent to follow the working of grace, this is true. Not
that man takes of him self somewhat whereby to labor with the grace of God.

12 Object. I have labored more then they all, says Paull, not I, but the
grace of God with me. Therefore he labored together with the grace of God.

An. He ascribes the whole praise of the labor to grace alone, by that
correction, It is not I, says he, which have labored, but the grace of God
which was present with me.

13 Augustine says * that the grace of persisting in goodness was given to
Adam, if he would: Lib. de correp. and grati. cap. 2. Note
but it was not granted to him to will that he might be able: that it is
granted to us both to will and also to be able. It was the first liberty to
be able not to sin: ours is greater, not to be able to sin.

14 Object. Will is not taken away by grace, Whence the grace of perseverance
comes Epist. 105.
but it is changed from evil to good, and is helped when it is good, says
Augustine.

An. His meaning is only this, that man is not so drawn that he is carried as
it were by outward force and violence without the motion of the heart: but that
he is so affected and moved within that he obeys with his heart

CHAP. IIII. How God works in the hearts of men.
Man's captivity.
1 IT is sufficiently proved that man is so holde^ captive under the yoke of
sin, that he cannot of his own nature either aspire by desire, or by
diligence travel to goodness.

Quest. There remain two doubts to be unfolded, the first whether we sin
willingly, when we Two doubts.


A similitude. The condition of man's will.
An. As touching the first, Augustine compares man's will to an horse that
waits his masters pleasure, God and the devil to riders or horsemen. If God
sit upon it he rules it well like a skillful rider. But if the devil possess
it, he carries it headlong unto death over steep down places, like a wanton
rider. So the will follows Satan being bewitched with his inchauntments.

2 But far other is the order of Gods working in such things. Which that it
may appear more plainly, Diverse ends of one action.
let us take the calamity which was brought upon Job by the Chaldees for an
example. It is the Lords purpose to exercise by calamity the patience of his
servant: Satan indeuoreth to drive him into despair: the Chaldees study
contrary to equity to get gain by that which is another man's. Therefore one
and the same fact is assigned to God, to Satan, and to man, but the variety in
the manner and end causes, that therein appears the justice of God to be
without fault, and that the wickedness of Satan and man bewrays it self to
their reproach.

Lib de praedest.
3 Object. Augustine says that hardening and making blind does appertain, not
to the working of God, but unto his foreknowledge.

An. Augustine himself holds, Lib. contra Lulianum.
that sins are not only by the sufferance or patience of God, but also by
his power, Will and sufferance in God.
that by this means former sins may be punished. Therefore he foreseeth
evil, he has suffered it, and he would it: which is done two manner of ways.
First he makes blind having taken away his light, and makes men's hearts
stony, having taken away his Spirit. Secondly to execute

4 After the first way this seems to be spoken. Ezech. 7.26.
according to the latter: I will harden the heart of Pharao, Exodus 4, 21. and 7.
and let the people go*.

5 Furthermore it shall appear sufficiently even by one place that the
ministry of Satan does come between to prick forward the reprobate, so
often as the Lord appoints them hither or thither by his providence. For it
is often said in Samuel, that the evil spirit of the Lord, or the evil
spirit from the Lord, either caught or let go Saull*. 1. Sam. 16.14 and 18.10
and 29.9. 2. These. 2.9
Also we must add that which Paull teaches, that the efficacy of error and
seducing is sent of God, that they may believe lying, which have not obeyed the
truth.

6 Hitherto we have handeled those actions which appertain unto the spiritual
life, wherein we have seen the weakness of will: Will can do nothing in
bodily things.
let us now do rather appertain unto the bodily life. Surely if we weigh with
our own understanding the administrations of outward things, we shall nothing
doubt that they are so far placed under man's will, but if we give ear to so
many testimonies which cry that the Lord does also govern our minds in these
things, they shall enforce us to make our will subject to the special motion
of the grace of God, who did reconcile the wills of the Egyptians to the
Israelites, God bends the wills of men.
that they should lend them all pretiouse things*? Neither would Jacob surely
have said of his son Joseph (whom he thought to have been a profane
Egyptian) God grant that you may find mercy in the sight of this man Genesis
43.14.
. Exodus 11.5.


7 Object. These are particular examples, to the rule whereof all things in
general ought not to be reduced.

Election is not free.
An They prove sufficiently that so often as God will make a way for his
providence, he does bend and turn the wills of men even in outward things, and
that their choice is not so free, but that the will of God has power over the
same. Experience.
Also daily experience does teach, that judgment does often fail even in
matters which are nothing intricate: the mind faints even in things that are
not hard: again counsel is sometimes ready in most hard matters, in
dangerous matters the heart and mind get the victory of all straites. Solomon
interprets that, that the ear may hear, that the eye may see, the Lord
makes both*. Pro. 20.12


8 Object. We must esteem the power of man's will by the event of things.

An. Yea the power whereof we speak must be considered within man, and not
measured by the outward success.

CHAP. V. A refutation of the objections which are wont to be brought for the
defense of Freewill.
1 WE have spoken enough of the thraldom of man's will as it may seem,
unless they which go about to carry him headlong with a false opinion of
freedom, did set certain reasons of theirs against us, being partly absurd,
and partly confirmed

Object. If sin be of necessity, Of absurdities. Pelagius. Sin is both of
necessity and also voluntary
it cease now to be sin: if it be voluntary then it may be avoided.

An. Sin is both of necessity, and also voluntary: because men being become
bond slaves of sin after the fall of Adam, can will nothing but that which is
evil.

2. Object. Unless both virtues and also vices proceed from the free election
of will, it is not meet that man should either be punished or rewarded.
Aristotle.


An. These are not like. Punishments are of desert.
For we are by good right punished, from whom the fault and blame of sin does
flow: but rewards are of grace. So Augustine, In Psalm. 70.
*If thou have thy due, thou must be punished. What is done then? God has not
repayed to thee punishment, Rewards of grace.
but he gives thee grace which was not due.

3 Object. If this be not the power of our will, Note.
to choose good or evil, either all those which are partakers of the same
nature should be evil, Chrysostom. 2. Hom. in Genes. All are evil by nature.
or all of the^ should be good.

An. We should all be evil, but it comes to pass through the mercy of God
that all continue not in wickedness.

Quest. Whence comes such a difference that some continue until the end, and
some faint after they have begun to run?

Perseverance the gift of God
An. Perseverance is the gift of God. God vpholdeth the former by his power,
that they may not perish: he gives not like power to the latter, that they may
be testimonies of man's inconstancy.

The cause of falling
4 Object. Exhortations shall be made in vain, admonitions shall be superfluous,
reprehensions ridiculous, unless it be in the power of a sinner to obey.

Whether admonitions be superfluous. Ioh. 15.5.
An. No truly, for though Christ affirm that we can do nothing without him*,
does he therefore less reprove those which did evil without him? Let us say
with Augustine, O man in commandment learn what thou owe: in correction,
that thou have it not through thine own fault: in prayer whence thou may
receive that which thou will have. Lib. de cor. and gra.


Note.
5 Object. Then to what end serve exhortations?

2 3 The fruits of exhortations.
An. If the wicked despise them with an obstinate heart, they shall be a
testimony against them.

Hardness of heart must not be imputed to God but to men.
Quest. But what can the silly man do when softness

An. Why does he turn his back, when as he can ascribe the hardness of his
heart to none but to him self? But the principal profit must be considered

Quest. Why are they now put in mind of their duty, seeing they are directed
by the Spirit of God? why are they stirred up by exhortations, seeing they can
not make have, but with the Spirit?

An. O man who art thou that prescribest God a Law. If he will have us to be
prepared by exhortations to receive grace, How God works in the Elect.
what can thou backebite in that dispensation? God works two manner of
ways in his elect: inwardly by his Spirit: 2. Cor 2.10.
outwardly by his word, which is to them a sweet savor unto salvation: as it
is to the reprobate the savor of death unto death*.

6 They gather together on an heap many testimonies of Scripture that they may
oppress us if not by weight, yet by number. Of testimonies of Scripture.
Which that we may 1. The ends of commandementes.
we will divide them into commandments, promises and threatenings. And
co^mandeme^ts into those which require turning unto God, and which speak
simply of keeping the Law: or which command us to continue in the grace
received.

Object. If God command those things which we can not perform: 1. Why
conversion is commanded.
If he forbid those things which to avoid is not in our power, does he not
mock us?

An. No truly, but this comes to pass, that when we know our own weakness,
we shall more earnestly embrace faith, whereby those things shall be geven us
which we want.

7 Quest. But to whom can this seem to be a thing like to be true, that God
has appointed a law for logges and stones?

An. Neither does any man go about to persuade that. For neither are the
wicked stones or stocks, when being taught by the Law, that their lusts are
contrary to God, they are made guilty through their own testimony: Men are
not stocks or stones.
or the godly, when being put in mind of their own weakness, they fly to
grace.

Of the form of commandments
8 That shall appear more evidently by reckening up the three forms of
commandments.

Object. The Lord commands often both in the Law, and also in the Prophets
that we be turned unto him.

An. And the Prophet sings another song. Turn me O Lord and I shall be
turned*. Ioe. 2.12. Ier. 21.18.
For after thou turnedst me I repented.

Object. He commands us to circumcise the foreskinne of our heart.

An. But by Moses he denounces that that circumcision is made by his hand*.

Deuteronomy. 10.16.
Object. He requires newness of heart.

An. But he witnesses in another place that he gives it. And that which God
promises (as says Augustine) we do not by will or nature, but he does it by
grace. The second kind of commandments are simple, wherein we are commanded
to worship God and to obey his will: Lib. 3. de Doct. Christ. Note.
innumerable places do witness, that all that is his gift what righteousness,
Of the simple commandment
Of the third kind, that the faithful continue in the grace of God, Paul
teaches whence Of continuing in grace. Act. 13.42. Ephesians. 6.10. Zach. 1.13.


9 Object. We bring with us our own strength, and God helps our weak
endeavors. Because it is said, Turn unto me, and I will be turned unto you.

An. That is I will be merciful unto you. For it is the work of God alone to
turn us unto him.

10 The second order of arguments entreats of promises.

Object. Seek good and not evil, and ye shall live Deuteronomy. 21.1.
, Ier. 4.1.
etc. We are mocked if will be not in our power.

An. We have such a will by the Spirit of God. Whereby it comes to pass that
promises are not superfluous.

11 The third form is concerning threatenings. We will that which is good by
the Spirit.


Object. Amalec and the Chananite are before you, with whose sword you shall
fall, because you Ier 7.13.
. Concerning threatninges Number. 14 43.
Because I have called you and you have not answered, I will do to this house
as I did to Silo. To what end serve such vpbraydinges, unless they had had
free will?

An. It is not in man's power, who is subject to the lordship of sin, to
harken to the voice of God, Man has not free will to harken to the voice of
God.
which thing proceeds from natural corruption. Therefore man shall be
always the first author of his own destruction.

Object. Paull says, quensh not the Spirit: 1. These. 1.19.
therefore it is in their will to foster the light which is offered them.

An. This diligence comes from God alone. And by granting that is applied to
us, which belongs to God, whereupon John says, Whosoever is of God he saves
him self*. 1. Ioh. 5.18.


Object. That is, because we are saved partly thorough the power of God, and
partly through our own power.

An. As if we had not this keeping from heaven.

12 Ob. Moses says*, The commandment which I command thee, Deuteronomy. 10.11.
is in thy mouth, and in thine heart, that thou may do it.

An. I grant, when the Spirit of God, whereof we are made partakers through
the Gospel, shall imprint it in our hearts. Romans 10.8
So does Paul expound it*.

Object. Paul does violently draw those things to the Gospel, which were
spoken concerning the commandments alone.

An. If Moses spoke of the commandementes alone, he puffed up the people with a
most vain confidence. For what other thing should they have done, but have
run headlong, if they should have attempted the observing of the Law by their
own strength, as being not hard for them.

13 Ob. I will go to my place says the Lord*, until they put in their hearts,
Osec. 5.14.
and seek my face: therefore the people being forsaken of God could turn unto
God of their own nature.

An. By the departing of the Lord is meant the removing of prophesying: What is
meant by the ^^par^ing of the lord.
to behold what men will do, does signify that he does exercise them with
diverse afflictions for a time, keeping him self close, and as it were
dissembling. Therefore the whole scripture is against that, that we can turn
unto God without his spiritual grace.

Why our good works are called ours.
14 Object. Good works are called ours: and we are said no less to do that
which is holy and acceptable to the Lord, then to commit sin. But and if
sin be worthily imputed to us, surely there must somewhat in righteousness
be assigned to us.

Note.
An. We call it our bread, which we beseech God to give us.

Object. The Scripture does often affirm that we our selves do worship God,
keep righteousenesse, and obey the Law: how should these things be attributed
to us, unless there were a certain communicating of our industry with the
power of God.

An. The Saints observe righteousness, when they do willingly follow the
Spirit which draws them. For when God erecteth his kingdom in the^, he
bridleth their will by his Spirit, that it may not be carried with wandering
lusts, The faithful do voluntarily follow the Spirit which draws them.
that it may be inclined unto holiness: least it faint, he confirms it by
the power of his Spirit.

15 Furthermore though all that goodness which is in the will, does proceed from
the mere instinct of the Spirit, yet because to will is in us naturally, To
will is in us naturally.
we are not without cause said to do those things, the praise whereof God does
by good right challenge to him self. First because that is ours which he
works in us, so that we do not understand it to be of

16 Object. It was said to Cain: His appetite shall be under thee, and thou
shall reign over him. Therefore it is evident that there should not be in his
mind such force of sin as should get the upper hand, if he would labor in
taming it.

An. That was spoken concerning Abel. For God A grant.
let God under sin, over which he ought to have borne rule?

Object. It includes a secret condition, as if he should say, that he should
have the victory if he would strive.

An. Therefore it shall be a commanding speech if this dominion be referred
unto sin, wherein is defined not what we are able to do, but what we ought to
do.

17 Object. The Apostle says, that salvation is not of him that wills or of
him that runs, but of God that has mercy. Therefore there is somewhat in
the will and endeavor, which being helped by mercy, does not want prosperous
success*.

Romans 9.16.
An. We will, and we run, but not as it becomes: therefore we have recourse
unto the mercy of God. It is so expounded in another place Epist. 107 ad
vitalem
. And Augustine also does so expound it. Tit. 3.4.


Object. Paull calls me^ Gods fellow laborers 1. Cor. 3.9
.

An. That is restrained unto the ministers alone. And he calls those fellow
laborers, not which bring any thing of themselves, How we work together.
but because God uses their industry, after that he has made them fit and
has furnished them with necessary gifts.

Ecclesiast. 15 14
18 Object. Before man is set life and death, good and evil*.

An. That is understood of the creation of man.

19 Quest. What means the parable of the traveler, whom the robbers did
cast out in the way half dead, save only that man is not so lamed by sin,
but that he keeps still some remnants of his former good things?

The use of Allegories.
An. Allegories must not proceed beyond the rule of the Scripture. But in
that place man's strength is not handled. Furthermore the word of the Lord does
teach that man is quite dead, as concerning the respect of blessed life*. Ephesians.
2.5. and 5 14
Therefore let the truth remain sure and certain to us, that the mind is so
estranged from God that it conceaueth and goes about nothing but that which is
wicked: The conclusion.
that the heart is so besmeared with the poison of sin, that it can breath out
nothing but corrupt stinch.

CHAP. VI. That man being lost must seek redemption in Christ.
1 SEeing all mankind is perished in the person of Adam, and is fallen from
life to death, all that whole knowledge of the Creator should be unprofitable,
unless faith also should succeed, setting before us God to be our father in
Christ. Therefore we must come to that of Paul*, Because the world thorough
wisdom knew not God in the wisdom of God, it pleased God through the
foolishnes of preaching to save those that believe. It is eternal life to know
the Father, and Jesus Christ who^ he has sent Ioh. 17.3.
. 1. Cor. 1.21


Object. The saying of Christ must be restrained unto the preaching of the
Gospel.

An. That reason was common in all ages and nations, Christ the reconciler.
that they which are pronounced to be the children of wrath, and accursed,
cannot please God without a reconciler.

2 And therefore God did never show him self favorable to the old people,
neither did he ever put them in hope of grace, without the Mediator. The
blessed and happy estate of the Church was always grounded in the person of
Christ. No grace with out the mediator.


3 Because both the first adoption of the elect people, and the preservation of
the Church, the deliverance Gal. 3.16.


4 For that cause God would have the Jews to be instructed with many
prophecies, that to seek for their deliverance, they might turn their eyes
directly unto Christ. Neither could (how so ever they had filthily degenerate)
the remembrance of that principle be at any time quite abolished, that God
would be the deliverer of his Church by the hand of Christ, A principle most
necessary
as he had promised David: and that by this means only the covenant should be
firm whereby God had adopted his children: hence came the song of the
children, Osianna to the son of David*. Mat. 21.9.


CHAP. VII. That the Law was given not to hold still the old people in it,
but to nourish hope of salvation in Christ until his coming.
Why the Law was given. The use of Ceremonies is ridiculous without Christ.
1 WE may gather by that which goes before that the Law was given therefore,
that it might keep their minds waiting until the coming of Christ. That
appears by the remembrance of the covenant often repeated, by the ceremonies,
sacrifices, washings, the end of adoption, and the right of the priesthood,
the use whereof should be ridiculous without Christ.

2 The same may be concluded out of that princely dignity which was erected in
the family of David, and also out of the very moral Law: which as Paul
witnesses, was as it were a schoolemaister to lead the Jews unto Christ, who
is called the end of the law to salvation to every one that believes.* 1. 2.
3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. Gal. 3.24.


3 Otherwise the perfect observing of the law were necessary that we might be
acceptable to god, and that we might obtain eternal life. For the Lord
abhors all unrighteousness. Therefore seeing that such perfect observing of
the law does pass our strength, all hope of salvation being cut off, The end
of the law.
death does assuredly hang over our heads. Therefore being thrown down
through it by our own misery, we are stirred up to crave pardon.

4 Object. The Lord should mock us, if he should make a show of felicity,
whereas in the mean season the entrance thereunto is shut against us.

An. Though the promises of the law be conditional, and depend upon the
perfect obedience of the law, which can be found no where, Conditional
promises.
yet they are not given in vain. For by this means it comes to pass that
we have recourse unto Christ, who not refusing our obedience being but half
perfect, Christ is our perfection.
and pardoninge that which is wanting of perfect fulfilling, he makes us to
reap the fru^t of the promises of the law, as if we our selves had fulfilled
the condition.

5 And it appears that the observing of the law is impossible. The observing
of the law is impossible. 1. King. 8.46 Psalm. 143.2. Gal 3.10. and. 5.7
For no man has ever attained unto the perfect mark of love: there is none in
who^ concupiscence is not found.

Object. We should do God injury, if we should say, that he commands more
then the faithful are able to perform through his grace.

An. God could if he would exalt man unto angelical pureness, but he neither
has done it, neither will he do it: because he has said otherwise in the
scripture.

The use of the moral law is three fold
6 But to the end the whole matter may appear more plainly, let us briefly
gather in a short order the office and use of the moral law (as they call it.)
And it is contained in three points: the first, that when it shows the
righteousness of God, it condemns Romans 7.7. A similitude.
*

Romans 3.20.
that by the law comes the knowledge of sin.*

8 And whereas the iniquity and condemnation of us all is sealed by the
testimony of the law, it is not done therefore that we may sink down through
despair, but that every mouth may be stopped, and that all the world may
become bound unto God. Romans 3.19. and. 11 32.
*

9 Furthermore, though this office of the law do properly appertain unto the
faithful, The use of the law toward the wicked.
that being convict of their own infirmity, they may seek medicine in
Christ: yet it shall be common to the wicked also, that they may be made
without excuse before God.

The schooling of the law
that they power not out wantonlie their frowardness: yea such schooling is
not unprofitable even for the children of God, so long as they wax wanton
through the folly of their flesh, before calling, being destitute of the
spirit of sanctification.

11 Unto that is applied that which Paul says, that the law was to the Jews
a schoolmaster to Christ. Gal. 3.24.
*

12 The third which is also the principal use, has Use of the law.
whereto they endeavor. Secondly that by continual meditating thereupon they
may be stirred up to obedience, they may be strengthened in him, and be drawn
back from the slipperie way of offending.

13 Object. It is not agreeable to christians to stick to the doctrine of the
law, which contains the administration of death.

An. Such an opinion is profane: for Moses teaches excellently, * that the
law which with sinners ingendereth death, is unto the saints a rule of
goodlife. Deuteronomy. 32.46. The law is a rule of good life.


14 Object. The law is abrogated to the faithful.

An. Not that it does no more command that which is right, but only that it
may not condemn and destroy them by terrifiyng and confounding their
consciences. Neither came Christ to abolish, Mat. 5.17
but to fulfill the law.*

15 And whereas Paul avouches that the law is abrogated, he speaks of the
curse, which does not belong to instruction, but to the force of binding the
conscience.

16 There is another respect to be had of the ceremonies, which were abrogate
not in effect, The Ceremo. law is abrogate not in effect but in use. Col 2.17.
but only in use. And whereas Christ made an end of the^, it does so little
diminish the holiness of them, that it makes the same more glorious. Therefore
Paul proves that they were shadows, the body whereof we have in Christ.*

17 For they were nothing else but certain solemn instruments, to testify our
giltinesse and uncleanness, which seeing Christ has taken away by his death,
he is unworthily said to have cancelled and fastened to the cross the hand
writing that was against us.

CHAP. VIII. The exposition of the moral law.
The law teaches the knowledge of God and of our selves
For it will evidently teach us the knowledge of God, and also of our selves.
And the law is double, natural whereby we do scarce slenderly taste what
worship is acceptable to God: the other written, which does more certainly
testify that which is more obscure in the law natural.

The law is double.
2 Now we may readily understand what we owe to God, namely glory, reverence,
love, and fear.

What we owe to God.
3 When we are come thus far by the doctrine of the law, the^ we will come
down to our selves, having What we are able to do.
we are far from answering Humility is the way unto Christ.
we shall find it to be nothing to the fulfilling of the law. Hence comes
humility and casting down, which shall turn us unto the mercy of God.

4 But the Lord being not content to have procured Why promises were added.
added promises, that we might be allured by the only beauty of goodness,
and with the sweetness of rewards,* Threatninges. Leuit. 18.5 Ezech. 18.4.
that we might hate unrighteousness, which he abhors. Leuit. 26.4. Deuteronomy.
28.1


5 And therefore he applied all parts of the law unto his will that we may know
that nothing is more acceptable to him then obedience: that the wa^tonnesse of
our mind may not be moved with any reasons, Obedience is most acceptable to
God. Deuteronomy. 12.32.
to add or diminish any thing.*

6 But before we go any further, we must consider three things in the law:
first, that man's life is informed and framed not only unto outward honesty,
Three things to be observed in the law
but also unto the inward and spiritual righteousness: because the lawgiuer
is spiritual*

7 Therefore he pronounces that the unchaste beholding Mat. 5.21.24.43.
he makes them guilty of judgment which have but conceived anger in their
mind: he makes them to be in danger of a council which by murmuring and
fretting have showed some token of an offended mind: guilty of hell fire which
have broken out into sharp anger by railing and evil speaking.

8 Secondly that there is always more in the commandments and inhibitions
then is expressed in words. Therefore where good is commanded, evil is
forbidden, and contrariwise.

9 Therefore in this commandment, Thou shall not kill, though common sense
consider none other thing, but that we must abstain from all hurt doing, and
from all desire to do hurt, yet this is furthermore contained therein, that we
help our neighbors life by such helps we be able.

10. Quest. Why did God thus, as it were by half commandments, by
Synecdoches rather signify what he would have done, then express the same?

An. Because flesh does always seek to wash away the filthiness of sins,
and to cover it with goodly shows, Why that which is worst is forbidden in the
law
he set down that which was the very worst in every kind of transgressio^,
at the hearing whereof the very sense might be afraid.

11 Thirdly we must consider the division of the



13 And because the first thing to be regarded in making laws, The first table.
is, that they be not broken or abrogated through contempt, God provides in
the proheme or beginning, The exposition of the law.
that the majesty of the law may not come in contempt, and that by three
arguments: first, 1. Power.
he challenges to himself the power and right of the government, that he may
bind the people with necessity to obey, 2. Promise.
saying, I am the Lord. Secondly, he sets down the promise of grace, and
professes himself to be the God of his church. 3. A benefit.
Furthermore he makes mention of a benefit, wherein he reproves the Jews of
unthankfulness, unless they answer his goodness.

14 After that he has showed that he is such a one as has authority to
command, least he seem to draw only by necessity, he does also allure
by sweetness, by pronouncing that he is the God of his church: for under this
speech is packed a mutual relation, which is contained in the promise, I will
be their God, Ier. 32.33.
and they shall be my people.*

15 The rehearsing of the benefit does follow, which ought to be of so much
more force to move us, the more detestable the offense of unthankfulness is
even among men. He did indeed put Israel in mind at that time of a benefit
which was fresh, but yet being such as that for the wonderful greatness
thereof it ought to be remembered for ever, and also to be of force among their
posterity.

The first Commmandement.
16 The authority of the law being grounded, The end.
he gives the first commandment, that we have no strange Gods before his
face: the end of the comma^deme^t is, that the Lord alone will have the
pre-eminence among his people. We owe four things to God.
That this may be done he commands that ungodliness and superstition,
whereby the glory of his Godhead is diminished, or darkened, be far from us. 1.
Adoration. 2. Confidence. 3. Invocation. 4. Thanks giving.
And though the things which we owe unto God be infinite, yet they may be
referred unto four heads and that not unfitly: namely adoration, confidence,
invocation, thanksgiving.

2. Commandment.
17 The end of the second commandment is, that he will not have his worship
profaned by superstitious rites: such as idolatry is. The end
And there be two parts of the commandment, the former brideleth our
licentiousness, 2. Parts.
that we make not God

18 To the end he may induce us to this, he sets out his power, which he
will not suffer to be abated. children, the childrens children, the childrens
childrens

God reuengeth his glory upon the fourth generation. Ezech. 18.20.
19 Object. To punish an innocent for an other man's fault, is against right, and
the word of God himself.*

An. There is no unrighteousness in God, neither does he suffer the son to
bear the iniquity of his father, but he is punished for his own offense.

20 For if the visitation be fulfilled, when God takes away grace and other
helps of salvation from a family, Every one is punished for his own
iniquity.
in that that the children being made blind and forsaken of the Lord do walk
in their fathers footesteps, they bear the curse of their fathers wickedness:
so that living wickedlie, they are by the just judgment of God punished, not
for other men's offenses, but for their own iniquity.

The promise of the law
21 On the otherside is offered the promise touching the spreading abroad of
mercy unto a thousand generations, whence the faithful have an excellent
comfort.

3. Commandment.
Three things to be observed
22 We must diligently note three things in the third: first, that whatsoever
the mind conceaueth

23 Furthermore, What an oath is
an oath is a calling of God to witness to confirm the truth of our speech:
Isa. 19.18. and 65 16. Ier. 12.16.
which by many places of scripture is proved to be a kind of the worship of
God. Ier. 5.7. Soph. 1.5.
In which respect the Lord is very angry with those which swear by strange
Gods.*

24 And the name of God is profaned three ways: first, when men swear falsely
by it: for what remains The name of God is profaned three ways.
when he is made the approuer of that which is false.*

25 Secondly, when it is used in true, but superfluous Leuit. 19.12 2. Ios.
7.19.
for an oath is not permitted but for necessities sake, when we must have
regard either of religion or of love. Last of all we sin if in Gods Exodus
23.13. Deuteronomy. 6.13. Heb. 6.13.


26 Object. Christ his inhibition is general, Mat. 5.34.
swear not at all.

An. Christ is not contrary to the father: but he corrects the abuse of the
Pharisees, which did suffer The error of the Pharisees.
so they were not false or the name of god were not used: yea he does also
forbid superfluous oaths, and such as were oblique, and which are made by the
name of creatures.

27 Therefore let us conclude that oaths are lawful (seeing Christ and his
disciples did swear) and Genesis 21.24.
* Abdias, Genesis 31.53.
did swear. Ruth 3.13.


4. Commandment. 1. King. 18.1^.

28 The end of the commandment is, that being dead to our own affections and
works, we think upon the kingdom of God, and that we be exercised by those
ways and means which he has appointed unto that meditation. Touching this
we must consider three things: Three things to be considered.
first, under the rest of the seventh day is figured to the people of Israel
the spiritual rest, whereby the faithful keep holiday from their own
works, that God may work in The spiritual rest.
Secondly he would have a set day, wherein they may come together to hear
the law, and do the ceremonies. Thirdly for servants sakes that they

The hearing of the word.
29 Notwithstanding we are taught in many places, that that shadowing of the
spiritual rest had the chiefest place in the Sabbath.*

Ease of servants. Number. 13.22 Ezech. 20.12
which that it might be observed with more religion, God commended it by his
own example.

The ceremony of the Sabbath is abolished by Christ. Romans 6.4.
31 And it is not to be doubted but that Christ by his coming did take away
that which was ceremonial here. For he is the truth, at whose presence all
figures do vanish away. Col. 2.16.
Therefore let all superstitious observing of days be far from christians.

32 The two latter causes are like convenient for all ages. Though the
ceremonies be taken away, yet it is necessary that we meet together to hear
the word, Why we meet together in the Church.
to break the mystical bread, and to common prayer. Again that servants and
laborers have their rest from labor.

Object. This commandment was given to the Jews and not to us.

An. We be the children of God, therefore he did no less provide for our
necessity then for the necessity of the Jews.

Quest. Why do we not come together daily.

An. Would God we might, but seeing the weakness of many cannot suffer that,
The profit of congregations.
why do we not obey the order which God has laid upon us?

33 Object. The christian common people is nourished in Iudaisme, The observing
of the Lords day.
because they retain some observation of days.

An. We observe the Lords day, not as ceremonies with most strait religion, but
we take it as a remedy necessary for retaining order in the church.

Object. Paul teaches that Christians must not be judged in observing days,
Col. 2.16.
in another place he avouches, that it is a superstitious thing to judge
between day and day. Romans 14.5.


An. He takes away the abuses whereby they darkened the glory of Christ, and
the light of the Gospel, by retaining shadows?

34 But the Lords day comes in steed of the Sabbath: The Lords day in place
of the Sabbath.
because there is an end made of that true rest, which the old Sabbath did
shadow, in the resurrection of Christ, and therein is it fulfilled.

5. Commandment.
35 Because the observing of that order which the Lord has appointed does
please him, the degrees of honor appointed by him, We must not resist or
diminish the dignity of our superiors.
ought not to be taken away or resisted by us. Whereupon it does follow, that
it is forbidden, that we do not diminish any whit the dignity of superiors,
either through contempt or stubbornness or unthankfulness. And the most amiable
superiority is set before us for an example, 3 Parts of honor. Exodus 21.17.
Leuit. 20 9
that we may more readily bend our minds unto the custom of submission.

36 But by diverse appurtenances of the law it appears that there be three
parts of honor: reverence Deuteronomy. 21 18 19.20. Mat. 15.4.
obedience,* thankfulness.*

The promise of long life is not always fulfilled.
37 There is a promise added, which does better admonish us, how acceptable that
submission is to God, which is commanded us in this place.

Object. But the promise is not always fulfilled. Because many godly men do
die before they come to ripe age.

An. That turns to the good of the godly: for long life is promised so far
as it is a blessing.

How far we must obey.
38 Furthermore we must note that this submissio^ is a degree or step toward the
honoring of that sovereign father. Therefore if they provoke us to transgress
the law, then they ought worthily to be accounted not our parents but
strangers. The same respect must we have of other superiors.

Act. 5.39.
6 Commmandement.
39 The end of the commandment is: because the Lord has knit together
mankind by a certain unity, the saftie of all ought to be committed to
every one. Therefore all violence and injury, whereby the body of our
neighbor is hurt, is forbidden us, 1 Ioh. 3.15 Mat. 5.22. Hatred. why we must
do good to our neighbor.
yea he is called a manslear which hates his brother.*

40 Therefore let us not do that to our neighbor, which we would not have
done to our selves: because man is both the image of God, and also our flesh.

7 Commandment.
Vnclea^nes forbidden.
41 The end of this: because God loves pureness, let us abandon all
uncleanness: yea let us moderate and order all parts of our life chastely and
continentlie. Let him that cannot contain marry a wife.*

42 Object. Virginite is an excellent virtue.

Cor. 7.29. Virginity is an excellent virtue.
An. It is denied to some, it is granted to other some for a time.

Quest. Being helped by the help of God, we can do all things.

43 An. The Lord helps those only, which walk in his ways. Therefore let
no man contemn matrimony, as a thing unprofitable and superfluous for him.
Let no man desire otherwise to lead a single life, then if he can want a wife.

44 Therefore when he forbids adultery, Wanton behavior of the body is
forbidden.
he requires integrity both of spirit, and body, he forbids laying in
wait for the chastity of another, both by wanton behavior of the body, and
impure and filthy gestures and speeches.

8 Commandment.
45 The end: because god abhors unrighteousness, that every man may have
his own. The kinds of theft.
And there be many kinds of theft: one is in violence: another in malicious
cosonage: another in close deceit, in flattery, etc. Therefore all crafts
whereby the goods of our neighbors are conueighed to us, are to be counted
thefts.

46 Therefore we shall rightly obey this commandment, if being content with
our estate, we seek to get no gain, but that which is honest: and on the
otherside, if we faithfully help with our counsel and help, all men so far
as we can, to keep that which is theirs.

9 Commandment.
47 The end thereof is, because God who is truth hates lying, that we must
use truth among our selves. Therefore the sum shall be that we neither hurt
any man's good name by false slanders, or that we do not hinder him in his
goods by falsehood: but that we employ our faithful endeavor for every man so
much as we can in defending truth, to maintain the integrity both of his
name and also of his goods.

48 Quest. If we discover the faults of other men and lie not, shall we be
guilty of that commandment?

An. He which forbids the name of thy brother to be defiled by lying, will
also have the same preserved, untouched.

10 Commandment.
49 The end is, because God will have the whole mind possessed with the
affection of love, all lust that is contrary to love must be driven out of the
mind. Therefore the sum shall be, that no cogitation creep into our minds,
which may move them with hurtful concupiscence, and such as may turn to
another man's hinderance.

Whether the tenth commandment of the law be superfluous.
Object This commandment is superfluous, because under theft and whoredom is
contained and forbidden the purpose to do hurt.

An. The purpose is one thing, the concupiscence or desire is an other thing,
the other commandments consider the deliberate consent of the will unto evil:
but this the desire, even without such both assenting and also deliberation.

What fantasies are condemned.
50 Object. Shall fantasies which are rashly tossed in the mind, and do at
length vanish away be condemned for concupiscences, whose place is in the heart?

An. No: but such as bite and strike the mind with lust. They which seek two
commandments in the forbidding of concupiscence, The error of the Papists.
they rent in pieces by a perverse mangling that which was one.

51 Furthermore the perfection of that holiness consists in those two points
which we have already rehearsed, The sum of the law. Deuteronomy. 6.5. and 11 13.
that we love the Lord God with our whole heart, with our whole soul, with
all our strength: and our neighbor as our self.*

52 Object. Christ and his disciples when they rehearse the sum of the law,
Why Christ does sometimes make mention of the latter table only
they omit the first table.

An. They do it for this cause, because the study of righteousness and
integrity, does more appear in the second then in the first.

53 Object. Therefore it is more worth to the sum of righteousness, to live
innocentlie with men, then to honor God with godliness.

An. No truly, but because no man does truly observe and keep love in all
points, unless he fear God, Ephesians. 1.4.
the approving of godliness is taken thence also. Col. 3.14.


54 Therefore our life shall be best framed according to the will of God, and the
prescript of the law when it shall be most fruitful to our brethren in all
points: so that we live rather to our neighbors then to our selves.

Object. Love begins with it self.

An. Yea love does not seek the things that are her own. Whether love begin
at her self. 1. Cor. 13.5 Touching our neighbor.
*

Object. The thing ruled is inferior to the rule.

An. When Christ commands that we love our neighbors as ourselves, he
will, that we be ready with no less cheerfulness to do good to our
neighbor then to our selves.

55 Also we must note that under the word neighbor, as Christ interprets
it, What is meant by the word Neighbor. Luke. 10.36.
* we comprehend all mankind, and also our very enemies.

56 Object. That which is spoken touching the not desiring of revenge, and the
loving our enemies is a counsel not a commandment.

An. Yea commandments are common, Pro. 25.21
which do most straightly require at our hands love of our enemies. Exodus 23.4.
Deuteronomy. 32.35


57 It is manifest that Christ commands, Love your enemies, do good to
those that hate you, etc. That you may be children of your father which is in
heaven.*

Object. It were a burden too heavy for Christians, to love their enemies.

Mat 5.44.
An. As if there could any heavier thing be invented, then to love God with
the whole heart, etc.

Object. Christians are under the law of grace.

An. They ought not therefore any more to give themselves to vices.

A venial sin.
58 Object. Lust without a deliberate assent, which does not long continue in
the heart, is a venial sin.

An. Where the transgression of the law is, there is the curse. Paul calls
death the reward of sin. Romans 6.23
*

Ezech. 18.20
59 So says the Prophet likewise: the soul which has sinned shall die.*
Therefore every sin is mortal.

Object. The sins of the saints are venial.

Why the sins of the Saints are pardonable
An. I grant, but not of their own nature, but because they obtain pardon
through the mercy of God.

CHAP. IX. That Christ although he was known under the law to the Jews, yet
was he delivered only by the Gospel.
1 THE fathers did in deed taste of grace, which is at this day offered to us
more fully: They saw the day though with a darker sight, the glory whereof
does now shine in the Gospel without any veil put between.

2 Furthermore I take the Gospel for the evident manifestation of the mystery
of Christ. What the Gospel is.


Object. The Gospel is the doctrine of faith*. 2. Tim. 4.9
Therefore whatsoever promises are found every where in the Law concerning
free forgiveness of sins, they are counted parts thereof.

An. I grant, if we take the word Gospel largely. But according to the
principal signification it is applied to the publishinge of gace given in
Christ*. Mat. 4.6. Mat. 1.1. Seruetus.


Object. By the faith of the Gospel the fulfilling of all promises is brought
unto us, therefore we stand no longer in need of promises.

An. We enjoy in deed the benefits which Christ has purchased: yet that is
true, Hope is nourished by promyses. 1 Timothy 4.8. 2 Timothy 1.1. 2 Cor. 7.1.
that our salvation is hid in hope*. Therefore the holy Ghost commands us
to lean upon promises so long as we live.

4 Object. The Law is set against the Gospel as the merits of works are set
against free imputation of righteousness.

An. The Gospel did not so succeed the whole Law that it might bring another
way to attain to salvation, but rather that it might prove that that was
firm, whatsoever it did promise, Romans 1.16.
and did join the body to the shadows*.

5 Furthermore John came between the Law and the Gospel, John was put
between the Law and the Gospel. Mat. 11 11.
who had a middle office between the Prophets which were interpreters of the
Law, and the Apostles which were preachers of the Gospel.

CHAP. X. Of the likelihood of the old and new Testament.
1 THe covenant of all the fathers does nothing differ from ours in substance
and very deed, that it The agreement between the Law and the Gospel.
And they agree in three points. First the Jews were adopted into the same
hope of immortality whereinto we are. Secondly the covenant

Romans 1.2. and 3.21.
And the Gospel does not hold men's hearts in the joy of this present life, but
it does extol them unto the hope of immortality.

Ioh. 8.56. The end of the preaching of the Gospel.
does nothing else but pronounce that a sinner is justified through the
fatherly kindness of God without his own deseruings.

5 And Paul teaches that they had the same Mediator, which makes the
Israelits equal with us, 1. Cor. 10.1.11. There is the same mediator of both
Testaments.
because they were baptized when they passed through the sea, and in ye cloud.

Object. That passing was carnal baptism.

An. It answered to our spiritual baptism. For it follows that they eat the
same spiritual meat. which we eat, and they did drink the same spiritual
drink which we drink, namely Christ*.

1. Cor. 10.11.
6 Object. Your fathers did eat Manna and are dead. He which eats my flesh
shall not die for ever*. Therefore it was not the same meat. Ioh. 6.31. Manna.


An. Christ does reprehende the Jews which comprehended nothing in Manna, but
a remedy for their carnal need and hunger: they did not pearce unto that
high mystery whereunto Paul has respect. Therefore Christ shows that they
ought to wait for a far more excellent benefit at his hands, then that
which Moses gave to their fathers, as they said.

7 The fathers, Adam, Abell, Noe, Abraham and The Fathers had the same hope of
eternal life which we have.
seeing they did stick to God, it is not to be doubted, but that they had an
entrance into the immortal kingdom of God. For it was a sound partaking of
God which cannot be without ye good thing of eternal life.

8 Also in that covenant, I will be your God, you The same covenant. Leuit.
26.12.
the prophets did always comprehend both life and salvation, and all the sum
of blessedness.

9 Furthermore he did not only testify that he was their God, The same God
Genesis 15.7.
but he did also promise that he would The same manner of living.
might extend unto eternity.

10 Furthermore the state of life which was enjoined the fathers, was a
continual exercise, whereby they were put in mind that they were of all most
miserable, if they should be happy only in this life.

11 Abraham especially, Abraham
who is called the father of the faithful, was so tossed during the whole
course of his life, that if any man will depaint as in a table a pattern of a
calamitous and wretched life, he shall find nothing more fit.

Isaac.
12 Isaac who is afflicted with less miseries, does yet notwithstanding scarce
taste even lightly of sweetness. Jacob.
Jacob is nothing else but a platform of extreme unhappiness.

13 If these holy fathers did wait for a blessed life at the hand of God,
they both thought upon and saw another blessedness then that of the earthly
life. To this end tends it that they made so great account of the sepulcher
in the land of Chanaan, Buryall in the land of Canaan
which was undoubtedly a myrrour of eternal felicity.

The end of the Birthright.
14 Fifthly to what end should Jacob have desired so earnestly and with so great
danger have sought to get the pre-eminence of the first begotten, unless he
had had respect unto an higher blessing.

15 There is extant in Moses an evident declaration of the spiritual covenant.
With how great certainty does David direct all his things unto that mark*?
Psalm. 39.13.


16 Neither may we otherwise understand those things which he writes every
where of the prosperous success of the faithful, but to apply them unto the
manifestation of the heavenly glory, because in this world they are oppressed
with all manner of misery. Psalm. 57.10. and 112.9 and 140.14.


17 Therefore they lifted up their minds unto the sanctuary of God, wherein
was laid up in store for them, that which does not appear in the shadow of
this present life.

18 They said, the wrath of the Lord endures but the twinkling of an eye: and
in his mercy is life*: Psalm. 30.6. Prou. 10.7. Psalm. 116.15. and. 34.22.
the remembrance of the just shall be in blessing: but the name of the wicked
shall wither away*.

19 Above all the rest, that saying of Job is notable, I know that my redeemer
lives, and that I shall rise out of the earth in the last day: and I shall see
God my Savior in my flesh Job. 19.25.
.

Object. These were speeches only of a few. Whereby it is not proved that there
was such doctrine among the Jews.

An. They were teachers of the common people, who did openly publish the common
principles of religion.

20 If we come down to the latter Prophets, the nigher they came in success
of time unto the perfect deliverance, so the matter was daily made more plain
by increasings of revelation.

21 Let us content our selves with one example, of the vision of Ezechiell,
wherein he was taught concerning the resurrection of the dead: or with the
saying of Isayas*, Thy dead shall live, Eze. 37.84. Isa. 26.19.
my corpse shall also rise again.

22 So likewise Daniell, Dan. 12.1.
In that time Michaell the great prince shall rise, who stands for the sons
of his people, and the time of tribulation shall come, etc. And of those which
shall sleep in the dust of the earth, there shall awake some to life eternal,
some to eternal shame.

23 Therefore let us conclude that the old Testament which the Lord made with
the people of Israel was not limited by earthly things, but it contained the
promise of the spiritual and eternal life.

CHAP. XI. Of the difference of both Testaments. Quest.
1 What? shall there then be no difference left between the old and new
Testament?

Five differences.
An. Yes verily, which appears in five points, first because in the old
Testament the Lord gave the heavenly inheritance to be holden and tasted

Gal. 4.1.
2 That shall better appear by the similitude which Paul sets down to the
Galathians*, Gal. 4.1.
he compares the nation of the Jews to a young heir, who not being as yet fit
to govern him self, does follow the leading and guiding of his tutor.
Therefore they had the same inheritance appointed for them which is appointed
for us: but yet they were not as yet by reason of their age apt to enter into
it, Why the fathers made more account of this life then we.
and to enjoy the same.

3 This is the reason why the holy men did make more account of this mortal
life, and of the blessing thereof, under the old Testament, as being a figure
of spiritual felicity, then is now meet to do: so on the other side God
showed more often testimonies of his judgment upon the reprobate, in bodily
punishments.

4 There is another difference in figures, because the old Testament did make
a show only of the image, the truth being absent, and of the shadow in steed
of the body: the new Testament gives the

Touching the figures of the old Testament. Heb. 7.11. and 9.9. and 10.1.
5 Hereby it appears in what sense the Apostle said, that the Jews were
brought by the schooling of the Law unto Christ Gal. 3.24. and 4.1.
, before he was revealed in the flesh.

6 Object. The faith of Abraham and of the prophets did surpass ours.

An. The question is not what grace God bestowed upon a few, but what
ordinary dispensation he followed had so great cleernes of sight, Mat. 13.17.
but that it did in some Luke. 10.24
.

7 The third difference is because the old Testament, is by reason of the Law
called the ministry of death: and the new of life: that of damnation; this
of righteousness: that that is disanulled, this remains*.

8 Which thing is more easily declared by comparing The old Testament the
ministry of death Ier. 31.31 2. Cor. 3.6
because it was published without the effectual working of the Spirit: the new
is spiritual, because the Lord has spiritually engraven it in men's hearts: the
old is deadly, because it can do nothing else but inwrap all mankind in the
curse: the new is the instrument of life, because it restores into favor with
God, men, being delivered from the curse.

9 The fourth, The old Testament is the Testament of bondage.
the Scripture calls the old Testament

Object. The fathers had the same spirit of faith which we have, therefore it
follows that they were partakers both of the same liberty, and also joy.

An. That came not from the Law but from the Gospel, whereto as to an
wholesome help, they fled being cast down. Notwithstanding they were subject to
the same bonds of observations, and burdens whereto the people are bound.

10 These three later differences are comparisons of the Law and Gospel: and
the first reaches farther, namely unto the promises which were given before
the Law, which are not to be counted of the old Testament. Seeing that those
which had the^ were directed unto the Mediator, as were the fathers which
lived under the old Testament.

Deuteronomy. 32.8. and 10.14.
But when the fullness of time appointed for the restoring of all things, came,
Christ was given, and he is the reconciler of God and man, the wall of
separation is plucked down, and Christ is made all in all, to whom the
Gentiles are given for his inheritance, and the ends of the earth to be his
own*. Psalm. 2.8. and 72.8.
The Gospel is preached to all creatures Mat. 28.
.

12 And Christ him self did not forthwith so sone as he began to preach
proceed to the calling of the Gentiles, Why Christ did not preach
streightwayes.
but he deferred it until such time as having perfectly fulfilled the work of
our redemption, and having ended the time of his humbling, he received of the
Father a name which is above all names, Phil. 2.9.
before which every knee should bow*.

13 Object. It is not agreeable, that God, in who^ there is no change, should
have suffered such a change, that he should afterward disanull that which he
had once commanded and commended.

An. God is not therefore chaungeable, because he applied diverse forms to
diverse ages, as he knew it was expedient for every one. Whereto the
unlikelihood of both Testaments does serve. A similitude. An other. Gal. 4.1.
So the husbandman appoints one kind of work to his family in winter, and
another in summer. The father traineth up his children after one sort in their
childhood, and after an other in youth*.

14 Quest. But could not God as well from the beginning, as after the coming
of Christ, reuele eternal life in plain words without any figures, teach
those that were his by a few and evident signs or Sacraments, give the holy
Ghost, spread abroad grace throughout the whole world?

An. He could.

Quest. Why did he it not, that so great diversity might be taken away?

An. He would not. Whatsoever God has done, let us not doubt but that it is
wisely and righteouslie done, although we be often ignorant of the cause why it
should have been done so.

CHAP. XII. That Christ must have been made man that he might fulfill the
office of a Mediator.
1 Now it was very expedient for us that he should be both very God and very
man, who was to be our Mediator. For seeing our iniquities had quite shut us out
and estranged us from the kingdom of heaven, no man could be the interpreter
for restoring of our peace. All men were affrayed when they saw God, as being
sons of Adam: also even the very Angels had need of an head, that they
might cleave to their God. The angels do cleave to God through Christ
Therefore not without cause does Paul, when he sets before us Christ to be
the Mediator, express plainly, that he is man.

2 That was also the office of the Mediator, that he might so restore us into
the favor of God, 1. Tim. 2.5.
that The office of the mediator
of heirs of hell, heirs of the kingdom of heaven: that he might swallowe up
death: overcome sin. Who could do this unless the Son of God were made
also the son of man: and so take ours upon him, to conueigh his unto us? and
so make that which The obedience of the Mediator.


3 This was another point of our reconciling to God, that man who had through
his own disobedience destroyed him self, should for a remedy set obedience
against it, should satisfy the judgment of God, should suffer the punishment
due to sin. Therefore our Lord came forth, being very man, he put upon him
the person of the Father, that he might present our flesh before the judgment
seat of God, for the price of satisfaction, and that he might in the same
flesh suffer the punishment which we had deserved.

4 Object. Although there had needed no remedy for the redemption of mankind,
yet should Christ have become man.

An. All the whole Scripture does cry, that he was clothed with our flesh,
that he might be made our Redeemer *, Col. 1.15. Isa. 53.45.
to imagine any other cause is a point of rashness, seeing the Law, the
Prophets, Christ him self, and the Apostles do witness that God sent his
Son, that in the similitude of sinful flesh he might make satisfaction for
us.

5 Object. There is no let but that the same Christ who redeemed the condemned,
could also have testified his love toward the safe and sound by taking flesh
upon him.

An. Seeing the Spirit pronou^ceth that these two things were conjoined by the
eternal decree of God, that Christ should be made our Redeemer, and partaker
of the same nature: it is not lawful to enquire any further.

Object. This council of God did depend upon man's fall, which he did foresee.

An. They which grant liberty to themselves to enquire farther concerning
Christ, then God has appointed before by his secret decree, break out through
wicked boldness to faigne a new Christ. 2 Timothy 15.
Christ came to save sinners*: let us stay our selves here.

Object. They are to be accused of too much boldness which deny that the
son of man should have appeared in the flesh, if Adam had not fallen, Osiander
because it is refuted by no testimonies of Scripture.

An. As if Paul did not bridle perverse curiosity, when having spoken of the
redemption purchased by Christ, he does forthwith command to avoid foolish
questions. Tit. 3 9.


Quest. Could the Son of God take upon him the nature of an Ass?

An. This is a monstrous and detestable question. As if when Paul counts
nothing preciouse or worthy to be known, besides Christ crucified*, 1 Cor. 2
2.
he admits an ass to be the author of salvation.

6 Object. Man was created after the image of God, because he was formed after
the pattern of Christ who was to come, that he might resemble him, whom the
father had already determined to cloth with flesh. Whereupon it follows that
if Adam had never fallen away from his first beginning, yet Christ should have
been made man. where we must seek for the image of God.


An. We must not seek for the image of God any where else, but in those
excellent gifts and marks of excellency, wherewith God had garnished Ada^
above all other living creaturs. And Christ was the^ the image of God:
therefore whatsoever excellency was graven in Adam, it flowed thence because
through the only begotten Son he approached to the glory of his creator.

7 Therefore if man's integrity had not decayed he should have been like to God
and Angels, and yet it should not have been needful that the Son of God
should therefore have become either man or Angel.

Object. Unless it had been decreed by the unchangeable purpose of God before
man was created, that Christ should be borne, not as a Redeemer, but as the
first man, that he might not lose his prerogative he should now have been
borne only by chance, that he might restore mankind being lost. Therefore he
was created after the image of Adam.

Heb. 4.15.
An. He was like unto us, sin only except*. Luke in the genealogy reckeneth
him up for a son of Adam, Luke 33.
because ma^s estate was appointed for him*, that he might raise up again the
posterity of Adam which were fallen. But if that went before the creation, 1
Cor. ^5.47. How Christ is the second Adam.
he should have been called the first Adam.

Object. Because Christ was already known before in the mind of God, that he
should be man, men were formed according to this pattern.

An. When Paul calls him the second Adam, he makes falling away the middle
between the beginning of man and his restoring.

Object. So long as Adam should have stood, he should have been the image of
him self, and not of Christ.

An. On the other side though the son of God had never taken flesh upon him,
yet nevertheless the image of God did shine both in his soul and also in his
body. The primacie of Christ over the Angels
In whose beams it did always appear that Christ is truly the head of men
and Angels.

Object. The primacie over the Angels does not belong to Christ save only
in as much as he is man.

An. Yea in as much as he is the eternal word of God*, Col. 1.15.
he is the first begotten of all creatures: in as much as he is man he is the
first begotten of the dead Col. 1.18.
.

Object. Men should not have had Christ to be their king, unless he had been
man.

An. As if the kingdom of God could not stand if the eternal son of God
although not clothed with man's flesh, gathering together into the fellowship of
his heavenly glory and life, Angels and men, should him self bear the
sovereignty.

Object. The Church should have been without an head unless Christ had
appeared in the flesh.

An. As the Angels did enjoy him for their head, he should also have been the
head of men by his divine power.

Quest. What is the meaning of the prophecy of Adam, This is now bone of my
bones, and flesh of my flesh?

An. It is no prophecy.

Object. Christ in Matthewe does attribute the same speech to God.

An. Every thing that God spoke by men is not a prophecy, otherwise every
commandment of the Law should be a prophecy. Therefore when the fullness of
time came, God sent his Son made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem
those that were under the Law*. Gal. 4.4.


CHAP. XIII. That Christ took upon him the true substance of man's flesh.
1 IT remains that we see, how being clothed with our flesh he fulfilled the
office of the Mediator. Which is proved by many testimonies of Scripture*.
Genesis 12.10. and 17.2, 26.4.


2 Object. He was made after the likeness of man, Psalm 45.7. etc. Marcion.
and was found in his shape as a man*. Therefore he did not take upon him a
true body.

An. Paul does not teach in that place what manner body Christ took to him
self, but whereas he might by good right have showed forth his godhead, he
made a show of nothing but of that which was proper to a base and contemptible
person, that by his example he may exhort us unto submission. Otherwise the
saying of Peter could not stand, that he dyed in the flesh and was quickened in
the Spirit. 1. Pet. 3.18.


Manichaeus. 1. Cor. 15.47.
Object Christ is called the second Adam from heaven heavenly*.

An. Paul does not bring in in that place an heavenly essence of the body,
but a spiritual force, which being powered abroad by Christ, does quicken us.

Object. Christ is called the son of man, because he was promised to men. How
Christ is the son of man.


An. He is called the son of man after the manner of the Hebrews, being very
man: so men are called the sons of Adam: we are called Christ's brethren.
Heb. 2.17.


Object. Infidels should be Christ's brethren.

An. The children of God are borne not of flesh and blood, Ioh. 1.13. The
children of God are borne through faith.
but of the Spirit through faith*. Therefore flesh alone does not make the
brotherly joining and knitting together.

Object. Christ should have been borne of Adam straight way after the
beginning, that he might be the first begotten among brethren*. Romans 8.29


An. The right of the first begotten is referred not unto age, Christ's
Birthright.
but unto the degree of honor and power.

Object. Christ took upon him man not the Angels, because he received mankind
into favor*. Heb. 2.16.


An. In that place that the Apostle may amplify the honor whereof Christ
vouchsafed us, he compares the Angels with us, who were set a part in this
point.

3 Object. Christ is called the son of David, How Christ is the son of
David.
because he was promised to him, and was given at length in his time.

An. After that Paul has called him the son of David*, adding immediately
after, according to the flesh, he does assuredly note out his nature.

Object. Christ took a body of nothing, Marcionists.
because women are without seed.

An. That is to overthrow the elements of nature, Whether women be without
seed.
and the principles of physic.

Object. Aaron and Ioadah married with women of the tribe of Iehuda, therefore
the seuering of the tribes should have been confounded if women had generatiue
seed.

An. This is granted to the excellency of man's sex, that the children are
counted noble or base by the condition of their fathers.

Object. It were an absurd thing to say that Christ was brought forth of the
menstruous seed of the virgin.

An. Art thou so shameless? and yet we must grant that he did congele in the
blood of his mother. Because he was begotten of Marie, and brought forth of her
seed*. Mat. 1.5. Christ was of the seed of man and yet without sin. 1 Cor.
15.47. Romans 8.3.


4 Object. If Christ took his beginning of men, then is he subject to sin as
other men be.

An. Paul separateth him from the common condition*, that he may be very man
without vice and corruption, saying, The first Adam is of the earthly and
natural, the second from heaven heavenly.

Object. If Christ be free from all blot, and begotten of the seed of Mary by
the secret working of the Spirit, then the seed of the woman is not unclean,
but the seed of man.

An. We make not Christ free from all blot, because he was begotten only of
his mother, without having any knowledge of man, but because he was sanctified
by the Spirit, that the generation might be pure, such as it should have been
before the fall of Adam.

Object. Then Adam had a double seed, if there came no pollution unto Christ.

Generation is unclean accidentally.
An. The generation of man is not unclean of it self, but accidentally by
reason of his fall. Therefore it is no marvel if Christ were exempted from the
common corruption, seeing the integrity was to be restored by him.

Object. If the word of God took upon it flesh, then was it shut up in a
strait prison of an earthly body.

An. Though the infinite essence of the word did grow together with the nature
of man to be one person, yet we must not imagine any shutting in. For the
Son of God came down from heaven wonderfully, yet so that he did not forsake
heaven, he would be borne wonderfully in the womb of his mother, Christ was
borne in the womb and yet did he fill the world.
and hang upon the cross, that he might always fulfill the world.

CHAP. XIIII. How the two natures of the Mediator do make one person.
1 FVrthermore whereas it is said, that the word was made flesh*, Ioh. 1.14.
it must not be understood, as if it were either turned into flesh, or
co^fusedly mixed with flesh, How the word was made flesh.
but because he choose to himself a temple of the virgins womb wherein he
would dwell: and he which was the son of God, was made the son of man not
by the confusion of substance, but by unity of person, the Godhead is so
joined to the manhood, as the soul to the body, so that either nature has her
sound property: A similitude.
and yet one Christ is made of these two. And the communicating of the natures
is so great, that those things are sometimes attributed to the Godhead which
appertain unto the manhood: The co^municatinge of natures.
to the manhood which belong to the Godhead: sometimes that which belongs to
both together. Ioh. 7.58.


2 For that which Christ said, before Abraham was made I am, is far from
his manhood.

Object. He was before all ages because he was even then known to be the
redeemer as well in the counsel of the father, as in the minds of the godly.
Things pertayninge to the god head.


An. Seeing that he does manifestly distinguish the day of his manifestation
from his eternal essence, and does of purpose purchase to himself an
authority by antiquity, whereby he may excel Abraham undoubtedly he
challenges to himself that which is proper to the Godhead.

And whereas he is called his fathers servant, Things pertayninge to his
manhood.
whereas it is said that he increased in age and wisdom with God and men*,
that he does not seek his own glory*, etc. It is proper to his manhood alone.
Luke 2.52.
And that is the communicating of properties, Ioh. 8.15.
whereas it is said, The comunicatinge of properties. Act. 10.25.
that God has by his blood purchased the church*, and that the Lord of glory
was crucified.

3 And whereas it is said, that he received power of the father to forgive
sins, to raise up whom he will, to give righteousness, holiness, salvation,
etc 1 Cor. 2.6. Ioh. 1.29. and. 5.24. and. 8.12 and 9.5. and. 10.9 etc
. It was neither proper to the godhead, nor to the manhood, but to both.

Nestorius
4 Therefore we must abandon the error of Nestorius, who whiles he went about
rather to pull in pieces then to distinguishe Christ's nature, did invent a
double Christ. Eutiches.
Also we must beware of the madness of Eutiches, least whiles we will prove
the unity of person, Seruetus.
we destroy both natures.

5 And the monster Seruetus is no less deadly, who put in place of the son
of God, a feigned thing made of the essence of god, the spirit, the flesh and
three uncreated elements.

Object. Before Christ was revealed in the flesh, there were only then,
shadowish shapes in God, the truth whereof began to be only then when that word
which was appointed to this honor, began truly to be the son of God. What
personal union is.


An. He is counted the son of God, because the word begotten of the father
before all ages, did by personal union taken upon him man's nature.
Furthermore, the old writers called that personal union, which makes one
person of two natures.

Object. If the eternal word had already been the son of God before it
was clothed with flesh, there should be two sons of God.

Christ is the son of God by nature and we by adoption.
An. We say that there is none other but he which was made manifest in the
flesh. For neither does it follow that if he was God before he became man,
therefore he began to be a new God. Therefore he was the son of God by
nature, and we by free adoption.

Object. This grace depends upon the Filiatio.
becoming a son, which God had decreed with himself.

An. We could not be sons unless our adoption were founded in the head: to
pluck that from the head which was common to the members, Our adoption is
sound in Christ.
is without reason.

6 Object. The beginning of his filiation or beco^ming a son, was since that
he was revealed in the flesh.

An. He should be the son in respect of his humane nature: but Paul teaches
that he is such in respect of his Godhead. Romans 1.12.13


7 Object. It is said that God spared not his own son. Romans 8.32.
* Also he shall be called the son of the highest. Luke. 1.32.
Therefore he began to be the son of God after his incarnation.

An. The saying of the Prophet should not be true.* Thou Bethleem in the
land of Judah, Mich. 5.2.
etc. and his going out from the beginning, and from the days of eternity.

Object. Before Christ appeared in the flesh, he was never called the son of
God, but under a figure.

An. Although he was more darkly described under the law, Christ was more
dark under the law.
yet he was none otherwise eternal god save only because he was the word
begotten of the eternal father: neither is he otherwise the mediator save
only because he is God revealed in the flesh.

8 Let us conclude that our Redeemer did come of the seed of Abraham and of
David, and that he was made man according to the flesh, and that there is the
unity of person in two natures.

CHAP. XV. That we may know to what end Christ mas sent of the father, and
what he brought us, we must respect three things in him, his prophetical
office, his kingdom and his Priesthood.
1 BUT to the end our faith may find in Christ perfect and sound matter of
salvation, we must set down this principle, that the office which was
enioined him by his father consists in 3. parts: for he was both made a
prophet, Christ a prophet.
and a king, and a priest, although it did little avail to know these things
in name, unless the knowledge of the use and end were

A king.
2 And unto these three offices appertains the

A Priest.
Object. He was called the Messiah by peculiar consideration or respect of his
kingdom.

An. I grant: and yet the prophetical and priestlie anointing, A prophet
Isa. 61.7.
have their degree, neither are they to be neglected by us. There is express
mention made of his prophetical office in Iesaias in these words*, The
spirit of God the Lord upon me, therefore the Lord himself has anointed
me that I might preach to the meek, etc. He is the true prophet whom the
father has set before to be heard*. Mat. 3.17. A king.


3 I come to his kingdom whose nature is spiritual, Dan 2.44. Psalm. 89.36.
Ios. 53.8.
whence all the force and eternity thereof is gathered*, which must be placed
in two things. The Ioh 18.56.
the other is proper to every member.

4 And the force and profit which we reap by the spiritual kingdom of
Christ, The profit of Christ's kingdom
consists in two things: first, that we may know him to reign rather for
our sakes then for his own, and that both within and without, namely, that
being replenished so far as is expedient with the gifts of the spirit,
whereof we are empty naturally, we may perceive that we shall always have
the victory against the Devil the world, and all manner hurtful thing.

5 Therefore his kingly anointing is set forth unto us, what manner
annoynting Christ's was.
not done with oil or ointments made with spices, but he is called the
anointed of God, because the spirit of wisdom, of understanding, of
council of strength and the fear of God did rest upon him.

Object. It is written, Ios. 12.2. Psalm. 45.8.
Then shall he deliver up the kingdom of God and the father. Again, 1 Cor.
15, 24
the son himself shall be made subject that God may be all in all.
Therefore his kingdom is not everlasting.

An. That is said, because in that perfect glory the kingdom shall not be so
governed, as it is now. Phil. 2.9. Luke 2 21. Io. 33 22.
Because God will at this day as it were by means govern his church in his
person*: but he shall be then by himself the only head of the church.

6 The end and use of the priesthood of Christ is, that he may be the
mediator, His priesthood
being clean from all blot, that he may reconcile God to us. That this may
more easily appear, we must begin with his Psalm. 110.4.
through whose patronage we obtain favor. Whence arises to godly
consciences Apoc. 1.6. Our sacrifices
that the sacrifices of prayers and praise which come from us may be acceptable
to God.

CHAP. XVI. How Christ has fulfilled the office of the redeemer, that he
might purchase salvation for us, where his death and resurrection are handeled,
and also his ascension into heaven.
The end of those things which have been spoken hitherto.
1 THOSE things which we have hitherto spoken touching Christ, must be referred
unto this one mark, that being in our selves condemned, dead, lost, we may
seek righteousness in him, deliverance, life and salvation, like as we are
taught in that notable saying of Peter, Act. 4.21. Three things to be
considered.
That there is none other name given under heaven to men, wherein they must be
saved.* That we may the more easily perceive that three things come to be
considered of us. First how great our iniquity is: secondly how

4 God was our enemy because of sin, until we were restored to favor
through the death of Christ. Romans 5.10.
*

Object. But his mercy did prevent us, and he gave his son freely, which are
manifest pledges of love.

Our miserable estate without Christ.
An. Such speeches are applied to our capacity, that we may the better
understand how wretched and calamitous our condition is without Christ. For
we can never sufficiently perceive how great Gods mercy is toward us,
unless we feel our own iniquity, being stricken with fear of eternal death.

3 As God is the chiefest righteousness, so he The righteousness of God.
therefore in respect of corrupt nature, again of our wicked life being added
thereto, we are all in the displeasure of God, being in his sight God loves
his creature.
But because the Lord will not destroy that in us which is his, he finds
something which of his goodness he loves Gods mercy.
before Christ does join us.

4 And for this cause Paul says, How God hated us and also loved us. Ephesians.
1.4. Ioh. 3.16. Romans 5.10.
that that love wherewith God loved us before the creation of the word, was
grounded in Christ.*

5 Furthermore he hated us after a wonderful and divine sort, because of
iniquity: and he loved us because he had made us. And now though Christ by
the whole course of his obedience has purchased the favorable good will of
God, yet the scripture ascribes this to his death as peculiar and proper to
it,* wherein we must consider two things: Romans 4 15. and. 5.9.
first, that he was condemned as guilty bearing our person:* Secondly, that
he was nevertheless acquitted by the mouth of the judge, Ioh. 1.29.
that it might more evidently appear, that he was burdened not with his own,
but with our wickedness.

6 And now even the very kind of death is not without an excellent mystery.
We must consider two things in the death of Christ Ioh. 10.15. Ios. 53.7. Mat.
72.11. The manner of his death must be noted. Deuteronomy. 21.23. Gal. 3.13. The
fruits of Christ's death and burial is double.
The cross was accursed not only in man's opinion, but also by the decree of
the law of God.* Therefore when he was hanged upon it, he made himself
subject to the curse. And it was meet that it should be so, that we might be
delivered from all curse which did lie upon us by reason of our iniquity,
whiles that it is conueighed unto him.

7 It follows in the creed that he was dead and buried, where we may see
again how he put himself in our steed, to pay the price of our redemption.
Thence we gather a double fruit: the first, is because by dying he brought to
pass that we shall not Vivification. Mortification.
he overthrew death which did hang over our heads, and did now triumph over
us, keeping us down. He did also destroy the Devil who had power over death,
and he delivered those which were his bondslaues during their whole life*,
Another fruit is that by enterparting of him, Heb. 29.15. Romans 6.5. Gal. 2.2.
he mortifieth our members, that they may not hereafter exercise

The resurrection of Christ
8 The history of the resurrection is of no small importance to the effect of
our redemption. For it signifies that Christ did both appease Gods wrath,

Object. Hell is often red in the scriptures for the sepulcher or grave.

Hell.
An. But not in this place, otherwise it should be to declare that which is
obscure by that which is obscurer neither is it like to be true that such a
superfluous repetition could creep into this short sum.

9 Therefore neither the grave, ne yet the limb of the papists is handled in
this place.

Quest. What must we then understand by the gates of brass, and the iron
bars which were broken: Psalm. 10.16.
also that he delivered those that were bound zach. 19.11.


An. The Psalm foretells the deliverance of those who being captives in
far countries are cast 1 Pet. 3.19.
Zacharias speaks of the captivity of

The soul of Christ did suffer.
19 Therefore Christ did not only suffer bodily death, but he felt even in his
soul the sharpness of Gods vengeance, that he might both appease his wrath,
and satisfy his just judgment. For which cause also it behooved him to wrestle
as it were hand to hand with the armies of hell, and with the horror of
eternal death.

11 Object. Then it seems that God was either his sons adversary, or else
that he was angry with him.

An. No truly: for he was his well-beloved son, and he could not have been
appeased by one with who^ he was offended. But we say that he suffered the
greeuousnesse of Gods severity, because being stricken with the hand of God, he
tried all the signs of God being angry and punishing. For which cause being
enforced by distress he cried out, My God, Psalm. 22.2. Mat. 27.46
my God why have thou forsaken me.

12 Object. That is to do injury to Christ, as if he were afraid of the
saluatian of his soul, or fell into danger of desperation, which is contrary
to faith.

An. But the Evangelists say that he was troubled in spirit, and full of
heaviness, and that he feared vehemently*.

Object. It was feigning. Mat. ^6.28. Luk 22.44.


An. Surely unless his soul had been partaker of punishment he should have
been the redeemer of our bodies only.

Object. We must not attribute corrupt passions to Christ.

An. The spirit reconcileth these two, that Christ was tempted in all things as
we are, and yet without sin.

Object. Though Christ feared death, yet he did not fear the curse and wrath,
from which he knew he was safe.

An. He should have been more faint hearted and fearful, then many thieves
which make have to death. But through vehemency of grief the drops of blood
came trickling down from his face.

Object. He did this to make a show to others.

Mat. 26.39. Christ's descending into hell.
An. Yea he directed his gronings to his father in a secret place, and the
angels did comfort him.*

Quest. Did Christ descend into hell then, when he prayed to his father.

An. This was the beginning: therefore the pains which he suffered for our
sake were horrible: notwithstanding we must know that his temptation was such
as was not contrary to faith: because it was impossible that he should be
holden of the sorrows of death. Act. 2.24.
*

13 Now follows his resurrection from the dead, His rising from the dead.
without which that should be lame, and nothing worth, which has been spoken
touching the cross his death, and burying. For Christ is said to be dead for
sin, but to have been raised again for our righteousness. Romans 4.5.
* And by the same we reap a threefold fruit: first, because as by the death
of Christ Three fruits of Christ's resurrection.
so by rising again he has purchased life for us.* Secondly, like as the
mortificatio^ of our flesh depends upon the partaking of his cross, 2. Cor.
13.4.
Phil. 3.10.
Last of all, having as it were received earnest,, we are assured of our
resurrection

Romans 6.4. Col. 3.1. 2. Cor. 15.20.
14 Furthermore though Christ did more fully declare his glory by rising
again, yet by his ascending into heaven, he did truly begin his kingdom.
Which the Apostle shows when he says, Christ's ascension.
that he ascended that he might fulfill all things.* For he powered out then
greater abundance of his spirit,* he did more gloriously advance his
kingdom, Ephesians. 4.10.
and showed greater power, both in helping those that were his, Ioh. 16.7.
and also in throwing down his enemies.

15 Wherefore it is added immediately, that he sits at the right hand of
the father: which is spoken Sitting at the right hand. A similitude.
which have their sitters by, to whom they commit their office of governing and
commanding. So Christ in who^ the father will be exalted, and by whose hand he
will reign, is said to be received to his right hand, as if he should be said
to have been installed in the kingdom of heaven and earth, Ephesians. 1.20. Phil.
2.9. Ephesians. 4.15. Act. 2.3. and 3.21
to have taken solemn possession of the government committed to him, and to
continue in the same until he come to judgment.*

16 Our faith gathers manifold fruit hence: The fruits of Chrysts sitting
at the right hand of the father.
has opened the entrance of the kingdom of heaven, which was shut by Adam:
because he is entered in thither in our flesh, and as it were in our name*.
Secondly that he sits at the right Ephesians. 2.5.
and advocate*. Last of all faith lays hold upon his Heb. 7.25.
and also our power, riches, and triumphing against hell*. Romans 8.3.4.


17 And he shall descend from heaven in a visible shape, as he was seen ascend
Ephesians. 4 6.
, and he shall appear to all with unspeakable majesty of his kingdom, with
brightness of immortality, with infinite power of the Godhead, having the
Angels to guard him, that he may judge the quick and the dead: that is, those
which are already departed this life; and those which shall be alive then
shall be translated and transformed into a new nature even in a moment. 1. Cor.
15, 5. and 51. 1. These. 4.16. Consolation drawn from the last judgment. A
similitude.


18 Hence arises excellent comfort, in that we hear that he shall judge, who
has already appointed us to be partners with him of honor in judging: so far
off is it that he shall sit upon his judgment seat to condemn us. For how
should a most merciful prince destroy his people? how should an head wast his
members?

A Caveat
19 Therefore seeing we see the whole sum of our salvation to be comprehended
in Christ, we must beware that we do not draw away from him the least jot
thereof. Act. 4.12.
For he is our salvation, our strength, our cleannes, our redemption, our
righteousness 1 Cor. 1.33.
.

CHAP. XVII. That it is rightly and properly said, that Christ has deserved
salvation for us.
Object.

1 IF Christ have deserved salvation for us, the grace of God shall be
darkened: for desert and grace are contrary.

Lib. 1. de pred. San: Cap. 15.
An. I answer with Saint Augustine*: The most clear light of predestination
and grace, is our Savior himself, the man Christ Jesus, who has obtained so
to be with no deserts of works or faith going before in the humane nature
which is in him. For he which made him of the seed of David a just man, Note.
that should never be unjust, without any merit: he makes those that be
members of that head, just of unjust. Desert depends upon mercy.
Therefore desert is not set against the mercy of God, but it depends
thereupon.

2 This distinction is gathered out of that which John says*: So God loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him
may not perish. We see how the love of God Causes of salvation.
as the principal cause: and faith in Christ does follow as the second cause.

Object. Christ is only the formal cause of salvation, he has not the true
effect.

An. If we obtain righteousness by faith which rests upon, Christ is the
matter of salvation.
surely we must seek for matter of salvation in him.

3 And it is soundly gathered that Christ has by his obedience purchased and
deserved favor with his father. For if he have made satisfaction for our
sins, if he have suffered the punishment that was due to us, if by his
obedience he have appeased God, if the just has suffered for the unjust*: what
it is to deserve. Col. 1.10. 1 Cor. 1.19. etc. 1 Ioh. 1.7.
we may conclude that by his righteousness he has purchased salvation for us,
which signifies as much as to deserve.

4 And that is all one as that we were purged by his blood, and that his death
was a satisfaction for our sins*.

5 And the Apostles do plainly pronounce that he has paid the price, that
he might redeem us from the giltinesse of death: Romans 3.24.
that we are justified by his grace through the redemption which is in Christ
whom God has made the propitiatory through faith which is in his blood*,
Christ gives that which is denied in the law.
whence we gather that we must fet that from Christ, which the law should
give, if any man could fulfill it, and that we obtain that through the grace
of Christ, which God promised to our works in the law.

Quest. Did Christ deserve any thing for himself? Curiosity.


An. This is foolish curiosity. For what need had the only son of God to come
down, that he might purchase some new thing for himself; And the Lord
declaring his own counsel, did put the matter out of doubt: for it is not
said that the father provided for the profit of his son in his deserts, but
that he delivered him to death, and that he did not spare him: because he loved
the world*, Romans 8.32. Ioh. 17.19.
whereby it appears that he purchased nothing for himself, who sanctified
himself for our sake.

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE INSTITVTION OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION.
Of the manner how to receive the grace of Christ, and what fruits we have by
the same, and what effects do follow.

CHAP. I. That those things which are spoken of Chirst do profit us by the
secret working of the spirit.
NOW must we se how those good things com to us, which the father has given
to his son, not to his own proper use, but that he might inriche the needy. And
first we must hold this, that whatsoever Christ has done it profits us
nothing so long as we are separate from him. Faith joins us to Christ. Ephesians.
4.15. Romans 1.17. 1. Pet. 2.4.
And we grow to be one with Christ by faith*, which faith is given us
partly by the preaching of the word, partly by the secret working of the
spirit*.

2 But that the matter may be more evident, we must understand that Christ
came furnished with the holy Ghost after a peculiar manner: to wit, Why Christ
came
that he may separate us from the world, and gather us together into the
hope of eternal inheritance. For this cause is he called the spirit of
sanctification: Romans 1.4.
because he does not only foster us with a general power, as other living
creatures: but he is also the root and seed of the heavenly life in us.

3 That such is the effectual working of the spirit in us, The efficacy of
the Spirit
even the very titles which are given him do testify and manifestly prove,
he is called the spirit of adoption*, Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.15.
the earnest and seal of the inheritance*, water*, oil*, the anointing*,
fire Isay. 55.1 and 44.3. Ioh. 7.37.
, the fountain and hand of God. All which do plainly teach that we are made
members of Christ by the grace and power of Christ that he may contain us
under him, and that we again may possess him Luke. 3.16.
. 1. Ioh. 2.20.27
Ioh. 4.14.


4 But because faith is his principal work, Ephesians. 4.15 Romans 8.29 Faith is the
principal work of the Spirit.
those things are referred unto it for the most part, which we find uttered to
express the force and operation of the spirit: because by faith alone he
brings us to the light of the Gospel. As John teaches that there is a
prerogative granted to those which believe in Christ, to be the sons of
God, because they are borne not of flesh, and blood, Ioh. 1.13. Mat. 16.17.
but of God*.

CHAP. II. Of faith where is set down the definition thereof, and the
properties that it has are declared.
1 WHEN in the schools they dispute about faith, The faith of the Schoolmen
so sone as they hear it named they conceive no higher thing, but a certain
common assenting to the history of the Gospel: and in calling God simply the
object thereof, they carry away silly souls rather with a vanishyng
speculation, then direct the^ to the mark. For God dwells in light that no
man can come unto, therefore Christ must needs come between: for which cause he
calls himself both the light of the world, the way, the truth, and the
life*, because no man comes unto the father but by him.

The mediator Ioh. 18.12 and 14 6.
2 Therefore let us thank the schoolmen for this evil, who have covered Christ
as with a veil, drawn before him, whom unless we do directly behold, we
do always wander through many Labyrinths and Mazes. And beside that they do
deface the whole force of faith with their dark and mistie definition, they
have forged a devise of entangled faith, with which name adorning most gross
ignorance, they delude the silly common people, Entangled faith.
to their great destruction.

Ob. It is sufficient to believe that which ye holy church believes, neither
need we to seek any further.

An. Is this to believe, to understand nothing, so that thou do obedientlie
submit thy sense to the church? faith is not placed in ignorance, but in
knowledge: and that not only of god, but also of ye will of god.

3 Ob. Because we be inuironned with ignorance many things are to us dark now,
wherein it is good for us to suspend our judgment, and to settle our selves to
keep the unity of the church.

An. I grant: but yet it is a most absurd thing to give ignorance tempered
with humility, the name of faith. For faith lies in the knowledge of God and
of Christ, and not in the reverence of the church under the title whereof
sometimes most monstrous errors are thrust in. Faith lies in the knowledge of
God.


Ob. We believe nothing absolutely, without adding this condition, If the
church do believe so.

An. By this means truth should be holden in error, light in darkness, true
knowledge in ignorance. Absurdities.


4 Object. So long as we are in our pilgrimage in the world, our faith is
entangled.

An. I grant that we be ignorant of many things, and that we be compassed
about with many clouds. It is the greatest wisdom to go forward.
For the principal wisdom of every most perfect man, is, to go forward.
Which we may note in the Disciples of Christ, before they were fully
illuminate. Because they did stagger even in very small things.

5 But yet for all this the desire which the faithful have to learn and
profit, Voluntary ignorance.
does much differ from gross ignorance, wherein they droupe, which are content
with an entangled faith, such as the Papists imagine. For if Paul do sharply
condemn those, who are always learning, and can never come to the knowledge
of the truth, how much greater reproach do they deserve, who of set purpose are
desirous to know nothing?

6 Therefore this is the true knowledge of Christ, The true knowledge of Christ.
if we receive him such as he is offered of his father, to wit clothed with his
Gospel: because as he is appointed to be the mark whereat our faith must aim,
so we can not come directly to him unless the Gospel go before us.

Quest. If faith be restrained to the Gospel, what shall the doctrine of Moses
and the Prophets profit us?

An. It was sufficient at that time to edify faith: Why the Gospel is called
the doctrine of faith Romans 10.4.
but because we have a more perfect manifestatio^ of Christ in the Gospel,
Paul does for good causes call it the doctrine of faith*.

7 And although it be the office of faith to subscribe to the truth of God, as
often, and whatsoever, and howsoever he does speak: yet it does properly
respect his good will, mercy and promises of grace in Christ; into the
certainty whereof the holy Ghost does illuminate our minds and confirm our
hearts. The definition of faith.
Whence we shall have a perfect definition of faith, if we say that it is a
firm and certain knowledge of Gods good will toward us, which being grounded
in the truth of the free promise made in Christ, is both revealed to our
minds and sealed up in our hearts by the holy Ghost.

unformed faith
8 Therefore that distinction of faith formed and unformed, which flies about
in the schools, is vain.

Object. They which believe whatsoever is necessary to salvation, have faith,
although they be touched with no fear of God.

An. Paul says otherwise, with the heart man believes unto righteousenesse*:
Romans 10.10
therefore faith may in no case be severed from a godly affection of
righteousness.

9 Object. Paul teaches an unformed faith, saying: if any man have all
faith, so that he can move mountains, and yet have no love, he is nothing*.

1 Cor. 13.2
An. Faith is put in that place for power to work miracles, Cor. 12.10.
which the reprobates also had*. Therefore it is no marvel if it be separate
from love.

Object. There be many forms of faith.

An. There is one only true faith of the godly.

Object. Many believe that there is a God, that the history of the Gospel is
true, and every part thereof: Historical faith.
also they are moved with threatenings and promises.

An. The name of faith is given to such, but improperly, because they do not
resist the word of God with manifest ungodliness.

10 But this whether shadow or image of faith, A shadow of faith.
as it is of no importance, so it is unworthy to have the name of faith.

Object. Simon Magus is said to have believed*.

An. He does shortly after bewray his want of faith. Such are they in whom the
seed of the word is choked before it can bring forth fruit*. Let those which
bost of such images of faith, know, that they are no better then the devils*.
Act. 8.13.


11 Object. Paul affirms that faith is a fruit of election*: Luke 8.13.
Faith of the Devils and of the reprobate. Ia. 2.19. 1. Th. 15. Faith is the
fruit of election. Heb. 6.4. Luke 8.7.13. Temporal faith.
why then is it attributed to the reprobate?

An. The reprobate are sometimes moved with the same feeling that the elect
are*, although none be illuminate into faith, neither do in deed feel the
efficacy of the Gospel, but those which are predestinate unto salvation. By
such temporal faith or which endures only for a short season, they are made
without excuse.

Object. Therefore there remains no more for the faithful, whereby they may
esteem their adoption.

An. Although there be great likelihood between the elect of God, and those
which have a frail faith enduring only for a time, yet the sure confidence is
only in the elect, that they cry, Abba father*: Gal. 4.6.
which alone continues stable and firm.

12 Object. The will of God is unchangeable, and his truth does never waver:
therefore the feeling of Gods love wherewith men are endued shall never decay.

An. The reprobate can never go so far as to pearce into that hidden
revelation, which the Scrip- does attribute to the elect alone. As a tree which
is not planted deep enough, that it may take root, does wither in success of
time: though for some years it send forth both leaves, A similitude.
and blossoms, and fruits.

Object. We might call the Spirit deceitful, which does besprinkle the reprobat
with such light, which afterward perish.

An. He does not quicken the seed which lies in their hearts, that it may
always remain incorruptible, as in the elect*.

Romans 5.5. The signification of faith. 1 Timothy 3.9. 1 Timothy 4.1.
13 Also we must mark the doubtful signification of the word. For faith does
oftentimes signify as much as the sound doctrine of godliness*. Contrariwise
it is sometimes restrained unto some particular object Mat. 8.10.
. Sometimes it is put for the gift of miracles Coll. 13.10
: sometimes for the doctrine whereby we are taught in the faith. But we speak
of the true faith whereby the children of God are justified.

The exposition of the definition, Knowledge
14 Now let us prosecute every particular point of the definition. By
knowledge we mean, not every comprehending, such as men use to have in their
matters, but altogether infinite, and far surpassing all other knowledge; and
that rather by persuasion of the truth of God, then by reasonable demonstration.

Object. There is no knowledge of that which is infinite.

An. Because the Lord has revealed to his Saints the secret of his will, How
faith is a knowledge. 1 Ioh. 31. Certain and firm.
which was kept secret from ages and generations, faith is for good causes
called in the Scriptures a knowledge*.

15 We add that it is certain and firm, that the more sound constancy of
persuasion may be expressed. For as faith is not content with a doubtful and
rouling opinion, so neither with a dark conceit: but it requires a full and
certain certainty such as that uses to be which we have of known and tried
things.

16 This is the chief point of our faith, Toward us.
that we do not think that those promises of mercy which the Lord does
offer are true only without us, and not in us: but rather by comprehendinge
them within us, we make them our own. Hence springs that confidence which
Paul calls peace*. Romans 5.1.


17 Object. But the faithful find it far otherwise, Faith is peace
who are not only tempted with unquietness, but also sometimes shaken with
most grievous terrors, which do not agree with that certainty of faith.

An. When we say that faith is certain, we do not imagine any such
certainty as is not touched with any doubting, (because the faithful have a
continual combat with their own distrustfulnesse) but they never fall from
that certain confidence which they have conceived of the mercy of God. We
have an example in David*. Psalm. 42.6. and 43.5. The unquietness of the
faithful. The first kind of fear.


18 Therefore a godly heart does feel in it self a division, which is partly
delighted with sweetness, by reason of the knowledge of Gods goodness:
partly it is vexed with bitterness, die reason of the feeling of calamity:
partly it leans to the promise of the Gospel: partly it trembles by reason
of the testimony of the own iniquity. Imperfection of faith is the cause of
unquietness.
Which variation comes by reason of the imperfection of faith: forasmuch as
we be never in so good case in this course of life, that being cured thoroughly
of all misbeliefe, we are wholly replenished and possessed by faith.

Effects of faith
19 Let this be the sum. So soon as any small drop of faith, is dripped into
our minds, we do forthwith behold the face of God to be pleasant, and fair,
and favorable to us, a far of I grant, but with so certain a sight, that
we know that we are not deceived. And the more we go forward, the nigher do
we come to behold him.

20 Paul teaches both things finely: For when he says that we know in part,
and that we prophecy in part*, 1 Cor. 13.9.
he shows what a small portion of that divine wisdom is given us in this
life. But the same does teach elsewhere how sure and not deceaueable a taste even
a small drop of faith does make us feel, when he affirms that we behold the
glory of God with so great efficacy, with open face, without having any veil
put between, that we are transformed into the same image*. 2 Cor. 3.18.


21 Furthermore faith does arm and fortify her self with the word, Faith
leneth upon the word. Temptation.
to bear of all brunts. If therefore any such temptation do assault her, that
God is our enemy, because he is angry: she answers that he is merciful
even then when he punishes. Because chastisement comes rather from love then
from anger. Faith is shaken, yet at length it has the victory: so does John
conclude*, This is the victory which overcomes the world, your faith.

Chastisment comes rather from love then from anger
22 There is another kind of fear and trembling, whereby notwithstanding the
security of faith is so little diminished, that it is thereby more surely
established. To wit when the faithful thinking with them selves that the
examples of Gods vengeance showed upon the wicked, are unto them in steed of
instructions, they take heed that they provoke not the wrath of God against
themselves with like wickedness.

23 Therefore we are taught with fear and trembling to work our own
salvation, 1 Ioh. 5.4.
which is that we accustom our selves to behold the power of God with great
casting down of our selves.

24 Object. So often as we look upon Christ, we grant that we find full
matter of good hope, but because we be unworthy of all those good things
which are offered us in Christ, The second kind of fear The feelinge of our
own unworthiness is the cause of doubting The hope of the faithful
by beholding our own unworthiness we stagger and doubt.

An. We think upon Christ not standing a far of, but rather dwelling in us.
Therefore we look for salvation at his hands, because he does make us (after
we be ingrafted into his body) partakers, not only of all his good things,
but even of him self also.

25 Bernard disputes in like sort, Hom. 5. dedica templi.
by the benefit of God, says he, sometimes thinking upon the soul, me thinks
I see in it as it were two contraries: if I behold it as it is in it self, and
of it self, I ca^ say nothing more truly of it, then that it is brought to
nothing, but of the mercy of God, we have cause to rejoice, not in our selves
but in the Lord.

26 Furthermore the fear of the Lord which is called elsewhere the beginning
of wisdom*, The soonnelie fear and the servile. Pro. 1.7.
and in some place wisdom it self Pro. 15.23.
, although it be but one, yet it flows from a double understanding. For God
has in him self the reverence of a father, and of a master. Therefore he that
will worship him aright, must show him self both an obedient child toward
him, and also study to do the duty of an obedient servant. Mal. 1.7.


27 Object. John says, that there is no fear in love, but that perfect love
casts out fear*. 1. Ioh. 4.18


An. He speaks of the fear and terror of incredulity, The difference
between terror and fear
from which that fear of the faithful differs much. For the wicked do not
fear God, but so soon as they hear of his anger, armed with power of
revenge, they quake and are taken with horror forthwith. But the faithful do
more fear the offense then the punishment. Whereby it comes to pass that we
say there is a double fear, servile and sonnely.

The goodwill of God is the cause of salvation.
28 Now we understand and know that the possession of salvation and eternal
life is obtained in Gods good will, which our faith does respect. For if we can
lack no good thing so long as we have God to be favorable to us: it does
abundantly suffice us unto the certainty of salvation, when he him self does
certify us of his love. Let him show his face says the Prophet, Psalm. 80.4.
and we shall be safe*. Wherefore faith being laid hold on by the love of God,
has the promises of this life and of the life to come, The promyses make faith
careless.
and perfect security of all good things: but yet such as may be gathered and
had out of the word.

29 Therefore we make the free promise the ground of faith, The free promise
is the foundation of faith
because faith consists properly in it. For though it be persuaded that God
speaks the truth, whether he command, or forbid: or whether he promise or he
threaten: and does also obediently receive his commandments, observe his
inhibitions, take heed of his threatenings: yet it begins properly with the
promise, in it it consists and continues, and in it it ends: for it
seeks life in the free promise of mercy: in which sense not the Law, but
the Gospel is called the word of faith*. Romans 1 5. and. 16 17. Pighlus.


30 Object. Such a restraint in pulling faith in pieces, does lay hold but upon
one piece.

An. Faith has respect unto all parts of the word of God: but it never stays
until it come unto the free promise of grace in Christ.

31 And hereby we gather that faith has no less need of the word, A
similitude.
then fruit has of the lively root of the tree: because as David does
witness, Psalm 9.11.
none trust in God, but such as know his name*: and in another place, I have
hoped in thy word, Psalm. 119.45. Faith lays hold upon the power of God by
the word.
save me*. Therefore we must not turn aside from the word no not one jot,
whereby we do also lay hold upon the power of God, which we do not conceive to
be idle but effectual, whereby the Israelits also might learn, that God who
was the author of salvation once, would be the everlasting keeper thereof.

Object. Sara and Rebecca, The error of Sara and Rebecca.
through zeal of faith offended.

An. Both of them erred because they passed the bounds of the word.

32 Again we do not without cause include all promises in Christ: Promyses in
Christ. Romans 1.17.
when as the Apostle includes all the whole Gospel in the knowledge of him*,
and in another place he teaches that all the promises of God are in him yea
and amen. For whatsoever God does promise, he does thereby testify his good
will, The promyses a testimonye of love.
so that there is no promise of his which is not a testimony of love. But no
man is beloved of God, which is without Christ. For he is the beloved Son*,
Mat. 3.17 and 17.5. Ephesians. 1.6. Note. 2. Kin. 5.19.
in whom the love of the Father abides, and does afterward descend from him
unto us. It follows that we must cast our eyes upon Christ, so often as any
promise is offered us.

Object. Naaman the Syrian Act. 10.31.
, Cornelius the Gentile and Roman*, the Eunuch Act. 8.7.
, were acceptable to God, and yet they knew not Christ the Mediator.

An. I grant that in some point their faith was enta^gled, not only as
touching the person of Christ: but also as concerning his power, Naamans faith
entangled.
and the office which was enjoined him by his Father. Yet nevertheless it is
certain that they were instructed in the principles which gave them some taste
of Christ, though it were very slender.

Preachinge of the word.
33 And this bare and external preaching of the word, ought to suffice
abundantly, to make it to be believed, unless blindness and stubburnnesse did
let it. Furthermore without the illumination of the Spirit nothing is done by
the word. Note. The holy ghost is the author of faith.
Moreover the Spirit is not only the beginner of faith, but he does also
increase it by degrees, until it bring us unto the kingdom of heaven.

The incresings of faith.
Object. On the other side Paul teaches that the Spirit is given by the
hearing of faith*.

Gal. 5.5
An. If there were one only gift of the Spirit, he should have spoken
absurdly in calling the Spirit an effect of faith, who is the author and
cause thereof: but forasmuch as he sets forth those gifts wherewith God
does adorn his Church, The Spirit put for the gifts of God.
and by the increasinges of faith does bring it unto perfection, no marvel,
if he ascribe those things to faith, which does prepare us to receive the
same.

34 These are the mysteries of God, which are revealed only to little ones Mat.
16.17.
. Mat. 11.25.
For flesh and blood does not reveal them, neither does the natural man
understand those things which are of the Spirit 1 Cor. 2.14.
: but the doctrine of God is rather to him foolishness. Therefore the aid of
the holy Ghost is necessary, or rather he is his only power. The word of God
is indeed like to the Sun which shines to all those to whom it is preached,
A similitude.
but with no fruit among the blind. Note.
But we which are by nature blind are enlightened by the Spirit.

35 Thereupon Paul calls the Spirit of faith faith, not that which we have
naturally, 1 Cor. 4.13.
but that which we have of the Spirit*. Therefore he prays that God would
fulfill in the Thessalonia^s all his good pleasure, and the work of faith in
power*. 2 Thessalonians. 1.11.
For faith is a singular gift, Faith is the gift of God.
which God gives to whom he will.

36 But it is certain that the mind is not sufficiently illuminate, by the
understanding and knowledge of the word, unless the certainty thereof do
likewise pearce into the heart, both which the Spirit works. A similitude.
Ephesians. 1.13.
Therefore he serves in steed of a seal to seal those promises in our
hearts*, the certainty whereof he had before imprinted in our minds.

37 Object. That confirmation is in vain, Faith is shaken but not overcome
when as faith is tossed and shaken with continual storms of temptations.

An. But it is not overcome, because God is the protection, aid, tower, and
buckler of the faithful*. Psalm. 13.6. and 47 3. and 27.1.
Only we have need of patience*.

38 Object. We can not otherwise be persuaded of the grace and favor of God
toward us, Patience is necessary. Heb. 10.36 Sorbonists. Conjectures are
contrary to faith.
but only by a moral conjecture, as every one does think him self not to be
unworthy thereof.

An. Nothing is more contrary to faith then co^iectures.

Object. No man knows whether he be worthy of hatred or of love*. Eccle. 9.1.


An. This place is corruptly translated: Solomon his meaning is: The sense.
If any man will esteem and judge by the present state of things, whom God
loves, and whom he hates, he shall take pains in vain, seeing all things
fall out a like to the just and the unjust, to him that offers sacrifice and
to him that offers none.

To know certainly is not to presume.
39 Object. It is a point of rash presumption, for a man to challenge and
attribute to him self the certain knowledge of the good will of God.

An. I grant, if we took so much upon us as to make the incomprehensible
counsel of God subject to the slenderness of our wit. But we say simply with
Paul*, 1 Cor. 2.12.
That we have not received the spirit of this world, but the Spirit which is
of God, who being our teacher, we know those things which are given us of God.

Object. It is rashness to boast of the Spirit of God.

Romans 8, 14. Ioh. 11.
An. But Paul pronounces that they only are the children of God, which are
led by his Spirit. He being our guide we call God father*, and we know
assuredly that we be the children of God.

40 Object. Although we may judge of the grace of God according to the present
state of righteousness, yet the knowledge of perseuering unto the end,
hangs in doubt.

Perseverance. Romans 8.38.
An. I am fully persuaded, says Paul*, that neither Angels, nor powers, nor
principalities etc. shall separate us from the love wherewith the Lord loves
us in Christ.

Ob. The Apostle had that by an especial revelation.

An. But he handles in that place those good things which all the faithful in
general have by faith and not those which he him self alone does seal.

Object. But the same Paul in another place does terrify us by making mention
of our weakness and inconstancy. Let him that stands, take heed lest he
fall*. 1 Cor. 10.12.


An. But not with fear and terror, whereby we may be thrown down, but
whereby we may learn to humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, as
Peter declares*. 1 Pet. 3.6


41 By these things which we have already said, we see that the definition of
faith which we set down varieth not from the Apostles description. Where he
teaches, that faith is the substance of things to be hoped for, What faith is.
Heb. 11.1.
and a certainty of things that are not seen*.

Object. Love is before faith and hope also.

An. Yea faith alone brings forth love, Faith is the mother of love.
and every good work besides.

42 Now whersoeuer this faith shall be, it can not be but that it has hope of
eternal salvation joined with it, as an inseperable companion, Faith has hope
for her companyon.
or rather that it begets and brings it forth of it self. Faith believes
that God is true, hope waits and looks that in convenient time he show his
truth: Note.
faith believes that he is our father, hope waits and looks that he do
always so show him self toward us: faith is the foundation whereupon hope
rests.

43 By reason of this affinity the Scripture does sometimes confound the
word of faith and of hope*. Faith and hope are sometimes confounded. 1 Pet.
3.4.


Object. Hope has a double foundation, the grace of God, and merit of works.

An. The whole Scripture does teach that hope must look unto the mercy of
God alone, Lombardus his error.
as it were with both eyes, as unto the mark which is common to her as well as
to faith.

CHAP. III. That we are regenerate by faith, where repentance is handled.
The parts of the Gospel.
1 THerefore faith does possess Christ, and does rest upon the Gospel, which
has two parts, repentance and remission of sins. Christ gives

Repentance proceeds from faith
2 Object. Christ and John in their sermons do first exhort the people unto
repentance, and then afterward they add that the kingdom of heaven was at
hand*. Therefore repentance goes before faith, Mat. 3.2
which we have by the Gospel.

An. We must not superstitiously stick to the placing of syllables. For it is
all one as if they should say, because the kingdom of heaven is at hand,
therefore repent. For in the Prophet that voice is commanded to begin with
consolation and glad tidings*. Isay. 40 3.


The parts of repentance.
3 Certain learned men have said that repentance consists in two parts, in
mortification and vivification. They interpret mortification to be
Mortification.
and the feeling of the judgment of God: Vivification.
and vivification to be the consolation which arises of faith: to wit, when a
man being thrown down with the conscience and feeling of his sin, and
stricken with the fear of God, looking afterward unto the grace of God through
Christ, does take a good heart, and does return as it were from death to life.
This is well. But yet vivification does signify rather a desire to live
godlilie, which arises of regeneration, then the joy which the mind
receaueth, being at quiet from trouble and fear.

4 Other some put two forms of repentance, the one legal or of the Law,
whereby a sinner being wounded with the searing iron of sin, Legal.
and Genesis 4.13.
, Saul 1 Samuel 28.30.
, Judas Mat. 27.4. Evangelical.
. The other Evangelical or of the Gospel, whereby a sinner being sore
afflicted in him self, does notwithstanding rise up higher and lay hold upon
Christ the salve for his sore, and consolation for his terror: such were
Ezechias 2. King. 20.2.
, the Ninevites Iona 3.5.
, David 2. Sam. 12 13.
, Peter Mat. 26.35.
.

5 Though all these be true, yet we must take the very name of repentance
otherwise, so that repentance may be a true turninge of our life unto God,
coming from the sincere and earnest love of God, which consists in
mortifying our flesh and the old man, and in quickening of the Spirit. In this
sense are all those sermons to be taken, wherewith either the Prophets in times
past, or the Apostles afterward, did exhort the men of their time unto
repentance.

6 Furthermore this definition contains three points. Three parts of the
definition
First when we name the turning of the life unto God, we require a transforming
or change, Conversion.
but even in the soul it self: which when she has put of her oldenesse, does
at length bring forth of her self fruits answerable to her renewing. Whereupon
the Prophet commands, that they make them selves a new heart*, Ezech. 18.31.
whom he calls to repentance.

From the true fear of Gods judgment.
For before the mind of the sinner can be inclined to repentance, he must be
awaked with thinking upon Gods judgment: and when this cogitation shall be
thoroughly infixed, that God shall be judge both of our words and works, it
does not suffer the silly man to be in rest, but does prick him forward to
think upon another trade of life, whereby he may safely appear before that
judgment seat. Therefore oftentimes when the Scripture exhorts unto
repentance, Ier. 44. Act. 17.30.
it makes mention of the judgment of God*.

8 In the third place we said, that repentance The third part of the
definition. Psalm. 14 15. Isa. 1.6.
This does the Prophet declare*, Cease of from evil, and do good, rest from
dealinge peruerslie and learn to do good.

Mortification.
by the power thereof our old man is crucified, and he dies to sin, that
the corruption of our former nature may live no longer. If we be made partakers
of his resurrection, we are thereby raised up to newness Vivification


Christian liberty.
10 Therefore the children of God are so set free by regeneration from the
slavery of sin, not as if having gotten full possession of liberty, they
did no longer suffer any trouble of their flesh, but that they may have
perpetual matter of strife, whereby they may both be exercised and also better
learn their infirmity: Feeding of sin in the regenerate.
because there remains as yet in the regenerate a feeding of sin, from
whence flow lusts which prick men forward to sin.

11 Object. God purges his church from all sin*: Ephesians. 5.26.27.
Also promises this grace of deliverance in baptism, and does fulfill it in
the elect.

An We refer that rather unto guiltiness, Sin does dwell but not reign in
the faithful.
then unto the matter of sin, because sin is not imputed: it inhabiteth,
but it reigns not.

12 Object. It seems an inconvenient thing that all lusts should be so
generally condemned, wherewith man is naturally moved, seeing they are put
into man by God, who is the author of nature.

An. We do not condemn those desires which God has so engraven in man's
nature from the first creation, What lusts are to be condemned.
that they cannot be rooted out thence unless humanity it self be destroyed,
but only wanton and unbridled motions which are contrary to Gods ordinance.

13 Thereto agrees Augustine, saying*: Lib. 2. contra Iulianum.
That law of sin is both remitted in the spiritual regeneration, and does also
remain in the mortal flesh: it is remitted because the giltinesse is taken
away in the sacrament, whereby the faithful are regenerate: Note.
and it abides because it works those desires against which the faithful
do fight.

Ob. After that concupiscence has conceived it brings forth sin*: therefore
concupiscence is not sin. Iam. 1.15.


An. In that he calls mischeuous deeds and wicked offenses, the children of
sin, and does give them the name of sin, it does forthwith follow, The
issue of concupiscence
but that even to lust is an evil thing, and damnable before God.

14 Object. The children of God being restored unto the state of innocence
ought not to take thought for the brideling the lust of the flesh, but they
must follow the spirit, who being their guide, they shall never err.

An. A monstrous forgerie. If it were so, then should all choice of dishonestie
and honesty, of just and unjust, of good and evil be taken away.

Object. This difference comes from the curse of the old Adam, from which
we are exempt by Christ.

An. Then there shall be no difference between whoredom and chastity, truth
and falsehood.

Object. Take away wicked fear, and the spirit will command thee no wicked
thing, so that thou carelessly and without fear do suffer thy self to be led
by him. An absurd maxim of the Anabaptists,


An That is to deny Christ and the holy Ghost, not to follow them. The
spirit is not the author of manslaughter or whoredom, but of love and
chastity.

Seven effects of repentance.
15 And whereas the Apostle in the description of repentance does reckon up
seven either causes, or effects, or parts, as, study, excuse, indignation,
fear, desire, zeal, revenge, he does that for good cause. For thing Bernard
his admonition is profitable. Ser. 11. in Cantic.
Sorrow says he for sin, is necessary, if it be not continual*.

16 Now it may also be gathered what manner fruits the fruits of repentance
be: to wit, three: Fruits of repentance.
godliness toward God, love toward men, and in our whole life holiness and
pureness, and the more Joel. 2.13. Iam 4 8.
that they take their beginning from the pure fountain of the heart*. And that
done, that external testimonies do follow 2 Cor. 7.11.
, which commend sincere repentance.

17 Object. A principal part of repentance as Joel does witness, consisting
in fasting, weeping, Joel. 2.12.
and in ashes*.

An. Yea that which is there spoken of the conversion of the whole heart unto
the Lord, of the renting of the garments, Weepinge and fasting are not
necessary in repentance.
but of the heart is proper to repentance: but as for weeping and fasting they
are adjoined not as perpetual or necessary effects.

18 Let us also add that, that the name of repentance is improperly applied
unto this external profession, What it is to repent in ashes and sackcloth.
which is rather a confession of the fault with a beseeching to have the
punishment and guiltiness forgiven. So to repent in sackcloath and ashes is
nothing else but to testify our displeasure, when God is angry with us for
grievous offenses. Mat. 11.21. Luke 10 12.
But we must note that there is a double confession, public, Public
confession.
we prevent the judgment of God. For says Paul, if we should judge our
selves we should not be judged of God*. But it is not always necessary to
make men witnesses of our repentance Private
but our grievous falls also*, Psalm. 51.7.
and those which seem to be buried long ago. Furthermore, we must note that
repentance is double, ordinary wherein we must apply our selves
continually, special and extraordinary, which does as it were raise up
from death, those, Repentance. Ordinary. Extraordinary.
which had either filthilie fallen, or given over themselves to sin through
unbridled licentiousnes

The parts of the Gospel.
19 Furthermore if the whole sum of the Gospel be contained in these two
points in repentance and remission of sins, do we not see that the Lord does
therefore justify his freely, that he may also restore them to true
righteousness by the satisfaction of the spirit? For Christ began his sermons
thus, * The kingdom of God is at hand: Mat. 1.15.
repent and believe

Hatred of sin is the beginning of repentance. Isay. 16.1. Mat. 11.5:
20 But as the hatred of sin, which is the beginning of repentance, sets
open to us the first entrance to the knowledge of Christ, who offreth himself
to none but to poor afflicted sinners*: so must we endeavor toward repentance,
and apply our selves in it during our whole life, if we will abide in Christ.
Therefore so long as we shall dwell in the prison of our body, we must
continually wrestle with the vices of our nature, and so consequently with our
natural soul. Wherefore I suppose that he has profited much, who has learned
to displease himself much: not that he may stick fast in this mire, He has
profited much which does much displease himself.
but rather that he may make have to God, that being graffed into the death and
life of Christ, he may continually meditate upon repentance.

21 Furthermore it is well known that repentance is the gift of God.
Repentance is the gift of God
Therefore the church commends the benefit of God in that he given to the
Gentiles repentance unto salvation*. Act. 11.28.
Also when the Apostle goes about to exclude reuoltes from hope of salvation,
he alleges this reason*, Sin against the holy ghost Heb. 6.6.
that it is impossible that they should be renewed unto repentance: to wit,
because when GOD renueth those whom he will not have to perish, he shows a
sign of his fatherly favor: again, he thundreth against the reprobate, with
hardening the^, whose wickedness is unpardonable. Which kind of punishment the
Apostle denounces to voluntary Reuoltes or Apostataes, who when they fall
from the faith of the Gospel, do mock God, do opprobriouslie refuse his
grace, do tread under foot the blood of Christ, yea and crucify him a fresh
so much as in them lies.

22 But to discuss this more plainly, it is meet that we search out what
that so horrible offense is, which shall not be forgiven: What it is to sin
against the holy ghost.
I say that those sin against the holy ghost, which resist the truth of God
of set purpose, with whose brightness they are daseled, that they cannot
pretend ignorance, and to no other end, but that they resist. For Christ going
about to expound that which he had said, adds, he which shall speak a word
against the son of man, it shall be forgiven him, but he which blasphemeth
against the spirit, it shall not be forgiven him

Quest. How can one blaspheme the son, but it shall also be against the
spirit?

What it is to sin against Christ.
An. Those which stumble at the truth of God, which they know not, those which
blaspheme Christ ignora^tlie, being endued with this * mind, that they will not
quench the truth of God, being revealed unto them, and that they would not
with one word hurt him whom they shall know to be Christ the Lord, they
sin against the father and the son. But as for those whose conscience is
convict, that that is the word of God which they impugn, they are said, to
blaspheme the holy Ghost: forasmuch as they wrestle against the inlightening
which is a work of the holy ghost*. Heb. 6.10.


1 Ioh. 2.19.
23 Quest. Why do such feel God unappeasable?

An. Because as John avouches they were not of the elect, out of whom they
went.

24 This seems to be too hard, and contrary to the clemency of God, that
those should not obtain remission of their sins, which fly to crave the
mercy of God.

An. The Apostle says not that pardon shall be denied if they turn unto the
Lord: bu the does flatly deny that they can rise to repentance*, Heb. 9.4.
namely, because they are smitte^ by the just judgment of God with eternal
blindness*, Zach. 7.13
for their unthankfulness.

Object. God should be contrary to himself, who cries by his prophet, that he
will be merciful so soon as a sinner shall convert*. Ezec. 18.20.21.


An. But man's mind is not changed to good, unless it be prevented by his
grace.

25 Quest. If God be not pacified with feigned repentance, how did Achab
obtain pardon, and turn away the punishment which was denounced against him.
Feigned repentance


An. God does sometimes so spare hypocrites, that notwithstanding his anger
does always lie upon them. Note. Why God spares hypocrites.
And that is done not so much for their sake as for a common example. For in
that Achab had his punishment mittigated, what profit gate he thereby, save
only that he should not feel it so long as he lived upon the earth? Genesis
27.28.29. Psalm. 78.36.
The same may be said of Esau* and the Israelites.* Therefore God does show
such examples of his inclination to pardon that thereby the godly may be
encouraged to amend there lives, Gods ready inclination to pardon.
and that their pride may be the more grievously condemned, which stubbornly
kick against the prick.

CHAP. IIII. How far that is from the pureness of the Gospel, whatsoever
the Sophisters babble in their schools, touching repentance, where confession
and satisfaction are handeled.
1 THE school Sophisters err greatly in the definition of repentance,
saying, The definition of popish repentance.
that to repent is to lament the sins which are past, and not to commit such
things as they may lament. The popish division of repentance
They err also when they divide it into the contrition of the heart, the
confession of the mouth, and satisfaction of the work: for a man may be truly
penitent without the confession of the mouth.

2 Again if those three be necessary to obtain remission of sins, nothing
is more miserable or in worse case then we, who can never be fully persuaded
of remission of sins. They make contrition the first point to obtain pardon,
and that they will have to be perfect, Popish contrition.
but a man can never know certainly when he has fully fulfilled this
contrition in just measure.

3 Furthermore, it should be the cause of remission of sins, which is
manifestly false as we have taught.

Popish confession.
4 Moreover they will have sinners to reckon up all their sins before the
Priest, which can never be, and it is contrary to the scripture.

Mat. 8.4. Luke 5.14.
Object. The Lord sent the Lepers unto the Priest*.

An. He sent them not to make confession. Who ever heard it spoken that the
Leuiticall Priests were appointed to hear confessions?

Object. It was appointed in the law of Moses, that the Priests should
discern between leprosy and leprosy*. Deuteronomy. 17.8.9, Sin is spiritual
leprosy.
But sin is spiritual leprosy.

An. All the Priesthoods are translated unto Christ, in him they are both
fulfilled and ended: therefore all the right of the Priesthood was translated
unto him*.

Quest. Why then does Christ send the lepers unto the Priests?

An. Least they should cavil that he brake the law, which did command that
he which was cured of his leprosy should be brought before the Priest, and
should be purged by offering of sacrifice.

5 Object. The Lord commands his Disciples that they should loose Lazarus
whom he had raised from the dead*. Ioh. 21.44. How Lazarus was loosed.


An. It was no more spoken to the disciples the^ to the Jews that stood by:
but what is this to confession?

6 Object. Those which came to John's baptism confessed their sins.

An. John preached the baptism of repentance*. Mat. 3.6.
Who then should he have baptized, but those which confessed that they were
sinners*?

Object. James will that one confess his sins to another. Iam. 5.16.


An. He will have one of us to lay his own weakness in an others bosom, that
we may one give counsel to another, one take pity upon another, and one
comfort another.

7 Ob. The use of confession was most ancient.

An. There was no law made concerning it before Innocentius the thirdes time:
The law of Innocentius the Pope abrogated.
which when it was made, Nectarius bishop of Constantinoble did reuerse.

8. Also this kind of Confession did greatly mislike even Chrysostom,
therefore let us conclude that auricular confession is absurd and contrary to
the word of God.

9 But the true confession which is commanded us respects both God and man.
The first is, True confession before God.
that we confess our sins to God, that we may obtain pardon, forasmuch as
it is the Lord who alone forgiueth, Psalm. 32.5. and. 51 1.
and he alone is privy to their thoughts*.

10 After the secret confession which is made to God, follows the voluntary
confession which is made before men, To confess before men.
so often as that is expedient either for Gods glory, or for our own
humbling. After this manner David reproved of Nathan, and pricked 2 Sim. 12.
Leuitic. 12.
having the Priest to say before them, did openly confess their inquiries in
the temple*.

Extraordinary confession.
11 This kind of confession ought to be ordinary in the church, and then to be
used extraordinarily, if the people have offended with any general offense.
Such was the confession which the whole people made, Neh. 17. Ordinary
confession.
being guided by Esdras and Nehemias*. We use that extraordinary confession
commended of God, and most profitable for us fi^^tly when we present our
selves in the sight of God and of the angels in every holy assembly.

Object. That is done in every prayer.

An. I grant, but if you consider how great our sluggishnes is, you will
grant that it is a wholesome kind of ordinance, if the christian common
people be exercised by some solemn rite of confession unto humility.

12 Furthermore, the scripture allows two forms of private confession. One,
which is made for Two kinds of private confession. Iam. 5.16.
Another which must be made for our neighbors sake, to pacify him, and to
reconcile him to us, if we have offended For our sake.
and

13 Christ speaks of the other in Matthew*. If Mat. 5.23 For our neighbors
sake.
So was the man of Corinthus received again to the communion, when he had
showed himself obedient to correction*. Corinthians. 2. Cor. 2.6.


14 In these three kinds of confession, the power of the keys takes place*:
Mat. 18.19. Ioh. 20.23
either when the whole Church craves forgiveness with a solemn
acknowledging of their offenses: or when any private person, who has by
committing some notorious A caution.


15 That which the Romish divines have dreamed of the use and number of the
keys, There is no authority of the keys without the word.
and of the power of binding and loosing, is so absurd, that it needs no
refutation.

16 For who is able, as they will have it to reckon up all his sins?
Necessity to reckon up all faults. Psalm. 19.13. and 58.5.
David cries out, who shall understand all his errors?

17 Therefore it is a butcherie cruelly to vex men's consciences with that
which is impossible.

18 Moreover that law, that a man must of necessity reckon up all his sins,
shall either throw men into despair, or else it will make them hypocrites, having
brought them from the true feeling of their sins, and so it shall make them
ignorant of God and of themselves.

Quest. Must I then confess all my sins? Is there no confession acceptable to
God, unless it be concluded in these few words, I am a sinner.

An. We must not only endeavor in one word, to confess our selves to be
sinners, but also what manner uncleanness ours is, how great it is, and in how
many points, that ye deapth of mercy may swallow up the depth of sin. Psalm.
19.13
David said for good cause* Lord cleanse me from my secret faults.

Object. The gate of Paradise is shut against him, which shall neglect the
power to confess which is offered him.

An. Yea at what time soever a sinner shall repent him of his sins from the
bottom of his heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance,
says the Lord*. Ezech. 18.21


Object. There can no judgment be given before the cause be heard.

An. These confessors do rashly and boldly chalendge to themselves that
power, who are made judges of themselves.

To bind and loose
Object. We have the office of binding and loosing committed to us.

An The Apostles knew not this power.

Auricular confession is hurtful.
19 Therefore let us reject auricular confession as pestilent and hurtful to
the whole church.

Object. It causes him which confesses to be ashamed, that he may hereafter
be more wary, and prevent the judgment of God. Liberty to sin comes from
auricular confession.


An. Yea we may every where see, that by nothing men have more liberty
granted to sin, then when having confessed them selves to the Priest, being
careless for making confession all the rest of the year, they never once sigh
before God.

Mat. 18.18.
20 Quest. Therefore the keys were given without cause*. Shall we make the word
of Christ to be of none effect?

To whom the keys were ge-
An. Christ gave this power to his apostles whose neither vicars not
successors the shauelings are. Again that was not done before they received
the holy Ghost.

Object. They have the holy Ghost.

An. Why do they then loose those things which the Lord would have bound, why
do they bind those which he commanded to be loosed?

21 Ob. They have power without knowledge.

An. Knowledge is required to good use. Power without knowledge.


Object. The saying of Christ is limited according to his deserts who is bound
or loosed.

An. The church pronounces fornicators and adulterers, etc. to be bound, as
those which are worthy to be bound. By the same word it loses those whom it
comfort after they repent. Which cannot be done without knowledge and
understanding of the word of God. 1 Cor. 6.9.


22 Ob. The lawful ministers of Christ shall stand no less in doubt, because
they know not his faith, which confesses his sins: but the priest does only
remit the sin which he knows.

An. The absolution is conditional, Absolution conditional.
that the sinner should trust, that God will be merciful to him, so that he
sincerely seek the cleansing of his sins in the sacrifice of Christ, and
rest upon the grace which is offered him.

23 Therefore these things are preposterouslie wrested unto auricular
confession, which are spoken by Christ partly of the preaching of the gospel,
partly of excommunication.

Object. The authority and power to loose was given to the Apostles, which the
Priests do exercise by remitting sins which they know.

An. This principle is false: because absolution True absolution.
is nothing else but a testimony of pardon, taken from the free promise of the
Gospel. But the other which depends upon discipline,

Object. Sins must be forgiven but with enioyning penance and satisfaction.

An. That is to half that, which God has promised wholly.

24 The whole sum tends to this end, If they will make God the author of
auricular confession, The beginning of auricular confession.
their vanity is reproved: because this tyranny was brought in, when the
world was oppressed with filthy barbarism.

Popish satisfaction.
25 They assign the third place in repentance to satisfaction: they say that
it is not sufficient for him which repents to abstain from evils past, and
to change his manners for the better unless he make satisfaction to God for
those things which are done.

Object. Though God forgive the fault, yet does he reserve the punishment.

An. What is remission but the free gift of liberality? Again, What remission
is.
Why is the word freely added but only to take away all opinion of
satisfaction? Last Ios. 52.3. Collo. 2.14. Tit. 3.5.
what shall we need satisfaction?

26 Object. We are received into the favor of God by Christ in baptism. After
baptism we must rise again by satisfactions. The blood of Christ profits
nothing, but so far as it is distributed by the keys of the church.

An. John says far otherwise, who says, That Christ is both our advocate
with the father, and the propitiation for sins, and that sins are forgiven
for his names sake *. For he is the only Lamb which takes away the sins
of the world*: Therefore we need none other recompense or satisfaction. 1.
Ioh. 2.2.12.
1 Ioh. 1.36.


27 We must here consider two things: The

28 Object. Certain sins be venial, and certain mortal: for mortal
sins, The venial sins of the Papists.
a great satisfaction is due: venial sins are purged with more easy
remedies, with the Lords prayer, with holy water, with the absolution of the
Mass.

An. That is to toy and mock with God. Such a distinction of sin is contrary
to the scripture, which pronounces death to be the reward of sin*, Romans
6.23.14. Ezech. 18.20.
and that the soul which shall sin is worthy of death*.

Object. The sins of the faithful are venial or pardonable.

An. Not because they do not deserve death, All sins are mortal. Romans 8.1.
but because through the mercy of God there is no condemnation to those which
are in Christ Jesus*.

Object. This is the paradox of the Stoics touching the equality of sins.

An. It does not follow that those sins are equal which are together
mortal. Of the offense and punishment of sins.


29 Object. The offense is forgiven through the mercy of God, but the justice
of God does require that the punishment should be paid.

An. The scripture teaches the contrary. This is the testament which God has
concluded for us in his Christ: that he will not remember our iniquities*. And
in another place, If the wicked man shall depart from his iniquity, Ier.
31.34. Ezech. 24.27.
I will put all his iniquities out of my remembrance*.

30 What had Christ done for us, if the punishment should yet be required for
sins? 1 Pet. 2.24. Ies. 53.5. Romans 3.24.
For when we say that he has borne all our sins in his body upon the tree,
there is no other thing signified, but that he has suffered the punishment and
pain which were due to our sins.

Quest. Will the Lord admit no recompense?

Ose. 14.3.
An. We will pay the calves of our lips*, namely thanksgiving.

David, 2 Samuel 12.13.
31 Object. David obtained pardon for his sin, and yet he is punished afterward
with the death of his son*.

Punishment of the wicked.
An. Such punishment is a correction, and not a punishment for sin: which two
must be diligently distinguished. For there be two kinds of judgments: the
one of a judge, such as the punishment of God Correction of Children.
The other of a father, which is properly called a correction or admonition.
The son is beaten, and

32 Therefore the chastisement of the faithful is a blessing of God, and a
sure testimony of Gods love*. Ioh. 3.17. Pro 3.11. Heb 12.5.
But what afflictions soever the wicked do suffer, it is depainted out unto us
as the entrance into hell, from whence they behold their eternal damnation
already a far of.

Object. God is oftentimes said to be angry with his Saints, when he
punishes their offenses*. Isa. 12.1 Abac. 3.2. The anger of God.


An. That is not referred unto the purpose of God who does punish, but unto the
vehement feeling of pain, which those suffer which abide his severity.

33 Therefore when the reprobate are scourged with scourges of God, The whipps
of the reprobate.
they are not therefore punished that they may return to a better mind, but
only they try with their great evil, that God is a judge and revenger*. 1 Samuel 15.23.
But the children are beaten with rods, not that they may thereby be punished
for their sins, but that they may thereby be brought on to repentance*. 1.
Cor. 11.32.


34 The faithful have need to be furnished with these cogitations in the
bitterness of afflictions. It is time that the judgment begin at the house
of the Lord, wherein his name is called upon*. 1 Pet. 4.17. Ier. 25.29 Why God
did chastise david.
What should the children of God do, if they did believe the severity of God
which they do feel, to be his vengeance?

35 Therefore we see plainly that after that God

36 Object. Daniell counsels Nabuchadnezar to redeem his sins with
righteousness, Dan 4.24 What it is to redeem sins.
and his iniquities with pitying the poor*.

An. This word redeem, is referred rather unto men, then unto God. For it is
all one as if he had said, Thou have exercised o king, an unjust and violent
government, now in steed of thy unjust exactions, repay to the people justice
and mercy.

Object. Solomon says that the multitude of sins is covered by love*. Prou
10.12.


An. Not with God, but among men them selves. For the whole verse goes thus,
How love covers sins.
Hatred rayseth contentions: but love covers all iniquities: as if he should
say, They which hate one an other, do one pull an other in pieces: but those
which love together, do wink at many things, and do one forgive another many
things.

Object. Sin is cleansed by mercy and liberality.

An. That is, they shall find God favorable, who bidding adieu to their former
wickedness, do turn to him by godliness and truth. So does the Apostle* and
Christ Mat. 23.25 Luke. 7.36.
expound them.

37 Object. The woman had many sins forgeuen her because she loved much*.

An. Her love was not the cause of the forgiveness of her sins, but the
proof: because the Lord said, Thy faith has saved thee.

Hom. 2. in Psalm. 50.
38 Chrysostom writes well in a certain place* Where mercy is required,
examination ceasseth: where mercy is craved, judgment does not rage: where
mercy is asked: Note
there is no place for punishment: where mercy is, there is no question: where
there is mercy, the answer is pardoned.

Hom. 10. in Gen Euch. ad Laur.
Object. Augustine calls the works of mercy, remedies to obtain remission of
sins.

An. He expounds himself in another place, The flesh of Christ, says he, is
the true and only sacrifice for sins, not only for those which are all blotted
out in baptism: but for those also which come upon men afterward through
infirmity, for which we say daily, Forgive us our debt*.

Mat. 6.12.
39 And the old writers for the most part, called satisfaction, Ecclesiastical
satisfactions among those of old time.
not a recompense to be rendered to God, but an open declaration, whereby they
which had been punished with excommunication, did certify the Church of their
repentance, when they would be received to the communion. For there were
certain fastinges appointed them, and other things whereby they should
testify that they were weary in deed and from their heart, August. Enchir. ad
Laur. cap. 65.
or whereby rather they might blot out the remembrance of former things. And so
they were said to make satisfaction not to God, but to the Church.

CHAP. V. Of the supplies which they add to satisfactions, namely indulgences
and purgatory.
1 FVrthermore from this doctrine of satisfaction flow indulgences. What
indulgences are.
For they dream that that is by them supplied, which is wanting in our own
ability to make satisfaction: so that they define the^ to be the dispensation
or distribution of the merits of Christ, and the martyrs, which the Pope does
divide by his bulls.

2 Hence comes the treasure of the Church, The treasure of the popish Church.
which contains the merits of Christ, and of his Apostles, and of his holy
martyrs. The principal custody of this barn is committed to the Bishop of
Rome, The pope of the keeper of the barn The great authority of the Pope
Epist. 81. Psalm. 116.^5. Note.
in whose power the distribution of so great goods is, so that he may bestow
them of him self, and appoint to others the jurisdiction to bestow them.

3 Leo Bishop of Rome writes excellently to the Palestines against the
sacriledges*. Although says he, the death of many Saints was precious in the
sight of the Lord, yet the death of no innocent has bin the propitiation of
the world. Just me^ have received and not given crowns: and the examples of
patience issued from the fortitude of the faithful, and not the rewards of
righteousness.

Object. Paul says*, Coll. 1.24. What it is to fulfill the sufferinges of
Christ.
I fulfill in my body those things which are wanting of the sufferings of Christ.

An. That is referred unto the sufferings of Christ in his mystical body,
which is the Church.

Object. Peter and Paul should nevertheless have obtained the crown of
victory if they had died in their beds. What profit the Church has by the
examples of Martires.
But in that they did strive to blood, to leave that barren and unfruitful,
does not agree with the righteousness of God.

An. The Church receaueth profit great enough in common, that it is enflamed by
their triumphs, unto zeal to fight.

Coll. 1.24.
4 Object. Paul affirms that he suffers for the Church*.

An. Not for the redemption of the Church, but for the edifying and increase
thereof. As he says in another place that he suffers all things for the
electes sake, that they may attain to the salvation which is in Christ Jesus*.
1 Timothy 2.10. 1 Cor. 1.16. In Psalm. 16. Note
Let us hear what Augustine says,* The sufferings of Christ in Christ alone as
in the head: in Christ and the Church as in the whole body.

5 Furthermore who taught the Pope to include the grace of Christ in lead and
parchment, which the Lord would have distributed by the word of the Gospel*.
2. Cor. 5.18. 1 Cor. 1.17


6 But this Purgatory, which is the satisfaction, which is made after death,
for sin, by the souls of the dead, Fruits of purgatory.
is invented by curious rashness without

7 Object. When the Lord avouches that the sin against the holy Ghost shall
not be forgiven either in this world or in the world to come*, Mat. 12.32. Mar.
3.28
he gives thereby an inkling that certain sins shall be forgiven in the
world to come.

An. When the Lord did cut of all the hope of pardon from such an heinous
wickedness, he thought it not enough to say, that it should never be forgiven,
but that he might the more amplify it, he used a partition, wherein he did
both comprehend the judgment which every man's conscience feels in

Object. It is said*, Mat. 5.25.
Whence thou can not come until thou shall pay the uttermost farthing.

An. If the judge in this place do signify God and the plaintiff the devil,
the sergeant the Angel, the prison purgatory, I will gladly yield unto them.
But if Christ does show in that place, into how many dangers they throw
themselves, which do obstinately pursue the extremity of the Law, to the end
he may more earnestly exhort those that be his unto concord, I pray you where
shall we find Purgatory?

8 Object. Paul affirms that the knees of things in heaven, in earth, and
under the earth, Ph. 2.10.
do bow to Christ. Therefore there be souls lying in pain in Purgatory.

An. In that place the Apostle means by the bowing of the knee, Bowing of the
knee
not the true worship of godliness, but that Christ has Lordshid granted
him, under which all creatures must be brought. Even the very devils shall
with terror know him to be their judge. Thus does Paul him self interpret
it in another place*. Romans 4.10.


Object. I heard every creature which is in heaven, and which is upon the
earth, and which is under the earth, and which is in the sea, and those things
which are in them, I heard them all say, Blessing, and honor, and glory, Apoc.
5.13.
and power* be for ever and ever to him that sits upon the throne, and to
the lamb.

An. It is affirmed that the chief parts of the world, from the highest part
of the heaven, unto the very middle point of the earth, even the creatures
which are void of sense, do after their manner declare the glory of their
creator.

2 Match 12.19.43.
Object. What means the book of Machabees*?

An That book is not reckened among the canonical books. And therefore the
author him self craves pardon*.

2 Match. 15.36.
9 Object. He him self shall be saved says Paul, but as by fire*. 1 Cor. 3.12.
What fire is that if not the fire of purgatory?

An. He speaks of fire by a similitude: that does the word, as, declare.
Therefore by fire we understand that the inventions of man, Fire put for the
trial of the holy Ghost.
being not established by the word of God, cannot abide the examination of the
holy Ghost, but they shall by and by fall to the ground and come to naught.

Prayer for the dead.
10 Object. It was a most ancient observation, and commonly received a thousand
and three hundred years ago, to pray for the dead.

An. But by what word of God? by what revelation? by what example?

Quest. Why durst they then do it?

An. They did therein suffer somewhat which is proper to man: and therefore it
is not to be imitated.

CHAP. VI. Of the life of a Christian man: and first of all by what arguments
the Scripture does exhort us therovnto.
The end of regeneration.
1 WE said that it is the end of regeneration that in the life of the
faithful there appear an agreement and consent between the righteousness of
God and their obedience; and that by this means they confirm their adoption,
whereby they are received to be sons. And although his Law contain in it that
newness, whereby the image of God is restored in us, yet because our slownesse
has need as well of many spurs, as also helps, it shall be good for us to
gather out of diverse places of Scripture a way how to order and frame the
life, lest they err in their study, who are delighted in repentance.

2 Furthermore this institution of the Scripture The parts of a Christian life.
that the love of righteousness, whereto we are otherwise not inclined by
nature, be dripped into our minds. The other is that there be a rule appointed
us, that Of the love of righteousness.
The Scripture has many reasons to command righteousness: the first is, that
we be holy, Leuit. 19.1. 1 Pet. 1.1.10. Psalm. 34.34. and 15.2.24.
both because

3 The other is that we be made like to Christ: through whom we are returned
into favor with God. Therefore we have a pattern of him set before The end of
Gods benefits.
and let us on the other side show our selves children to him. Christ has
purified us from filthiness by his blood, let us not pollute our selves afresh
he has ingrafted us into his body, let us not sprinkle any spot or blot upon
us: our head is ascended into heaven, let us desire with the whole affection of
our heart to come thither, laying away the affection of the earth. We are the
temples of the holy Ghost, let us not be profaned with filthiness of sin*.
Mal. 1.16. Ephesians. 5.1.26. 1. Ioh. 3.3. Heb. 10.10. Who they be which are not to
be called Christians.
These are the best foundations to order and frame the life well.

4 Therefore they which have nothing of Christ besides the bare title, are not
to be called Christians. Because none have any fellowship with Christ save
those which have gathered out of the word of the Gospel the true knowledge of
him. But the Apostle denies that any of those has rightly learned Christ*,
Ephesians. 4.12.
which is not taught, that he must put on Christ having cast of the old man
which is corrupt according to the desires of error.

5 Neither is it required that the manners of a Christian man should breath out
nothing but the absolute Gospel: which notwithstanding is to be wished, and
toward which we must endeavor our selves. Otherwise all men should be excluded
from Christianity, seeing there is none Angelical perfection: yea we are all
found as yet a great way of: and many have as yet gone smally forward. The
end of man's life
What the^? that mark is set before our eyes whereat alone let our study
aim, that we may go forward more and more, until we come to the very
perfection: that having at length put of the infirmity of the flesh, we may be
received into the perfect fellowship of God.

CHAP. VII. The sum of a Christian life: where is handled the denying of our
selves.
The duties of the godly. Romans 12.1
1 THe first office of the faithful is to give their bodies a lively sacrifice
to God, holy and acceptable to him*. Surely it is a great matter for us to be
consecrate to God that we may neither think do any thing afterward, but only
to his glory. For that which is holy is applied unto profane uses, not
without doing injury to him. But and if we be not our own but the Lords, it
appears both what error is to be avoided, The beginning of the denial of
our selves.
and to what end all the actions of our life are to be directed, namely that
neither our reason nor our will bear the chief sway in our counsels. O how
greatly has he profited, who being taught that he is not his own, has
deprived him self of the rule and government of him self to give it to God.

2 The other follows, that we seek not the What the denial of our selves is.
but those which are both agreeable to the will of God, and which serve to
further his glory. This is that denial of our selves, which Christ even from
their first beginning of instruction does so diligently give his charge to his
Disciples, which so soon as it has once taken root in our mind, it leaves no
place either for pride or covetousness, or other vices which are engendered of
love of our selves.

3 The same Paul elsewhere more plainly though briefly sets down all the
parts of a well ordered life*. Tit. 1.11.
The grace of God which brings salvation unto all men has appeared, and
teaches us, that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we live soberly,
and godlilie, and righteouslie in this present world, waiting for the blessed
hope and manifestation of the glory of the great God, and of our Savior Jesus
Christ, who has given him self for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar people zealous of good works.

4 In these words we see that the denial of our selves has respect partly
unto men, The parts of a Christian life
and partly (and Self love is bread in us.
Therefore to the end this self love which is bred in us may be taken away, A
Caution.
to wink at their

5 Now what an hard matter is it for a man to seek the profit of his
neighbor? Unless thou depart from considering thy self, and do after a sort
put of thy self, thou shall not prevail, because love seeks not those
things which be her own*. And it is an hard matter for us to depart from our
own right of our own accord, and to resign it to another.

1 Cor. 13.5. Love seeks not her own 1 Cor. 15.4.
6 Furthermore that we be not weary of well doing, there must be another thing
added, which Paul puts down*, that love is patient, and is not provoked.
Love is patient.
The Lord commands to do good to all men in general, a great part whereof
are most unworthy, and also our enemies. For the image of God is to be
considered in all men, to which we owe all honor and love. The image of God is
a great argument of bountifulnes. Gal. 5.10 When mortification takes place in
us which does the duties of love.
But in those which are of the household of faith, the same is more diligently
to be considered, inasmuch as it is renewed and repaired by the Spirit of Christ.

7 Therefore this mortification shall then only take place in us, if we fulfill
the duties of love. And he does fulfill them not which does all the duties of
love, but which does them with a sincere affection of love. He shall do it if
he put upon him that man's person whom he sees need his help, and does in
like sort pity his estate, as if he him self did feel it: that he may be
moved with the feeling of mercy and compassion, to help him, as if it were his
own case. For how great soever we be, we are detters to our neighbors.

8 That we may the more easily accomplish the What part respects god.
which respects God, it is needful that in seeking the commodities of this
life, resigning both our selves and all that we have to be governed by the
Lords pleasure, we deliver up the affections of our heart to be tamed by him.
We desire riches and all worldly things, we fly from poverty and
afflictions: notwithstanding let us not desire any other way to prosper, but
by the blessing of God. Let us praise the Lord in prosperity, even as well as
in adversity.

9 Thereupon it shall follow, that we shall neither seek wicked means to
wax rich, neither Fruits Psalm. 131.1.


10 Neither ought the godly minds to have that quietness and tranquillity
consisting only in this point: but it must needs be exte^ded also unto all
casualties. This is the rule of godliness to believe that the hand of God
alone is the governor and guider of both estates, What is the rule of
godliness.
and that the same does not run headlong with rash and unadvised force, but
that it does according to most ordinate justice distribute to us good things
and also evil things.

CHAP. VIII. Of the bearing of the cross which is a part of denial.
The Christian Cross. Mat. 16.14
1 But a godly mind must yet ascend higher, to wit that every one take up his
cross*. For those whom the Lord has adopted must prepare them selves unto an
hard life, and a life replenished with diverse kinds of miseries. Thus will
God exercise those which are his: beginning with his first begotten Son, he
prosecuteth this order toward al his own children. The cause of the cross.
Heb. 1.8. The first fruit of the cross is that our weakness may appear.
Invocation follows humiliation.
The Apostle assigns the cause, because we must learn obedience by those
things which he suffered for us.

2 Furthermore we must lead our life under a continual cross for many
reasons. First that we may the more easily beat down arrogance, whereby we
attribute too much to our own strength, and that it may more easily appear
how great our weakness is. Being thus humbled we learn to crave help of the
power of God, which alone makes us stand upright under the burden of
afflictions. David proves by his own example, that that is most profitable
even for the most holy men*. Psalm. 30.7. Romans 5.3.


3 The same does Paul teach, that tribulatio^s engender patience, and patience
trial. For the faithful perceive that that is true which God has promised,
when they stand patiently: Whereby the hope of the faithful is confirmed.
thereby also their hope is confirmed, to look for hereafter the truth of God,
which they have tried.

4 The Lord has also another end for which That their patience may be tried.
that he may try their patience, that he may teach them obedience. Not that
they are able of them selves to perform obedience, but that the graces of God
may be made manifest in his Saints. From whence these speeches came, that God
tempted Abraham, Why God te^pteth those that be his Genesis 22.1 12.
and had proof of his godliness 1 Pet. 1.7
. For faith says Peter is tried by tribulations, as gold is tried in the
furnace by fire.

5 And yet we do not see how necessary obedience is for us, A similitude.
unless we therewithal consider how great the wantonness of our flesh is to
shake of the yoke of God, so soon as it has been but a little while tenderly
handled. For the same befalls it which we see in stubburne horses, which if
they be well fed and stand idle a few days, they cannot afterward be tamed,
they are so stout of stomach: God complains that the same befell the people
of Israel*. Deuteronomy. 32.15.


6 Furthermore our most gentle Father has need not only to prevent our
infirmity: but also To correction.
that he may make us obey him as we ought. Therefore so often as we are
punished, let us by and by call to mind the life which we have led before.
So we shall find that we have done some thing which deserves such correction,
and that we are therefore punished, 1 Cor. 11.8.32. Pro. 3.11. Heb. 12.8.
lest with this world we be condemned*.

To suffer for righteousness sake Mat 5.10. Act. 5.41.
For then we ought to bethink our selves of how great honor the Lord
vouchsafes us, in that he does give us this particular mark of his warfare.
And this comes to pass not only when we suffer for defense of the Gospel,
but also when we are troubled for any defense of righteousness.

8 Therefore seeing that the Scripture does abundantly comfort all those either
shames or calamities which we suffer for defense of righteousness: we are too
unthankful unless we receive them joyfully from the hand of the Lord,
especially seeing this kind of cross is most proper to the faithful, whereby
Christ will be glorified in us.

The kind of cross most proper to the faithful. 1 Pet. 4.11.
9 But Paul has finely described the conflict which the faithful do suffer
against the natural feeling of sorrow, in these words, 2 Cor. 4.8.
In all things we are put to distress, but we are not made sorrowful: we
labor, but we are not forsaken: we are cast down but we perish not. Therefore
to bear the cross patiently, The conflict of faith.
is not utterly to become like blocks. For Christ mourned and wept at his own
and at other men's adversities.* Yea they are called blessed which mourn Mat.
5.4.
. Ioh. 17.20.


10 These things are spoken to this end, that godly minds may be called
back from despair, lest they utterly renounce the study of patience, because
they can not put of the natural affection of sorrow. For the Scripture gives
to the holy ones the praise of patience, when they are so troubled with the
hardness of adversity, that they are not discouraged nor thrown down: they
are so pricked with bitterness, that they be also delited with spiritual joy.
They are so pressed with sorrow, that being comforted with the comfort of God,
they receive comfort again. They will always conclude thus, The Lord would
have it so: therefore let us follow his will.

11 By that which is said it appears what difference there is between the
patience of Philosophers and Christians. The difference between the patience of
the philosophers and that of Christians.
For the Philosophers bring none other reason, but because it must be so. For
it were in vain to strive against the stream. But Christians consider a far
other thing in the will of

CHAP. IX. Of the meditation of the life to come.
1 ANd with what kind of tribulation soever we be distressed, The end of
tribulation,
we must always have respect to this end: that we acquaint our selves to
contemn this present life, and that we be raised up thereby to think upon the
life to come. And because God does know that we are too much set upon the love
of this world, he uses this most fit mean of the cross, to shake of our
sluggishnesse, lest that we stick too fast in that love.

2 For between these two there is no mean, either we count the earth vile, 2.
Extremes to be fled
or else it holds us fast bound with an intemperate love of it. Therefore if
we have any care of eternity, we must diligently A similitude. A Caution


3 But let the faithful acquaint them selves with such contempt of this life,
as may neither engender This life is the blessinge of God.
nor unthankfulness toward God. For this life, howsoever it is full of
miseries it notwithstanding reckened among the blessings of God which are not
to be despised.

4 Therefore what soever is taken away from the wicked love of it, ought to be
added to the desire of a better life. Those thought most truly, who thought it
the best not to be borne, and the next to die quickly. For being destitute of
the light of God, It had been better for the wicked either not to have bin
borne or to dye quickly the^ to live
what could they see in this life which was not unhappy and miserable? But
they did all things without profit. But the faithful which have the
knowledge of true religion, will say, If heaven be our country, what other
thing is the earth but exile? If it be the chief felicity to enjoy the
presence of God, is it not a miserable thing to want it? Therefore this life in
comparison of the life to come is easily contemned: but we must never hate it,
save only inasmuch as it keeps us subject to sin. Therefore if it become
us to die and live to the Lord, let us leave the term of life and time of
death to his pleasure: yet so that we be enflamed with desire thereof. And let
us despise this life in comparison of the immortality to come, and let us
wish to forsake it so often as it shall please the Lord, Romans 7.22 Phil.
1.25. Note.
because of the bondage of sin.

Death is not to be feared
5 And this is like to a monster, that in steed of that desire of death, many
are so affrayed of it, that they quake when they hear any mention made of it.

Object. But there is nothing which does not desire to continue.

An. Therefore we must have respect unto the immortality to come, where we
shall have a stable condition, which is no where to be seen here*. 2 Cor. 5.2.
Rom 8.19. The joy of the faithful. Luk, 21.82.
The Lord fetteth a firm argument of perfect joy from hence: Rejoice says he,
and lift up your heads: for your redemption draws near*.

6 For if the faithful be in this life as sheep appointed to be slain, that
they may be made like to Christ their head: surely they were in a most
miserable case, unless they did raise and lift up their head above all
earthly things, Romans 8.36. 1 Cor. 15.19. Apo. 7.17.
where the Lord shall wipe away all their tears*. This is righteousness as
Paul witnesses 2 Thessalonians. 16
, to grant release to those which are unjustly troubled. Therefore I will
conclude in one word: the cross of Christ does then only triumph in the
hearts of the faithful, over the Devil, the flesh, sin, and the wicked, The
triumph of the cross
if they turn their eyes toward the power of the resurrection.

CHAP. X. How we must use this life and the helps thereof.
1 BY such introductions the Scripture does well instruct us, The use of
earthly goods.
what is the right use of earthly goods. For if we must live, we must also use
the necessary helps of life. Neither can we avoid even those things which
seem rather to serve for pleasure then necessity. Notwithstanding we must
use a mean, Necessaries of life.
that we may with a pure conscience use them, whether for necessity or
delectation. For if we must pass through the earth as pilgrims, no doubt we
must use the good things thereof so far as that they may rather help then
hinder our course. Things which delight. A Caution. 2 Cor. 7.31.


2 Therefore let this be a principle that the use of gods gifts swarueth not,
when it is referred unto the end appointed of God, for God has created all
things for our good, and not to our destruction. Now if we consider to what
end he has created food, The end of food.
we shall find that he meant to provide not only for necessity, but also
for delectation. So in apperrell comeliness, in herbs, trees and fruits,
besides diverse uses, we have diversity of taste, color, smell and shapes.

3 Notwithstanding on the otherside we must diligently prevent the lust of the
flesh, which unless it be brought in order does by and by break out. First
of all it shall be brideled with one bridle, if we set down, A Caution. The
wanto^nes of the flesh.
that all things are therefore created for us, that we may know the author
thereof, and give him thanks for his tender kindness toward us.

4 But there is no certainer way then that which The first rule touching
abou^dance. 1 Cor. 7.31.
Secondly, that they do no less patiently abide penury, then moderately
suffer abundance. For those which are much occupied about the body, are for
the most part negligent in caring for the soul.

The other rule touching Penurye.
5 The other rule is that those whose substance is not great, do know how to
suffer want and scarcity patiently, that they be not carefully moved with
immoderate desire of riches. For he which will blush when he wears a simple
garment, will glory in a gorgeous. Therefore let all those endeavor the^
selves to come to this point, who have a desire to live godlily, that they may
learn by the example of the Apostle*, to be full and to be hungry: the third
rule sets down, Phil. 4.12. 3 Rule of love toward a man's neighbor.
that we must give an account of that which is committed unto us, and as it
were of our stewardship, even to God, who allows none other distribution of
Goods, but that which is joined with love.

6 Last of all, that is to be noted that the Lord commands every one of us
in all the actions of his life to look unto his vocation: 4 We must have a
respect to our calling.
least through foolish unadvisedness or a wavering conscience all things be
turned topsituruie. And from this we shall have excellent comfort, because
there shall be no work so vile and base, which (if thou do only obey thy
vocation) shall not shine in the sight of God.

CHAP. XI. Of the justification of faith: and first of the definition of the
name and thing.
1 WE have already declared diligently enough, that the only help which is
left for men being accursed by the law, to recover salvation, rests in faith.
Again we have showed what faith is and what fruits it brings forth. What
Christ has done for us.
The sum was this, that Christ who is given to us, is laid hold on by faith,
by partaking of whom we reap a double fruit: to wit, that being reconciled to
God through his innocence, we may have him now in steed of a judge to be a
most merciful father in heaven: secondly that being sanctified by his spirit
we may give our selves to holiness and pureness of living. We have spoken
sufficiently of regeneration. And now we must speak of justification, which
makes the principal stay of upholding religion.

2 He is said to be justified before God, who is What it is to be justified
before God.
For as iniquity is abominable before God, so also a sinner. Therefore where
sin is, there is the wrath and vengeance of God: and he is justified which
stands By works.
as deserves the testimony of righteousness By faith.
does lay hold upon the righteousness of Christ by faith, wherewith being
clothed, he appears before God as just. What justification is.
So that we interpret justification to be that accepting, whereby God
receiving us into favor, does take us for righteous: and we say that the same
is placed in our forgiveness of Luke 7.21. and 16 15. Gal. 3.4. Romans 5.23. Romans
6.26. Act. 13.38.


3 Also to justify, in the scripture does signify nothing else, but to absolve
from giltines him, which was accused, as if his innocence were approved.

4 And if we omit to contend about the word, if we look into the thing it
self, there shall no doubt remain. For Paul by the word Accepting, means
justification*. Acceptinge. Ephesians. 1.5. Romans 3.24.
We are appointed unto adoption by Christ, according to the good pleasure of
God, to the praise of his glorious grace, whereby he has accounted us
acceptable, or in favor.

5 Object. Christ is one with us and we again are one with him. Wherefore as
righteousness is essentiallie in Christ, so is it in us, and yet not imputed or
free, but essential,

An. We use with Christ the secret power of his spirit, How we are united in
Christ.
not that the essence of Christ is powered out into our essence.

Object. Not only Christ, but also the father and the holy Ghost do dwell in
us, therefore we are substantiallie in God.

An. We must consider the manner of dwelling: What is meant by dwellinge.
namely that the Father and the Spirit are in Christ, and like as the
fullness of the Godhead dwells in him, so in him we possess God wholly.

6 Quest. Does God leave those whom he justifies such as they were by nature,
without changing them from their vices?

An. Righteousness and justification cannot be separated. Righteousness and
justification are not separate.
Therefore who^soeuer God receives into favor, he does also indow the^ with
the spirit of adoption, by whose power he reformeth and fashioneth them
according to his own image, that they may live godlily and holily.

Object. Faith does not justify of it self, but in as much as it receives
Christ.

An. I grant: For God does properly justify by Christ, 1 Cor. 1.3. A
similitude.
who is given us to be our righteousness and sanctification*. But we compare
faith to a vessel: because unless being empty, we come with the wide open
mouth of the soul to crave the grace of Christ, we are not capable of Christ.

Object. Faith is Christ.

An. As the pot is the treasure. A similitude. Faith an instrument.
For faith is the only instrument to receive righteousness in Christ, who is
the material cause, author, and minister.

8 Object. By the ministry of the external word the internal is received.
Therefore Christ being God and man is made unto us righteousness in respect
of his Godhead and not of his manhood.

An. He is made unto us righteousness, as he is man the mediator: and that
which was from everlasting, cannot conveniently be said, to be made to us.

Ios. 51.10
Object. The Lord shall be our righteousness*.

An. He speaks of Christ who being God revealed in the flesh, is made our
righteousness.

9 Object. This work of iustifiying does by his excellency exceed the nature
of man, and therefore it cannot but be ascribed to the divine nature.

An. I grant.

Object. Therefore the divine nature alone does justify us.

An. It does not follow: for although Christ could neither by his blood purge
our souls, nor appease the father by his sacrifice, Christ does justify as he
is man.
nor deliver us from giltinesse, unless he had been very God: yet it is
certain that he did all these things according to his humane nature. For we
are justified by the obedience of Christ*, Romans 5.19.
and he did no otherwise obey, but as he took upon him the nature of a
servant: therefore we have righteousness given us in his flesh.

2 Pet. 1.4.
10 Object. By Christ, says Peter, we have precious and most great promises
given us, that we should be made partakers of the nature of God.

An. John expounds that of the last coming of Christ: 1 Ioh. 3.2
that we should then see God as he is, because we shall be like to him.

11 Object. It is an absurd thing to say that the word Justify is a law
term, To Justify is a law term
so that it is all one as to absolve, seeing that we must be righteous in
deed.

An. God does justify both by acquitting or absoluing, and also by pardoning,
whereupon Paul says, 2 Cor. 5.21.
God was in Christ and reconciled the world to himself, in not imputing sins
to men Psalm. 32.1. Romans 4.7.
Also David describes righteousness without works thus: they are blessed whose
iniquities are forgiven.

Object. It is contrary to God and his nature, to justify those which do in
deed continue wicked.

An. The grace of justification is not separate from regeneration, though they
be distinct things. And God does so begin regeneration in the elect, in who^
there remain always some remnants of sin, and does so proceed during the
whole course of their life, that they are always subject to the judgment of
death before his judgment seat. Romans 8.33.
But he justifies* them not in part, but freely, that they may appear in
heaven, as clothed with the purity of Christ.

12 Object. Christ is made to us wisdom, which agrees only to the eternal
word. 1 Cor. 1.30.
Therefore neither is Christ as he is man righteousness.

An. The only begotten son of God was always indeed his eternal wisdom
but that which he had of the father has he revealed unto us, namely the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge*, Coll. 2.3.
and so the saying of Paul is not referred unto the essence of the son of
God, but unto our use, and it is well applied to the humane nature of Christ.

Object. They which place salvation in the death of Christ alone, make two
Gods, in denying that we are righteous by the righteousness of God.

An. That which we have in Christ does come from the grace and favor of God:
also that righteousness which Christ gives us is the righteousness of God. Our
righteousness and life is only in the death and resurrection of Christ.
We grant: but we hold steadfastly that we have righteousness and life only in
the death and resurrection of Christ.

Object. That is properly called righteousness whereby we are moved to do good.
But God works in us both to will and to do*. Phil. 2.13.
Therefore we have righteousness no where else.

An. God indeed reformeth us by his spirit unto holiness of life, and
righteousness, but immediately by his son, with whom he has left all the
fullness of the holy Ghost, that by his abundance he might supply the need
of his members.

Ob. Christ himself was just by the righteousness of God: because unless the
will of the father had moved him, he himself would not have satisfied the
office committed unto him.

Romans 3.21. and. 5.9. Papists.
An. Paul says that Christ has given us salvation * to show his own
righteousness.

13 Ob. Righteousness is co^pou^ded of faith and works.

An. These two do so differ, that if the one stand, the other must needs be
ouerthrown. Paul counts all but doung, Ph. 3.8. Faith and works.
that he may win Christ *, and that he may find in him, not having his own
righteousness which is of the law, but that which is by the faith of Jesus
Christ, righteousness which is of God through faith.

14 Ob. Paul speaks of the works which men do before they be regenerate, such
as were the Jews. But there is a far other respect to be had of spiritual
works. Spiritual works.
For they be fruits of regeneration.

An. In the comparison of the righteousness of the law and the righteousness of
the gospel, which he makes*, Gal. 3.11.12. Romans 10.5.9.
he excludes all manner works with what title soever they be adorned. For he
teaches that the righteousness of the law is, The righteousness of the law.
that he obtain salvation which shall perform that which the law
commanudeth: The righteousness of faith.
and that this is the righteousness of faith, if we believe that Christ died and
rose again.

15 Object. Faith is a certainetie of the conscience in looking for at Gods
hands a reward for deserts. Also the grace of God is not the imputation of
free righteousness, but the holy ghost to the study of holiness.

16 An. When the scripture speaks of the righteousness of faith, it leads us
to a far other thing, to wit, that being turned away from the beholding of
our works, we may look only unto the mercy of God, and the perfection of
Christ.

17 Furthermore we must diligently note, The relation between faith and the
Gospel.
that there is some relation between faith and the Gospel: because faith is
said therefore to justify, because it receives the salvation, and imbraceth
righteousness offered in the gospel: and whereas it is said to be offered by the
gospel, thereby is excluded all consideration of works: which Paul shows most
plainly in 2. places. Rom 12.5. Gal. 3.18.


Object. Then the righteousness which we have by our own industry and will is
rejected.

An. The law profits nothing by commanding because there is none that can
fulfill it*. Romans 8.2.


18 And it is manifest that no man is justified by the law: because the just
shall live by faith. No man is justified by the Law.
But the law is not of faith: but the man which shall do these things, shall
live in the^*. Therefore the Gospel differs therein from the law, because it
does not tie righteousness to works, but places it in the mercy of God alone.
Hence comes it that the inheritance is free, because it is received by faith:
and faith leans wholly upon the mercy of God without any help of works.

19 Object. The scripture affirms no where that a man is justified by faith
alone.

An. A man is said to be justified by faith without works, Romans 3.21.24.
therefore by faith alone: which the word Free, does declare. Because it is
not of faith says Paul*, unless it be free.

Ob. Without the works of the law, namely the ceremonial law.

Gal. 3, 10.12. Deuteronomy. 27.16
An. When Paul says: He which shall do shall live*, He is accursed which
shall not fulfill al things. He does not there speak of ceremonies.

Gal. 5.6.
20 Object. We are justified by faith alone which works by love, so that
righteousness rests upon love*. Faith is effectual through love.


An. I grant: that faith which is effectual through love does justify, but it
does not take the force of iustifiyng from that love, but because it brings
us into the fellowship of the righteousness of Christ, A similitude.
like as fire does not burn with his light, but with his heat.

What the righteousness of faith is
21 Furthermore, let us know that that righteousness of faith is nothing else,
but the reconciliation with God, which consists in remission of sins alone.
For those whom God imbraceth are made righteous by no other means, save only in
that they are purified having their blots wiped away through remission of
sins. And such righteousness may in one word be called remission of sins.

2 Cor. 5.19.12.
22 Which thing Paul teaches most plainly*: God was in Christ and reconciled
the world to himself, by not imputing to men their faults, but he has
committed unto us the word of reconciliation. Also he which knew no sin,
was made sin for our sakes, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him.

23 Whereupon it follows that by the only mean of Christ's righteousness,
we obtain to be justified before God.

CHAP. XII. That we may be thoroughly persuaded of free justification we must
lift up our minds unto the tribunal seat of God.
1 BUT we speak not of the righteousness of man's court, but of the heavenly
judgment seat. We must lift up our minds thither, if we will inquire after
true righteousness with fruit: how we may make answer to the heavenly judge
when he shall call us to an account: Read the book of Job.
with whose brightness the stars are darkened: with whose strength the
mountains are molten, whose justice the very angels cannot endure*. Psalm.
130.3. Job. 15.15.
Let him sit to examine men's works: and who can appear assured before his
throne*? Yea if any man should fulfill the law he could not so stand to the
examination of the righteousness of God which surmounteth all our senses.

2 Hither, hither must we lift up our eyes, that we may learn rather to
tremble, then vainelie to triumph. That befalls our soul toward God, A
similitude.
which befalls our body toward the visible heaven. For the sight of the eye
so long as it continues viewing things which are near unto it, it shows of
what force it is: but if it be directed toward the Sun being too much damped
with the brightness thereof, it feels no less weakness in beholding it,
then strength in viewing earthly things. Luke. 16.13. Psalm. 133.2.
Therefore Christ said to the Pharisees, that which is high among me^, is
abominable with God*. Let us say with David: Enter not into judgment with thy
servant, for no man living shall be justified in thy sight.

Aust. lib. 3 ad. Bonif. c. 5. Bern. Sermon. 16. super Cantic etc
3 Neither are such examples extant in the scriptures only, but all godly
writers also show that they were always of this mind*.

4 This is the only fortress of safety, wherein exercised consciences may
safely rest, when they have to deal with the judgment of God. For those
stars which shine most cleerelie in the night season, A similitude.
do loose their light and brightness when the sun arises: what do we
think shall become even of the most rare innocence of men, when it shall be
compared with the pureness of God? For there shall be a most strait examination:
2 Cor. 4.9.
first, because god shall pearce Examination.
For that which is commonly counted righteousness, is before God mere
iniquity.

5 Let us come down from beholding the perfection of God, The beholding of our
mescrie
to view our selves without flattery. For it is no marvel if we be so blind
in this point, seeing no man does beware of pestilent flattering of himself.
Every man's way is right in his own eyes*. In an other place, Pro. 21.2. and 16
3.
all man's ways seem clean in his own eyes. But if we call back our
conscience unto the judgment seat of God, every man shall appear before God,
to be rottenness, a worm, abominable and vain, drinking iniquity as water.
For who can make that clean which is conceived of unclean seed*. Ioh. 15.16.
and 14 4. and 9.20.
Thus far ought the streightnes of this examination to go, until it have
brought us, that we be fully and thoroughly thrown down, The way to salvation
and have by that means prepared us to receive ye grace of Christ.

6 This is the true way to humble our selves, that being altogether empty and
poor we may give place to the mercy of God. True humility
For it is not humiliation if we think that any thing remains in us.
Salvation is prepared, but for the humble people*. And that is perfect
humility, Psalm. 18.28
not that modesty for which men are commended, but submission unfeigned of a
mind thoroughly thrown down with the feeling of his own misery, and
poverty. For so is it described in the word of God*. zep. 3.11. Ies. 66.2.
and. 57 Luke 18.13.


7 And Christ represe^ted in the publicane the true image of humility Luke
18.13.
, who standing a far off, and not daring to lift up his eyes toward heaven,
prays with many tears: Lord be merciful to me a sinner. On the other side,
he sets before us an example of arrogancy in the Pharisee. Therefore the
heart or breast is open to receive mercy, Luke 16.11.
if it be empty of his own worthiness. Therefore does Christ preach the
Gospel to the poor, he bids those which labor come to him Mat. 11.28
, he calls not the just but sinners Mat. 9.13.^
.

8 Therefore if we will give place to the calling of Christ, let us abandon
both arrogancy and also security: Arrogancy and security are two plagues.
Note.
that being ready we may make have unto Christ, that being empty and hungry
we may be filled with his good things. Because every man does so much hinder
the bountifulness of God, as be does rest in himself.

CHAP. XIII. That there must be two things observed in free justification.
1 WE must especially respect two things: first that the Lords glory remain
to him untouched and vndeminished: Two things in justification.
and that our co^scie^ces have Because so long as man has any thing to say
for Note. 1 Cor. 1.13. Romans 2.19.
whereby being beaten down we may fly unto Christ in whom we may rejoice and
triumph*.

2 So it is indeed, we do never truly glory in him unless we be thoroughly
spoiled of our own glory*.

Object. He does not glory, who without arrogancy does recognize his own
righteousness.

The end of justification.
An. Such estimation breeds confidence, and confidence glorying. Therefore
let us remember that in the whole disputation of righteousness, we must have
respect unto this end, that ye praise thereof remain sound and whole to the
Lord. For no man can chalendge to himself even the very least jot of
righteousness, without sacrilege.

Whence peace of conscience does come.
3 Whereas we set down in the second place, that the conscience cannot
otherwise be kept before God, unless free righteousness be given us by the
gift of God: let us always remember that saying of Soloman, Who will say. I
have cleansed my heart, I am purified from my sin? There is no man surely
which is not drenched in infinite filthiness. He shall have no quietness of
conscience thereby, but shall rather be tormented with the terror of hell. He
shall profit nothing by deferring or driving of. Pro. 20.9.
By works comes doubting, and at length desperation, when every man for
himself accounts how much he owes, Desperation comes by works.
and how unable he is to pay. Lo now faith is extinguished and oppressed: for
to doubt and despair is not to believe.

4 Again, the promise should be void: for if the accomplishment thereof
depend upon our merit, when shall we come to this point to deserve the
goodness of God? Moreover that second member follows upon the former: for
the promise shall be fulfilled to none but to those which shall believe it.
Therefore if faith be fallen, there remains no force of the promise. Therefore
the inheritance is of faith that it may be according to grace, Mercy and truth
are joined together. Psalm 119.76. Ies. 9.6. Ephesians. 2.4.
to establishe the promise: for it is abundantly confirmed when it rests
upon mercy alone: because mercy and truth are knit together with a perpetual
knot*. Therefore seeing that faith does lay hold upon Christ alone, it follows
that he is not without cause called the king of peace, and our peace, which
appeaseth all the trobles of the soul. If the means be demanded, we must
come unto his sacrifice.

5 For Paul denies that there is any peace or quiet joy left to men's
consciences, Romans 1.5. Romans 8.45. Psalm. 23.4.
unless it be set down that we are justified by faith, which is a thing
altogether passive to justification, bringing nothing of ours to win Gods
favor: but we receive that of Christ which we want.

CHAP. XIIII. What manner of beginning justification has, and the continual
process thereof.
1 THAT we may more easily discuss what manner righteousness man may have
during the whole course of this life, What manner righteousness man has
let us make a fourefold degree. For men are either endued with no knoweledge
gifts, there shall not be found one sparkle of goodness from the crown of the
head unto ye sole of the foot. 1 Natural Idolaters.


2 Ob. What excellent gifts soever are seen in the unbelievers they are gifts
of God: as in Titus and Traianus justice, Ier. 17 9. Genesis 8.21.
moderation, equity: in Vespasian continency.

3 An. Nevertheless that is true which Augustine writes, that all those which
are strangers from the religion of god, howsoever they be counted wonderful for
the opinion of virtue which men have of them, are not only worthy of no
reward, but rather of punishment: because they pollute the pure gifts of God
with the filthiness of their heart.

Object. They are Gods instruments to preserve society.

An. Notwithstanding they do most wickedlie execute these good works of god:
because they are kept from doing evil not with any sincere desire of goodness,
Why the works of the wicked be no good works.
but by ambition, by the love of themselves, or by some sinister affection.

4 Furthermore John says, that there is no life without the son of God:
Therefore as for those which have no part in Christ, 1 Ioh. 5.12
how great soever they be, whatsoever they do or go above, they go forward
notwithstanding unto destruction, and unto the judgment of eternal death,
forasmuch as they cannot please God being destitute of faith*.

Heb. 12.6.
5 The thing shall appear more plainly, if the grace of God be set against the
natural condition of man as contrary. The misery of man is known by the
grace of God.
The scripture cries that God finds nothing in man, whereby he may be moved
to do good to him, but that he does prevent him with his free goodness. For what
can a man that is dead, do to recover life? But when he does inlighten us with
the knowledge of him self, he is said to raise us up from death, and to make
us a new creature*. 1 Ioh. 5.25. Ephesians. 2.4.


6 So soon as Isaias has described the universal destruction of all mankind,
he does excellently add afterward the order of his restoring*. Ies. 59.15.
If the covenant of God which is our first joining with God do rest upon the
mercy of God, Justification is the beginning of love. Romans 5.6. Coll. 1.21. 1
Ioh. 4.10 Ose. 14 5.
there is no foundation left for our own righteousness. For if justification
be the beginning of love*, what righteousness of works do go before it?

7 Under this sort are comprehended the second and third order of men. For the
uncleanness of their conscience argues that they are both of them
unregenerate by the Spirit of God. Again there is in them no regeneration,
because no faith, without which there is no justification. What can sinners
then bring forth, which are estranged from God, Hagg. 2.12.
but that which is execrable in his judgment*?

8 Therefore hypocrites and such as keep wickedness inwrapped in their heart, do
in vain study to bring God indebted to the^ by their works. Ies. 1.13.
For they shall more and more provoke him*, seeing the sacrifices of wicked men
are abominable before God*. Prou. 15.8 4 The works of the Regenerate.


9 Now let us see what righteousness those have whom we have placed in the
fourth rank. Let us grant that they are reconciled, justified, mortified,
sanctified by the grace of Christ, that they walk in the ways of the Lord
through the guiding of the holy Ghost, yet let them not be puffed up, there
remain remnants of imperfection which may minister argument of humility.
There is none so righteous 1 Kin. 8.48
Then what manner righteousness shall they have?

30 Again although it might be, that we might of our former righteousness, as
says the Prophet, and whereto also James agrees*, Ezech. 18.24. Iam. 2:10.
He which offends in one is made guilty of all.



Object. Good works are not of so great value by inward dignity, The Popish
works.
as that they are sufficient to obtain righteousness, but this that they are
of so

An. That which you call accepting grace is nothing else, What acceptinge grace
is.
but his free goodness, whereby the Father embraces us in Christ: when as he
clotheth us with innocence, and accounts the same ours, that by the benefit
thereof he may take us for holy, pure, and innocent.

That no works of man do please.
13 If these things be true, surely no good works can make us acceptable to God
of them selves, nay nor please him, save only inasmuch as man, being clothed
with the righteousness of Christ does please God, and obtain remission of his
sins. For God has not promised the reward of life to certain works: but
only pronounces, that he which does these things shall live: setting down a
curse for those which shall not abide in all things. Therefore all the
righteousness of men being gathered on one heap, cannot be sufficient to make
recompense for one. That does the sin of Adam prove.

14 And to boast of works of supererogation, how does it agree with that which
is commanded, Works of supererogation. Luke 17.10.
we say that we are unprofitable servants*, and that we have done no more then
was our duty to do. To say before God, is not to dissemble or lie, but to
determine with thy self, that whereof thou art certain.

15 Object. Paul did yield of his own right, which he might if he would have
used: neither did he only employ upon the Corinthians so much as he ought of
duty: but he bestowed upon the^ pains freely, beyond the bounds of his duty.

An. He did this lest he should have been a stumbling block to the weak: but
not that he might do somewhat of supererogation for the Lord. Because all our
works are due to the Lord, as the proper possessions of bondmen.

16 Therefore we must drive away two plagues in this point: Confidence and
gloryinge are Plagues. Psalm. 143.2. Ies. 45.20 and 61 3.
the first that we put no confidence in the righteousness of works. Secondly
that we ascribe no glory to them. When confidence is once gone, glorying must
needs be packing also*.

17 Furthermore if we respect the four kinds of causes, we shall find none of
them to agree to works in the establishing of our salvation. 1 The efficient. 2
Material. 3 Formal.
The efficient is the mercy of our heavenly Father: the material is Christ
with his obedience: the formal or isntrumental is faith. And these three does
John comprehend in one sentence*: Ioh. 3.16.
So God loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that every one
which believes in him may not perish, but have everlasting life*. 4 Final.
The final cause is the declaration of Gods righteousness, and the praise of
his goodness: as Paul witnesses*. Romans 3.25.
Therefore seeing we see all the parts of our salvation to be thus without us,
what cause is there why we should now have any affiance in works, or glory
in them?

18 Object. But holy men do often make mention of their innocence and
integrity. Why holy men made mention of their righteousness.


An. That is done two ways: either by co^paring their good cause with the
evil cause of the wicked, they thereby conceive sure hope of victory: not so

19 Therefore when holy men confirm their faith by innocence of their
conscience, and take and gather thence matter of rejoicing, they do nothing
else but call to mind by the fruits of their calling, that they are adopted by
the Lord into the place of children*: Pro. 14.26. Genesis 14.40 1 Kin. 20.3
not that they place in them any foundation of their righteousness and
salvation.

In psalm. 137. Note.
20 This self same thing does Augustine show in a few words*, I commend not
the works of mine hands, I fear lest when thou shall look into them, thou
find more sins then merits, but I say, despise not the works of thine hands:
behold thy work in me and not mine own work. If thou shall see mine, thou
condemnest it, if thine thou crownest it. Because own: secondly, because even
that is oppressed with the multitude of sins.

21 Object. The good works of the faithful are the causes for which the Lord
does good to them. Election is the beginning of graces.


An. The cause whereby God is moved to do good to those that be his, is not the^
handled, but only the ordinary dispensatio^. Because God by heaping graces
upon graces, takes occasion by the former to add the latter, that he may omit
nothing which may serve to the enriching of his servants: and so by this means
he prosecuteth his liberality, yet so that he will always have us to respect
the free election which is the fountain and beginning.

CHAP. XV. That those things which are boasted of the merits of works, do
overthrow as well the praise of God in giving righteousness, as the certainty of
salvation.
1 WE have already dispatched that which is chief: that a man is justified
by the mercy of God alone, by the communicating of Christ alone, and therefore
by faith alone, and not by works. Whether good works deserve favor.
It remains that we discuss this question, that howsoever works are not
sufficient to justify a man, yet whether they do not deserve favor at Gods
hands?

2 Surely whosoever he were that first applied merit to men's works compared
with Gods judgment, Merit.
he provided very evil for the sincerity of faith.

Object. The ancient writers of the Church did every where use it.

An. Would God they had not ministered matter of error to their posterity by
the abuse of one little word.

3 The Scripture does show what all our works deserve, when it denies that
they are able to abide the sight of God, because they be full of
uncleanness*, again what if we should fulfill the Law? Ezec. 36.22.32 Lu. 17
20
we are unprofitable servants*.

Object. The Lord does call those good works which he has bestowed upon us,
ours, and does not only testify that they are acceptable in his sight, but
that they shall also have a reward.

An. He does it for this cause that we may be encouraged by so great a promise,
and that we may not be weary of well doing, and that we may be thankful
indeed to God for so great bountifulness.

Works are good as they are of God.
Object. If works be of God, then are they good.

An. They are good as they are of God: but man polluteth and defiles by his
uncleanness those works which were good.

Quest. How then do they please God, and are not unprofitable to the doers of
them?

An. Not because they deserve this, but because the goodness of God does of it
self set this price upon them.

Eccle. 16.14.
4 Object. Mercy will make place for every one according to the merit of his
works*.

An. It is thus in Greek, for every one shall find according to his works.

Object. With such sacrifices men merit at Gods hands, Heb. 13.16.
says the Apostle*.

An. There is nothing else in the Greek, but that such sacrifices do please
God, and are acceptable to him.

Object. Good works do merit those graces which we have given us in this life:
but eternal salvation is the reward of faith alone.

An. Isaias does show that the increasings of the faithful are the gifts of
his own free goodness*. Is. 51.1.


5 Paul teaches in many places that we have the fulfilling of all good
things in Christ*: and nothing of ourselves. 1 Cor. 1.3. Ephesians. 1.4. Coll. 1.14
Ioh. 10.28


6 Object. Moral works make men acceptable to God, before they be ingrafted
into Christ.

An. But the Scripture says that they are all in death which possess not the
Son*: and again, 1 Ioh. 5.12 Romans 14.23
Whatsoever is done without faith is sin*.

Object. Christ deserved for us the first grace: now it stands us upon not to
be wanting to the occasion offered us.

An. O impudency! as if Christ did only set open the way to salvation. Would
God they did but taste what these sayings mean. He has life, which has the
Son*. 1 Ioh. 5.12.
Whosoever believes is past from death to life Ioh. 5.12
, and such like Romans 3.14. 1 Ioh. 3.23 Ephesians. 2.6. Coll. 1.13.
.

7 Object. A man is justified by faith which is formed, because good works have
from faith to be auailable to righteousness.

An. That is to name faith in mockage, and to steal from God the praise of
good works.

Object. The principal cause is in good works, Free will.
and yet free will is not excluded, by which comes all merit.

An. The Apostle says, that we are the workma^ship of God, created unto good
works, which he has prepared that we should walk in them*. Ephesians. 2.10.
Therefore seeing there comes no good from us, unless we be regenerate, and
regeneration is of God, In good works nothing is of our selves.
there is no cause why we should challenge to our selves one ownce in good works.

8 That is most plainly showed by many testimonies of Scripture*. Whereupon we
conclude that men are not justified before God by works: but we say that all
those which are of God are regenerate and made a new creature, that they may
pass from the kingdom of sin, 2 Ioh. 1.8. 1 Pet. 4 3. 2 Timothy 2.20 etc. A
similitude
unto the kingdom of righteousness: and that by this testimony they make
their calling sure, and are judged as trees by the fruits.

CHAP. XVI. The refutation of those sclaunders wherewith the Papists endeavor
to burden this doctrine and to bring it in contempt.
Object. 1 BY the justification of faith good works are destroyed.

An. Yea they are rather established. Because we dream not of a faith that is
void of good works, There be no works good without faith.
or of justification which is without these. Notwithstanding we place
justification in faith, and not in works.

2 Object. Men's minds are brought from the desire of well doing, when we take
from them the opinion of deserving.

Heb. 9.13. Lu. 1.74. Romans 6.6.18. Tit. 2.11 etc.
An. If men must be pricked forward, no man can use sharper goads then those
which are fet from the end of our redemption and calling. For it were
unseemly sacrilege, if being once cleansed, we should defile our selves with
new filthiness, and so profane the holy blood of Christ.

How every man shall be rewarded according to his works
3 Object. God shall give every man according to his works.

An. That is a kind of exhortation, which the Scripture does oftentimes use,
that he may omit no way that may encourage us.

4 Object. Men are invited to sin, when we hold free forgiveness of sins.

An. We say that remission of sins is of so great estimation, that it can not
be recompe^ced with any good of ours, and that therefore it could never be
gotten unless it were free. Remission is free to us not to Christ.
Furthermore to us it is free, not to Christ, who paid so dear for it.
Therefore men are admonished that so often as they sin, they do so often shed
his most precious blood, so much as in them lies. Ought not they which do
hear these things to be more affrayde of sinninge, A prick to Prick us
forward to do good.
then if it were said that sins are wiped away by good works?

CHAP. XVII. The reconciling of the promises of the Law and the Gospel.
Quest.1 IF good works do not justify, to what purpose serve the promises of
the Law*? Deuteronomy. 7.11 Ier. 7.3 33


An. God makes promise to none but such as are perfect obseruers of his Law,
which are no where to be found. Therefore all mankind by the Law remains in
danger of the curse.

2 Object. By this means all the promises of the Law should be void of effect
and vain.

An. It is true, unless the goodness of God did help by the Gospel, when it
assigns Christ alone, when he sets Christ for the fulfilling of
righteousness*. Gal. 2.16.


3 Object. That is repayed to the works of the faithful, which God promised
in his Law to the followers of righteousness.

An. But in that repaying or rendering we must always consider the cause, Why
our works be acceptable to God.
which wins favor for our works. And it is three fold: the first, that God
turning away his eyes from beholding the works of his without any help of
works: The second is that he extolleth works, of his fatherly goodness

4 Object. God is no accepter of persons, but in every nation he which does
righteousness is accepted of him.

There is a double accepting of persons.
An. There is a double accepting of persons. First such as man is by nature,
God finds nothing in him, wherewith he may be inclined unto mercy,

Object. The prayers and alms deeds of Cornelius came into the sight of the
Lord*, Act. 10.31
therefore man is prepared by good works to receive grace.

An. Cornelius was already illuminate by the Spirit of wisdom, and also
sanctified, who was a follower of righteousness. Therefore he had from the
grace of God those things which in him did please God, as it is said. Therefore
seeing all men are lost by nature, and God would not have them lost, surely that
accepting does not respect man's righteousness, but it is a pure token and
proof of Gods goodness toward miserable sinners.

5 The second accepting whereof Peter makes

6 And to the end these things may be the better understood, The promyses of
the law.
we must mark, whether the promises be of the law or of the Gospel. For they
must not be taken in one and the same sense. The promises of the Law do always
promise a reward upon condition, if we shall do. But the promises of the
Gospel do rather show what manner persons God his servants be, which have
received his covenant in good earnest, the^ express the cause why God does
good to them.

7 Quest. Why then have good works the title of righteousness given them,
Deu. 6.25. and 24.13. How good works do justify.
and why is it said that a man is justified by them*?

An. They justify if they be perfect works: and we are too blame that they are
not such.

8 Object. We are not justified without faith: neither are we justified by it
alone: works fulfill righteousness. For faith was imputed to Abraham for
righteousness*, Romans 4.3. Genesis 15.6
that notable fact of Phinees is imputed for righteousness Psalm. 106.31. Iud.
25.7. Deuteronomy. 26.26. How faith does justify.
.

9 An. A man is not counted righteous for one or two good works, neither yet
for many: because he which offends in one is guilty of all: neither is
there found any work which is in all respects pure. And faith alone does
justify by laying hold upon Christ our righteousness. In that place Phinees
is counted righteous before men, who praised his fact, not before God.

10 Object. As David says, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven Ps.
112.1
. Psalm. 32.1.
So on the other side Blessed is the man that fears the Lord Psalm. 14.21
: which takes pity upon the poor; Psalm. 1.1.
that has not walked in the counsel of the wicked Iam. 1.12
etc.

An That which Paul says is most true Mat. 5.3.
, that blessedness consists in remission of sins. Romans 4.3
For because those virtues, shall never be in man in such sort that they can be
acceptable to God of them selves it is proved that man shall always be
miserable, unless he be rid out of the misery by forgiveness.

11 Object. James teaches in plain words, that both Abraham was justified by
works, and that all we likewise are justified by works, and not by faith
alone*. Iam. 2.12.


An. James speaks of a dead faith, but we of the lively: the faith of the
devils is handled in that place but we entreat of the faith of the faithful.

12 There is another fallacy in the word Justified. Because it is said there
that Abraham was justified, that is counted just before men in respect of his
works: but we speak of justification before God*.

Object. The doers of the Law are justified and not the hearers*. Romans 4.3.


An. It is true if any man fulfill it.

14 Quest. Why then do the faithful so boldly offer their righteousness to be
examined by the judgment of God, and why do they covet to have sentence given
of them according to it*? Romans 2.13.


An. We are to consider two things therein: first they bring not all their
whole life, but some special cause into judgment. For David says in an other
place*, Psalm. 7.9. and. 27 1. and 18.21. and 26 19.
If thou shall mark iniquity who can abide it? Enter not into judgment with
thy servant*: Again Psalm. 130.3
So David said to Saull, Let the Lord render to every man according to his
righteousness Psalm. 14.30.


Object. Salomo^ says, that he which walks in his integrity is just. 1 Samuel
26.23. Pro. 20.7 and 12 28. Ezech. 18.9.21
After which manner Ezechiel reports that he shall live which shall do
judgment and justice*.

An. But let one of the children of Adam come abroad with so great integrity:
if there be none they must either perish in the sight of God, or else they must
fly to the fortress of mercy: but the Lord after he has once received men
into the covenant of grace, he does not examine their works as they deserve,
but does kiss them with fatherly kindness.

Object. The Apostle wishes so great perfection to the faithful, that they
may be blameless and unreprovable in the day of the Lord*. Ephesians. 1.4. 1 These.
3.23.


An. All the godly must indeed aim at this mark and strive to come unto it,
but because the best manner of this present life is nothing else but a goinge
forward, we shall come to that mark then only, when being unclothed of the
flesh of sin, we shall be wholly joined to the Lord.

CHAP. XVIII. That the righteousenesse of works is ill gathered of the reward.
Object.

1 GOd shall render to every man according to his works*. Mat. 16.29. 2 Cor.
5.10. Romans 2.6 Ioh 5.29. etc Degrees and steps to salvation.


An. The manner of speaking does rather show the order of following, then the
cause. For the Lord does finish our salvation by these degrees of his mercy,
when he calls the elect unto him self, having called them does justify them,
having justified them does glorify them.

Object. It is said to the faithful, that they work out their own salvation*.

An. That is done when by applying the^ selves in doing good works, Ph. 2.12.
they meditate upon eternal life. But the Lord is said both to begin and to
finish*. Ph. 1.6.


2 The kingdom of heaven is not servants wages, but childrens inheritance:
which they alone shall enjoy which are adopted of the Lord to be his children*.
Ephesians. 1.18. Gal. 4.30.


Object. God swear to Abraham, Beccause thou have done this thing, and have not
spared thine own son, I will bless thee, and will multiply thy seed*. Genesis
22.3.


An. He had received the promise before the commandment was given. Therefore
he deserved not the blessing by his obedience.

3 Object. The Lord does either deceive or mock us, when he says that he
renders that for reward to our works, which he had given freely before works.

Why that is attributed to works which is given frielie
An. He does not mock us. Because he will have us exercised by good works to
think upon the giving of those things which he has promised, and to run
through them, that we may come to the blessed hope which is set before us in
the heavens, the fruit of the promises is rightly assigned to them, unto the
ripeness whereof they bring us: Therefore let us say with Peter*, 1 Pet 1.6.
eternal life is the reward of faith.

4 Therefore when the Scripture calls eternal life the reward of works,
Eternal life is the reward of faith.
it does it not to set forth the dignity of our works, as if they deserve such
a reward: but that it may succor our weakness which it does otherwise exercise
with so many griefs, whiles we live here.

5 Object. God who is a just judge will once give to those that be his the
crown of righteousness*. 2 Timothy 4.8.


An. To whom should he give a crown as a just judge, if he had not given grace
as a merciful father? and how should there be righteousness, Grace went
before righteousness.
if grace had not gone before which justifies the wicked?

6 Object. Make you friends of the wicked Mammon, that when you shall need
they may receive you into everlasting habitations*. Lu. 16.9
The same is said of Paul 1 Timothy 6.17.
. Good works are compared to richesse, which we may enjoy in the blessedness
of eternal life.

An. He which gives to the poor, lends to the Lord*. He which sows
plentifully, Mat. 25.4. Pro. 19.17
shall reap plentifully 2 Cor. 6.6
. For those things are put into the hand of the Lord, which are bestowed upon
the pore according to the duty of love. As he is a faithful keeper of that
which is committed to him, so he will once restore it with plentiful overplus.

7 Object. Tribulations are brought upon the faithful, that they may be
accounted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which they suffer: because he is
just to restore affliction to those which afflict you, and to you rest*. 2 Th.
1.5. Heb. 6.10.


An. God the Father will have us whom he has chosen to be his children, to be
made like to Christ his first begotten Romans 8.29: Luke 24.26 Act. 14.22
. As it was meet that he should first suffer, and then at length enter into the
glory of God appointed for him, so must we by many tribulations enter into the
kingdom of heaven. So we are counted worthy of the kingdom of heaven, The
marks of Christ.
which bear in our body the marks of our master, that his life may be made
manifest in us.

8 Object. Love is greater then faith, therefore we are rather justified by
love then by faith*.

An. Love is greater then faith, 1 Cor. 13.13
not that it is more meritorious, but more fruitful: because it farther:
because it serves more: because it is always quick and in force: whereas the
use of faith lasts but for a time. How love is greater then faith


Object. If love be the bond of perfection, therefore

An. But we shall never come unto that perfection unless we fill all the
measures of love.

9 Object Christ said to the Lawyer, If thou will enter into life, keep the
commandments.

An. We are excluded by our sins from the righteousness of the Law, Therefore
we must needs seek another help, that we may enjoy eternal life.

Ioh. 6.26. Faith is a work.
Object. Faith is a work*, therefore it ought not to be set against works.

An. Faith justifies, not inasmuch as it is the obedience of the will of God,
but inasmuch as it embraces the mercy of God.

The law of contraries
Object. There is the same rule of contraries. Therefore if every sin be
counted to us for unrighteousness, it is agreeable that the praise of
righteousness be attributed to every good work.

Iam. 2.10.
An. This maxim has no place here. For if we offend in one we are guilty of
all*. And a man can not be righteous by works, unless he follow this straight
line with a continual course.

CHAP. XIX. Of Christian liberty.
1 NOw must we in treat of Christian liberty, which is as it were an
appurtena^ce of justification, and is of no small force to understand the force
of it.

2 And it consists in three points: the first is that the consciences of the
faithful, when the affiance of their justification before God is to be sought
do lift up themselves above the law, and forget all the whole righteousness of
the law.

Object. Then the Law is superfluous for the faithful. Christian liberty
consists in three things.


An. It is not: because it stirs us up to that which is good. And all the
whole life of Christians ought to be a meditation of Godliness: but before
God, not the law, but Christ, must be set for righteousness.

3 Therefore was Christ made a curse for us, Gal. 3.13. and. 5 1. and. 3.20
that he might redeem us from the curse of the law*.

4 The other which depends upon that former is, 2 Part of christian liberty.
that men's consciences obey the law not as being enforced by the necessity of
the law: but that being free from the yoke of the Law, they do freely and
willingly obey the will of God. And that cannot be so long as we are under
the law.

5 But so soon as we are delivered and freed from this exaction of the law, we
can merrily and with great cheerefulnes answer God, when he calls, and follow
him being our guide. For they which are tied to the yoke of the law, are like
slaves, to whom certain taskes are assigned for every day, they dare not come
in their masters sight, A similitude.
unless they have done their work and task. But children though they have but
done half their task, and have left it imperfect, yet do they without fear and
freely offer themselves to their fathers.

6 That is the cause for which the author of the epistle to the Hebrews, Heb.
11.2.
does refer unto faith what good works soever we read were in the holy
fathers, and does only weigh the^ by faith*. Therefore Paul to the Romans
reasons thus, Sin must not have dominion over us, because we are not under
the law.

7 The third, that we be bound before god with no conscience of outward things
which are of themselves indifferent, 3 About things indifferent.
but that we may indifferently sometimes use them, and sometimes omit them.
The knowledge of this liberty is therefore more necessary for us, because
without it, our consciences shall have no rest, there shall be no end of
superstitions.

Romans 14.14.
8 I know says Paul that nothing is common, but who so thinks any thing
common, to him it is common*. 1 Tit. 4.5.
He is blessed which does not judge himself in that which he allows*. For all
the gifts of God are sanctified by thanksgiving.

Christian liberty is spiritual.
9 And this is diligently to be observed, that christian liberty is spiritual
in all his parts, whose whole force consists in pacifying fearful
consciences A double fall.
but there be two sorts



11 Furthermore, we must avoid offenses, whereof there is one sort which is
given, Double offense
another taken. Given.
Paul teaches the contrary, that we receive the weak. That is called an
offense taken when a thing which is neither evil done, 2 Taken.
nor out of season, is through malice drawn to be occasion of offense. Mat.
25.14.
Such was the offense of the Pharisees*. Therefore we must beware that we
give none offense: if others take it we are blameless.

12 Paul seems to have set down a difference both by doctrine and also by
examples, We must regard the weak
between the weak, of whom we must have great regard, and the Pharisees, to
whom our liberty may not give place. For when he took Timothy to his
company, Act. 16.3.
he circumcised him Gal. 2.3.
. He could not be persuaded to circumcise Titus*. The facts were diverse, but
there was no change of his mind or purpose. When he was free from all, he
made himself a servant to all, that he might save many*: and withstood false
brethren, which says he, 1 Cor. 9.66.
entered in to spy out our liberty which we have in Christ*. Verily we must
study to preserve love, and we must have respect to the edifiying of our
neighbor. 1 Cor. 10.23.
For all things are lawful but all things are not expedient*.

13 Furthermore as our liberty must be subject to love: Liberty must be
subject to love
so on the other side love must be under the pureness of faith. Verily even
here also we must have respect to love, but unto the altars: that is, that
we offend not GOD for our neighbors sake.

14 And now seeing faithful consciences having this prerogative given them,
are not entangled 1 Pet, 1.18.
For it cost Christ not gold, but his own blood*.

The government of man is double.
15 But least any man stumble before he be ware let us mark that there is a
double government in Spiritual.
the other politic, whereby a man is taught the duty of humanity and
civility. Civil.
as it were, two worlds, which both diverse kings and diverse laws do govern.
And yet we must take heed that we do not wickedlie draw unto the civil
order, that which the Gospel teaches concerning spiritual liberty.

Object We must obey the magistrate not one lie for fear of punishment, but
for conscience sake also*. Romans 1*.1.5.
Therefore men's consciences are bound by the politic laws.

What conscience is.
An. Conscience is nothing else but that feeling which does not suffer sins to
lie hid, but draws men unto the judgment seat of the judge.

16 Thereby it comes to pass, that the fruit of a good conscience (which it
the inward integrity of the heart) does come unto men also, The law of God
must not be made subject to man's power.
though it do properly respect God alone. But the laws of God must not be
made subject to man's power.

CHAP. XX. Of prayer which is the principal exercise of faith, and whereby we
do daily receive the benefits of God.
Man's poverty.
1 BY that which goes before we plainly perceive how needy and empty man is
of all good things, and how he wants all helps of salvation. Therefore if he
seek helps to relieve his poverty withal, he must needs go without him
self: to wit, unto the Lord, who does give himself unto us of his own accord,
and freely, in his son, in whom he offers us in steed of our misery,
felicity, and sets open to us the heavenly treasures: that all our faith
may behold his well-beloved son, that all our expectation may depend upon him,
that all our hope may rest in him. It remains that we seek in him, and that
by prayer we crave at his hands, that which is wanting in our selves, and
which we have learned to be in him. For as the Apostle witnesses, like as
faith springs from the Gospel, Romans 8.26.
so by the same faith our hearts are framed to call upon the name of God*.

2 Therefore we obtain that by the benefit of prayer that we pearce unto
those riches which are laid up for us with our heavenly father. Prayer is a
conference with God
For it is a certain talking of men with God, whereby they enter into the
sanctuary of heaven, and do face to face call to him touching his promises,
that they may try that that was not vain, (when necessity so requires) which
they believed when he affirmed it only in word.

3 Ob. Does not God know what is expedient for us, without he have one to tell
him, The fruits of prayer.
and to put him in mind?

An. God has ordained that not so much for his own sake, as for ours: First,
that our heart may always be inflamed with a fervent desire to seek, love, it
self may confirm in our minds his providence, power, and goodness.

The laws of prayer.
4 Furthermore we must observe four rules, if we will make our prayer aright:
The first is, that we be

5 Because nothing is more contrary to the reverence of God, then that
lightness, a witness of too wanton licentiousness, and without all fear.
Wherein we must labor so much the more earnestly, the harder we find it to
be. To this end tends the lifting up of our hands: that men may remember that
they are far from God, unless they lift up their senses on high. The
liftinge up of the hands.
Also we must beware that we ask no more then God gives us leave to ask in
his word.

Object. He promises that he will do according to the will of the godly*.
Psalm. 92.^.


An. His tender bearing with the godly proceeds not so far, that he gives
the bridle to their wicked affections, and submits himself to their
pleasure. Therefore we must hold that of John. This is our confidence, 1 Ioh.
5.14.
that if we ask any thing according to his will he hears us. The affection
of the heart toward God.
But as it is meet that we bend the sight of our mind to God, so the affection
of the heart must follow thither also. Because both are carried another way, it
is needful that God by his spirit do succor and relieve this weakness*.
Romans 8.20. 2 Cor. 14.16.


6 Let this be another law, that in asking we do always truly feel our
poverty: and that thinking and feeling indeed that we need al things which we
ask, we may join the fervent affection of obtaining with prayer it self.

7 Object. We are not always urged to pray with like necessity. 2 Law. The
feelinge of our Poverty does inflame Prayer. Iam. 5.13. Perseverance in
prayer. Repentance. Ioh. 9.3.


An. I grant: and this distinction is profitablie delivered to us by James*.
Is any man sad among you, let him pray: let him that is meerie sing. Therefore
common sense tells us what we ought to do in this case. We must pray
continually, because we are continually in need and necessity. And because God
hears not sinners* true prayer requires repentance, which is far from all
hypocrisy and deceit.

8 Unto these let us add the third also, that he abandon all thinking upon
his own glory, 3 Law. Let glory and pride be far from prayer
whosoever he be that presents himself before God to make his prayer, giving
all the glory to God in the casting down of himself: least if we take to
our selves but a very little, we do through our own swelling, fall away from
his face. Dan. 6.17.
We have examples of this submissio^ in Daniel Psa. 143.2.
, David Ies. 64.5.
, Iesaias, Jeremy Ier. 14.7.
, and others Bar. 2.18. Note.
.

9 Finally the beginning and also the preparation of true prayer, is, craving
of pardon, with an humble and free confession of our fault. Neither shall even
the most holy man obtain any thing, until he be freely reconciled:
neither can it be that God should be favorable to any other, but to those whom
he pardons*. When Christ healed the man sick of the palsy, he said, Thy
sins are forgiven thee Mat. 9.2.
, Psalm. 25.


10 Object. Holy men do sometimes seem to cite and crave the help of their
own righteousness to entreat God*. Psalm. 86.1. 2 Kin. 20.4.


An. By such forms of speech they mean nothing else, but that they testify
by their regeneration that they are the servants and children of God, to whom
he promises to be merciful*. Ioh. 3.22.


11 The fourth is, that being thus cast down with true humility, 4 Law Hope
is necessary in Prayer.
we be nevertheless encouraged to prayer with sure hope to obtain our
petitions.

Object. These things are contrary, to join sure hope of favor, with the
feeling of the just vengeance of God.

Repentance and faith are companions.
An. They agree very well, if the goodness of God set upon foot, such as are
oppressed with their own misery. So repentance and faith are companions,
whereof notwithstanding the one terrifieth us, and the other makes us glad: so
in prayer those two must meet together. Psalm. 5.8.
So David, I will worship in the temple of thy holiness with fear*.

Coma^dements required in Prayer. Psalm 33.22. and 56.10.
12 Therefore we hold with assured confidence that God is favorable and
merciful to us: otherwise there shall be no use of prayer. For which cause the
whole church prays*, Let thy mercy be upon us, as we have hoped in thee.

Commandment
13 Also when he bids us pray, he does by the very same commandment
reprove us of wicked stubbornness, Psalm. 50.15. Mat. 7.7 The promise.
unless we obey*. Unto prayer there is joined also a promise, that he will
be favorable and entreated, least being disobedient, and convict of unbelief,
we mistrust God when he calls.

14 And it is a wonder, that we are either coldly or almost no way moved with
the sweetness of his promises, so that a great part had rather wander in bie
ways: and having left the fountain of living waters, dig to themselves dry
cesternes, then embrace the liberality of God offered unto them freely. The
name of the Lord is a strong tower, the just man shall fly to it, and be
saved*. A similitude Pro. 18.10. Joel 2.32.
Therefore let the faithful being persuaded of the fatherly love of God,
always commit themselves to his faithful keeping, neither let them doubt to
crave the help which he promises: yet does not a careless security lift
them up, but they clime up by degrees of his promises, yet so that they remain
humble in their own abasement.

15 Object God granted the prayers of Ioatham and Sampson, Iud. 9.20.
Iud. 16.^8.
which notwithstanding proceeded not from a quiet mind.

An. A continual law of God is not abolished Those prayers which God hears
do not always please him.
that the godly may pray with more affiance and feruentnes. So God being
moved with the feigned repentance of Achab, taught how easy he is to be
entreated of his elect.

16 This is also worth the noting, that those things which we have spoken of
the four rules of praying aright, are not so strictly required, that God
refuses those prayers, wherein he can not find either perfect faith, or
repentance, together with feruentnesse of zeal, and well ordered petitions.
For we see with what vehemency of sorrow David was carried away when he
said*, Psalm. 39.14.
Cease from me until I go hence and be not.

Therefore the endeavors of the faithful do please GOD, howsoever they be
not free from all lettes, and their prayers are allowed, so they please
forward thither whyther they come not straight.

17 And forasmuch as there is no man worthy to represent himself before God,
the heavenly father himself, to the end he might exempt us from shame and
fear, The mediator
gave us his son to be our mediator, by whose guiding we may safely draw
near* trusting to such a mediator, 1 Timothy 3.8. 1 Ioh. 2.1. Ioh. 14.13. and
16.26.
that nothing which we ask in his name shall be denied us, as the father can
deny him nothing*. They err which follow any other way. Because all the
promises of God are in Christ, Yea, and Amen 2 Cor. 1.20.
.

18 And we must diligently consider the circumstance of the time, when Christ
commands his Disciples to fly to his intercession, after that he is
ascended into heaven, In that hour, says he, ye shall ask in my name*. Ioh
16.26.
It is certain that from the beginning none were heard which did pray, save
only for the mediators sake. For this cause the Lord appointed in the law
that the Priest alone should enter into the sanctuary, and carry upon his
shoulders the names of the Tribes of Israel: to this end auailed the
sacrifice, The glory of the mediator did more plainly appear by the
ascension of Christ.
that the prayers might be established: Being helped by these rudiments they
embraced the Mediator, whose glory notwithstanding did more clearelie shine
by his ascension.

19 Furthermore, forasmuch as he is the only way to God, there is nothing
left for those which turn aside, in the throne of God besides anger, judgment
and terror.

Object. The saints have their intercessions left them, whereby they do
mutuallie commend the safety one of another*. 2 Timothy 2.1.


An. They be such as depend upon that only, so far of is it that they any
whit diminish it. The intercession of the saints


20 Ob. Christ is the mediator of redemption: and the faithful of
intercession.

An. As if Christ having performed the mediatorship which lasts only for a
time, has turned over the eternal mediatorship which never shall have end
unto his servants. 1 Ioh. 2.1. Romans 8.31. 1 Tit. 2.5.
The scripture says otherwise, if any man sin, we have an advocate with the
father Jesus Christ*.

21 As touching the Saints who being dead in the flesh do live in Christ, The
intercession of the dead.
if we attribute any prayer to them, let us not dream that they have any
other way to entreat God but Christ. Therefore the scripture calls us back
unto Christ alone, who is the only way to the father*. Job 14 6.
He is our mouth by which we speak to the father: our eye wherewith we see
the father: our right hand whereby we offer our selves to the father.

22 But folly is gone so far, that we have here the nature of superstition
expressed, which after it has once gotten the head, makes no end of
wantonness. For unto the intercession of Saints was added the particular
procuration of every one, and according to the diversity of business,
sometimes one, sometimes another was called upon, to be advocate: then every
man had his several Saint, Safegarding Gods.
to whose tuition they committed themselves as to the tuition of safegarding
Gods.

23 Object. The prayers of the faithful are carried by the hands of Angels
into the sight of God.

An. The Angels are appointed to take charge of our safety*, not dead men.
Heb. 1.14. Psalm. 91 11. and 34.8.


Object. If Moses and Samuel shall stand before me, my soul is not toward
this people Ier. 25.1.
: therefore the dead make intercession for us.

An. But seeing it appears thereby that they prayed not for the people, it is
then concluded that the dead do not pray at all: But the Lord does only
pronounce that he will not spare the wickedness of the people, although they
had some Moses or Samuel, at whose prayers and intercession he became so
merciful.

24 Quest. Shall we then take from them al prayer and desire of godliness, who
during their whole life did breath out nothing but godliness and love?

An. They long for with an immovable will the kingdom of God, which
consists no less in the destruction of the wicked then in the salvation of
the godly.

Object. Those men which live upon earth do one commend another to God by their
prayers.

An. This duty serves to nourishe love among them, Why those which are alive
pray one for another.
when as they do as it were divide their necessities among themselves, and
mutuallie take upon them the same. And this they do according to the
commandment of the Lord, neither do they want a promise: which two things are
always chief in prayer.

Ob. It cannot be but that they must retain the same love toward us, as they
are joined with us in one faith.

The Saints neither hear nor see what we do.
An. Yet who has revealed that they have so long ears, as to reach to our
voices? and that they have eyes so quick of sight, which watch to see whereof we
stand in need?

Ob. They behold and look down from above upon men's affairs, in the
brightness of the countenance of God casting his beams upon them, as in a
myrrour.

An. That can be confirmed by no testimony of scripture.

25 Object. Jacob requesteth to have his name and the name of his fathers
Abraham and Isaach to be called upon over his posterity. The calling upon a
name over any man Genesis 48.16.


An. He prays that he may send the succession of the covenant unto his
posterity: and that they may be called the children of Abraham Isaach, and
Jacob.

Ob. Isaias affirms that the name of the men is called upon over the woman*.
Isa. 4.1.


An. When as they count the^ for their husbands under whose faith and tuition
they live.

Object. God is besought to have mercy upon the people for David's sake. Psalm.
132.10


An. There is respect had rather of the covenant then of the man, under a
figure the only intercession of Christ is avouched.

26 Object. We read often that the prayers of Saints were heard*. Psalm. 22.5.


An. Therefore let us also pray as they did, and we shall be heard as they were.

27 Let this be the sum, seeing that the scripture commends this unto us,
as a principal point The conclusion.
our prayers cannot be directed unto others without manifest sacrilege*:
Again, for as much as God will be called upon only in faith: and does
command Psalm. 44.22.
seeing that faith having her foundation in the word is the mother 2 Kinds of
prayer.


28 And although prayer be restrained unto wishes and petitions, yet there is
so great aliance between petition and tha^ksgiuing, that they may fitly be
comprehended under one name. 1 Petition
In asking we crave as well those things which serve to set forth his glory, 2
Thankesgiuinge
as those which are profitable and serve to our own use. In giving thanks we
set forth and extol his benefits toward us with due praise, thanking his
liberality for all those good things which come unto us. Why perseverance in
Prayer is necessary
Let both be used in the Church continually, seeing necessity urges us,
Satan lies in wait, we are overwhelmed with sins, and the hand of God is
open to do good: Moreover it is both commanded, and also the use of other
good things without praise is hurtful.

We must apoint hours for prayer
29 This continuance of prayer, though it principally concern every man's
private prayers, yet it does somewhat appertain unto the public prayers of
the Church also: and it is expedient that we have hours appointed for them. We
must fly vain babbling and also vain glory*: 1 Cor. 14.40. Mat. 6.7.
we must seek some secret place. Yet we may pray in all places, and not
neglect publik or private prayers, but always join both together. And let us
especially note this, that prayer must proceed from the inward affection of
the heart.

The use of Churches
30 Now as the Lord in his word commands the faithful to make public
prayers, so there must likewise be public Churches assigned wherein they may
have the same: for the Lord has promised that he will do whatsoever two or
three gathered together in his name shall ask*. Mat. 18.20.


31 Again, it appears most evidently hereby that neither the voice, nor
singing are any thing worth, Singinge. The voce.
unless they proceed from the deep affection of the heart. Nay rather they
provoke his wrath against us, if they come only from the lips and throat:
forasmuch as that is to abuse his holy name, eI 29.13. Mat. 12.8
and to mock his majesty*. We commend the voice and singing as helps of
prayer, inasmuch as they accompany the pure affection of the mind.

32 The rite of singing in churches, The rite of singinge has bin of long
continuance.
was not only most ancient, but it was also used of the Apostles*. And surely
if singing be tempered after that gravity which becomes the sight of God and
Angels, it does both win favor and dignity to holy actions, and also it is
of great force to stir up our minds unto the true study of praying: 1 Cor
14.13. Coll 3.16.
notwithstanding we must beware that our ears be not more attentive to mark
the note, then our minds to the spiritual meaning of the words.

33 Whereby it is evident likewise, that public prayers must be made not in a
strange language, To pray in a strange tongue.
but in a common kind of speech: for as much as they ought to be made for the
edifiyng of all the whole church to the which there comes no profit at all
by a sound not understood*. 2 Cor. 14.16.
The secret muttering of Hanna, 1 Samuel 1.13.
does show that the tongue is not necessary for private prayers*.

34 Now we must learn a more certain way and form of prayer: namely, The
Lords. prayer. Mat, 6.9. Luke. 11.2.
that which the father has delivered to us by his beloved son*: where we may
know his infinite goodness. For he has prescribed a form, wherein he has set
before us as in a table whatsoever is lawful for us to ask of him, whatsoever
is profitable for us, and whatsoever we have need to ask.

35 And this rule is set down in six petitions: The division in to 6 petitions
the former three are peculiarly appointed for the glory of God, without
respect of our own profit. The other three, have care of us, and are
properly appointed for asking those things which are for our use. Now let us
take in hand the exposition of the prayer it self.

Our father which art in heaven.
Father.
36 When we call him father, we allege the name of Christ the mediator. For
with what boldness could any man call God, father, unless we were adopted
in Christ to be the children of grace*? Ioh. 1 12. 1 Ioh. 3.1.
By this sweetness of the word, he delivers us from al doubting, seeing
there is no where to be found a greater affection of love then that of a
father. He will never forget us*. Ies. 49.15.
Therefore we ought not to seek help any where else but there, unless we
reproach him with poverty or cruelty.

2 Cor. 13. Lu. 15.20.
but that he will receive and be beneficial to those which submit them selves
and crave pardon*.

38 Lastly of all when we call him ours in common, we are thereby taught how
great affection of Our.
by the same right of free liberality. And let us pray for all*, but chiefly
for those which are of the household of faith*. Ephesians. 2.24. Gal. 6.20.


39 We may pray especially both for our selves, and also for certain others,
yet so that our mind depart not from the beholding the comminaltie. Special
prayer


40 When we say that he is in heaven, we signify that he is not kept in some
one country, because the Which art in heaven. 1 Kin. 8.37 Ie. 60.1.
that when we seek him we may be lifted up above all sense of body and soul.
Secondly he is set above all change

Hallowed be thy name.
41 The sum of the first petition, is, The first petition.
that we desire that God may have the honor whereof he is worthy, that men may
never speak or think of him without great reverence: against which profaning
is set. By Name, we mean his power, goodness, wisdom, righteousness,
mercy, truth, which carry us to wonder at him, and provoke us to set forth his
praise. Name
Therefore we desire that that name may be sanctified, and that God will deliver
that holy name from all reproach and contempt, Hallowed
yea that he will bring all mankind under his reverence: and that all
ungodliness may be abolished.

Let thy kingdom come.
42 The kingdom of God has two parts: one The parts of the kingdom of God.
Secondly that he will frame all our senses unto the obedience of his
government:

Thy will be done.
43 We speak not in this place of the secret will of God, whereby God does
govern all things, The third. The will of God is double
and appoint them to their end: but of that which is made known to us by the
Scriptures, whereto willing obedience does answer. And therefore the heaven
and earth are expresselie compared together. Therefore we are commanded to
desire, that like as nothing is done in heaven, but according to the
commandment of God, and the Angels are meekely framed unto all
righteousness: so the earth may be brought under such government, as
stubburnnesse and frowardness being extinguished.

Give us this day our daily bread.
The second part. The 4 petition.
44 The second part follows now, wherein we descend to our own profit. By
this we ask in general of God, all things which the use of the body
needs, under the elements of this world: we commit our selves to his keeping
and providence, that he may feed, Bread Our. Daily
foster and save us. This is no light exercise of faith. We ask bread, that
we may be contented with that portion which God gives. We call it ours in
respect of the gift: and daily, that the immoderate desire of transitory
things may be bridled in us

Forgive us our debtes.
The fifth.
45 In this and the next, Christ has briefly comprehended what soever makes
for the heavenly life. Like as the spiritual covenant consists only upon
these two members, which covenant God has made for the salvation of his
Church, I will write my laws in their hearts, and I will be merciful to their
iniquity*. Ier. 31.33. and. 33 8. Sins are debts
He calls sins debtes, because we owe the punishment thereof, neither could
we by any means make satisfaction, unless we should be discharged by this
remission, and we desire to have this remission, as we forgive our debtors:
Remission conditional.
that is, as we spare all men, and pardon all men, by whom soever we have bin
hurt in a thing, either by deed or word. Therefore unless we forgive we shall
not be forgiven. And yet there is no merit in our remission, but the Lord meant
by this means to help the weakness of our faith, that it may be not a cause,
but a sign of our debt which is forgiven us.

And lead us not etc.
46 Because we have a continual combat, The Sixth.
we desire to be furnished with weapons, and to be aided, that we may be able
to get the victory. Tentations are manifest.
And now there be many forms of temptations. For even the evil desires of
the mind which provoke us How god does lead into temptation.
to become the bondslaues of Satan: which is a sure testimony and token of
his vengeance.

For thine is the kingdom.
47 Furthermore this is the sound rest of our faith, to wit, that the kingdom
is Gods, and the power and the glory for ever. Amen is added, whereby is
expressed the earnestness of our desire to obtain those things which we have
asked of God.

48 We have what so ever we ought to ask of God taught us by Christ, Mat. 17.5.
whom the Father has appointed to be our teacher*, Mat. 17.5.
and who is his eternal wisdom Ies. 11.2
. Therefore this prayer is most perfect,

We must add nothing.
49 And yet we are not tied to the words, or sillables, but are taught that no
man may ask any other thing, then that which is summarily contained in this
prayer.

50 And although we ought always to sigh and to pray without ceasing lifting
up our minds unto God yet forasmuch as our weakness is such, as that it has
need to be helped with many helps, let every man appoint him self certain
hours for exercise sake, which let him not omit without prayer. And let be
far from us all superstititious observing of time and places.

Perseverance with certainty
51 If having our minds framed to this obedience, we suffer our selves to be
governed by the laws of Gods providence, we shall easily learn to persevere
in prayer, and with longing desires patiently to wait for the Lord: being also
sure that though he appear not, yet is he always present with us, and that in
his time he will declare, that he heard our prayers, which in men's sight
seemed to be neglected.

52 But and if at length after long waytinge our sense do not perceive what
good we have done by praying, We have always that which is expedient. Ioh.
5.25.
yet our faith shall assure us, that we have obtained that which was expedient,
seeing that the Lord does so often and so surely promise that he will have
regard of our troubles*, after that they be once laid down in his bosom. And
by this means he shall bring to pass that we shall in poverty abundance, and
in affliction, consolation.

CHAP. XXI. Of the eternal election whereby God has appointed some to
salvation, and some to destruction.
1 ANd now whereas the covenant of life is not preached in like sort among all
me^, and whereas it takes not like place, either equally, or perpetually among
those to w^^^ it is preached: The depth of Gods judgment.
the depth of the wonderful judgment of God does therein show it self. For
undoubtedly this diversity serves the free choice of Gods eternal election.
Whereas salvation is offered to some: and some are kept from hearing the same:
Fruits of predestination.
by this we have three most sweet fruits. First that we have salvation by the
mere liberality Curious men
lest they enter into a maze, whereof they shall find no end, and that they
may follow the word without which they shall always go astray.

2 We are come into the way of faith says Augustine*, let us hold the same
steadfastly, Aug. Homil. in Ioh. 35.
it will bring us unto the kings chamber, wherein all the treasurs of knowledge
and wisdom are hid.

3 Object. The mention of predestination must be buried as an hard and
dangerous matter. The mention of predestination is not to be buried.


An. That is to reprove the Spirit, and to backbite him, who has revealed
those things in word, which were profitable to be suppressed.

Object. It is the glory of God to co^ceale a word*.

An. Secrets, says Moses belong to our God, but he has revealed these things
to us and to our children*. Deuteronomy. 29.29


4 Object. All this whole disputation is dangerous for godly minds, because
it is an enemy to exhortations, it shakes faith, it troubles the heart it
self.

An. Let us not search out the things which the Lord has left hidden, Things
to be avoided.
let us not neglect the things Aug. Lib. 5. de. Genesis ad Lit:
lest it forsake our weakness*.

5 Object. Foreknowledge is the cause of predestination.

An. The one is wrongfully made subject to the other. When we attribute
foreknowledge to God, our meaning is that all things have always been under
his eyes, What fore knowledge is. Predestination.
and in his sight, as present. And we call predestination the eternal decree
of God, whereby he determined with him self, what he would have to become of
every man. For men are not created to like estate: General election.
but for some eternal life: and for some eternal death, is appointed. Whereby
his free election is made manifest, seeing it lies in his will, what shall be
the estate of every nation. Whereof God showed a token in the whole issue of
Abraham*. Deuteronomy. 32.8. and 4.37. etc. Particular Election.


6 There is also a certain special election, wherein appears more plainly
the grace of God, seeing that of the same stock of Abraham God rejected some,
Psalm. 78.69 and 47.20. Mat. 1.2.
as Ismael, Esau: and at length almost all the ten tribes of Israel: he
shows that he retains others among his children, in nourishing them in the
Church.

7 Quest. Why is not the general election of one people always sure and
certain?

An. Because God does not straight way give those the Spirit of regeneration
with whom he makes a covenant, by the power of which Spirit they may continue
until the end in the same covenant. The sum tends to this end, that God in
his eternal and unchangeable counsel has appointed, whom he would in time
to come take to salvation: and whom again he would adiudge to destruction. Two
testimonies of election
the entry of life is shut before them, by his just, but yet by his
incomprehensible judgment. In the elect is calling, which justification does
follow (being two testimonies of election) until they come to glory. But by
excluding the reprobate either from the knowledge of his name, or from the
sanctification of his Spirit, he declares what manner judgment is prepared for
them.

CHAP. XXII. The confirmation of this doctrine by testimonies of Scripture.
Object. 1 AS God forseeth that every man's merits shall be, so he
distinguishes between men. Therefore whom he knows before not to be
unworthy of his grace, them he adopteth to be his children: Of the fore
knowledge of merits
and look whose natures he sees will be bent unto wickedness, them he gives
over unto the damnation of death.

An. That is filthily to darken election by putting in the veil of
foreknowledg. Ephesians. 1.4.
Surely when Paul teaches that we were elect in Christ before the creation of
the world, he takes away all respect of our worthiness.

2 Object. That appertains unto the age wherein the Gospel was first preached.

An. This is so filthy an invention that it needs none answer.

2 Timothy 3.9.
3 He has called us, says Paul*, with an holy calling, not according to our
works, but according to his purpose, and the grace which was given us by
Christ, Election is the cause of good works.
before the word began. Therefore he did not foresee us to be holy, but he has
chosen us that we might be holy.

Object. God repayeth the grace of election to merits going before,
notwithstanding he grants it for those which are to come.

Whence holiness comes. Ephesians. 1.5. Genesis 48.19.
An. Holiness is derived from election as from his cause*, and not on the
contrary.

4 Therefore says the Lord*, Jacob have I loved but Esau have I hated. If
foreknowledge were of any importance in this difference of the brethren, it
should be out of season to make mention of the time, seeing they were not yet
borne.

Examples Genesis 58.19
5 So rejecting Ismaell, he choseth Isaach. Setting aside Manasses, he does
more honor Ephraim*.

The force of the first birth.
6 Object. We must not determine of the sum of the life to come by these
inferior and small benefits: that he which has bin advanced unto the honor
of the first birth, should therefore be reckened to be adopted unto the
inheritance of heaven.

An. The Apostle was not deceived, neither did abuse the Scriptur: but he saw
that God meant to declare by an earthly sign the spiritual election of Jacob,
which otherwise lay hid in his inaccessible throne. Like as the pledge of the
heavenly habitation was annexed to the land of Chanaan.

Object. God foreseeth all things which he does not.

An. Seeing Peter says in Luke*, Act. 2.21
that Christ was by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God appointed
to death, he does not bring in God as a beholder, but as the author of
salvation.

7 Object. He reckeneth Judas among the elect, How Judas was among the elect.
whereas he was a devil.

An. This is referred unto his Apostolical office, which though it were an
excellent myrrour of the favor of God, yet it does not contain in it hope of
eternal salvation.

8 Object. Ambrose, Origene, Hierome thought that God does distribute his grace
among men, as he foreseeth that every man will use it well.

An And Augustine also was of that mind*, Lib. retract 1. cap. 11.
but when he had better profited in the knowledge of the Scripture, he did not
only call it back as evidently false, but did strongly confute it writing
against the Pelagians.

9 Object. The foreknowledge of merits is not indeed the cause of
predestination on the behalf of the act of predestinating: but on our behalf
it may after a sort be so called: Thomas fu. 1. sect. Tract. 25 Quest. 13. The
goodness of God the cause of election.
namely according to the particular estimation of predestination.

An. On the other side when the Lord will have us behold nothing in election,
but mere goodness, if any man desire to see any more there, it shall be a
disordered greediness.

Object. Glory is predestinate for the elect after a sort, according to their
deserts: because God does predestinate grace to them whereby they may deserve
glory.

Predestination is the handmaid of election.
An. Yea predestination unto grace serves the election of God, and is as it
were her handmaid. For grace is predestinate for them to whom the possession of
glory is long time assigned: because the Lord brings his children to
justification from election.

20 Object. God should be contrary to him self, if he inuit all men
generally to come to him, and do only admit a few whom he has chosen.

An. The generality of the promises does not take away the difference of
special grace.

Quest. How shall these two be reconciled, that all should be called unto
repentance and faith by outward preaching, and yet the Spirit of repentance and
faith should not be given to all?

Amos. 4.7. and. 8 11.
An. He which threatens that when it rayneth upon one city, there shall be
drought upon another*: he which elsewhere denounces a famine of doctrine, does
not bind him self with a certain law to call all men alike: Act. 16.6.
and he which forbids Paul to preach the word in Asia, and turning him from
Bithinia draws him into Macedonia, does show that he is at liberty to
distribute this treasure to whom he will.

Object. There is a mutual consent between faith and the word.

An. Namely whersoeuer faith is. But it is no new thing that the word does fall
among thorns, or in stony places*: Mat. 13.4.
not only because the more part is indeed stubburn against God, but because all
have not eyes and ears.

Quest. How then shall it agree and hang together, that God does call those
unto him, who he knows will not come.

An. Augustine answers*, Will thou dispute with me? wonder with me and cry
out, O depth! August de ver. Apost. Ser. 11. Ephesians 1.3. Note.
Let us both agree together in fear lest we perish in error. Moreover if
election as Paul witnesses be the mother of faith, then faith is not
general, because election is special.

11 Furthermore as Jacob is received into favor having as yet deserved
nothing by good works: So Esau is hated being as yet polluted with no
wickedness. Whereby it appears that the foundation of predestination is not in
good works. And to this end are the reprobate raised up that the glory of God
may be made manifest through them. The end of reprobation.
Therefore if we cannot allege any reason why God vouchsafes his of mercy,
save only because it pleases him that it should be so: neither shall we have
any thing else in rejecting the other but his will. For as he has mercy on
whom he will, Rom: 9.18,
so he hardneth whom he will*.

CHAP. XXIII. A refutation of the slanders wherewith this doctrine has
always been wrongfully burdened.
Object. 1 THere is indeed in God election, but not reprobation.

An. Election it self should not stand unless it were set against reprobation.
Whom God rejects.
Therefore whom God passes over he rejects adopting the rest unto salvation:
Whence comes that saying of Christ Every tree which my father has not
planted, Mat. 15.13.
shall be plucked up by the roots.*

Object. God does not altogether reject those whom in lenity he suffers:
but he waits to see whether they will repent or no.

An. As if Paul does attribute patience to God, whereby he waits for their
conversion, who he says are made fit for destruction*. Romans 9.20.


Object. The vessels of wrath are said to be prepared to destruction, and that
God has prepared the vessels of mercy, because by this means Paul ascribes
to God the praise of salvation, and lays the blame of perdition upon those
who of their own accord do bring it upon them selves*. Romans 9.21


An. God hardens whom he will. Whereupon it follows that the hidden
counsel of God is the cause of hardening.

The cause of hardening.
2 Quest. By what right is God angry with his creatures, which have not
offended him before, in any thing? For to adiudge to destruction whom he will,
is more agreeable to the lust of a tyrant, then to the lawful sentence of a
judge.

The will of God is the rule of justice.
An. It is a point of bold wickedness even so much as to enquire the causes of
Gods will: seeing it is the cause of all things which are, and ought worthily to
be. Yea it is the only and sole rule of justice.

3 Quest. Why has God from the beginning predestinate some unto death, who
seeing they were not as yet, could not deserve as yet the judgment of death?

Men are naturally subject to death.
An. If all those be subject to the judgment of death by natural condition,
whom the Lord does predestinate unto death, of what iniquity of his toward
them, shall they complain? seeing man is the cause of his own damnation?

4 Quest. Were they not predestinate before by the ordinance of God unto that
corruption, which is now pretended for the cause of damnation?

An. I confess indeed that all the children of Adam are fallen into this
misery of condition, A similitude
by the will of God. But O man who art thou that disputest with God? Has not
the potter power to make of the same lump one vessel to honor, and an other to
dishonor? Romans 9 20


Object. The justice of God is not so defended. For it seems that there is
nothing else said in this place, but that God has such power as can not be
hindered, but that he may do whatsoever he will.

An. God is righteous and hates iniquity. But and if we cannot comprehend his
judgments, Epist. 106.
will we therefore be so bold as to disalow them?

5 I say with Augustine, that they are created of God who without doubt he
knew before should go into destruction, Faithful ignorance is better then
rash knowledge. Aug. de. verit. Apost Ser. 20
and that was so done because he would have it so. But why he would, it is not
for us to require Because faithful ignorance is better then rash knowledge*.
Paul rested, because he found wondering*. We learn to speak well, when we
speak with God Romans 11.32
.

6 Quest. Why should God impute those things for sin unto men, the necessity
whereof he has laid upon them by his predestination?

An. God, says Solomon*, Pro. 16.4
has made all things for him self, even the wicked man for the evil day.
Therefore even from their mothers womb they are borne the children of death,
who by their destruction glorify his name.

Object. There is no necessity laid upon them by the providence of God, but
they are rather created of God in that estate, because he foresawe their
wickedness which was to come.

An. Life and death are rather actions of Gods will, then of his foreknowledge,
therefore it is in vain to move any question about his foreknowledge, All
things come to pass by ordinance.
where it is certain that all things come to pass rather by ordinance and
commandment.

7 Object. This is not extant in plain words that it was decreed by God, that
Adam should perish by his fall.

An. As if the self same God, who, as the Scripture does declare does
whatsoever he will, An absurdity.
created the noblest of all his creatures to an uncertain end.

The free will of Adam.
Object. He had free will, to shape his own fortune: and God appointed
nothing, but to handle him as he deserved.

An. Where shall that omnipotency of God be then, whereby he governs all
things according to his secret counsel, which does not depend upon any other?

The distinction of sufferance and will.
8 Object. The wicked perish, God suffering, and not willing their destruction.

An But why should he suffer it save only because he will have it so? I say
with Augustine*, that the will of God is the necessity of things: and that that
must needs come to pass which he shall will: like as those things shall truly
come to pass which he has foreseen. The cause of evil is in man, because
those things which God made were very good Lib. 6. de gen ad litteram. cap 15.
.

9 For though man was created by the eternal providence of God, to that
calamity whereto he is subject, Genesis 1 31. The matter of evil is of man
yet he took the matter thereof of himself, and not of God, because he is so
lost by none other means save only because he is degenerate from the pure
creation of God, unto corrupt wickedness.

Acceptinge of persons
10 Object. There should be then accepting of persons with God, which the
Scripture does every where deny: therefore either the Scripture is contrary
to it self, or else there is respect of merits in the election of God.

An. In that God chooses one man and refuses an other, that does not come from
the respect of man, but from his mercy alone, for which it ought to be free to
utter and show it self when and so often as he will.

11 Object. If God find all men guilty let him punish all alike: if
guiltless, let him withold the rigor of his judgment from all.

An. All are guilty: but the mercy of God releeueth and succoureth certain.

Object. Let it succor all.

An. It is meet that by punishing he likewise show him self to be a just
judge. Note. Grace gives without merit.
In giving to some that which they do not deserve, he declares his free grace:
in not giving it to all, he declares what all deserve.

12 Object. By this means all desire of well doing falls flat to the ground.
Predestination does not take away the desire of well doing.
For if God have decreed salvation, he will bring us unto it in his time: if he
have appointed death, we should in vain strive against it.

An. But Paul says, that we are chosen to this end, that we may lead an holy
and unblameable life*. Ephesians. 1.4.
If holiness of life be the end of election, it ought rather to awake us to
think thereupon joyfully, then to serve to be a cloak for sluggishnesse.

13 Object. Such doctrine overthrows all exhortations to live godlily.

An. Paul was an open and loud proclaimer of election*: 1 Th. 4.7. Ephesians. 2.10.
was be therefore cold in admonishing and exhorting? Christ commands to
believe in him: and yet he says, No man can come unto me, but he to whom it
shall be given of my Father*. Ioh. 6.61.
Therefore we must preach godliness, that God may be wor-aright, aright, and
likewise predestination, that he which has ears to hear of the grace of God
may glory in God and not in himself.

A Caution
14 Notwithstanding let offense be avoided wisely, so much as may be. For it is
necessary that those things which are spoken truly, be also spoken
appertinentlie.

CHAP. XXIIII. That election is confirmed by the calling of God, and that the
reprobate do bring upon them selves the just judgment whereto they are
appointed.
The proof of Election
1 ANd God by his calling does make election manifest. The order of election
For whom he knew before, them also he has ordained before, whom he has
ordained; Romans 8.26.
partly by the power of the Spirit, who is called the seal and earnest of the
inheritance to come*.

Ih. 15. Ephesians. 1.11
Quest. Why does he not teach all men, that they may come to Christ?

An. Whom he teaches them he teaches in mercy: whom he does not teach, he
does not teach in judgment, Romans 9.13 Calling is free.
because he has mercy on whom he will, and hardens whom he will*. For his
calling is free.

2 And we have and see in the Prophet, to whom he offers his word*: I am
found of those which sought me not: I have plainly appeared to those, which
did not ask me.

3 Object. God gives us his Spirit that we may believe.

An. We do not so make man Gods fellow labourer.

Object. We must hang election upon faith, for it is doubtful and
ineffectual, until it be confirmed by faith.

An. Election does not depend upon faith, Whence says comes.
but faith, which we receive when we be enlightened by preaching, and the
brightness of the holy ghost makes us not to doubt of our election.

4 Thereby it comes to pass that we remain stable against the grievous and
dangerous temptations wherewith Satan strikes the faithful, Whence our
stabilitie comes.
whiles that disquieting them with doubting of their election, he does also
provoke them to a wicked desire to seek the same out of the way.

5 Therefore if we seek to be sure of our election, Mat. 3.17.
we must turn our eyes unto Christ, in whom alone the soul of the father
rests, and not in our selves*.

6 There is also another stay of our election to establish our confidence,
which we join with our calling. For whom Christ receives into the bosom of
his church, after he has illuminate them, them he receives into his tuition
and custody: and whom he receives, being commi^ted to him of his father, Ioh.
6.37.39. and. 17.6.12.
them he keeps unto eternal life*.

Quest. How should calling assure us of our election, seeing many are called,
and few chosen 1 Cor. 10.12.
. Mat 22.14.
Also let him that stands well, take heed that he fall not*.

An. Christ has delivered us from that care, saying, I know my sheep, and I
give them eternal life, neither shall they perish for ever, Ioh. 10.27.
neither shall any man take them out of mine hands*.

7 Object. But those which seemed to be Christ's do oftentimes fall away: and
where Christ affirms that none of all those has perished which were given
him of his father*, he excepteth the son of perdition. Ioh. 17.12.


An. Such did not stick to Christ with that affiance of heart, whereby the
certainty of our election is confirmed unto us. They went out from among us
says John, but they were not of us. For if they had been of us, they would
have tarried with us*.

1 Cor. 10.12.
Object. Let him that stands well, take heed least he fall*.

Effects of security.
An. Paul disswadeth from the careless and dissolute security of the flesh,
which brings with it arrogancy, extinguisheth humility, and brings
forgetfulness of grace received.

Calling is double.
8 But there is a double kind of calling, universal, whereby God through the
outward preaching Universal.
And there is also an other special calling, Special.


9 That is the reason for which Christ says, that none is perished but the
lost child*. Ioh. 17.12.


Object. The Lord says that he had chosen him with the Apostles*. Ioh. 6.70.


An. That is only referred unto his ministry. Hom. 38. Gregory's error.


Object. Gregory says that we are certain only of our calling, and
uncertain of our election.

An. He was deceived, because he hanged election upon the merits of works.

10 Furthermore, The diverse calling of the faithful.
the elect are neither forthwith so soon as they are borne, neither all at one
time, gathered into the sheepfold of Christ by calling, but as it seems good
to God to distribute his grace unto them. And before that time they wander in
the common wilderness, neither do they any whit differ from other men, save
only that they are defended by the singular mercy of God, that they run not
headlong into utter destruction.

Object. Paul in the time of his Pharizaisme lived unreprovable*. Ph. 3.5.


An. I grant: but he was not therefore more acceptable to God, then Aristides,
Socrates, the Curij, etc. whose integrity is commended.

Object. Cornelius his alms and prayers were accepted of God*. Act. 10.2.


An. It appears that he was then already illuminate and regenerate, How
Cornelius his alms and prayers were acceptable. Ephesians. 2.12.
so that he did want nothing besides the evident revelation of the Gospel. Ye
were says Paul once darkness, but now light in the Lord: walk as the children
of light 1 Pet. 4.3
.

11 What manner seed of election was there in those which wallowed in
unspeakable wickedness*? Ioh. 2.1.
What bud of righteousness in Rahab the harlot before faith*, in Manasses*, in
the Thief*? 2 Kin. 21.16
Luke 23.42.


12 Therefore as God finisheth the salvation toward his elect, whereto he had
appointed them in his eternal counsel, through the force of his calling: so
he has his judgments against the reprobate, whereby he executes his counsel
concerning the^. example in the nations, from which God hyd the wholesome light
of his wholesome doctrine about four thousand years before the coming of
Christ.

An example of want of the word.
Ob. They were not made partakers of so great a benefit, because they were not
worthy.

An. Their posterity was never a whit more worthy, Mal. 4.1.
which thing besides experience the prophet does plentifully witness*, who
reproving incredulity, mixed with gross blasphemies, does notwithstanding
auouche that there should a Redeemer come.

Quest. Why is it rather given to the posterity then to their fathers?

An. He may torment himself in vain, who seeks Examples of blindness.
Of the other member we have examples daily, and also there be many extant in
scripture: There is a sermon made before an hundred, twenty embrace it, the
rest make small account of it, or else laugh at it, or loath it.

Ob. Such diversity proceeds from their malice.

An. The nature of the other should be possessed with like malice, Cor. 4.7.
unless God did refourme it by his goodness.

13 Quest. Why does he give grace to the one and omit the other?

Act. 33.48.
An. Luke shows a cause of those which embrace the word: because they are
ordained to life*: we have an example in Lidia the purple seller*. What shall
we then think of the other, save only that they are vessels of wrath unto
dishonor? Act. 16.14
Such was Pharao Exodus 4.21.
, such were the Jews in Christ his time Ioh. 12.39.
.

14 Quest. But why do these continue obstinate when the other are framed to
obedience?

An. Because as Paul answers, the Lord raised them up from the beginning, Rom
9.7.
that he might show his name in all the earth*.

15 Object. God will not the death of a sinner, but that he may be converted
and live*. Ezech. 34.12.


An. If he will, who shall let him? but he will put the penitent in hope of
pardon: because he is ready to pardon, so soon as a sinner shall be
converted. Therefore he will not his death, because he wills repentance.

Object. God will have all to be saved. 1 Timothy 2.4.


An. That is, he has shut the way to salvation against none order of men.

Object. God will have mercy upon all.

An. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy: and I will show mercy to
whom I will show mercy*. Exodus 33.19.


Object. God receives all to repentance, neither will he have any to perish.
2 Pet. 3.9.


An. But conversion is in the hand of God. He gives a fleshie heart but to a
few*. Ezech. 36.26


Object. Turn you unto me, and I will be turned unto you*. Zach. 1.3.


An. No man comes unto God, unless he be prevented of him. Whereupon Jeremy
says*, Ier. 31.18
Turn me O Lord, and I shall be turned: for so soon as thou turnedst me I
repented.

16 Object. If the case so stand the promises of the Gospel shall carry but
small credit, which avouch that God wills that which is contrary to his
decree, which cannot be broken.

An. The general promises of salvation, The universal promise of salvation.
do nothing disagree with the predestination of the reprobate. And they are
made effectual to us, when we receive them by faith: on the other side when
faith is made void, the promise is therewithal abolished.

Quest. But why does he name all?

An. That the consciences of the godly may the more safely rest, when they
understand that there is no difference of sins, so faith be present: and
that the wicked may not object that they want a fortress,

Object. There is nothing more disagreeing with the nature of God, The double
will of god.
then that there should be in him a double will.

An. Though the will of God be manifold as concerning our sense and
understanding, yet he wills not sometimes this, sometimes that in himself:
but according to his wisdom which is diversely manifold, Ephesians. 3.10.
as Paul calls it*, does make our senses amazed, until it shall be granted us
to know, that he will that wonderfully which now seems contrary to his will.

Object. Seeing God is a father, it is an unjust thing that he should cast
off any, save him who through his own fault has deserved this before.

An. As if Gods liberality did not reach even unto swine and dogs: who
brings forth the sun upon the good and the evil, Mat. 3.45. Mat. 25.34.
yet the inheritance is laid up but for a few, to whom it shall be said, Come
ye hlessed, etc.

Object. God hates nothing of that which he has made.

An. God hates the reprobate: because being destitute of his spirit, they can
bring forth nothing but cause of curse. Why the reprobate are hated.


Object. There is no difference between the Jew and the Gentile*, therefore the
grace of God is set before all indifferently.

An. God calls as well of the Jews as of the Gentiles according to his good
pleasure, so that he is bound to none.

Object. God has shut up all things under sin, Romans 11.22
that he may have mercy upon all*.

An. Namely, because he will have the salvation of all those which are saved
to be ascribed unto his mercy: although this benefit be not common to all.
Let us cry out at such depth, O man, who art thou that disputest with God*.
For Augustine does truly affirm that they deal peruerslie, Romans 9.20
which measure Gods righteousness by the measure of man's righteousness.

CHAP. XXV. Of the resurrection.
1 ALTHOUGH Christ having overcome death has given unto us the light of life,
being now not strangers but of the household of God, 2 Timothy 1.10
that we may want nothing unto perfect felicity: yet let it not be as yet
troublesome to us to be exercised in an hard warfare: because we hope for
those things which do not appear*. Romans 8 18
Hence we have need of patience, least being weary we either turn our backs,
or forsake our standing. Wherefore he has soundly profited in the Gospel,
The patience of the faithful. Meditation of the resurrection. Cristian
felicity. Phil. 3.20.
who is acquainted with a continual meditation of the blessed resurrection.

2 For seeing that it is our only and perfect felicity to be joined with our
God, we must lift up our minds unto the resurrection*. For our conversation is
in heaven, from whence we also look for a Savior Heb. 10.12
, to our redemption*.

3 The very weight of the thing it self will sharpen our desire. Neither does
Paul without cause affirm, Cor. 15.14.
that unless the dead rise again, all the whole Gospel is vain and
deceitful*: because our estate should be more miserable, then the estate of
other living creatures, Romans 8, 39.
seeing we are every hour as sheep appointed to be slain*. And therefore all
the authority of the Gospel should fall to ground, which both our adoption,
and the effect of our salvation does comprehend. Helps
Furthermore that our faith Phil. 3.21. 1 The likliehoode of christ 2 Cor. 4.10
the one is in the similitude of Christ*: the other in the omnipotency of
God*. For Christ is the first fruits of the resurrection:: then they that are
Christ's, every one in his own order. 1 Cor. 15.22 2 The power of God.


4 Paul says breiflie concerning the power of God that he may make says he,
our vile bodies like to his glorious body according to the working of his
power, whereby he is able to subdue all things to his self.

Ph. 3.20.
Therefore let us with Paul triumph amidst the fight, because he is able who has
promised us the life to come, Comfort.
to keep that which is committed to him: and so let us rejoice that the crown
of righteousness is laid up for us, 2 Cor. 4.8
which the just judge shall give us*.

Beastly blockishnes. Mat. 12.18. Luke 20.27.
5 But this brutish blockishnes has reigned during all ages, which the
Sadducees did openly profess, that there is no resurrection: yea that the
souls are mortal*. Whereof as of an opinion generally received Solomon
speaks when he says that a living dog is better then a lion that is dead,
Eccle. 9.4.
* and in an other place, Who knows whether man's soul goes upward and the
soul of a beast descend downward. Eclec. 3.^.21
* But the whole Scripture does cry that there shall be none end neither of
the blessedness of the elect, neither of the punishment of the reprobate.

Object. The kingdom of Christ endures but a thousand years*. Chiliasts.
Apoc. 20.4


An. This is a childish surmize: for he speaks not in that place of the
eternal blessedness of the church, but of diverse troubles which were
prepared for the Church when she was as yet upon the earth.

Object. It were too great cruelty in God, if the wicked should be punished
eternally.

An. God is not injurious, if he deprive them of his kingdom, who made them
selves unworthy thereof through their unthankfulness.

Object. But their sins last but for a time. Why the punishment of sin is
eternal


An. But the majesty of God which they have offended by sinning is eternal.
Therefore it is for just causes that the remembrance of their iniquity does
not perish.

Object. Then their punishment shall be greater then their offense.

An. It is intolerable blasphemy, when as the majesty of God is so lightly
esteemed, when as there is no greater account made of the contempt thereof,
then of the destruction of one soul. The soul does not die


6 Object. The whole man shall die: therefore the souls shall rise again with
the bodies.

An. This is a beastly error to make a vanishing blast of the spirit created
according to the image of God, and to bring to nothing the temple of the holy
ghost: finally to rob that part of us wherein the Godhead shines most, of
this gift, so that the state of the body should be better then the state of
the soul.

Quest. What middle state of the souls is there?

An. It is neither lawful nor expedient to enquire curiously. Luke 23.43. Act.
7.59. Mat. 5 8. Ioh. 12.32
It was said to the thief, this day thou shall be with me in Paradise*. Let us
commend our souls to Christ, as did Stephen*. The souls of the reprobate
suffer such torments as they have deserved*.

Quest. Where shall they be?

Abrahames bosom.
An. There is not that demension of the soul which is of the body. The
gathering together of the holy spirits is called Abraham's bosom: it is enough.
Jude assigns the same lot and portion to the reprobate which he allotteth to
the devils*. Iud. 6


Manicheus.
7 Object. The immortal souls shall be clothed with new bodies. For it is not
likely, that flesh which is unclean shall rise again.

An. As if there were none uncleanness of the souls: neither could that be
purged by God, which is infected and defiled with the blot of sin. Every one
says Paul, 2 Cor. 6.10. Death accidental.
shall receive by his body, whether good or evil. And this does plain reason
tell us. For if death which has his beginning from the fall of man, be
accidental the restoring which Christ brought appertains to the same body,
which began to be mortal. Moreover if we must have new bodies given us where
is the likelihood of the head and members?

8 Therefore the spirit of God does every where in the scripture exhort us to
hope for the resurrection of our flesh*. Genesis 13.4. Baptism. Coll. 2.12.
And baptism is unto us a seal of the resurrection to come*. To the same end
tends the word Sleeping, which gave also the name to church yards. Therefore
we shall rise again in the same flesh which we bear, as touching the
substance but the quality shall be changed, and the estate shall be far more
excellent: for the corruptible body shall put on incorruption*. Also we must
note a difference between those which died long ago, and those whom that day
shall find living and remaining. For, as Paul witnesses*, we shall not all
sleep, 1 Cor. 15.29.
but we shall be all changed. Neither shall those which then are alive prevent
the dead, 1 Cor. 15.51.
but rather they shall rise again first, which have slept in Christ*.

Object. It is appointed for all mortal men once to die*. These. 4.15. Heb.
9.27,


An. Where the state of nature is changed it is a kind of death.

9 Quest. By what right is the resurrection common to the wicked and to those
which are accursed of God, which is a singular benefice of Christ? The
resurrection of the wicked.


An. Those things which are proper to Christ and his members flow over unto
the wicked also, not that they may lawfully possess them, but that they may
be made more inexcuseable: Mat. 5.48: A similitude
So the Sun rises upon the good and the bad*.

Object. The resurrection is not fitly compared to frail benefits.

An. So soon as the Devils were estranged from God the fountain of life, they
deserved destruction, whereby they should be utterly abolished: yet through
the wonderful counsel of God there was found a middle estate, that with out
life they should live in death. It ought to seem more absurd, To live in
death.
if the resurrection be accidental to the wicked, which draws them before the
judgment seat of Christ against their will, whom now they refuse to hear as
their teacher.

10 And because the prophecy of death swallowed up in victory*, shall then
be fulfilled, The resurrection is accidental to the wicked Ose. 13.14
Eternal felicity 1. Ioh. 3.2.
let us always remember eternal felicity the end of the resurrection. We
know that we are the children of God*, but it has not yet appeared: but when
we shall be like to him, we shall see him even as he is. Furthermore as God
distributing his gifts to his Saints in this world, The glory of the Saints
unequal. Thesa. 2.19
does unequally cast his beams upon them, so the manner of their glory shall
be unequal in the heavens, where God shall crown his gifts*.

11 Quest. What distance shall there be between the Prophets and Apostles,
between the married and virgins, etc.

A Curious question.
An. This is a curious question, and without the bounds of scripture,

Quest. To what end serves the repairing of the world, seeing the children of
God shall want nothing but shall be as angels*? Mat. 22.30.


An. In the very beholding and sight of God there shall be so great
pleasantness, that this felicity shall far exceed all helps wherewith we
now are helped*. 1 Cor. 13.12.


12 Furthermore, because no description can match the greatness of Gods
vengeance against the reprobate, The torments of the wicked. Mat. 8.12 and. 22
13. and. 3.1.12 Mar. 9.43. Ies. 66.24. and. 30.33.
their torments and vexations are figured to us by bodily things, namely by
darkness, weeping, gnashing of teeth, unquenchable fire, the worm gnawing the
heart without end. Whereby as we ought to be helped to conceive after a sort the
state of the wretched, so we ought principally to fasten our cogitatio^ in that
what a miserable thing it is to be estraunged from all fellowship with God, and
not so only, but to feel the majesty of God so set against thee, that thou
can no way escape but thou shall be urged and pressed by it.

THE FOVRTH BOOK OF CHRISTIAN INSTITVTION.
Of the outward means or helps whereby God allureth us to the fellowship of
Christ, and retains us in it.

CHAP. I. Of the true Church with which we ought to keep unity.
1 WE have taught that Christ is made ours by the faith of the gospel. But
because our rudenes is great, faith needs outward helps whereby it may both
be ingendered in us, and also increased. Therefore he has appointed Pastors
and Doctors* to teach us with mouth, Ephesians. 4.21.
and confirm us by the administration of the sacraments. Wherefore order of
teaching does require, that we entreat now of the church, to which God has
committed this treasure, and also of the government, orders, and power thereof:
also of the sacraments, and last of all, The division of the book
of politic order.

What it is to believe the church.
2 In the Creed where we profess that we believe the Church, that is
referred not only unto the visible Church whereof we now speak, but also unto
the invisible. We believe, because oftentimes ^ Kin. 19.16.
That happened in the time of Elias*. But we do not say, In the church as in God,
because our confidence rests in him, which should not so agree to the church.
It is called catholic or universal, because as there is but one head, The
Catholic Church.
Christ, so also there is but one body, whereof there be many members, living
together by one faith, hope, love, and through one spirit of God.

Under the Catholic Church the visible is comprehended.
3 Under the catholic and universal church we comprehend the visible church.
The communion of saints is added better to express the quality of ye church,
as if it were said, that they are gathered together unto the fellowship of
Christ upon this condition, Act. 4.32. Ephesians. 4.4.
that they may mutuallie impart whatsoever benefits God bestows upon them*.
From thence we have many fruits. For upon this condition we believe the
church, that we may be assuredly persuaded that we are members thereof.
Salvation is sure because election is sure
So long as our salvation has such a stay, it shall never fall down: For it
stands with Gods election and eternal providence. Secondly it is joined with
the firmenes and certainty of Christ who is never plucked from the members of
his body. Moreover we know that the truth shall never fail us. Psalm. 46.6
Joel. 2.32. Abd. 17.
Finally the promises appertain unto us For there shall be salvation in
Sion*. Also there is great argument of consolation in the very imparting of
good things: For we know that all that appertains unto us, Consolation
drawn from the communicating of ecclesiastical goods
whatsoever the Lord bestows upon his members and ours.

4 But because we are now purposed to entreat of the visible church, let us
learn even by this one title of mother, how necessary the knowledge thereof
is, seeing there is none entrance into life, A similitude.
unless she conceive us in her womb, unless she bring us forth unless she
nourish us with her breasts. That done, unless she defend us under her
custody and government, until having put of this mortal flesh, Mat. 22.30.
Iesa 37.32 Joel. 2.32.
we be like to angels*. Moreover there is no salvation to be hoped for without
her bosom*.

5 And to the end we may be nourished, and kept in the Church, God has given
us pastors*, Pastors Ephesians. 4.11. Assemblies.
to whom is committed the preaching of the heaue^lie doctrine. For this purpose
would he have only assemblies to be kept, that doctrine might nourishe the
consent of faith.

Object. The beholding of a mortal man does debase the word of God. A
similitude.


An. An inestimable treasure must not therefore be cast away, because it is
brought unto us in earthly

6 Object. That is falsely translated to mortal man, which is proper to the
spirit.

An. God who is the author of preaching, joining his spirit with it, promises
fruit thereof*: Mal. 4.6. Ioh. 15.16.
or again when he seperateth himself from outward helps, he challendgeth to
him self alone, as well the beginninges of faith, as the whole course thereof 1
Cor. 3.7. 1. Cor. 15.10.
.

7 Furthermore in the visible Church there be many hypocrites intermingled,
who have nothing of Christ besides the only title, who are suffered for a
time, 1 Cor. 3.7. 1 Cor. 15.10. Why the wicked are suffered in the Church
either because they cannot lawfully be convict by just judgment, or else
because there is not always such sharp discipline used as ought to be.

8 Therefore the Lord has set it out unto us by

9 Namely by the ministry of the word, and the

The marks of the true Church.
10 For wheresoever the preaching of the gospel is reverently heard, and the
sacraments are not neglected, there appears neither deceitful, ne yet a
doubtful face of the church: whose authority no man may despice, nor yet
refuse her admonitions: for it is the pillar and strong stay of truth, and the
house of God*: 1 Timothy 3.15.
therefore to depart from the church is to deny God and Christ.

Satan attempteth to tak away the marks of the Church.
11 Wherefore let us keep diligently these marks imprinted in our minds. For
there is nothing which Satan does more go about, the^ to take away the one of
these or else both: sometimes, that having abolished these marks, he may take
away the true distinction of the church: sometimes that having

12 But although there creep in sometimes some fault either in the
administration of doctrine, or of the sacraments, yet it may not estrange us
from the communion thereof. For all points of true doctrine have not one form.
In the mean season, if we endeavor to amend that which misliketh us, we do
that, according to our duty.

13 And our sufferance must go far farther in tolerating the imperfection of
life. For it is an easy matter to slip here.

Object. The Church is not there where there is not perfect pureness of life.
Putitanes. Donatists. Anabaptists Ephesians 5.26
Because the Church must be holy*.

An. Christ taught by many parables, that the Church will be mixed of good and
evil until the day of judgment*. Mar 13.47. and 3.12.


14 Object. It is an intolerable thing that the plague of vices, does so
reign every where.

An. I grant: and yet Paul confesses the church of the Corinthians to be the
fellowship of Christ and the Saints, though a filthy blot had besmeared
almost all the whole body, not only in corruption of manners, but also of
doctrine *. 1 Cor. 1.11. and. 3.3. and. 5.1. and. 6.7 and. 9. and. 15.12
. And among the Galathians the Apostle found Churches which were forsakers of
the Gospel Gal. 1.6.
.

15 Object. If it be not lawful as Paul witnesses 1 Cor. 5.2
, to eat common bread with wicked men, much less shall it be lawful to eat
the Lords bread.

An. It is surely a great reproach and shame, if dogs and swine have a place
among the children of God. Swyne and dogs are not to be admitted
And much more if the sacred body of Christ be made common to them. Let the
Pastors be circumspect in that point. But it is one thing to avoid the
company of the wicked, and an other thing to forsake the fellowship of the
Church through hatred of evil men. But Paul does exhort them which come to
the Lords Table, that every man examine him self, not another, or the whole
Church. He which eats unworthily, eats damnation to him self, 1 Cor
11.28.29
and not to others*.

16 And although this temptation do sometimes assault even good men, through
rash zeal of righteousness: yet we shall find this, Tentation through rash
zeal of righteousness.
that too much churlishness springs rather from pride and hautinesse, then
from mere holiness, and the true desire

17 Object. Christ has cleansed his Church thorough the washing of water, in
the word of life, that he might make it to him self a glorious bride, not
having spot or wrinkle etc*. Ephesians. 5.25.


An. The Lord works daily in publishing her wrinkles, and in wiping away her
blots. Whereupon it follows that her holiness is not yet perfect.

18 There was great corruption in the Church of Israel*, Is. 1.10.
and yet for all that the Prophets did not therefore erect to them selves new
churches, or build new altars.

19 What manner age was that of Christ and the Apostles? And yet the desperate
impiety of the Pharisees could not be let, neither yet that dissolute kind
of life which reigned every where at that time but they would be partakers of
the same sacrifices with the people, and would come together with the rest into
one temple unto the public exercises of religion. The church must not be
forsaken
Therefore let both these continue firm and certain: that they are not to be
excused who forsake the Church: Secondly that the faults of men

20 Object. When the Pastors exhort the people to go forward, and to fly to
pardon, they lead the^ away from perfection.

An It is a deuellish devise, to infect our minds with confidence of
perfection, Confidence of perfection is vain.
whiles we are yet in the course. And therefore in the Creed remission of sins
is annexed: and we are entered into the society of the Church by the sign of
washing.

21 Neither does the Lord only once receive us into the Church by remission of
sins, Remission of sins.
but also he keeps us in it by the same.

22 To make us partakers of this good thing the keys of the Church are
committed and given, Why the keys were geuin to the Church.
not only that they might be loosed from their sins, which should be
converted from ungodliness, unto the faith of Christ, but rather, that the
Pastors might continually execute this office among the faithful. Therefore
we must mark three things in this place. First, that how great soever the
holiness

23 Object. The people of God is regenerate by Baptism unto a pure and
angelical life. Anabaptists Nouatianes.
But if any man sin after Baptism, there is no longer any hope of pardon.

An. By the commandment of the Lord the Saints do daily say, Mat. 6.17
Mat. 18.22
Forgive us our trespasses*, and he promises pardon. Whom will he have us to
pardon seauentie times seven times*, not our brethren? God pardons not once
or twice, but so often as a sinner sigheth and groneth unto him.

The infirmity of the Saints Genesis 36.18 Ih. 28
24 The Patriarchs were circumcised, and diligently taught righteousness: and
yet they conspired to put their brother to death*. Simeon and Leui did rage
cruelly against the Sichemites*. What shall we say of Ruben, Judah, David and
many other: being regenerate they fell filthily: and yet they obtained pardon.

25 What offense is greater then rebellion? For it is called a diuorcement
between God and his Church: Rebellion a great offense
but this is overcome by the goodness of God*, Return unto me says the
Lord, and I will receive thee, Ier. 3.1.12
Return thou turn away, and I will not turn away my face from thee. Neither
was it in vain, that he ordained in the Law, daily sacrifices for sins.

26 Is this benefit taken away from the faithful by the coming of Christ,
that they dare not pray for forgiveness of sins? He should have come to the
destruction, and not to the salvation of his. Peter denied Christ, and that not
without cursinge*, Mat. 26.35. Gal. 1.6. and. 3.1 and. 4.9
and yet he is not excluded from pardon.

27 The falling away of the Galathians was no small sin*. 1 Cor. 12.21.
The Corinthians did swarm with more and no lighter offenses*. And yet neither
of them is excluded from the mercy of God.

28 Object. Every fault is not an unpardonable sin, but the voluntary
transgressinge of the Law.

An. Why did God then command in the Law sacrifices to be offered for purging
the voluntary sins of the faithful*? Leuit. 4.
Who can excuse David by ignorance? Did the Patriarchs think the murdering of
their brother a lawful thing?

29 Object. The sins which are forgiven the faithful daily are light faults,
The sharp Censure of the old fathers
which come upon the^ through infirmity of the flesh: but solemn repentance
for more heinous offenses, ought no more to be repeated then Baptism.

An. Whereas the men of old did so hardly pardon those who had committed any
thing worthy to be punished by the Church, they did it not for this cause,
because they thought that the Lord would hardly pardon it: but they meant by
this sharpness to terrify others that they might not run headlong into
wickedness: for which they should be estranged from the fellowship of the
Church.

CHAP. II. A comparison of the false Church with the true.
1 THerefore seeing the Church being grounded upon the doctrine of the Apostles
and Prophets*, Ephesians. 2.10.
has the ministry of the word and Sacraments as proper to it, if you take
away doctrine, how shall the building any longer stand? It is the stay of
truth*. 1 Timothy 3.15. The Church is the ground work of truth.
Therefore there is no Church where lying and falsehood reign.

2 Seeing the case so stands in Papisme, we may perceive what Church remains
there. In steed of the ministry of the word there reigns there a What the
mass is
all doctrine is buried and banished: public assemblies are schools of
idolatry and impiety.

Object. The Church of Rome being founded by the Apostles, consecrated by the
blood of the martyrs, There is no succession without Christ
has been preserved by continual succession of Bishops: therefore it is the
true Church.

An. The color of succession is nothing worth, unless the posterity hold
the truth which they have received of their fathers by hand, vncorrupt, and
unless they abide in it.

Wherein the Papists and the Jews agree
3 Therefore the Romanists pretend none other thing at this day, then did the
Jews in old time, when they were reproved by the Lords Prophets for their
blindness, impiety, and idolatry. For as they did gloriously boast of the
temple, ceremonies, and sacrifices*, so in steed of the Church they show
certain outward visures. Ier 7 4 Ezech. 10.4.


4 For this is a perpetual mark wherewith our Lord has marked us, He which is
of the truth, hears my voice Ioh. 18.37.
. I am that good shepherd, and I know my sheep, and am known of them. My
sheep hear my voice*. Ioh. 10.14. The Church is Christ's kingdom.
The Church is the kingdom of Christ: he reigns by his word: therefore
seeing there is no scepter in Popery, should the kingdom of Christ be there?

Who are heretics and Schismatickes.
5 Object. They are guilty of schism and heresy who preach any other doctrine
then that which the Church of Rome does preach, and have by them selves
assemblies to prayer, to baptize, and to minister the Supper.

An. They are called heretics and schismatics who making a division, do
break in sunder the communion of the church, which is contained in two bo^ds,
to wit the agreement of true doctrine, and brotherly love: whereupon Augustine
puts this difference between schismatikes and heretics*, Lib quest. Euan.
sect. Mat.
because the latter corrupt with false opinions the synceritie of faith: and
the former, even where there is like faith, do break the bond of fellowship.

6 How then should we be such which keep the doctrine of the truth, having
cast away lying? I say nothing of that that they have excommunicate and cursed
us: the Apostles had experience of the same*. Ioh. 16.2


7 The true Church was at that time extant among the Jews and Israelites,
Without the word there is no Church.
when they did abide in the laws of the covenant. But after that having
forsaken the Law of the Lord they did degenerate unto idolatry, they partly
lost that prerogative. For who dare call that company the Church, where the
word of the Lord is manifestly trodden under foot?

8 Quest. Was there then no parcel or part of the Church among the Jews after
that they fell to idolatry?

An. There were some degrees in the very falling away. For they came not
straight way to the uttermost point, until even the very Priests did defile
the Temple of God with profane and abominable rites.

9 Go too, let the Papists if they can, There is greater corruption under the
pope then under Jeroboam
deny that the state of religion is as corrupt among them as it was under
Jeroboam. But they have grosser idolatry, neither are they purer in doctrine.

Object. All the Prophets which were at Jerusalem, when things were most
corrupt there, did neither offer sacrifice by them selves, neither had they
several assemblies gathered to prayer.

An. They were commanded to meet together in Salomons temple*. The commandment
to meet in the temple Exodus 29.9
And yet they were not enforced to use any superstitious worship: yea they
took in hand nothing, but that which was appointed of God. But what like thing
have the Papists?

10 We will willingly grant them that, which the Prophets granted to the
Jews, and Israelites of their time*, Is. 1.14
seeing things were there in better state. And yet they cry every where, that
the assemblies are profane, whereto they may no more agree, then deny God. But
and if there be a Church in Popery, then is the Church not the pillar of truth
*, 2 Timothy 3.19
but the establishment of falsehood: not the tabernacle of the living God, but a
receptacle of idols.

There remain footesteppes of the Church
11 Notwithstanding as there remained in times past among the Jews, certain
peculiar prerogatives of the Church, so neither do we at this day take from the
Papists the footsteps which the Lord would have to remain among them, after
the scattering abroad of the Church: for circumcision could not be so profaned
and defiled with their unclean hands, but that it was also a Sacrament of his
covenant. So God in Popery preserved baptism to be a testimony of the
covenant.

Da 9.27.
12 By this means that is fulfilled which Daniel* and Paul 2 Thessa. 2.4
fortold concerning Antichrist, namely that he should sit in the Temple of God.
Thereby is meant that his kingdom shall be such, as shall neither abolish the
name of Christ nor of the Church, though godliness be so banished, and all
things so out of order, that there appears there rather the face of Babylon
then of the holy city of God.

CHAP. III. Of the teachers and ministers of the Church, of their election and
office.
1 But though God be able to govern and teach the Church, either by him self,
or by Angels, Why the church is governed by men.
yet there be three causes for which he had rather have this done by men. First
he declares his good 2 Cor. 5.20 1 Cor. 3.16 1 Cor. 4.7.
when as he acquainteth us to obey his word, how so ever it be preached by
men, like to us*. Last of all nothing is more fit to nourish mutual love, then
that men should be knit together with this bond, when one is made Pastor to
teach the rest, and the scholars receive from one mouth common doctrine. All
this ministry does Paul divide into five things when he says *, The same
has made some Apostles, Ephesians. 4.4. The division of the ministry
some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, and teachers, unto the
restoringe of the Saints, etc.

2 In these words he teaches two things: The necessity of preaching the
word. A similitude
are so necessary for this present life, as is the Apostolic and pastoral
function, for preseruinge the Church upon earth.

3 Furthermore, God did set forth this worthiness with such titles as he could,
saying, that their feet are beautiful, and their coming blessed which bring
tidinges of peace *. Ies. 52.7.
That they are the light of the world: the salt of the earth: and the ministers
of the Spirit, of salvation, and of eternal life 2 Cor. 3.9.
. Mat. 5.13.14
Therefore did he send Peter to Cornelius*, and Paul to Ananias Act. 10.3.
.

4 The Apostles have no certain bounds appointed them, but the whole world is
assigned them to be brought under the power of Christ Act. 9.6. Mat. 16, 15.
Apostles. Prophets. Evangelists. Pastors. Doctors.
. Not all those which were interpreters of the will of the Lord were Prophets:
but such as excelled in singular revelation. Evangelists were lesser in
dignity then the Apostles, and next them in office: Pastors are such as bear
rule of discipline and the administration of the Sacraments: but Doctors
only of interpreting the Scripture. Of these, only the two last remain in
the Church: the other three the Lord raised up in the beginning of his
kingdom.

5 Therefore the same likelihood which our Doctors have with the old prophets,
the same have our Pastors with the Apostles. The office of the Prophets was
more excellent, by reason of the singular gift of revelation wherein they did
excel, but the office of the doctors has almost like respect.

6 For the office of the Apostles was to preach the Gospel, and to baptize
those which believed, unto remission of sins*. Paul appoints the same
office to Pastors, Mat. 28.9. Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 3.1.
namely to preach the Gospel, and to minister the Sacraments*. As for the
order of teaching it consists not only in public sermons, but it
appertains also unto private admonitions*, Tit 1.9 Act. 20.10.31.
but that which the Apostles did to all the whole world, that does the Pastor
to his flock.

7 We assign to every Pastor his Church. Let pastors have their Churches
Yet they may help other Churches, if any thing happen which requires their
presence, but they must not think upon removing, neither ought they for their
own commodity to seek to be at liberty. Again if it be expedient for any
to be translated to an other place, let him not attempt this on his own head,
but let him wait for the public authority.

8 And they are called Bishops, Elders, Pastors, Ministers, without difference,
which rule Churches. Hitherto concerning the offices which consist in the
ministry of the word. But there be other also*, as powers, the gift of
healing, Romans 12.7. 1 Cor. 12.28.
interpretation, government, caring for the poor, whereof two remain,
government and care for the poor. Governors were Elders chosen out of the
multitude, which should bear rule together with the Bishops in censuring
manners and exercising discipline*. Romans 12.7.
Therefore every Church from the beginning had her Senate gathered of godly,
grave, and holy me^, who had authority to correct vice. The consistory of
the Elders
Which is necessary for all ages.

9 The charge of the poor was committed to Deacons, whereof there be two
sorts. Who were Deacons.
For some did distribute the alms: some gave them selves to care for the
sick: such as were widows*. 1 Timothy 5.10.
Yet the Scripture does specially call the^ Deacons, who are made as it were
public treasurers for the poor: whose institution is described by Luke*. Act.
6.3.


10 And now seeing all things must be done in order and decently in the holy
assembly *, 1 Cor. 14.40.
that must be observed principally in appointinge government. Therefore let
no man rashly intrude him self to teach or govern without a public calling.
1 Cor. 14.40. Let no man teach without a calling
Therefore that a man may be counted a minister of the Church, first let him be
rightly called: and then

4 Things to be observed in calling. Outward. Inward.
and how, and by whom, and with what rite, they are to be appointed. I speak
of the outward calling, which appertains unto the public order of the
Church. But I omit that secret calling whereof every minister is privy him
self before God, that he has taken upon him the office offered him, neither
of ambition, nor through covetousness, but in the sincere fear of God, and
with a desire to edify the Church.

What manner persons.
12 Paul teaches, what manner persons are to be chosen to be Bishops, namely
such as are of sound doctrine, and holy life, and not guilty of any notorious
vice, which may both take away their authority, and also defame the
ministry. There is altogether like consideration to be had of Deacons and
Elders. Tit. 1.9.^. 2 Timothy 3.1.2. 2 How. Act. 14.23
And how, is referred unto religious fear. Hereof came the fastinges and
prayers which the faithful did use when they made Elders*.

13 The third thing is, by whom they must be chosen. 3 By whom. Immediate.
The rule must not be fet from the Apostles, who addressed them selves unto the
work at the commandment of God and Christ alone. Therefore is it that they
dare not appoint an other in the place of Judas, but they set two in the midst
among them, (...)* ^.23. (...) 1.12. ^ediate.
that the Lord may declare by the lot, whether of the two he will have to
succeed*. Also Paul denies that he was made by men*.

14 But no man that is well in his wits will deny that Bishops are appointed
of men, seeing there be so many testimonies of Scripture extant for this
matter.

15 Now the question is whether the minister ought to be chosen by the whole
Church: or only by his fellows in office, and the Elders, or only by the
authority of one? Lib. 1. Epist. 3 Let the priest be chosen the people being
present or ministers
Cyprian* answers these questions*, when he affirms that it comes from
the authority of God, that the priests be chosen in the sight of all, the
multitude being present, and that he be allowed meet and worthy by public
judgment and testimony.

Object. Titus in Creta*, Timothy at Ephesus*, Tit. 1.5. 1 Timothy 5 21.
did appoint Elders.

An. Not alone: but they were only as chief, that they might go before the
people with good and wholesome counsel. So the Pastors ought to bear rule in
the election, that no offense be committed in the multitude, either through
lightness, or through evil affections, or through tumult.

16 The rite of ordering remains. 4 What rite. Laying on of hands
And it is manifest that the Apostles used none other rite or ceremony, then
laying on of hands. Which rite came from the Hebrews: who did as it were
represent to God by layinge on of hands, that which they would have
consecrated, Genesis 48.14
as we may see in the blessinge of Ephraim and Manasses Mat. 19.15.
. So the Lord laid his hands upon the infants*. And though we have no
commandment touching layinge on of hands, yet the diligent observation of
the Apostles ought to be in steed of a commandment. This sign is profitable
to comme^d unto the people the worthiness of the ministry that he which is
appointed may know, that he is no longer his own, The use of laying on of
hands.
but he is consecrate to God and the Church: that he may believe that he shall
not want the holy Ghost.

CHAP. IIII. Of the state of the old Church, and the manner of governing which
was in use before Popery.
1 What ministers soever the old Church had, it did divide them into three
sorts: into Elders, out of which Pastors and doctors were chosen: Elders.
Seniors. Deacons. Readers. Acoluthes. Elders.
Elders, which bare rule in punishing manners: and Deacons, to whom was
committed the charge of the poor, and the destribution of alms. Readers and
Acoluthes were no names of any certain offices, as we shall afterward see.

2 The office of teaching was committed to the Elders. They according to their
office did choose one in every city, to who^ they gave the title of Bishop: A
Bishop.
lest through equality discord should arise. Yet he had no Lordship over his
fellows in office: but the Bishop had that function in the company of Elders
which the Consul had in the Senate, A similitude.
that by his authority he might govern the whole action, The Eldership.
and that he might execute that which was decreed by the common counsel. And
that was brought in by man's consent, according to the necessity of the time.
In every city they had a college of Elders, which were Pastors and Doctors.
Diocese.
Also there was given to every city a certain country, which did take
Elders thence, and should as it were be accounted into the body of that
Church. If the country were larger under the bishopric, Country Bishops
the^ they appointed country Bishops, who through the same province did
represent the Bishop.

3 And the Bishops and Elders were to apply them selves to the ministration of
the word and Sacraments. Neither do I rehearse the custom of one age only:
for even in Gregory's time, wherein the Church was now almost decayed, it had
not bin tolerable for any Bishop to abstain from preaching*. Epist. 24. Hom.
in Ezech. 11. Archbishop.


4 And whereas every province had one Archbishop among the Bishops: and whereas
in the council of Nice there were Patriarchs appointed that did appertain
unto the preservation of discipline Patriarchs.
And if any thing did happen which could not be dispatched by a few, they
referred it unto the provincial Synod. If the greatness and hardness of the
cause, did require greater discussing, Prouincial Synod.
the Patriarchs were joined with the Synodes, from which they might not appeal
but unto a general council. Neither would they invent any form of governing
the Church differing from that which God prescribed in his word. A General
Counsel.


5 Neither was the order of the deacons other in that time, then under the
Apostles. For they received the daily alms of the faithful, and the yearlie
revenues of the Church, for nourishing partly the ministers and partly the
poor: but at the appointment of the Bishop, to whom they gave an account of
their distribution yearly. Deacons.
Subdeacons were joined to the Deacons, that they might use their help about
the poor. Archdeacons were made, Subdeacons.
when the great plenty of goods did require a more exact kind of
distribution. And whereas the readinge of the Gospel was committed to them, as
also exhortation to prayer, Archdeacons
and whereas they ministered the cup in the Supper: that was done to adorn
their office, that they might understand that they bare a spiritual function.

The division of the church goods into four parts
6 By this we may gather what use there was of the Church goods, and what manner
distributio^ was made thereof.

7 At the beginning the administration was voluntary: after that there were
certain Canons made which divided the revenues of the Church into four
parts: Gelasius. cap. Pre. 16 quest. 3
whereof one is assigned to the Bishop and his family: another to the clergy:
the third to the poor: the fourth to the repairing of the Churches.

8 Furthermore that which they bestowed upon adorning holy things was very
little and mean. And if any need were that continued also wholly to the
poor. Glegor. reser. ca. Mos est. 11 quest 12. Hist. Triper. li. 5.
So did Cyrillus Bishop of Jerusalem* Acatius of Amida*, Exuperius of Thelosa*,
and Ambrose * behave them selves, neither did they suffer the poor to be
hungry. Lib. 11. ca. 16.


Lib. ad Nepotia. number.
9 Those which were appointed to be as it were the seminary of the Church, were
called Clerks but improperly. Lib. 2. de offic. cap. 28. Clerks.
To them they committed first the charge of opening and shuttinge the Church,
and they called them door keepers. After that Acoluthes
and did accompany him, first for honors sake, and secondly that none
Subdeacons
that by little and little they might be made known to the people, and that they
might learn to abide the sight of the people, lest being made Elders they
should be abashed when they came to teach. So they went forward by little and
little, until they were made Subdeacons.

10 Whereas we said that the first and second What manner
what manner persons were to be called, and how they were to be called, the old
church did therein follow the How.
In that which we set down in the third place: namely by who^ they ought to
be chosen, they did not always keep one order. In old By whom.
But because in those lesser exercises there was no great danger, Cip lib. 5
When they ceased from asking the consent of the church
they began at length to cease from asking the consent of the multitude.
Afterward even in the rest of the orders (except the bishops) the common
people left the judgment to the Bishop and Elders: save only when new Elders
were appointed to parishes: then it was expedient that the multitude of the
place should give their consent. Orders were geuin at certane appointed times
of the year.
Orders were given at certain times of the year, least any should creep in
privily without consent of the faithful, or least he should proceed too
easily.

11 The people did long keep their liberty in choosing Bishops: hence came
these sayings, Bishops
let him be chosen Bishop, whom the clergy, multitude, or the greater number
shall require. Leo primus epist 92 cap 2 Cap. 13.
Let him be chosen of all, which must govern all.

12 Object. It was established in the Council of Laodicia*, that the
multitudes should not be suffered to choose.

An. It was done for good cause: Why the people ceased to choose.
for it comes to pass scarce at any time, that so many heads agree
together in one sense. But there was a good remedy for this danger. For first
the clearks alone did choose: What order was kept in election.
and having chosen one, they presented him to ye Magistrate or Senate or chief
men. They (after co^sultatio^ had) if they thought the election just, confirmed
it: if not, they did choose one who^ they did better allow. Leo Epist. 93.
Then he was brought to the multitude, So Leo says, the desires of the
citizens, the testimonies of the people, the judgment of the honorable, the
election of the clearkes must be waited for.

13 This manner of choosing was yet of force in Gregory's time, and it is
likely that it endured long after.

14 The fourth thing follows, with what rite ministers were admitted to their
office. With what rite
The Latins called this, ordination or consecration, the Grecians Cheirotonia
or Cheirothesia. Cheirotonia. Cheirothesia
And there is extant the decree of the Nicene council, that the Metropolitan
come together with all the Bishops of the province, to ordain him which is
chosen. If he cannot, let three at least come together: let those which are
absent testify their consent by letters. They were commanded to be present
therefore, that there might the straighter examination be had of the learning
and manners of him which was to be ordained: None was ordained with out
examination.
neither was the matter dispatched without examination.

15 Whereas this was done every where without exception, a diverse manner grew
in use by little and little, that those which were chosen went together to the
Metropolitan to require orders: and not long after came in a far worse
custom, Consecration of Ministers
that the Bishops in a manner of all Italy, did fet their consecration thence.
But the rite was laying on of hands.

CHAP. V. That the ancient form of government was overthrown by the tyranny
of the Papacy.
1 NOW let us confer and compare the order of governing the Popish church,
with that of the primative and old church which we have described, Calling.
that it may more easily appear how falsely they challenge to themselves the
title of the church. It is best to begin with calling, and we will give the
first place to Bishops. There is there no examination of learning or manners,
yea this hundredth years, What manner bishops.
there has been found scarce one among an hundred which had in him any
sound doctrine: few which were not drunkardes, whoremongers, hunters, etc.

2 Now in choosing, By whom
all that right of the people was taken away: their desires, assent,
subscriptions and al such things did vanish away. The whole power is translated
unto the Canons only: they bestow the Bishopric upon whom they will, so
that it is made at this day for the most part, a reward of adultery and
baudrie.

3 Ordaining is nothing but a mere mock: With what rite
whereas princes have by bargaining in some places obtained of the Bishops of
Rome to nominate the Bishops, the church has suffered no new loss therein,
because the election is only taken from the Canons, who took it to themselves
by no right.

4 Behold their excellent calling, by reason whereof the Bishops boast that they
be the successors of the Apostles. Elders
And they say that the right to make elders belongs to them alone: and they
are made not to govern, or feed the people, but to sacrifice: in like sort,
when they consecrate Deacons, Deacons.
they speak nothing of their proper office, but they ordain the^ to certain
ceremonies about the challice and pattin. It was established*, In Synod
Calcedon. distinct. 70. cap. 1.
that every one which was ordained should have a place appointed him
forthwith: now it is sufficient if their revenue be sufficient to sustain
them. They do in deed with great pomp shadow that which they do, but they be
only visures, Vicars.
wherein there is no soundness.

5 Object. Bishops have vicars to enquire of learning before ordering.

An. But what? whether they can read their Masses: whether they can decline
some common word wherewith they meet in reading. When those which are to be
ordered are brought to the altar, it is demanded thrice in words which they
understand not whether they be worthy of the honor? One which never saw them,
answers, they be worthy. Is not that to mock God and men?

Bestowing of Benefices.
6 How much better do they behave themselves in bestowing of benefices? Truly
so, that no one of them can hit another in the teeth. All of the^ break in
generally as into a farm of their enemies.

7 But this is also a greatet monster, that one man is appointed to govern
five or six churches. Quot liberaries
We may see in Princes Courts young men which are thrice Abbots, Munkes.
twice Bishops, once Archbishops.

8 But let us see how faithfully they do their duty. Of Priests, some are
Monks, some Seculars. That former flock was unknown to the old church, to

9 Seculars are partly beneficed, and partly they spend their daily labor
in saying Mass, or in singing, and they live by the wages which they get that
Seculars.
or else they be stipends for dainty Benefices
they get their living from day to day, and after a shameless manner set
themselves to sale for gain, Hungry hyrelinges.
and like hungry dogs with importunate begging, they wring out of men against
their will, that which they put in their hu^grie belly. They sacrifice Christ
upon the altar: which is to do sacrifice not to God, but to the Devil.

10 The same account ought we to make of Canons, Deanes, Chaplains, Prouosts,
etc. Chanons. etc


11 There remain Bishops and governors of parishes, Bishopes.
who have an excellent office if they would use it. They have churches
committed unto them, though they turn the charge over to their vicars: they
make none other account of them then of farms, A Similitude
over which they set their vicars as Baliffes or Farmers: as if it were the
office of a Pastor to do nothing.

12 Of this did Gregory complain in his time, saying, The world is full of
Priests: Hom. 17.
and yet it is a rare thing to find a labourer in the harvest: because we take
upon us in deed the office of the Priests, but we do not the work of our
office.

13 But if any man do duly examine all this face of Ecclesiastical
government, Popery is an horrible theeuish corner.
which is under popery at this day, he shall find that there is no theeuishe
corner, wherein robbers do live more licentiously without law and order.

14 But if we descend unto the manners, where shall we find that light of
the world, the salt of the earth? Examinations of manners Mat. 5.14
Where is that holiness which may be as a perpetual rule to judge by. There
is no kind of men more infamous at this day, for riot, wantonness,
daintiness, and finally for all kind of lusts.

15 Let Deaco^s now come forth, where is that most holy distribution of goods?
But they are not made to that end. Deacons with out distributio^ of goods
For there is none other thing enjoined them, but to serve at the Altar, to
recite the gospel, or to sing it, and to do I cannot tell what toies. There is
nothing spoken of alms, nothing of the caring for the poor. They appear not
at all with the institution which the Apostles used.

16 Having made a division of the church goods, every man did catch to
himself so much as he could, Thieves cannot agree about the parting of the
stake.
the Bishops and townish Priests (who being enriched by this pray, became
Canons) did pull in pieces among them the best part. It was a troublesome
division, because they cannot yet agree about

17 Object. By this gorgeousness of churches, the prophesies are fulfilled,
Psalm. 72.10. Ies. 52.1. and 60.6
wherein the old prophets describe the beauty of the kingdom of Christ*.

The poverty of ministers is glorious.
An. That is to translate those things which are spoken spirituallie of the
spiritual kingdom of Christ unto the flesh and the world. The sentence of the
Synod of Aquileia is to be noted. Poverty is glorious in the Priests of the
Lord.

Garnishinge of Churches
18 That which is bestowed upon garnishing of churches, is bestowed amiss,
because it does not smell of chirst, but of riot and corruption of times. In
the mean season it is so far of that they have respect of the living
temples, that they do rather suffer many thousands of poor people to starve
through hunger, then that they will break the least challice or cruet to
relieve their poverty.

19 The revenue of lands and possessions causes that Bishops and Abbtos in
number of waiting men, Revenues of lands
in gorgeousness of houses, in gay apparel and dainty dishes, do imitate,
or rather strive with Princes. I am ashamed to say any more. Lo of what titles
the Papists boast for commendation of their church.

CHAP. VI. Of the supremacy of the Sea of Rome.
1 NOW let us entreat of the supremacy of the Sea of Rome.

2 The state of the question is, whether it be necessary for the true form of
Ecclesiastical order, that one Sea be above another both in dignity, and
power, that it may be the head of all the whole body.

Object. In the law there was the highest Priesthood, and also the highest
judgment.

An. That which was profitable in one nation, Christ neadeth no vicegerent Heb.
7.12. Whether peter were the first pope
but now the priesthood being translated unto Christ, as he bears the
office himself alone, without any vicegerent, so he resigneth the same to none
Mat. 16.18
.

3 Ob. It was said to Peter: Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build
my congregation Ioh. 21.15
. Also, Feed my sheep.

An. He made the same power common to the rest. For to bind and loose, is to
retain and forgive sins, which is done by preaching of the word. Ioh. 20.23


4 Object. He promised the keys of the kingdom of heaven to Peter alone Mat.
16.16.
.

The doctrine of the Gospel is the keys
An. The heavens are opened by the doctrine of the Gospel: the same was common
to the rest of Peter's fellows in office, as well as to Peter.

Object. Peter excels therein, because he received that both with the rest,
Mat. 18.20. Ioh. 20.23
and also a part by him self, which is not given to the rest but in common*.

An. Christ did not this to prefer one man above another, Cypr. de. simp.
praelat.
but that he might by this means commend the unity of the church*.

5 Object. It was not said to the rest, upon this rock will I build my
church*. Mat. 16.18.


An. As if Christ spoke any other thing there of Peter, Ephesians. 2.20. 1 Pet. 2.6.
but that which Paul and Peter himself spoke of all christians*. For he
makes Christ the corner stone upon whom are builded those which grow to be an
holy temple to the Lord.

Object. He above the rest: because he has the name properly.

2 Concession.
An. Let him be the first and chiefest of all the faithful in feruentnesse of
study, doctrine, courage: yet he has not power therefore over others.

Peter's confession.
6 Peter had confessed both in his own name and also in the name of his
brethren, that Christ is the son of God: upon this rock does Christ build
his church: 1 Cor. 3.11
because there is one only foundation, besides which none other can be laid*.

7 If any thing be to be done, he refers it unto the council*. He
exhorts his fellows in office 1 Pet. 5.1.
, Act. 15.5.
he does not command them: being accused he purges himself*. He was
sharply reproved by Paul*. Act. 11.3. Gal: 2.8. 3. Grant
By these it appears manifestly that there was no more power in Peter, then
in the rest of the Apostles.

8 But admit he were chief among the Apostles, yet they were only twelve: and
it was done but once. Therefore that is a miss made to continue for ever,
Continuance of succession
that one ought also to be appointed as head over an hundred thousand.

Object. Bees and Cranes choose one only captain and no more. A similitude.


An. But they come not together out of all the whole world to choose one king:
every king is content with his own hiue.

Object. The Poets commend the government of one. Monarchy.


An. Not because one ought to govern all the whole world. But because a
kingdom cannot easily suffer two: for power cannot abide to have a partner.
Christ is the head of the church.


9 Quest. Is it not necessary that the Church have an head?

An. Christ himself is the head of the Church, of whom the whole body being
coupled and knit together in every joint, wherewith one ministers to another
according to the operation in the measure of every member, makes increase of
the body*. Ephesians. 4.15.


Object. It is needful that there be another ministerial head, to bear
Christ's office upon earth. A ministerial head.


An. There is none ordained by Christ Furthermore the scripture gives this
honor to Christ alone*. Ephesians. 1.22. and. 4.15. and. 5.23.


10 Object. It is necessary that there be a certain likelihood between the
heavenly hyerarchie and the earthly.

An. To play the Philosophers and dispute subtillie about both, is to be wise
beyond measure of the scripture.

11 But let us grant that the supremacy was in Peter, 4 Grant.
yea that it should always continue by perpetual succession: yet how will they
prove that his seat was so established there, that whosoever is Bishop of that
City, he should be set over the whole world?

Object. Peter lived at Rome, and there he died.

An. And Christ lived in Jerusalem, and there died: Deuteronomy. 34.5
and Moses in the wilderness*: yet did they not give such honor to the place.

12 Ob. Peter was chief of the Apostles: therefore the church wherein he sat,
ought to have this privilege.

An. Then the church of Antioch should by right chalendge to her self the
supremacy, because he sat first there.

Marcell. papa 12, q. 1. cap. Roga.
Object. It was in times past the chief: but when Peter removed thence he
translated to Rome the honor which he brought with him.

An. If this be a privilege, it is either personal, and then it belongs
nothing to the place: or real, and when it is once given to a place it is not
taken away again: The manner of privilege.
or mixed, then the place shall not be simply considered unless the person
do also agree.

13 But let it be so: let us grant that the supremacy was translated from
Antioch to Rome: 5 Grant.
yet why had not Antioch the second place? But Alexandria is before Antioch.
Gal. 2.9.
Paul * names three which seemed to be pillars, James, Peter, and John. If the
honor of Peter the Sea of Rome have the first place, does not that of Ephesus
and of Jerusalem deserve the second and third, where John and James sat?

14 Howbeit that which they report of Peter his sitting in the Church of Rome
has no credit. Whether Peter were at Rome.


Object. Eusebius says, that he ruled there five and twenty years. Peter's
pilgrimage Gal. 1.18. and. 2.1


An. He was at Jerusalem about twenty years after the death of Christ*,
afterward he came to Antioch, where how long he continued it is uncertain.
Gregory reckons seven, and Eusebius twenty years. But from the death of
Christ until the end of the Empire of Nero (under whom they say he was
slain) there shall be found only seven and thirty years. Thereby we
perceive and see that he could sit at Rome but a short time. Furthermore Paul
wrote to the Romans*, Romans 15.25 16.3.
but there is no mention made of Peter.

15 Object. But it is a firm opinion of writers, that he governed that
Church until his death.

An. Writers tell many fables. 6 Grant.
But admit it be so: yet not long, because his Apostleship appertained unto
the Jews. The supremacy had been meeter for Paul who was the Apostle of the
Gentiles.

16 Furthermore, Why there was so great honor given to Rome.
the men of old time gave so great honor to the church of Rome for three most
weighty causes. The first was, because it was a common opinion that it was
founded by Peter. Secondly,

17 Notwithstanding in time of the government of the old Church, De Simply
prel.
Rome never had the supremacy over other Churches. Therefore let us conclude
with Cyprian*, that the bishopric of Christ alone is universal, which
comprehends the whole Church under him

CHAP. VII. Of the beginning and increasing of the Romish papacy, until it
lifted up it self so high, that both the liberty of the church was oppressed,
and all moderation was overthrown thereby.
1 THERE is nothing more ancient to establish the authority of the Sea of
Rome, then the decree of the Nicene Synod, whereby both the first place is
granted to the Bishop of Rome, among the Patriarchs, The beginning of the
papacy
and he is commanded to care for the churches adjoining to the city. But in an
other Synod which followed, the Bishop of Rome was not chief, but others.

2 In the council of Chalcedon the Legates of the Church of Rome had the
chief seat by the Emperors grant: Primacie.
but Leo himself confesses that this was an extraordinary privilege, Lib.
Epist. 1. Epist. 2. et. lib. 4. 4. Epist. 6.
neither was it observed in other councels.

3 As touching the very title of primacie, and other titles of pride, it is no
hard matter to judge when and after what sort they croope in. Cyprian does
often call Cornelius brother, or fellow Bishop, or fellow in office. But
writing to Stephen Cornelius his successor, he sometime obiecteth to him
arrogancy, and sometimes foolishness. The council of Carthage forbade, that
any should be called prince of Priests or chief Bishop.

Contention about the universal Bishop.
4 The contention about the title of universal Bishop, began only in Gregory's
time: the occasion whereof was John's ambition. For he would make himself
general, which no man before him had assaied to do. Gregory calls it a
wicked, profane, ungodly, Lib. 4. Epist. 76. ad Mauri.
proud title, and such a one as was invented by the devil, and published by
Antichrists crier*.

5 I come to the jurisdiction which the Pope of Rome avouches he has over
all churches, The Jurisdiction of the pope.
without question. And there arose the mischief. When the Sea of the Church of
Rome was counted to be of great authority, not only the godly in other
parts which were grieved for want of aid: but also wicked men which were
condemned by their own Bishops: for unjust defenses sake fled thither: all
which the Bishop received greedily. Through this ambition it came to pass
that the Bishop of Rome did take to himself some authority over others.

6 But let us see what power this was. The power of the church is contained in
4. things.
The power of the church is contained in these four points. In ordaining of
Bishops in calling of Councels: in Jurisdiction: in Censures. All the old
Synodes command 1 Ordination.
and that the Bishop of Rome be never called unto it, but in his own
patriarchie.

7 The same Censures or admonitions which the Bishops of Rome did use toward
others, 2 Censures.
the same did they themselves suffer*. Cypr. Epist 13. lib. 3. 3 Counsel
Tripart. Hist. lib


8 To call a provincial Synod was the duty of every Metropolitan: the
Bishop of Rome had none authority there: but the Emperor only could call a
general Council*.

9 As concerning hearing of appeals or jurisdiction, it is manifest that he
has the chief power, unto whose judgment seat the appeal is made. Many did
often appeal unto the Bishop of Rome: and he himself also went about to draw
unto him the hearing of causes: 4 Jurisdiction.
but he was always derided when he did pass his bounds. In the Council of
M^leuite, where Augustine was present, The Meleuetane Counsel.
they were excommunicate which appealed beyond the Seas.

10 In the time of Constantine the Emperor, he had no authority over other
Bishops, Aug. Epist. 163 In breut. colla. cont. Donatum.
as it does plainly appear by the history of Celianus, accused by Donatus *.
For Constantine committed the judgment of the appeal to the Bishop of
Orleance.

11 I know how many Epistles there be, Rescripts, Edicts, wherein the Bishops
ascribe what may be to the Sea of Rome, and do most constantly chalendge
what may be to the same. But all men which have but a little judgment know this
also, that they are so blockish for the most part, that at the first taste it is
an easy manner to perceive out of what shop they came, namely of ambition.

Gregory. When the authority of the Pope was increased
12 The authority of the Sea of Rome was greatly increased in Gregory's time,
by reason of the wars which did possess almost all the whole world. Therefore
that in so great a shaking of civil affairs, the integrity of faith might at
least remain, or not altogether perish, all Bishops on every side joined
themselves to the Bishop of Rome. Then did the dignity of the Sea increase,
yet so that one man did not bear rule over the rest, as him pleased: but it
was granted him, with his authority to bridle the wicked and stubborn.

Lib. 2. Epist. 37. Epist. 16. Gregory's humility.
13 Therefore Gregory takes no more to himself over others, then he grants
to others over himself, when he confesses that he is ready to be controuled
by others.

The decree of the counsel of Taurinum
14 The bishop of Constantinople did at that time co^te^d with the bishop of
Rome, about the primacie. It was decreed in the council of Taurinum, that the
cities which were chief in civil government in every province, should likewise
be chief Seas of ye bishops.

15 In the first Synod of Constantinople it was established, The Synod of
Constantinople
that the Bishop of that City should have the privileges of honor after the
Bishop of Rome, because it was new Rome.

16 Shortly after, John of Constantinople being helped with the favor of
Mauritius the Emperor usurped the name of universal Patriarch. Gregory did
constantly oppose him self against him: and does abhor that voice as
wicked and ungodly.

17 At length Boniface the third obtained of Phocas, that Rome should be head
of all churches. The ambition Boniface.
But this was of no importance in a manner, until at length France came by
wicked policies into his power.

18 After that time when things did daily every where wax worse and worse,
the tyranny of the Sea of Rome was also established and increased: and that
partly through the ignorance, and partly through the sluggishnesse of the
Bishops. Bernarde
Therefore does Bernard in his time with many complaints bewail the scattering
abroad of all the whole Ecclesiastical order*. Amongst other he adds these,
Lib. 1. de consid. Euang. circa fine^ lib The Papacy is the devils pasture.
Thou Pastor come forth environed with much gold. If I durst speak it,
these are rather the pastures of devils, then of sheep.

19 And now though we grant to the Bishop of Rome that excellency which he
had in time of Leo and Gregory, Grant.
what does this help the present Papacy? I do not yet speak of the earthly
Lordship, but of the spiritual government whereof they make boast. For these be
the sayings of the Bishops: A deuelish decree. Nicol in decret 17.9 3. C.
Nemini Innoc. 9.9.3. cap. Nem^.
God would determine the causes of other me^ by men: but he has reserved the
Prelate of this Sea without question to his own judgment*. Again, the facts of
our subjects are judged by us: but ours by god alone.

20 And to the end these decrees might have more weight they did falsely cog in
the names of old Bishops, as if things had been so appointed and ordained since
the beginning: whereas it is most certain that it is new and lately forged,
whatsoever is given to the Bishop of Rome, over and besides that which we have
said was given him by the old councels.

21 If Gregory's testimony ought to be of force they declare there by that
their Bishop is Antichrist, Epist: 92.4. ad Ioha^nem. constant.
because they make him universal*.

22 Are not the Patrones of the Sea of Rome ashamed to defend the present
estate of the papacy, which is certainly an hundred fold worse, The papacy
is at this day worst.
and more corrupt, then it was in the time of Gregory and Bernard?

Grant.
23 Last of all, though all these things should be granted: yet there arises a
fresh and new strife for them. For we deny that Rome can be the mother of
churches, seeing there is no church at Rome: and that the Pope is Prince of
Bishops seeing he is no Bishop, Why there is no church at Ro^e
because he teaches not the word of God, he does not minister the Sacraments,
neither does

24 Yea the Popes do whatsoever they can to oppress the pure doctrine of the
Gospel: The virtues of the popes.
Leo was cruel, Clement blooddie, Paul a fierce murderer. Shall he be
Christ's vicar, and Peter's successor who by persecuting the Church with
furious endeavors, Leo. Clement. Paul. An absurdity.
does openly profess that he is Antichrist?

2. These. 2.4.
25 We speak as did Paul when we say that Antichrist shall sit in the temple
of God*. That his kingdom shall be placed in hautinesse of speech, and
blaspheming of God*. Dan. 7.23.
Also whereas Paul sets out Antichrist by this mark, that he shall take
away from God his honor, that he may take it to him self, this is a
principal token in seeking Antichrist, especially when such pride proceeds to
the public scattering and destruction of the Church.

26 God translated the Church which was at Jerusalem to Pella*. That which was
once done, Eusebius. lib. 3. ca. 5.
might be done oftener. Therefore so to tie the honor of the supremacy to a
place, that an enemy of Christ, The pops arms.
an adversary of the Gospel, a destroyer of the Church, a butcher of the
Saints, should be Christ's Vicar, Peter's successor, the chief Bishop of the
Church is too ridiculous.

27 We have spoken enough of the thing. If we come to the men, we shall find
that Leo, Clement, Paul, and almost all the rest were Atheistes, and that they
knew nothing else in a manner concerning Christ, but that which they learned
in Lucian his schools.

28 And yet for all this the Romanistes avouch, that the Pope cannot err.
Though John the xxij. Pope did openly avouch that the souls of men are
mortal*, John Gerson does witness this who lived then.
and that they die together with the bodies until the day of the resurrection.

29 Therefore though Rome were in times past the head of Churches, yet she is
not worthy at this day, to be counted one of the smallest toes, seeing she is
made common to all kind of wickedness.

30 The Cardinals were in times past only priests of the church of Rome, What
Cardinals were in times past.
and far inferior to Bishops: but such as they be now at this day, they
have no true and lawful office in the Church.

CHAP. VIII. Touching the power of the Church as touching the articles of
faith, and with what unbridled licentiousness it has in the papacy been
wrested to corrupt all pureness of doctrine.
Ecclesiastical power.
1 NOw follows the third place touching the The first parts touching doctrine.
The place touching doctrine has two parts: authority to deliver and teach
articles and points 1 Cor. 10.8. and 13.10
the master of the Church, be kept safe and sound.

2 Furthermore we must remember in this place, that what authority soever the
Scripture does give either to Priests, or Prophets, or Apostles or to the
successors of the Apostles, that is properly given not to the men them
selves, but to the ministry wherein they are placed. Priests Deuteronomy. 17.10.
It is said of the priests*, The lips of the priest shall keep knowledge, and
they shall require the Law at his mouth: because he is the Angel of the Lord
of hosts.

3 The authority of the Prophets is described in Ezechiell: The prophets are
watchmen
Son of man (says the Lord) I have made thee a watchman to the house of
Israel. Therefore thou shall hear the word out of my mouth, and thou shall tell
it them from me*.

Ezech. 3.17. Apostles. Mat. 5.13.
4 The Apostles are called the light of the world*, the salt of the earth, they
are to be heard in steed of Christ Luke. 11.26. Ioh. 20.13.
.

5 And though there be but one and the same doctrine, yet according to the
diversity of times, the servants of God had diverse kinds of teaching. The
same doctrine but diverse manners of teachng^
It is true indeed which Christ says, that no man has seen the Father but
the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him*. God used secret
revelations with the Patriarks: and these did he confirm with undoubted
signs. The Patriarks conveyed that unto their sons, and they to their
childrens children.

6 When the Lord raised up a more manifest form of the Church, Revelations
The word written.
he would have his word put in writing, that the priests might thence set that
which they should teach the people, and that all doctrine might be examined by
that rule. Priests.
Therefore after the publishing of the Law, the priests are commanded, that
they should only teach that which God did comprehend in the Law. It was not
lawful for them to add or to diminish. Prophets.
After the^ followed the Prophets which were interpreters of the Law, who
added nothing thereto, but prophecies concerning things to come. Herunto were
added the histories, which are also the works of the Prophets: The old
testament.
but being made by the enditing of the holy Ghost. Such was the rule of the
life of the fathers until the coming of Christ. The new testament. Heb. 1.2.


7 When the wisdom of God was made manifest in the flesh, he taught with full
mouth whatsoever man's mind can conceive of the Father Mat. 17.5. Aimaxime.
: because the Father appointed him to be a teacher*. Therefore he left nothing
for others to speak after him. In the old and new testament is comprehended
the truth and the best kind of teachinge.


8 Therefore let this be a firm maxim, that there is none other word of God
to be had, but that which is contained in the old and new Testament: and that
there is none other manner of teaching aright in the Church, but according to
the prescript and rule of his word. Therefore Christ commanded the Apostles to
teach, whatsoever things he had commanded them.

Mat. 27.20. 1 Pet. 4.11. 1 Cor. 14.19.
9 That was also diligently observed by the Apostles*.

Object. It is not lawful for one alone to add any thing: but there is another
respect to be had of the universal Church.

An. Faith comes by hearing: and hearing by the word of God*: Romans 10.10.
If faith depend upon the word of God alone, what place is now left for the
word of all the whole world.

10 Object. A general council is the true image of the Church, and it is
governed immediately by the Spirit of God: therefore it can not err.

Whether a Council can err.
An. A general council is governed by the holy Ghost, when it decrees or
sets down nothing contrary to the word of God. Then it cannot err.

11 Object. Christ said, behold I am with you until the end of the world*.
Mat. 28.20. Ioh. 14.6.
Also, I will give unto you a comforter, the Spirit of truth*.

An. He did not only promise that to the number of twelve, but even to every
one of them. And this spirit is not the spirit of error, of lying, of ignorance
or darkness, but of sure revelation, wisdom, truth, and light*. 1 Cor. 2.12.
Ephesians. 1.28.


12 Object. Whatsoever is given to every one of the faithful severally, that
is given and belongs to the Church altogether.

An. The Church shall never want that which shall be necessary for it. But the
richesse of the Church are such, that it wants much of the chiefest
perfection.

The church is without blott. Ephesians. 5.25.
Object. The Church cleansed by the washing of water, in the word of life, is
without blot and wrinkle*. The pillar and foundation of truth *. 1. Tim. 3.15.


An. In the former place it is rather taught what

13 Is it any marvel if the bride and scholar be subject to Christ her spouse
and master, that she may continually and diligently depend upon his mouth?

14 Object. I have many things to say to you, The church is Christ's scholar
Ioh.. 16.12.
which you cannot carry now*.

An. The Apostles being led by the Spirit of truth into all truth, they did
publish their writings, wherein they left the perfect knowledge of the doctrine
of the Gospel, written.

15 Object. Christ commands that he be counted an Ethnicke and as a
Publicane, which shall gainsay and resist the decree of the Church*. Mat. 18.17.


An. There is no mention made there of doctrine: but only the authority of
censures to correct vices is avouched, that they may not set them selves
against the judgment thereof, which shall be admonished and reproved.

Object. The Church must be heard. The force of Censure.


An. Who denies that? because it pronounces nothing but out of the word of
the Lord. Whether baptizing of infants be by the decrees of the church.


16 Object. Baptizing of infantes sprange not so much from the manifest
commandment of the Scripture, as from the decrees of the Church.

An. It shall sufficiently appear else where, that it is far otherwise.

Object. That is nowhere in the Scripture to be found, which was pronounced in
the Nicene synod that the Son is consubstantiall with the Father.

An. I grant this word is not extant in Scripture, but the thing signifying
the same, is often found in Scripture.

CHAP. IX. Of Councels and their authority.
What counsels be lawful.
1 FVrthermore Councels shall be lawful then, if Christ sit as chief in the
same, and do govern the whole assembly with his word and Spirit.

2 For this is Christ's saying, where two or three shall be gathered together in
my name, I am there in the midst of them*. Mat. 18.20.
Which promise does no less belong to every particular assembly, then to a
general Council. And those only are gathered together in the name of Christ,
which add nothing to his word, neither take any thing therfro.

3 Object. The truth remains not in the church, unless it continue among the
Pastors. Neither does the Church consist, unless it appear in general
Counsels.

Pastors are blind.
An. That is not always true. For there was a Church in Isaias his time at
Jerusalem, which God had not as yet forsaken, and he calls the Pastors
thereof blind watch men, Isa. 56.10.
ignorant, dumb dogs*. In an other place he teaches that they have a
shadowish pretense and cloak of priesthood*. From the prophet to the priest
every one follows lying*. Osc. 9 8. Ier. 9.13.


4 Object. Peradventure that was of force among the Jews: but our age is free
from so great an evil.

An Would God it were: but the holy Ghost has pronounced that it shall be
otherwise. As says he there were in the old people false Prophets: so
likewise there shall be among you false teachers, slily bringing in sects of
perdition*. 2 Pet. 2.2. Mat. 24.11. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4


5 And yet I would not overthrow the authority of Pastors: only I warn men
to make choice of them, lest we admit wolves in steed of true sheepheardes.

6 Out of this we may easily answer to that other thing touching general
Counsels. General counsels.
The Jews had the true Church in the time of the Prophets. But if there had
been gathered at that time a general counsel of the priests, what manner face
of the Church should have appeared? The spirit of Satan bare rule in the mouth
of four hundred Prophets, 1 Kin. 22.5.22.
which Achab called together*. Micha is condemned for an heretic, he is
smitten, Ier. 20.2.
he is cast in prison. So was Jeremy handled.

7 In that Council which the priests and Pharisees gathered at Jerusalem what
was wanting as touching the outward face? And yet Christ is condemned there,
and his doctrine is driven from amongst them*. Ioh. 10.47.
And yet there was at that time a Church at Jerusalem. Therefore it does not
necessarily consist in the assembly of Pastors, whom the Scripture does
pronounce to be sometimes evil.

8 Object. What? shall the Councels have none authority in defining?

An. Yes verily. For all Councels are not to be condemned here, neither are the
acts of all Councels to be cancelled. But so often as the decree of any
Council is brought forth, I would have it diligently weighed, at what time it
was holden, Things to be considered in Counsels.
for what cause, to what end, what manner of men were present: and then that it
be examined according to that Councels should have that majesty which they
ought to have. So we do willingly embrace those old Synodes, as the Nicene,
that of Constantinople of Ephesus, and the first Chalcedon Synod.

The synod of Constant. touching breaking of images.
9 By the later Councels, which are often contrary one to another, we may see,
how much the church has oftentimes degenerate from the purity of that golden
age. It is now about nine hundred years ago since the Synod of Constantinople
being gathered under Leo the Emperor, did adiudg images placed in Churches to
be broken. The Nicene counsel decreed that they should be restored.

The contrariety of councels. The Nycene Synod.
10 All those ancient and purer Councels had their imperfections. There
appears a notable example hereof in the Nicene Synod. For there, having as
it were forgotten all gravity, modesty, and all courtesy, omitting to contend
with Arrius, they began one to wound another with inward dissentions, obiecting
of crimes, and infamous libels.

11 Object. Synodes may indeed err in those things which are not necessary
to salvation.

An. Then they did not always follow the Spirit as their guide. But we may
easily judge by general Councels, how great authority prouincial councels have
to make articles of faith.

12 Object. Though they be in mind blockish and in will most wicked, yet the
word of God remains which commands us to obey those which have the
oversight of us*.

We must obey those which have the oversight of us.
An. What if I deny that they be such as have the oversight of us, which are
such? But what manner persons does Iosue describe? Let not says he, the book
of the Law depart out of thy mouth: but thou shall meditate in it day and
night. Thou shall not turn aside either to the right hand or to the left*.
John. 1.7.8.
Therefore those shall be our spiritual governors, Who are true Oureseers.
which turn not aside from the Law of the Lord, either to the right hand or to
the left. Otherwise we must not hear the^, as being false prophets and false
Apostles*. Ier. 23.16. Gal. 1.8. Mat. 7.15. and. 15 10.


13 Because we have proved that the Church has no power given to erect any
new doctrine: let us now speak of the power which they give her in
Interpretation of the Scripture. Use of Synodes
that if any disputation fall out about any opinion, there is no better or
surer remedy, then if a Synod of true Bishops come together, where the
article or point in controversy may be discussed. For the determination shall
have much more weight: they shall more commodiously deliberate being together:
1 Cor. 14.29.
and also Paul describes* this way in judging doctrines. So when Arrius arose
the Nycene Synod was called: the Synod of Constantinople against Eunomius and
Macedonius: that of Ephesus against Nestorius. A Caveat.
Also we must note this, that it is no perpetual thing, that that is a true
interpretation of the Scripture, which has been set down by the consent of a
Council. For in the second Synod of Ephesus, the heresy of Eutiches had the
upper hand, and the holy man Flauian was banished.

14 Christ commands all to drink of the cup which he gives in the
Supper*. The heresy of Eutiches. Mat. 26.26. Contradictions of Synods.
The Council of Constance commanded that it should not be given to the common
people, but it would that the priest alone should drink. Paul calls
forbidding of marriage, hypocrisy of devils*. 1 Timothy 4.1. Heb 13.4.
And the Spirit pronounces in an other place that marriage is holy and
honorable among all men*. Whereas they did afterward forbid priests to marie,
they desire to have that counted a true interpretation of the scripture.
Therefore whatsoever interpretations or decrees of Councels shall be contrary
to the truth of the Gospel, they must in no case be received.

CHAP. X. Touching the power in making laws, wherein the Pope with his
adherents did exercise most cruel tyranny and butcherie upon souls.
The second part touching making of laws
1 NOw follows the second part touching making of laws: from which spring
innumerable traditions of men did issue, being as many snares to strangle
souls. Therefore it is worthy to be known whether it be lawful for the Church
to bind men's consciences with the laws which it shall make.

Consciences must not be ensnared.
2 We see how wearily Paul walked in this point*, so that he durst not even in
one thing ensnare the conscience. For he did foresee what a wound might be made
in the consciences of men, if the necessity of those things should be laid
upon them, the liberty whereof the Lord had left.

What conscience is.
3 That this knot may be loosed, we must first know what conscience is. We must
fet the definition out of the proper deriuation of the word. For as science
takes the name from the knowledge of things: Science.
so when men have the feeling of Gods judgment, as a witness adjoined to them,
which does not suffer them to hide their sins, but that they are drawn unto
and arraigned before the judgment seat of the judge, that feeling is called
conscience. For it is a certain mean between God and men. From whence the
old proverb comes, the conscience is a thousand witnesses.

Works respect men and the conscience God.
4 Therefore as works have respect unto men, so the conscience is referred unto
God. So that a good conscience is nothing else, but the inward integrity of
the heart. In which sense Paul writes, that the fulfilling of the Law is love
out of a pure conscience and faith unfeigned*. 1 Timothy 1.5.
Also it is sometimes extended unto men. So Paul endeavored to walk with a
good conscience toward God and men. But that is improperly spoken. And that is
to be considered both in the commandments of God which must needs be kept, and
also in things indifferent and mean. How men's laws be to be observed.


5 If men's laws be given to this end that they may charge us with religion,
as if the observing thereof were of it self necessary, we say that that is
laid upon the conscience which was not lawful. For our consciences have not
properly to deal with men, but with God, seeing they are governed by the word
of God alone.

Object. We must obey Princes even for conscience sake*: Romans 13.2.
therefore the laws of Princes bear rule over men's consciences.

An. We must distinguish between the Genus and the Species. The general
commandment of God commends the authority of magistrates. That we must obey
princes and how far
Hitherto we must obey. But it is not meet that the laws which are written by
them, should appertain unto the inward government of the soul. Therefore if
any

6 Such are those which in Popery are called ecclesiastical co^stitutions
which are brought in for the true and necessary worship of God. Popish
constitutions.
And as they be innumerable, so they be infinite grins to ensnare souls.

Ob. Bishops are spiritual lawgiuers appointed of the Lord, Authority of
Bishops.
after that the government of the Church is committed to them. Therefore he
which breaks their co^stitutio^s, rebelleth against god and the church

An. The authority of Bishops appertains to set the policy of the Church in
good order, against which we must not speak. But it is necessary that they
always follow the rule of the Scripture.

There is but one lawgiuer, God.
7 For to speak properly there is but one Lawgiuer, namely, the lord, who is
able to save and to destroy. He has so comprehended in his Law, all that which
was necessary to the perfect rule of good life, that he left no thing for men
to add to that

8 If we keep in mind these two reasons, we may easily judge what
constitutions of men are contrary to the word of God. With the former reason
Paul contendeth against the false Apostles which assaied to burden the churches
with new burdens*. Col. 2.8.
He uses Gal. 5. Faults of popish constitutions.


9 Let us apply this doctrine to our times. We say that the constitutions
wherewith the Pope does 1 They are counted for the true worship of God 2 They
bind the consciences. 3 They make the commandment of God of none effect Mat.
15 3. 4 They be unprofitable and foolish.
are hurtful, whether they be concerning ceremonies and rites: or which do
more belong to discipline. First because they hold that the worship of God is
contained in them: Secondly because they bind the consciences with precise
necessity to keep what soever they command.

10 Furthermore that is the worst of all that when religion is once begun to be
determined by such vain inventions, the commandment of God is made of none
effect*. For it is a greater offense with the^, to have omitted auricular
confession, the^ to have continued a most wicked life a whole year together.

same constitutions, first they prescribe unprofitable observations. Secondly
they oppress the consciences with an infinite multitude, and they do so cleave
to shadows, that they cannot come to Christ. Infinite multitudes.


12 So that at this day not only the unlearned multitude, but as every one is
puffed up with worldly Popish snares
so he is wonderfully delighted with the beholding of ceremonies. Hypocrites
and silie women think that nothing can be invented, which can be either more
beautiful, or better. Neither is it any marvel that the authors thereof are
come to that point, as to mock both them selves and others with frivolous
toys: The papists are apes.
because they have taken a pattern partly by the dotings of the Gentiles: and
partly like apes they have imitated the old rites of Moses Law.

13 Again there is such a number of them, The number is not tolerable
that the Church can in no case endure them. Hereby it comes to pass that
there appears in ceremonies, I wot not what Iudaisme: and other observations
bring upon godly souls a grievous butcherie.

14 Object. There be amongst us many, as ignorant, Popish introduction.
as they were some among the people of Israel. Such introduction was
appointed for their sake.

An. To oppress weak consciences with great heaps of ceremonies, is not to
comfort them. Paul says that the Jews are like to children, which were kept
under tutors and governors, and we to grown men, which being set free from
the tuition of others, have no need of childish rudiments.

Quest. Shall the ignorant sort then have no ceremonies given them to help
their unskillfulness?

An. Let those be given the^ which set forth Christ more plainly, and not those
which darken him.

They are counted purging sacrifices
15 Object. They be sacrifices, wherewith God is well pleased: sins are taken
away: and salvation is purchased.

An. They are rather foolish and pernicious opinions.

Bosting of stage players.
Object. Good things are not corrupt by strange errors, for as much as in
this behalf a man may no less sin in works commanded by God.

An. But they are evil, as being not understood, and like to a stage play. God
seeks obedience, neither will he be worshipped with precepts of men Mat. 15.9.
. Ier. 7.22.
Lastly they do not direct us unto Christ: but they are only nets to catch
money, and serve for sacrilegious buying and selling.

7 Invented for gain.
16 Therefore so often as this superstition creeps in, that they will have men
to worship God with their inventions, what laws soever are made to that end,
they straight way degenerate unto those gross abuses. God threatens this
curse to all ages, that he will strike them with blindness and blockishnesse,
Ies. 29.13. Popish traditions.
which worship him with doctrines of men*.

17 Object. Our traditions are not of men, but of God. For the Church is so
governed by the Spirit of God, that it can not err.

An. We have already showed how falsely they challenge to them selves the
title of the church. For the Church follows the rule of her spouse. Neither
is that the Church, which passing the bounds of the word of God, does play the
wanton, and does riot, in giving new laws.

The Church does not go without the word.
Object. The prophecies are added to the Law.

An. There is no addition there, but an exposition.

18 Object. We have from the Apostles the beginning of our traditions.

An. The whole doctrine of the Apostles trauelleth to this end, that the
consciences may not be

Object. The most of the Apostles decrees were received by use and the manners
of men, The decrees of the Apostles are set down in writing
and yet they were not put down in writing.

An. They learned by the revelation of the Spirit, after Christ his ascension,
those things which they could not understand when Christ was living, and those
things which were necessary to salvation they left in writing.

19 Therefore in all these things there is great simplicity required, such as
we see appear in the administration of the Supper in the Apostles time. The
next successors added somewhat, which was not to be misliked. But afterward
came those foolish counterfaiters, The making of the Mass
who patching together diverse pieces now and then made these gestures and
iettings of the Mass.

Object. Augustine says, that those things which are done with one consent in
all the whole church, came first from the Apostles them selves.

An. We may understand, says he *, Epist. 118.
that those things which are kept in all the whole world, were decreed either
by the Apostles the^ selves, or else by general councels, whose authority is
most wholesome in the Church. But he speaks of the observations of his time,
which were then very few.

20 Object. We have holy water from the Apostles.

An. Yea I wot not what Pope did pollute Baptism with this strange and
unseasonable sign. Holy water. The decree of the Apostles.


21 Object. The Apostles and Elders of the primitive Church, established a
decree, besides the commandment of Christ, wherein they commanded all the
Gentiles to abstain from things offered to idols, Act. 15.20.29.
from strangled, and from blood*.

An. The Apostles made no new Law, but the divine and eternal commandment of
God, touching the not breaking of charity. Neither is any jot of that
liberty taken away, but the Gentiles are admonished by what means they should
temper them selves to their brethren, that they abuse not their liberty to the
offending of them.

22 Like as if any faithful Pastors bearing rule in the Churches which are
not as yet well ordered, do forbid al those which are of their flocks that they
eat no flesh upon the Friday before those which are weak, or that they work
not openly upon holy days.

23 Object. And yet it is needful, that being in subjection we suffer eue^ the
hard commandments of our rulers.

An So they decree nothing that is contrary to the truth of the word of God.
Ies. 29.13. Mat. 15 9.
For God rejects* and punishes 2 Kin. 17.24.32. 1 Kin. 12.1. 2 Kin. 16.10.
the inventions of men.

24 Therefore both our own wisdom, and also the wisdom of all men must
become foolishness in our eyes, that we may suffer God alone to be wise.

25 Object. Samuel sacrificed in Ramath, and though he did that contrary to
the Law, yet it pleased God. 1 Samuel 7.17.


An. He did not set any second Altar against the only Altar: Samuels
sacrifice.
but because there was not as yet any place appointed for the Arc of the
covenant, he appointed the city where he dwelt for the sacrifices, as being
most commodious.

Object. Menoha being a private man, did offer a sacrifice contrary to the
Law*.

Iud. 13.19. Menohaes sacrifice. Mat. 22.3.
An. This was an extraordinare and particular example, neither is it to be
imitated.

26 Object. Christ would have those burdens which were heavy and which could
not be born, to be borne, which burdens the Scribes and Pharisees did bind
together.

An. Christ would have his disciples to beware of the leaue^ of the Pharisees,
The traditions of the pharisees
because they mixed their traditions with the doctrine of truth: yet he will
have them to be heard, if they teach Moses his law.

27 Object. Then all the laws are evil, whereby the order of the Church is set
in frame.

An. Laws which serve to nourishe policy and peace, are greatly to be
observed in Churches, What ecclesiastical laws be good. 1 Cor. 14.40.
so they be made decently and according to order.

28 Which shall be, if rites be used, which may purchase reverence to holy
things. That done, if modesty What things order requires.
This is the first thing in order, that those which rule, know the rule how to
rule well: and that the common people be accustomed unto the obedience and true
discipline.

29 And that is comeliness, which is so fit, Comeliness must de observed in
the church.
for the reverence of holy mysteries, that it is a fit exercise unto
godliness, or at least such as shall serve to the convenient garnishing of the
action, and that not without fruit. Order in the church.
Such exercises of godliness lead us directly unto Christ. And order is
placed in that framing, which takes away confusions and tumultes. Paul gives
an example of the former, 1 Cor. 12.21.
In the other sort are the hours appointed for prayer and preaching. Therefore
the one sort of constitutions have respect unto rites and ceremonies, the other
to discipline and peace.

What constitutions be good.
30 Furthermore I allow those constitutions of men, which are both grounded
upon the authority of God, and also are taken out of the scripture, and
consequently are altogether divine. Let kneeling in time of solemn prayer be
an example.

Quest. If we must hear the Lord alone, why has he not described
particularly, One form of discipline does not agree to all ages.
what we ought to follow in discipline and ceremonies?

An. Because they depend upon the condition of times, neither does one form
agree to all ages. Yet we must follow general rules, that that may be observed
which is comely, 1 Cor. 14.40.
and which order requires*.

Quest. What liberty of conscience can there be in so great observation and
circumspection?

An. Yea it shall stand excellently well, when we shall consider that the
laws are not steadfast and continual, Rudiments of our infirmity.
whereto we are bound, but external rudiments of man's infirmity which
though all of us do not need, yet all of us do use, because one of us is
bound to another to nourish love.

Quest. What? Is there so great religion in a woman's veil, or in her silence,
or in kneeling, that it cannot be omitted without danger?

An. If in these one swerve either through want of wit, Evil contempt by
reason of stubbornness.
or through forgetfulness, or necessity, there is none offense committed, but
if through contempt the stubbornness is to be misliked.

32 Furthermore we must use great diligence in this point, that none error
creep in which either stain or darken this pure use. Which thing shall be
brought to pass, if all the observations that be, shall have a manifest show
of profit, and if very few be used: Let ceremonies be profitable.
and especially if the doctrine of a faithful pastor be joined therewithal,
to shut and stop the way before wicked opinions.

CHAP. XI. Of the jurisdiction of the church, and the abuse thereof, such as we
see in popery.
1 THE third part of Ecclesiastical power remains, The third part touching
jurisdiction.
which we say consists in jurisdiction. And this jurisdiction is an order
provided for preservation of spiritual policy: to this end, from the
beginning there were judgment seats or co^sistories in churches, to examine
manners, Consistories. Mat. 18.18.
and punish vices: and bear rule in exercising the office of the keys*. Paul
calls them governments 1 Cor. 12.22. Governments. Ioh. 20.23. Mat. 16.19. The
preaching of the word.
. Furthermore, that power of the keys has two parts principally. The one
consists in preaching the Gospel*, which is properly not so much power as a
ministry, if we respect men. For Christ has given this power to his word,
whereof men are ministers. We speak not of this now.

2 The other power of binding and loosing is described by Christ*, when he
says, What it is to bind and the end.
If any brother hear not the church, let him be to thee as an Heathen or
publicane. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind, etc. But the
church binds him whom it excommunicateth: What to loose
not that it may destroy him, but that he may repent: It loses him whom it
receives to communion or fellowship: because it does as it were make him
partaker of the unity which it has in Christ Jesus. And least any man
contemn the judgment of the church, the Lord does testify, that it is nothing
else but the publishing of his sentence.

3 Object. All these things lasted but for a time, when as the magistrates
were as yet aliens from our religion. Discipline is necessary.


An. This order is always necessary. Because the church does neither take
any thing to herself which is proper to the Magistrate: The difference
between the magistrate and the church.
neither can the Magistrate do this which the church does: yea the Magistrate
himself must sometimes be chastened, which thing befell Theodosius Caesar.

4 And surely if any man do thoroughly weigh the words of Christ, he shall
plainly see that the state and perpetual order of the church is described
there, and not any temporal order.

5 Furthermore the true use of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction is, Use of
ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.
that offenses may be prevented: and if any offense be risen, it may be done
away. There be two things to be considered in the use: first, that this
Discipline separated from the power of the sword. Excommunication is the
sharpest censure of the church.
but by a lawefull assembly: both things were observed in the purer church.
For the holy Bishops did neither use fines nor prisons, but their sharpest
punishment was excommunication and that in great necessity, according to the
word of God.

6 Neither was such power in man's hand only, that he might do whatsoever he
would, but it did belong to the company of Elders, which was in the church, The
Senate of the church.
that which the Senate is in the city. Cypria^ joined the whole Clergy with
the Bishop. And it was an usual custom that the jurisdiction of the church
should be exercised by the Senate of elders: whereof there were two kinds:
Epist. 14. lib. 3. Two sorts of Elders. In. 5. cap. 1. ad Tim. Tirannie of
Bishops.
for some were appointed to teach: othersome were only Censors of manners: This
ordinance grew out of kind by little and little. In Ambrose his time the clarks
alone were Ce^sors*. At length the Bishop did challendge that to himself, which
was granted to the church.

7 Afterward the Bishops committed this charge to their officials: Officials.
which in deed differ nothing from profane judges.

Object. Officials admonish and excommunicate. The jurisdiction of officials is
ridiculous.


An. Surely they mock God by this. Some poor man owes a little money? He is
cited: If he appear he is condemned. Being condemned, unless he pay he is
admonished. By the second admonition there is a step made to excommunication:
if he appear not, he is admonished to come to the court: if he make delay,
he is admonished, and forth with excommunicate. I speak nothing of the
prays, spoils, briberies, sacrileges, which are gathered thereby.

8 Such is the popish spiritual jurisdiction. Also they do falsely attribute
to themselves the power of the sword: Bishops do falsely attribute to them
selves. the power of the sword.
because it is not exercised upon men's consciences, and Christ also forbade
that*.

Object. Moses had both together.

An. First, that was done by a rare miracle. Secondly it did but last for a
time: Mat. 20.25.
for when there is a certain form appointed by God, the civil government

9 Object. By this means the glory of Christ does flourish as it is worthy,
The priesthood is resigned to Aaron.
and in the mean season the Bishops are not too much called away from that
which their calling requires.

An. As touching the first Christ says*, Kings of the nations and Princes
reign over them, Mat. 20.23. Luke 22.25. Luke 12.14.
Who made me a judge or a deuider among you? As touching the other they are not
more excellent then the Apostles, who did not think it meet Act. 6.2.
having forsaken the word of God*.

Act. 6.2.
10 Neither is it to be doubted, but that Bishops went thus far beginning with
a very little: but they have lifted up themselves with subtlety and crooked
crafty means, and that privily. In times past if any controversy did
happen, A laudable custom.
the godly committed the judgment thereof to the Bishop, because they did not
doubt of his uprightness. This was praise worthy, Jurisdiction was made of
voluntary judgments
but these men made an ordinary jurisdiction of voluntary judgments. When
cities and countries were shortly after brought into diverse straits, they fled
unto the patronage of Bishops: these men of patrones, became lords.

11 Although the Bishop of Rome being not content with their kingdoms, laid
hands upon the Empire, Lib. de. consid. 2.
who as Bernard says*, had need of a weedhooke, not of a scepter.

Epist. 5 lib. 2. Gregory.
12 Gregory called the Emperor most noble Lord, and himself his unworthy
servant*.

13 Neither are five hundred years yet past, when as the Bishops were in
subjection to princes: neither was the Pope created without the authority of
the Emperor. Henry the Emperor sold holy things. Hildebrand brought the
Emperoures in subjection to him. Constantinus. Increase of the Papacy.
The Emperor Henry the 4. of that name, who sold holy things, gave occasion
to Gregory the seventh, to alter this order. At length Hildebrand who called
him self Gregory the seventh, made also the Emperors subject to him.

Object. The West Empire was given to the Pope by Constantine.

An. That is a false starting hole, under color of donation.

In the mean season the Popes ceased not sometimes by fraud, sometimes by
treachery, sometimes by weapons to invade other men's dominions: also they
brought the city it self which was at that time free under their power: until
they came to that power, which they do now enjoy.

15 To jurisdiction is annexed freedom. Freedom annexed to Jurisdiction.
For they think it an unmeet thing, if in personal causes they answer before
a civil judge, and they suppose that both the liberty and also the dignity
of the church consists in that, if they be exempted from common judgments
and laws.

Object. If any question of faith were handled or any such question as did
properly appertain to the church, the hearing thereof was referred to the
church.

16 An. By this exception holy men sought nothing else, but that Princes which
were not religious might not with tyrannical violence and lust hinder the
church in doing her duty. For they did not disalow it, if sometimes Princes
did use their authority in Ecclesiastical matters, so this were done to
preserve the order of the church, and not to disturb it. Therefore they do
evil to chalendge to themselves freedom.

CHAP. XII. Of the discipline of the church, whose principal use is, in
censures and excommunication.
1 FVRTHERMORE, The division.
that we may the more easily understand Ecclesiastical discipline, which
depends upon the power of the keys, and spiritual jurisdiction, let us
divide the church into the clergy and the common people. Let us speak first

2 The first foundation of the church, is, that private admonitions do take
place: that is, if any man The degrees of common discipline. Private admonition.
and that every one study to admonish his brother when need is. Especially
let the Pastors be dilligent herein, whose duty it is to preach to the people,
and to exhort through every house*. Act. 20.20.
and if he continue stubborn, let Mat. 18.15.17.
as a contemner of the church.

Excommunication.
3 But because he entreats there of secret faults we must put this division,
that some sins are private, Division of sins. Mat. 18.15. 1 Timothy 5.20. Gal.
2.14.
Reprove him between him and thee alone*. Paul says concerning open sins,
Reprove him in presence of all men*: that the rest may fear. He himself
followed this last in Peter*. Therefore in secret sins let us proceed
according to the degrees which Christ sets down: Another destinction of
sins.
in manifest sins, let us straight way proceed unto the solemn rebuking of
the church.

4 Let this be also another distinction. Of sins some are defaults, some
heinous offenses: for these latter Paul uses a more sharp remedy in the
incestuous person of Corinthus*: because he does not only in words chasten,
but with excommunication punish him.

5 And there be three ends whereto the church has respect in such corrections,
Ends of correction.
and in excommunication. The first is that they may not be named Col. 1.24.
The 1 Cor. 5 6.11.
The third 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.
may begin to repent of their filthiness*.

6 These ends being set down, it remains that we see how, and after what
sort the church does execute this point of discipline, The division of sins.
Public. Private Stubbornness. Heinous offenses. Defaultes
which consists in jurisdiction. First of all let us retain that division of
sins, that some are public and some private. The former kind does not
require these degrees which Christ reckons up. In the second sort, they come
not to the church, until stubbornnes come. When it is once come to knowledge,
then must we observe the other division between heinous offenses and defaults.
In lighter offenses there must a light and fatherly chastisement be used. But
heinous offenses must be chastised with a more sharp remedy: 1 Cor. 5.5.
as by depriving of the supper, until the sinner do testify his repentance*.
This order did the old and better church observe, when lawful government was
in force. Let Princes submit themselves to discipline.


7 So far of was it that any was exempted from this discipline, that the
Princes did submit themselves together with the common people, to abide and
bear it. And it is meet that the scepters of all princes be made subject to
Christ's crown. So Theodosius was deprived by Ambrose of the right of the
communion*. Am. lib. 1. Epist. 3. in orat. funeb. Theo.
This is a lawefull proceeding in excommunicating of a man, if not the elders
alone do that apart, but the Church knowing and approving the same.

8 And such sharpness becomes the church as is joined with the spirit of
meekness, that he may not be swallowed up of sorrow which is punished*. 2 Cor.
2.7.
For by this means a remedy should be turned to destruction. A caveat.
Sharpness of the men of old.
For when as they enjoined a sinner penance to endure for 7. 4. 3. years, or
during his whole life: what could follow thereupon, but either great
hypocrisy, or great desperation?

9 All things must be tempered with love and courtesy. All things must be
temperat with courtesy.
Neither is it for us to blot out of the number of the elect excommunicate
persons, or be out of hope of them as if they were already damned. We may
indeed count them strangers from the Church, and therefore from Christ: but
yet only during that time wherein they continue divorced.

The difference between excommunication and cursing.
10 For there is this difference between excommunication and accursing that
accursing does give over a man to eternal destruction, taking away all pardon:
this that is exco^municatio^ does rather punish manners. There is either rare or
none use of accursing. Though the Church do not suffer us to keep company
with excommunicate persons, yet we must strive, and labor to bring them to
better fruit, 2 Thessalonians. 3.15.
that they may return to the fellowship of the Church*: least we fall
straightway from discipline to butcherie.

To depart from the church. Lib. 2. cont parm cap. 1.
11 This is also especially required to the moderating of discipline, which
Augustine disputes against the Donatists*, that neither private men, if they
see vices not diligently corrected by the council of Elders, depart from the
Church, or that the Pastors themselves, if they cannot purge all things which
need redressing, What pastor is free from the curse.
do not therefore cast from them their ministry, or disturb the whole
church with unaccustomed sharpness. For whosoever does either by rebuking
amend what he can: or excludes that which he cannot amend, saving the bond
of peace: or does disalow with equity, and support with steadfastness that
which he cannot exclude: he is quit and free from the curse.

12 And this does he say, because of the Donatists, which when they saw vices
in the churches, which the Bishops did reprove with words, but not punish with
excommunication, they did cruelly inueigh against the Bishops, We must not
make any schism. The schism of the Anabap.
and did divide themselves from the flock of Christ with a wicked Schism. So
at this day the Anabaptists.

13 Augustine does principally commend that one thing, if the infection of
sin invade the multitude, then the sharp mercy of lively discipline is
necessary. For says he, Epist. 64. Note.
even purposes of separation are vain, pernicious, sacrilegious: because they
are wicked and proud: and do more trouble the good weak ones, then amend the
stout evil ones.

14 The other part of discipline, The second part of Discipline concerning
fasting.
consists therein, that as times shall require, the pastors exhort either to
fasting, or solemn prayer, or to other exercises of humility, repentance and
faith, for which there is neither time, nor manner, nor form prescribed in the
word of God, but it is left to the judgment of the church: the observation of
this point also, as it is profitable, Joel 2.16. Act. 13.3.
so it was used in the old church in the time of the Prophets and Apostles*.

15 Let lawful fasting have three ends. For we use the same either to bring
down the flesh: The ends of fasting.
or that When a fast must be bidde^.


16 Therefore so often as we must make prayer to God for any great matter, it
were expedient to proclaim a fast when we bid prayer. So when the men of
Antioch did lay hands on Paul and Barnabas, they join fasting with prayer
Luke 2 37.
. Act. 13 3.
Such was the fast of Anna the Prophetess, of Nehemias Nehem. 1.4.
, and others,

17 Again, if either pestilence, or famine, or war begin to raunge, or if any
calamity hang over any country, it is the duty of the Pastor to exhort the
church to fast, Joel. 2.15. Ioh. 3.5.
that it may humbly beseech the Lord to turn away his wrath. We may readily
gather out of the words of Joel, that the people of Israel did that*.

Object. It is an outward ceremony, which together with the rest had an end in
Christ.

An. Yea it is even at this day also an excellent help for the faithful. Mat.
9.15.
Therefore when Christ excuses his Apostles*, because they did not fast, he
says not that fasting was abrogated, but he assigns the same to times of
calamity, and he joins the same with mourning.

Sobriety is most fit for Christians. Fasting consists in three things.
18 It is well known that the life of the godly must be tempered with
thriftinesse and sobriety: but there is besides that another temporal fast,
when we diminish somewhat of our accustomed manner of living: this consists in
three things, in the time, that we come to prayer fasting: in quality, that
being

Things to be avoided in fasting.
Therefore let us first remember that we must rent our hearts and not our
garments*. Secondly we must take heed that we count it not a meritorious Lib.
2. de Mor.
Lastly, that it must not be strictly required Manich. cap. 13. and lib. 30.
cont. Faustum.


20 Wherein the men of old did err, and those which brought in the
superstitious Lent, and other ceremonies.

Object. Christ fasted forty days.

An. He fasted not therefore that he might prescribe others an example: What
manner fasting Christ's was.
but that by a miracle he might confirm the preaching af the gospel. Neither
did he fast often, nor after the manner of men: because he eat no meat for the
space of 40. days. Exodus 24.18 and 34.28.
But as Moses to establish the authority of the law*. So Christ to begin the
gospel. So Elias, to the end the people might know him to be a restorer of the
law, 1 Kin. 19.8.
spent 40 days without meat*. There was also a great diversity in that
superstitious imitation, which is in deed a wrongful zeal.

21 Afterward followed far worse times, and unto the disordered study of the
common people was added both the ignorance and also the rudenes of the Bishops,
and also lust to reign and tyrannous rigor.

22 There follows another part of discipline The second part of Discipline
touching the clergy.
That is contained in Canons, which the old Bishops laid upon themselves and
their order, of which sort these are, that no clark should give himself to
hunting, dicing, or banqueting. To these were added the punishments also,
where by the very authority of the Canons was established. To this end every
Bishop had the government of his clergy committed to him. Therefore were
provincial Synodes instituted, that those which were negligent, Provincial
synods. The Emperor alone did gather a general council.
might be made to do their duty. For it was in the Emperors power only to
call a general council. So long as this sharpness did last, the clarks
required no more in word at the peoples hands, then they themselves did
perform in example. Forasmuch as they were straighter to themselves then to
the people. All that is so grown out of use, that nothing can at this day be
inverted to be more unbridled and dissolute the^ the clergy: and it is growe^
to such licentiousnes, that almost all the world cries out. Antiquity is
buried, only the shadows thereof remain.

Marriage forbidden.
23 They are therein straigth, and vnintreatable, that Priests be forbidden to
marry: though that be done through wicked tyranny and against the word.
Because God has expreslie provided that this liberty might not be infringed
*. 1 Timothy 3.2. Tit. 1.6.
Paul foresawe that such doctrine of devils would be broched*.

Montanus. Talianes. Eucratites.
Object. Montanus, the Tatianes, and Eucratites did condemn matrimony, not
we: but we do only exclude the Ecclesiastical order from it.

An. The Prophecy agrees as well to the Papists, as to the Tatianes, because
it is all one thing.

24 Object. The Priest must be distinguished from the common people by some
mark.

An. As the Lord did not foresee that also, in what ornaments the Priests
ought to excel: 1 Timothy 3.2. Siritius called marriage polution. Ad Epis.
Hispantarum..
notwithstanding he has placed marriage among the rest of the gifts*, which
Siritius the Pope called the defiling of the flesh*.

25 Object. The Leuiticall Priests, so often as their courses came to
minister, must have lain from their wives, that being clean they might
handle holy things.

The difference between the ministry of the Gospel and he Leuiticall.
An. There is not like reason or consideration of the ministry of the gospel,
as was of the Leuiticall ministry. For they as figures did represent the
holiness of Christ the Mediator, and did shadow it with certain gross
draughtes. The Ecclesiastical Pastors do not at this day bear this person.
Wherefore the Apostle without exception pronounces that marriage is honorable
among all men*. Heb 13.4.
Which thing the Apostles did approve by their own examples. 1 Cor. 9.5.


26 Neither did the old fathers only tolerate marriage in the order of
Bishops, but also it was pronounced in the Nicene Synod, Hist. tripart. lib.
2. ca. 14.
that lying with a man's own wife was chastity*.

27 After this followed the times wherein too superstitious love of single life
got the upper hand: and the praises of virginity were song without measure.

Object. Priests were many times forbidden to marry.

An. This liberty continued both under the apostles, and also certain ages
afterward, Single life. Bishops were long time married.
that Bishops might marie: shall we think that unlawful and unseemly at
this day, which was used and received then with praise?

28 Let us conclude that there must be no necessity laid, where the thing is
of it self free, and does depend upon the profit of the Church.

CHAP. XIII. Of vows, by rash making whereof every man has miserably
entangled himself.
1 SVRELIE it is a lamentable thing, that the church, for which liberty was
bought with the price of Christ's blood, Ecclesiastical tirannie.
was so oppressed with cruel tyranny, and almost overwhelmed with an huge
heap of traditions: but the private madness of every man did show that
Satan and his ministers had so great liberty granted the^ by God not without
most just cause. Hereby it came to pass, that neglecting Christ, and having
grievous burdens laid upon them, by digging ditches and pits for themselves,
they drowned themselves more deeply: A similitude.
that we see in vows, wherewith they bind themselves as with most straight
bonds.

Lawful vows.
2 Furthermore if we will not err in judging what vows be lawful, and what
otherwise: we must 1 To whom the vow is made.
that we think that we have to deal with God: whom our obedience does so
delight, that he pronounces that all will worshippings though they be
beautiful, Col. 2.23.
are accursed*. That which is done without faith, which rests in the word,
is sin. Therefore let this be the first caution or provision that we attempt
nothing unless we have God to go before us, The first caution in vows
and to tell us as it were out of his word, what is good to be done, or
unprofitable.

2 Who we be.
3 In the other let us measure our strength, and behold Act 23.12. Iud. 11.30
Iephthaes vow
is ignorant. Such was the vow of the cutthrotes* of Iephthe*, and at this day
of the sacrificing Priests, Monks, Nuns, who forgetting their own
infirmity, think that they are able to lead a single life.

3 With what mind.
4 Thirdly it skilleth much with what mind thou make thy vow if thou will have
it to be allowed of God. 4 Ends of vows
Therefore let us direct our vows to four ends: whereof we refer two to the time
past, and two to the time to come. To the time past appertain the vows of
thanksgiving, Of thanks giving. Genesis 28.20
and the vows of repentance. Of the former we have an example in the tithes
which Jacob vowed Psalm. ^2.16 and 55.13. and 116 14.
. In the old sacrifices of the peace makers. Thus must we understand the
Psalms wherein mention is made of vows*. The second kind shall be lawfully
observed if using a vow, The vow of Repentance.
that we may bind ourselves with a straiter bond, we renounce that wickedness
into which we were fallen.

5 The vows which are made for the time to come to te^d to this end, The vows
of the time to come.
partly that we may be made more wary: partly that we may be pricked forward
as it

6 Such is the vow made in Baptism, confirmed by catechizing and the
receiving of the Supper: whereby, renouncing Satan, we bind our selves to
serve God, that we may obey his holy commandments, and not obey the wicked
lusts of our flesh.

Object. No man does perfectly obey the Law.

An The promise which we there make, is joined both with craving of pardon, and
also with craving of the help of the holy Ghost. Let particular vows be only
for a time.
In particular vows the three former rules must be observed. Let them be sober
and but for a time: lest if they be continual, thou either pay them with great
tediousness, or being wearied with the long continuance thereof, thou be
enforced to break them.

7 Therefore we condemn all superstitious vows: Superstitious vows
such as are abstaining from wine and flesh: fasting for certain days:
gadding on pilgrimage to holy places and such like.

8 Yea we see how far Munkish vows are from the true rule of vowing. Vows
of Monks.


Object. They were allowed by the public judgment of the Church.

An. Colleges of Munkes were in times past as it were seminaries of the
Ecclesiastical order, Colleges of Monks.
that being brought up there with great hardness and patience they might be
called to the office of Bishops. A similitude.


De moribus ecclec. Cath. cap 31. The old munks
9 Augustine does thus depaint out unto us the form of the old Munkerie.
Conte^ning, says he, the enticements of the world being gathered together into
a most holy common life, they spend their time together, living in prayers,
readinges, disputations, swelling with no pride, being troublesome through no
stifneckednes, waxing pale with no envy, no man possesses any thing of his
own: none is burdenous to another. They work with their own hands those
things wherewith both the body may be fed, and the mind may not be kept back
from God. They deliver their work to the Deanes, which make an account to one
whom they call Father, etc.

10 Such was the Munkish profession in times past. Our men at this day place
the greatest part of their holiness in idleness, which if you take away,
where shall that contemplative life be, Idleness of munkes.
wherein they boast they excel all other men, and draw near to the Angels?

The order of the perfection of munkerye
11 And yet they vouchsafe their order alone of the title of perfection, and
they exempt the same from all callings of God.

Object. It is not so called therefore, because it contains perfection in it
self, but because it is the best of all to attain to perfection.

Perfection of munkes.
An. Yet that admiration remains in the common people, as if the Munkish life
alone were the Angelical life, perfect, and clean from all vice. Under this
color they make most gainefull markets. Gaynefull markets.


12 Object. The Munkish life is the way to perfection, because they promise
that they will keep the Councels of the Gospel touching love of enemies, Mat.
5.44. A commandment concerning the loving of our enemies.
touching not desiring of revenge*, etc. whereto Christians are not commonly
bound.

An. Such Counsels are very commandments, which all Christians must obey.

13 Object The Lord said to the young man, If thou will be perfect, sell all
that thou have, and give to the poor*. We do that. Mat. 19.21.


An. If the sum of perfection be placed in this, what means that which
Paul teaches, that he which shall give all that he has to the poor, is
nothing unless he have love*? 1 Cor. 13.3.


Object. This is the principal work of perfection, but not the only work
thereof.

An. Paul makes love the only bond of perfection*, without any renouncing
of goods. Coll. 3.13.


14 Object. The Munkish profession is a form of a second baptism, because
they renounce the world, to live holilie.

An. As many Monasteries as there be at this day I say there be as many
conuenticles of schismatiks, Conuenticles of schismatikes
who troubling the order of the Church, are cut of from the fellowship of the
faithful, Franciscanes.
that they may more freely give them selves to pleasure. Such are at this day
the Benedictines, Franciscanes, Dominicanes, etc.

15 By this comparison of the old and new Munkerie it appears sufficiently,
Munkes.
that our could Munkes falsely pretend the example of the primative Church,
for defense of their profession: A similitude.
for as much as they differ no less from them then apes from men.

16 It is an excellent thing to play the Philosophers in secret: but it is not
a point of christian meekness to fly as it were into a wilderness, through
hatred of mankind, and also to forsake their offices which the Lord has
especially commanded.

17 Now therefore we see of what sort the vows be, Vows of Munkes.
whereby Munks are admitted and entered at this Deuteronomy. 32.17. Psalm. 116.37.
but to the devil*. The same must we say of perpetual virginity, which they
promise to God, whereas it is not in our power.

The vow of virginity. Mat. 19.11.
Object. We make this vow trusting only to the grace of God.

An. Whereas it is not given to all*: and those are with open voice cited to
marry, to whom power to contain is denied: it is not for us to conceive hope
of an especial gift.

1 Cor. 7.9.
Object. It has been observed time out of mind, that those should tie them
selves with the vow of continency, The vow of continency.
which would wholly dedicate them selves to the Lord.

An This custom was ancient: it is not therefore blameless: moreover it was
lawful for those to marry which could not continue. Which thing is not
permitted at this day.

18 Object. Vowing was used in the Apostles time: because Paul says that the
widows which being once received into the public ministry did marry, did
deny their first faith*. Vow of widows. 1 Timothy 5.12


An. The widows which were at that time received to the public ministry were
about threescore years of age, they laid upon them selves the condition of
perpetual single life: if they should afterward marry, that did easily come
to pass which Paul says, that casting from them shame, they became

19 And Deaconesses were made not to delight God with singing and with mumbling
not understood, The office of Deaconesses.
and to lead the rest of their life in idleness which Popish Nonnes do: but
that they might do to the pore the public ministry of the Church, that they
might wholly apply themselves to the duties of love. Thereupon I conclude with
Paul, that it is wickedness that women should be received to vow continency
before they be threescore years of age.

20 Therefore let us conclude that as unlawful vows and not rightly made,
Vows rashly made must be reuersed.
are of no reputation with God, so ought they to be void with us. For it is an
absurd thing that we should be driven to perform those things, which God does
not require at our hands. Therefore vows rashly made do not only not bind, but
they must necessarily be reuersed and disanulled.

21 Therefore when they forsake the Munkish life, and take in hand some honest
kind of life, they are unworthily accused of breach of faith and perjury,
because they have broken the knot which could not be loosed (as it is commonly
believed) whereby they were bound to God and the Church. But it is no bond when
God does abrogat and disanull that which man confirms. Note.


CHAP. XIIII. Of the Sacraments.
1 BEside the preaching of the word there is an other help for our faith in the
sacraments, which What a sacrament is.
to support the weakness

2 The men of old used this word in that sense. For so often as the old
interpreter would translate into Latin the Greek word (...), especially
where mention was made of holy things, Ephesians. 1.9. and. 3.2. Col. 1.26.
he translated it Sacramentum.

3 By this definition we understand that a Sacrament is never without a promise
going before it, but that it is rather annexed thereto as an appurtenance, to
this end that it may confirm the promise it self, and may establish and make
sure the same to us. Of which mean God foreseeth that our ignorance A medicine
for our infirmity and ignorance. A similitude.
For the weakness of our faith is so great, that unless it be underpropped on
every side, it is straight way shaken and does forthwith faint.

4 This is that which they say commonly, that Sacrament consists in the word
preached and understood, and the external sign.

Object. It is enough if the priest do only recite the form of consecration
even in Latin, before men unlearned.

Homil. in. Ioh. 13.
An. Augustine says otherwise that the word being added unto the element does
make a Sacrament, not because it is spoken, but because it is believed. This is
the word of God which we preach, Romans 10.8. A popish dilemma.
says Paul*.

5 Object. Either we know that the word of God which goes before the Sacrament
is the true will of God, or else we know it not. If we know it, we learn no
new thing out of the Sacrament. If we know it not, the Sacrament shall not
teach us that, whose force consists in the word.

An. Seals which are hung upon public acts, Seals confirm writings. A
similitude.
being received alone are nothing worth, being hung upon parchment they
confirm that which is written. So the Sacraments have this peculiar thing
above the word, that they are more fit to stay up our faith, seeing they do
lively represent unto us the promises, depainted as it were in tables.

6 Object. That which is earthly and bodily can not confirm that which is
heavenly and spiritual. Whether a bodily thing can confirm that which is
spiritual.


An. Earthly Sacraments do not confirm the spiritual truth, but us which are
carnal.

7 Object. They be not testimonies of the grace of God, because they are given
to the wicked also, The Sacraments do not give grace to the wicked.
who notwithstanding do never a whit more feel thereby that God is favorable
to them.

An. Grace is offered, but they refuse it by their want of faith.

Object. If faith be good, it can not be made better. For there is no faith but
that which does firmly lean upon the word of God.

An. None of the sons of men shall ever attain to such perfection of faith,
but that he ought rather to pray with the Apostles, to have his faith
increased*, and to have his want of faith helped*. Luke 17.5. Mar. 9.14. Act.
8.37.


8 Object. Philip answered the Eunuch*, that he might be baptized, if he did
believe with all his whole heart. Therefore he would have his faith to be perfect.

An. To believe with the whole heart is not to believe perfectly, but heartily
and with a sincere mind to embrace Christ? so David, with my whole heart have I
sought thee*, I will confess to thee with mine whole heart*. Psalm. 119.10 Psalm.
12.3.


Object. If faith be increased by the Sacraments, the holy Ghost is given in
vain, whose work it is to begin, maintain, and finish faith.

An. For one benefit which these men set forth, we consider three. First the
Lord teaches us by his word: Secondly he confirms us by the Sacraments: The
confirmation of faith.
which should otherwise only sound in our ears, and be present before our
eyes, but not move our inward parts.

9 Therefore the ministry of the confirmation, and increase of faith, is so
assigned to the Sacraments, The inward Master does make the Sacraments
effectual. A similitude.
that in the mean season all this proceeds from the holy Ghost. If that
inward master be wanting, the Sacraments can do no more in our minds, then
if either the brightness of the Sun should shine to the blind eyes, or if a
voice did sound in deaffe ears.

10 For lest the word should sound in our ears in vain: and lest the
Sacraments should be present before our eyes in vain, the Spirit shows
that it is God, which speaks to us there, he mollifieth the hardenesse of our
hearts, and frames it unto that obedience, which is due to the word of Cod.

11 For like as seed, if it should fall in a barren plot of the field, A
similitude.
does but die: but if it be sown in arable land well tilled, and manured, it
will bring forth fruit with gain: So the word of God, if it shall hit upon
an hard neck, it waxes barren, as being sown in sand*: Mat. 13.4. Ier. 8.15.
if it get a soul ma^nured with the hand of the heavenly Spirit, it will be
most fruitful.

12 Yet the Sacraments are so said truly to confirm our faith, that many
times when the Lord will take away the confidence of the things promised, he
takes away the Sacraments themselves, which we may see in Adam*, and the
Ephesians Ephesians. 2.12.
. Genesis 3 22.


Object. The glory of God is so far diminished as it is derived unto
creatures, to the which so great power is given.

An. God uses the instruments which he sees to be expedient, that all things
may obey his glory: but we place no power in creatures.

13 Object. Sacraments are only signs whereby

An. Sacraments are indeed sure testimonies of our faith before men, but this
is the chiefest thing that they serve for our faith before God.

14 In the mean season let us beware that we We must take heed of three steep
downs. The Sacraments do not give grace.
which we can no where read to be given them of God.

Object. The Sacraments do justify and give grace, so we put not in the bar
of mortal sin.

An. Such doctrine is deuillish, when as it promises righteousness without
faith: Secondly, because the minds of men do rest rather in this spectacle of a
bodily thing, then in God him self.

15 Also we must beware that we traslate not that to the one, which is proper
to the other. The truth is contained indeed in the Sacraments, but they are
not so linked together but that they may be separate. The Sacraments work that
which they figure only in the Elect.
Therefore the thing must always be distinguished from the sign. For the
Sacraments work that which they figure only in the elect: For Christ is
received by faith alone.

16 Quest. Do then the wicked bring that to pass by their unthankfulness, that
the ordinance of God is void, and does come to nothing?

An. Augustine answers: if thou receive it carnally, it cease not to be
spiritual, but not to thee*. Hom. in. Joan. 26


17 For there is none other office of the Sacraments, then of the word of God,
which is to offer to us Christ, and in him the treasures of the heavenly
grace: but they profit us nothing unless they be received by faith: which is
to us as the mouth of a vessel, to receive liquours, and graces of the holy
Ghost. Faith is like the mouth of a vessel. Sacraments put for all manner
signs


18 Furthermore the word Sacrament does generally comprehend all signs, which
God did ever command men to use, that he might assure them of the truth of his
promises. Those he would have to Genesis 2.17. and 3.3.
and the rainebowe to Noe and his posterity*. Genesis 9.13.
: when he wet the fleece with dew, Genesis 15.17. Iud. 6.37.
all the ground being dry, to promise victory to Gedeon*.

19 But we entreat properly of the Sacraments which God would have to be
ordinary in his church, to nourish his children in one faith and the
confession of one faith. For Augustine says*, men can be congeled together
into no name of religion, either true or false, unless they be knit together
by some fellowship of visible Sacraments.

20 And these also have been diverse according to the diverse respect of time.
For Circumcision was granted to Abraham*, whereto purifications and sacrifices
were afterward added*. Lib 9 contra Faust. manich cap. 11. Genesis 19.20.
Diversity of sacraments. Leuit. 1.2.
Christ gave to the Church Baptism*, and the Supper*. I speak not of laying
on of hands: because it is not ordinary, neither does it agree to all.

21 Circumcision was granted to Abraham for a seal of the righteousness of
faith Mat. 28.19. Mar. 26.26. Romans 4.11. Heb. 9.1.14. Heb. 4.14.
Purifyinges were testimonies of their washing in Christ*. Sacrifices did
promise the satisfaction of the Mediator.

22 Baptism does witness to us that we be washed by the blood of Christ, the
Supper that we are redeemed: these two are found in Christ, who came in water
and blood*, that is, 1 Ioh. 5.6.
that he might purge and redeem.

23 But the Fathers did eat the same meat which we eat, and drunk the same
drink which we drink namely Christ*. 1 Cor. 10.3.


Object. The Sacraments of the old Law did shadow grace: those of the new do
give it being present.

An. Who dare make void that sign, which gave to the Jews the true communion
and partaking of Christ?

24 Object. The outward Circumcision is nothing with God, neither does it
give any thing*. Romans 2.25.


An. So it is, if the truth it self be wantinge. Which might also be said
concerning Baptism, by good right. For God regards not the outward washing*,
unless the mind be inwardly purged. 1 Cor. 10.5.


1 Pet. 3.21 Col. 2.17.
Object. Paul does utterly contemn Circumcision made with hands, when he
compares it with the Circumcision of Christ*.

An. Paul disputes in that place against those which required Circumcision as
necessary, whereas it was abrogat. Therefore he admonishes the faithful that
omitting the old shadows, they stay in the truth. And he proves that Baptism
is the same to Christians, which Circumcision was to the men of old time.

25 Object. All the Jewish ceremonies were shadows of things to come. The
body is in Christ*.

Heb. 7.8.9.10. What the Jewish ceremonies did profit the Jews.
An. Paul did not therefore make the ceremonies shadowish, because they had in
them no sound thing, but because the fulfilling thereof did after a sort hang in
suspense until the giving of Christ. And also though they shadowed Christ being
absent, yet he uttered inwardly to the faithful the presence of his power.

Object. Christ distinguishes the Supper from Manna even in respect of the
efficacy.

An. He has to deal with those which thought that Manna was nothing else but
the meat of the belly: The comparison between Manna and the Supper.
he says that he gives better meat, which feeds the souls unto the hope
of immortality.

26 Furthermore the Sacraments of both Laws being diverse indeed in signs,
but equal and like in very deed and efficacy, do testify that the fatherly
good will of God, and the grace of the holy Ghost are offered to us in Christ,
but our Sacraments do this more plentifully and plainly: there is in both the
same giving of Christ.

CHAP. XV. Of Baptism.
1 Baptism is a sign of our entering, What baptism is.
whereby we are admitted into the society of the Church, that being ingrafted
into Christ, we may be reckened among the children of God. A double end.
Furthermore it is given us of God to this end: First that it might Faith.


2 In this sense must we understand that which Paul writes: that the Church
is sanctified by Christ her spouse, and washed with the washing of water in the
word of life*, and in another place: Ephesians. 5.26. Tit. 3.5. 1 Pet. 3.21
that we are saved according to his mercy, by the washing of regeneration*.

3 Object. Baptism is only given for the time past, so that we must seek
other new remedies for our new falls into which we fall after Baptism.

An. At what time soever we be baptized, We be washed by Baptism for our whole
life
we be once washed for all our life time, and also purged. For the purity of
Christ, which is offered to us therein, is always fresh.

Object. Hereby men take liberty to sin in time to come.

An. This doctrine is delivered to those only, who after they have sinned,
being weary, do groan under their sins, that they may have wherewith to lift
up and comfort them selves again, lest they fall into despair.

Object. Christ is made to us a propitiation for remission of sins going
before*.

Baptism is the Sacrament of Repentance.
An. In that place Baptism is not handled but repentance. Therefore so often as
being wounded with the searinge iron of conscience I shall turn unto God, my
sins shall be forgiven me.

Object. By the benefit of repentance, and the keys, we obtain remission
after Baptism, which at our first regeneration is given us by Baptism alone.

An. Baptism is the Sacrament of repentance. But if this be commended to us
during our whole life, the force of Baptism ought also to be extended unto the
same ends.

Romans 6.3.
For as Paul says, we are baptized into his death, that we may walk in
newness of life.

6 Our faith receaueth this third fruit, because it does surely testify to us
that we are not only ingrafted into the death and life of Christ, but also
that we are so united to Christ him self, that we are partakers of all his good
things. Therefore he did dedicate and sanctify Baptism in his own body*.
Mat. 3.13.
And we are baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, The form of
Baptism.
and of the holy Ghost: because we obtain the cause both of our purging, and
also of our regeneration in the Father, in the Son the matter: in the Spirit
the effect.

7 Object. The Baptism of John was one, the Baptism of the Apostles another.

Of the Baptism of John and the Apostles.
An. Diverse hands do not make the Baptism diverse: but the same doctrine
shows that it is the same: both did baptize to repentance, and remission of
sins.

8 Object. There were more plentiful graces of the Spirit shed forth after the
resurrection.

An. This appertains nothing to make the diversity of Baptism.

Object. They are baptized again by Paul which had once received the Baptism
of John*. Act. 19.3.5.
Therefore the Baptism of John was only a preparation. Baptism put for the
gift of the holy ghost


An. Baptism is taken in that place for the gifts of the holy Ghost, which
the faithful received by the laying on of hands, as else where oftentimes.

Object. John said that he did baptize with water but Christ should come, who
should baptize with the holy Ghost and with fire*. Mat. 3.11.


An. He did not compare Baptism with Baptism, but his person with the person
of Christ, he was the minister of the water, but Christ the giver of the holy
Ghost.

9 These things which we have spoken both concerning mortification, and also
touching washing, were figured to the people of Israel in the sea, and the
cloud*. 1 Cor. 10.2. Exodus 14 21. A figure of mortification. Number. 9.14.
Mortification was shadowed when he delivered them out of the cruel hand of
Pharao. In the cloud there mas a token of their purging*.

10 Object. By Baptism we are loosed from original sin, and we are restored
to the same purity of nature, which Adam had before his fall.

An. Therein we must note two things: First

11 The other is that this perverseness does never Gal 5.19. Works of the flesh.
Those make us guilty of the wrath of God. Therefore we are baptized into the
mortification of the flesh, which we follow daily, but it shall be perfected
when we shall depart this life and go to the Lord.

Romans 6.14.
12 Hereupon Paul exhorts the faithful that they suffer not sin to reign
in their members*. Therefore he is enforced to cry out with mourning, O wretch
that I am, who shall deliver me from this body that is subject to death? The 2
end




Faith an instrument.
14 And the means to receive those things which the Lord promises us in
Baptism, is faith: that we may believe that it is God that speaks by the
sign, which purges us, washes us, makes us partakers of the death of
Christ: What things are given in Baptism.
which takes away the kingdom of Satan: weakeneth the strength of
concupiscence, and causes that having put on Christ, we are counted the
children of God.

Quest. If sins be not washed away by the force of Baptism, why did Ananias
say to Paul, that he should wash away his sin by Baptism*? Act. 9 17.


An. Namely that by the sign of Baptism Paul might be certified, that his
sins were forgeuen.

16 Furthermore if we receive the Sacrament as from the hand of God, from
which it came, we may thereby gather, that there is nothing added thereto, or
taken therefro by his worthiness, by whose hand it is delivered. Yea when
circumcision was corrupt with many superstitions, yet it ceased not to be
counted a sign of grace. Neither was circumcision iterated under Josias and
Ezekias.

17 Object. That faith of ours which has followed baptism certain years,
does sufficiently show that baptism was void.

An. The promise was always true, but our unbelief did let that it had not
then the effect: Romans 3.3.
because though men be liars, and unfaithful, yet God cease not to be true.

18 Object. Paul baptized again those who^ John had baptized*. Act. 19.3.5.


An. We have already said that the baptism is taken in that place for the
visible graces of the spirit which were given by laying on of hands*. Act. 15.
and 11 16.


19 As touching the outward sign, let us follow the natural institution of
Christ, Popish additions.
casting far from us those Popish additions, blessing, breathing, salt, tapers,
chrisme, and such like deceites of Satan. Therefore let him that is to be
baptized be represented in the company of the faithful, The form of Baptism.
the whole church being witness beholding him, and praying for him: let him
be offered to God: let the confession of faith be recited: let the promises
be repeated which are contained in Baptism: How one that is to be instructed
ought to be baptized.
let the instructed be baptized in the name of the father, of the son, and
of the holy ghost: at length let him be dismissed with prayers and
thanksgiving.

20 It is also appertinent to the matter to know this, that it was done
amiss, Let not private men baptize.
if private men do usurp the administration of Baptism. For as well the
distribution of this, as of the supper, is a part of the Ecclesiastical
ministry.

Object. If he which is sick discease without baptism, he is in danger to be
deprived of the grace of regeneration: August. lib. contra. Epist Parm. 2. cap.
13.
therefore if necessity constrain, and if a lay man or a woman baptize, it is
either no fault, or a fault venial*.

An. God pronounces that he does adopt our infants to be his, before they be
borne, when as he promises that he will be our god, Genesis 17.7.
and the God of our seed after us*. Therefore salvation consists in the
promise, which may be fulfilled without Baptism: as in the people of Israel,
which died before circumcision.

21 Object. It was an ancient custom.

An. It was not therefore to be praised. Epiphanius does vpbraid Marcion, for
granting license to women to baptize*: and in an other place he teaches that
the holy mother of Christ was not suffered to do it.

22 Object. The Angel of God was pacified after that Sephora having taken a
stone, Lib. contr. Her. 1. Note. Exodus 4.25. Sephora circumcised.
did circumcise her son*.

An. God did not therefore approve her fact: Otherwise we might say that the
worshipping which the Gentiles which were brought from Assyria raised Contempt
of the sacraments must be fled
Therefore if in omitting the sign there be neither sluggishnesse, nor
contempt, nor negligence we are safe from all danger.

CHAP. XVI. That baptizing of infants does very well agree both with the
institution of Christ, and also with the nature of the sign.
Object.

1 BAPTIZING of infantes is grounded upon no institution of God, but it is
brought in only by the boldness and curiosity of men, and afterward rashly
used through foolish facility.

2 An. The force of baptism depends upon the promise: The force of Bap:
depends upon the Promise.
therefore we may not deny the sign to those, to whom the things are given
which are there represented.

3 Moreover if God made infants partakers of circumcision, because the promise
was made to Abraham and his seed*: Genesis 17.10. Circumcision and Bapt: are all
one
why shall we not say the same of Baptism, seeing it is instituted for us in
steed of circumcision? For as Christ is the foundation of baptism, so
likewise of circumcision.

4 There is the same promise in both, namely of the fatherly favor of God,
of remission of sins, 1 The promise.
and of eternal life. The thing figured is all one, namely regeneration.

5 But and if the covenant made with Abraham, 2 The thing figured.
remain firm and steadfast, it does no less belong to the children of
Christians at this day, Why Infants are to be baptized.
then it did appertain under the old testament unto the children of the Jews.
And they are partakers of the thing signified, why shall they be excluded from
the sign? If they have the truth, why shall they be put back from the figure?

Object. There was a certain day appointed for circumcision.

An. Therefore we have greater liberty. And God will have infants to be
received into his covenant, what more will we have.

6 Wherefore the children of the Jews were called the holy seed: because
being made partakers of that covenant, they were distinguished from the
children of the wicked*: Genesis 17.12.
and even by like reason the children of christians are accounted holy, yea
although they be the issue but of one faithful parent and they differ from the
unclean seed of the idolaters*. 1 Cor. 7.4.


7 Wherefore the Lord Jesus does meeklie embrace the infants, which were
brought to him, chiding his disciples which went about to keep them from him:
forasmuch as they led away those to who^ the kingdom of heaven did belong,
from him through whom alone the entry stands open into the kingdom of
heaven*. Mat. 19.13.


What agreement there is between Baptism and the embracing of Christ.
Quest. What agreement has Baptism with this embracing of Christ?

An. Because Baptism does conueigh us unto Christ, whom embracing by faith we
have the kingdom of heaven. Which thing he does afterward testify in deed,
when as he commends them afterward to his father. If the kingdom of heaven
be theirs: why shall the sign be denied them?

Object. Christ says, Suffer little ones to come: therefore they were in age
and good big ones.

An. But they are called by the Evangelists (...) by which words the Grecians
signify those young infants which hang upon their mothers breasts. To come
put for to have access.
Therefore to Come is put for to have access.

Object. The kingdom of heaven is not given to infants, but such as they be:
because it is said, To such, not to them.

An. When he commands that infants be suffered to come unto him, nothing is
more plain then that he means very infancy.

8 Ob. We can no where find that even one infant was baptized by the hands of
the Apostles.

An. So often as mention is made of some family that was baptized*, Whether
the Apostles did baptize infants Act. 16.15.32.
and infants are not excluded who will reason thence that they were not
baptized? By the very same reason women should be forbidden to come to the
Lords supper.

9 Quest. What fruit comes by this observation either to parents or to the
infants, which are dipped in the holy water?

An. Faith is helped by an excellent comfort. The fruit of the Baptism of
Infantes.
The promise is confirmed to a thousand generations.

Object. The promise is sufficient to confirm the salvation of our children.

An. It seemed otherwise to GOD, who as he knows our infirmity, What
baptism does profit children.
would bear so much in this matter with it. Therefore let those which embrace
the promise, offer their children to the church The arguments of the
adversaries against baptizing of Infantes.


10 But let us examine the arguments of our adversaries. First they hold that
the signs of Baptism and circumcision differ much for diverse things are
signified: the covenant is altogether

Circumcision a figure of mortification.
Object. Circumcision was a figure of mortification.

An. So is baptism.

Object. With whom the covenant made goes not beyond the temporal life: to
whom the promises given, do rest in present and bodily good things.

An absurd thing.
An. And if God meant to fat the Jewish nation as an heard of swine in a stie.

11 Surely if circumcision were a literal sign we must think none otherwise
of baptism. Forasmuch as the Apostle makes the one no whit more spiritual
then the other*. Coll. 2.11. Spiritual promyses are confirmed by erthlie
benifits Genesis 15.1.18.
And in the mean season we do not deny, but that God did testify his good
will by earthly and carnal benefits, whereby we do also say that that hope
of the spiritual promises was confirmed*.

12 Object. They were called the children of Abraham which took their
beginning of his seed: they are called by this name which imitate his faith.
Therefore theirs was the carnal infancy, and ours the spiritual.

Who are Abraham's children.
An. God promises to Abraham that he will be his God, and the God of his seed.
Whosoever they be which receive Christ the author of this blessing they be
heirs of this promise: and so consequently they are called Abraham's children.

13 Circumcision was given to testify such bountifulness to the Jews:
whereby their minds were lifted up to the hope of eternal life: and it was
called the seal of faith*, Romans 4.20.
that Abraham might be the father both of uncircumcision and of circumcision.

14 Object. Paul teaches that those which are of the flesh, Romans 9.7.
are not the sons of Abraham*.

An. He shows by the example of Ismael and Esau that the goodness of God is
not tied to the carnal seed: The goodness of God is not tied to the carnal
seed
but that he which shall keep the law of the covenant, and embrace the
promise of God by faith, he is counted the child of Abraham.

15 Object. Those which in times past did circumcise infants, did only figure
the spiritual infancy, which comes from the regeneration of the word of God.

An. The Apostle does not so subtillie play the Philosopher, Romans 15.8.
when he writes that Christ is the minister of circumcision to fulfill the
promises which were made to the fathers*.

16 Object. Women ought not to be baptized, Act. 2.29.
if baptism must be like to circumcision.

An. By circumcision was testified the sanctification which did agree both to
men and women. Whether women ought to baptized.
But the bodies of men children alone were imprinted, which could be so only
by nature, yet so that the women were through them after a sort partakers and
companions of circumcision. The likelihood of Circum. and Bap.
Therefore let the likelihood of baptism and circumcision remain in the
inward mystery, in the promises, in use, in efficacy.

17 Object. Children are not yet by age fit to understand

An. Then were they to be left in death. But on the other side Christ
commands that they be brought to him*: because he is the life Ioh. 14.6.
. Mat. 19.13.


Ob. Infants do not therefore perish if they be counted the children of Adam.

An. Yea in Adam we all die: neither does there remain any hope of life, but
in Christ alone*. 1 Cor. 15.22.


Ephesians. 2.3. Ioh. 11.25. How infants are regenerate.
Quest. How are infants regenerate being not endowed with knowledge either of
good or evil?

An. The work of God, though it be not subject to our capacity is not yet
nothing. For theirs is the kingdom of heaven, where into no unclean thing
does enter. Ioh. 3.3.
Therefore they are first regenerate*, and sanctified Luke 1.15.
from their mothers womb.

Object. From the womb, that is, from their childhood. The secripture speaks
so.

An. The Angel tells Zachary, that that which was not yet borne shall be
filled with the holy ghost*. Luke 1.15.


17 And surely Christ was therefore sanctified from his very infancy,
Christ's sanctification.
that he might sanctify his elect in himself, out of every age without
difference.

Object. The spirit acknowledges no regeneration in the scripture, but of the
incorruptible seed, that is, 1 Pet. 1.23
the word of God*.

An. Peter speaks only of the faithful which had been taught by the
preaching of the word. The word of God is the seed of regeneration.
To such the word of God is the only seed of regeneration. It does not
thereupon follow that infants cannot be regenerate by the power of God.

19 Object. But faith comes by hearing, the use whereof they have not yet
obtained*. Romans 10.17


An. Paul speaks of the ordinary dispensation of the Lord, Many are
illuminate without preaching
which he uses to keep in calling his. But he has enlightened many without
any preaching.

20 Object. Baptism is the Sacrament of repentance and faith. But neither of
these is in tender infancy.

An. Circumcision was a sign of repentance*, and a seal of faith Romans 4.11.
. Ier. 4.
And yet infants were circumcised. What if we say that infants are baptized to
the repentance and faith to come? Which two though they be not as yet formed in
them, The seed of faith in infants
yet the seed of both lies hid in them through the secret operation of the
spirit, whose fruits shall afterward appear.

21 If therefore those whom the Lord has vouchsafed to elect, having received
the sign of regeneration, do depart this life before they grow up, he
renueth them by the power of his Spirit, as he himself alone foreseeth to be
expedient. If they come to riper years, that they may be taught the truth of
baptism, Baptism is a mark of renewing.
they shall be hereby more inflamed to the desire of renewing, the mark
whereof they have given them, that they might think thereupon throughout the
whole course of their life.

22 Object. Baptism is given for remission of sins.

An. I grant: Therefore seeing God does assure this age of hope, of mercy,
why should we take from it the sign, being indeed far inferior?

Object. The church is cleansed by the Lord, Ephesians. 5.26.
by the washing of water in the word of life*.

An. Therefore it seems to be an unmeet thing, that it should want the
testimony of it in infantes, Infantes are heirs of the kingdom.
who are by right accounted a part of the church, seeing they be heirs of the
kingdom.

Object. We are ingrafted by baptism into the body of Christ*. 1 Cor. 12.13.


An. Therefore infants must be baptized, that they be not plucked from the body
of Christ.

23 Object. Peter counsaileth the Jews to repent and then to be baptized for
the remission of sins Act. 8.37.
. Act. 2 37.
Also Philip makes answer to the Eunuch, that he may be baptized, if he
believe with his whole heart.

An. He speaks of those which are grown up which are not to be baptized
unless their conversion and faith be seen and tried. They which are grown up
must not be baptized until they make confession of their faith. Gen 15.1. Genesis
17.11 Infantes are contained in the covenant by right of inheritance. Ioh. 3.5.
There is an other respect to be had of infants.

24 As we may see in Abraham, whose faith the Sacrament does follow*: in
Isaach it goes before all understanding*: because he is contained in the
covenant from his mothers womb, by right of inheritance.

25 Object. Unless one be borne again of water and the spirit, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God*. They think that baptism is called
regeneration. Therefore they which are not capable of regeneration, ought not
to be baptized.

A similitude.
An. He does not there entreat of baptism, but of regeneration which is made
by the spirit, which is compared to water*, Mat 3.11.
as in an other place to fire: otherwise faith should follow after baptism,
seeing water is put before the spirit. Mat. 28.19.
Which is contrary to the scripture*.

26 Object. All which are not baptized must be adjudged to eternal death.

An. Yea whosoever believes in the son, shall not see death. Ioh. 5.24.
Those which are not yet baptized must not be adjudged to death. Mat. 28.19.
Mat. 16.16.
He shall come into judgment, but he shall pass from death to life*, we do no
where find that he which was not yet baptized is condemned.

27 Object. It was said, Teach, then Baptize*. Again, he which shall Believe,
and be baptized, shall be saved*. What will we more? Therefore doctrine and
faith must needs go before baptism.

An. If we would greedily stay in the order of the words, it should likewise
follow, that we must first baptize, then afterward teach: seeing it is said,
baptize, Mar. 16.15.
teaching them to keep*, etc.

28 But he entreats there of those which are grown up, which must first be
taught, and then when they believe, they must be baptized: Infantes must be
baptized because of the promise.
but infants are baptized by reason of the promise made to their parents.

29 If any man cavil, that infants are to be deprived of food, 2 These. 3.10.
because the Apostle does not permit them to eat which do not work, shall he
not be worthy to be spitted at of all. Why Christ was bap. when he was thirty
years of age.


Object. Christ was not baptized until he was thirty years of age.

An. Because he determined to lay a sure foundation of baptism then by his
preaching, he sanctified it under his own body, that it might succeed
circumcision.

30 Object. In like sort infants were to be made partakers of the supper. Why
the Supper is not made common to infants.


An. They differ greatly therein: because baptism is a certain entering into
the church: the supper is given to those which are grown up in years, which
are now fit to bear strong meat, which are apt to discern the body and blood
of the Lord, which thing does not agree to infants.

31 Object. As the signs of Christ are perfect, they do likewise require those
which are perfect, or capable of perfection.

An. The perfection of baptism reaches unto death: The perfection of Baptism
reaches unto death
therefore it is ill done to restrain it unto one minute of time.

Object. The signs of Christ are instituted for memories sake, that every
one may call to mind that he was buried together with Christ.

An. It appertains to the supper, The examination of the Supper.
that every one examine himself.

Object. All those remain in death which believe not in the son of God, and
the wrath of God remains upon them*. Ioh. 3.36.
And therefore infantes which cannot believe, lie in their own condemnation.

An. Christ speaks not there of the general giltinesse, wherein all the
posterity of Adam is inwrapped, but he does only threaten to the contemners of
the Gospel, damnation. But this does nothing belong to infants.

What it is to hear the voice of the Spirit.
Object. Whosoever is borne of the spirit, hears the voice of the spirit.

An. That is, the faithful are framed to obedience as the spirit works in
them.

1 Cor. 15.46.
Object. Because that which is natural is first*, we must wait for the time
which is fit for baptism, which is spiritual.

1 Cor. 7.14.
An. Though says Paul they be lost by nature, which are borne of the
faithful, yet they are holy by supernatural grace*.

Object. When David went up into the tower of Sion, 2 Samuel 5.8
he did carry with him neither blind nor lame but courageous soldiers Luke.
14.21.
.

An. Yea truly, he bids blind and lame to the heavenly banquet Mat. 4.19.
.

Object. The Apostles were fishers of men, not of children Mat. 13 47.
.

An. All kind of fishes is gathered into the net of the Gospel*.

1 Cor. 2.13
Object. Spiritual things are fit for those which are spiritual*, infants
are not such.

An. He entreats of doctrine, yea God does consecrate to himself by his free
adoption, those which are begotten of the flesh.

With what meat me^ must be nourished.
Ob. They must be fed with spiritual meat, if they be new men.

An. Baptism being the sign of adoption suffices them, until being grown
up they be able to bear strong meat.

Ob. Christ calls all his unto the holy Supper.

An. He admits none but such as are already prepared to celebrate the
remembrance of his death. Who are to be admitted to the Supper.


Object. It is monstrous if a man eat not, after he is borne.

An. Christ is nevertheless meat to infants, though they abstain from the
sign.

Object. A good steward gives meat to the family in due time*. Mat. 24.46.


An. It belongs to God alone to determine that.

Ob. The Apostles are commanded to make have to the harvest, whiles the fields
are white*. Ioh. 4.35.


An. Christ his meaning is to have the Apostles to address themselves more
joyfully to the work, whiles they behold the present fruit of their labors.

Object. All Christians are brethren, in which number infants are not, so long
as we drive them from the supper.

An. None be heirs of the kingdom of heaven, Infantes are members of Christ
but such as are members of Christ.

Object. No man is made our brother, but by the Spirit of adoption, which is
only given by the hearing of faith.

An. That is preposterouslie drawn to infants, which is spoken only of those
which are grown up.

Object. By regeneration we be made Gods. But those be Gods to whom the word
of God is spoken.

An. The place of the Psalm is wrested to a strange sense. Again to feign
that there is a Godhead in the faithful, Seruetus his doting.
is of Seruetus his dotings.

Object. Sheep and goats were not straightway offered in sacrifice, so soon
as they came out of the womb.

Exodus 13.2.
An. All the first begotten so soon as they opened the matrix, were holy to
the Lord*. Therefore we must not wait for man's strength.

32 Therefore let us conclude that those opinions must be taken away, which make
void that consolation which the faithful conceive in their minds, by the
promises of God: which make them unthankful toward the mercy of God: and
sluggish to teach their children godliness.

CHAP. XVII. Of the holy supper of Christ, and what it avails us.
The Supper does nourish those which are begotten by the word. Signs.
1 LIKE AS we are by baptism brought into the church of God: so by the
spiritual banquet we are kept in that life, into the which he has begotten
us by his word. The signs are bread and wine, which represent unto us the
invisible food, which we have by the flesh and blood of Christ. The end is
threefold: that it may serve for confirmation of our faith: A three fold end.
for our confession before men: and for exhortation 1 The confirmation of faith
is the first end of the Supper.
that his blood was shed for us, that it is to us continual drink. And so
sound the words of the promise which is added there.

2 And out of this sacrament godly souls may gather great fruit of
confidence, and sweetness, because The Supper is a great argument of confidence.
so that we may call all that ours which is his: again whatsoever is ours he
will have it so imputed to him, as if it were his

3 Whereas he commands us to take, he signifies that it is ours: whereas
he bids us eat, The commandment. Take.
he signifies that, that is made one substance with us. Whereas he says of his
body, that it is delivered for us, of his blood that it is shed for us, he
therein teaches that both these are not so much his as ours: because he took
both, and laid down both, not for his own commodity, but for our salvation.
The force of the Supper.
And the whole force of the sacrament consists in these words: which is
given for you: which is shed for you.

4 Therefore they be not the principal parts of the sacrament, to preach to us
the body of Christ simply, and without any higher consideration: The
promise.
but rather that promise, whereby he does testify that his flesh is meat
indeed, and that his blood is drink indeed: wherewith we are fed to
eternal life. Whereby he affirms that he is that bread of life, of which
whosoever shall eat, he shall live for ever.

5 That is done, both by the Gospel, and also 2 Faults to be taken heed of
in the Supper.
that neither doing too much in extenuating the signs, we A similitude.
we seem in the mean season to darken the mysteries themselves.

Ob. To eat the flesh of Christ and to drink his blud: is nothing else but to
believe in Christ himself.

An. Like as not the sight, but the eating of bread ministers food to the
body: so the soul must truly and thoroughly be made partaker of Christ, that
by his power it may be quickened to a spiritual life. They think that to eat
is only to believe: Eating is a fruit of faith.
therefore I say that that eating is a fruit and effect of faith.

6 This is also to be observed that when the cup is called the covenant in
the blood, there is a promise expressed which serves to confirm faith,
whereupon it follows that unless we have respect unto God, and embrace that
which he offers, we do not rightly use the the holy supper.

7 Ob. In the supper we are only partakers of the spirit of Christ.

An. Yea his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed: The flesh
of Christ is meat indeed.
neither has any man life but he which eats that flesh and drinks that
blood.

8 The sum cu^meth to this end: that Christ was from the beginninng that
lively word of his father*, the fountain of life, and the original from
whence all things did always receive life. That life was then made manifest,
Ioh. 1.2. Christ is the fountain of life
when the son of God having taken our flesh upon him, offered himself to be seen
with eyes, and handeled with hands. Moreover it makes the self same flesh
wherein it is to bring life to us, that through partaking thereof, we may be fed
to immortality*. Ioh. 6.48.58.
Heerin the godly have singular comfort, that they find life in their own
flesh. Let them only hold out the lap of their heart, that they may embrace it
being present.

9 Object. The flesh of Christ has not so great power of it self, that it can
quicken us, which by the own condition was subject to mortality: and being
now endued with immortality does not live of it self

An. Yet it is by good right said to give life, The flesh of Christ gives life.
which is filled with fullness of life, that it might pour it out into us. For
the flesh of Christ is like to a fountain being rich, and such as cannot be
drawn dry, A similitude. Ephesians. 1.22. and 4.15.
which does pour out into us the life which flows from the godhead into it*.

10 Therefore our souls are none otherwise fed with the flesh and blood of
Christ, then bread and wine do maintain and sustain the corporal life.

Object. The distance of place is so great, that the flesh of Christ can not
come to us, that it may be to us meat.

An. The power of the holy Ghost does so much surpass our senses, The
distance of places does not hinder the partaking.
that it is a foolish thing to go about to measure his infiniteness by our
measure. Let faith conceive that which the mind does not comprehend, that the
Spirit does truly unite those things which are separate in place. After
which sort the Apostle said: that, the bread which we break is the partaking
of the body of Christ.

Object. It is a figurative speech, whereby the name of the thing signified is
given to the sign.

An. By the breaking of bread, Breaking of bread.
the Lord does not only represent, but also deliver the partaking of his body.

11 And the holy mystery of the Supper consists in two things: in bodily
signs, and in the spiritual truth. Let us therein consider three things: the
signification: the matter which depends thereupon: Three things to be
considered. The matter. The signification. The effect. Sorbonistes.
Transubstantiation. Lombard lib. 4. did. 12.
By the effect we mean redemption, righteousness and eternal life.

12 And although in the mystery of the Supper we grow together in one body
with Christ by faith, yet we reject the error of those, which fasten Christ to
the element of bread.

13 Object. The body of Christ which is in it self visible, lies hid and is
covered under the form of bread after consecration*, so that only whiteness
remains.

14 An. Hence came feigned transubstantiation. But there should be no
likelihoode between the sign, and the thing signified.

Object. Some of the old writers did use the word Turning. Conversion or
turning in the Supper.


An. That they might teach that the bread which is consecrated to the mystery,
does much differ from common bread: but they would not abolish the substance of
the outward signs.

What consecration is.
15 That is it which is signified by the word of consecration: that shall
appear by an example. The water which flowed out of the rock in the
wilderness was a sign of the same thing to the Fathers, which the wine does
figure to us in the Supper. But it was a common watering to beasts, and the
people, and the cattle. Whereupon it follows that there is none other
change made, but in respect of men, by reason of the promise.

Object. The rod of Moses being turned into a serpent, though it get the name
of a serpent, yet it retains the old name, Exodus 4.3. and 7.20.
and it is called a rod*. So bread is called bread, though it be become a new
substance.

An. The eye was a witness of that turning, The rod is called a serpent.
but not in the Supper: and in short time it returned to the own form,
therefore it retains the name of a rod.

16 Object. The body of Christ as it is invisible and infinite, it is every
where: Vbiquitaties.
therefore nothing does hinder, but that it may lie hid under bread.

An. The nature of a true body does not suffer that.

17 Object. The flesh of Christ had never any other measuringes save only so
far and wide as heaven and earth do reach. How Christ is said to have waxed
and grown.
And whereas Christ was borne and did grow, that was done by dispensation, that
he might fulfill in the sight of men, those things which were necessary to
salvation.

An. What is this, Marcion.
to ascribe to Christ a fantastical body, but to raise up Marcion from hell?

Object. Christ's body is glorious and immortal therefore there is none
absurdity if it be contained in more places the^ one, if in no place, if in no
form under the Sacrament.

An. But the body was mortal which Christ gave to his disciples, the day before
he suffered. Mat. 17.2.


Object. He had already showed his glory to the three disciples in the mount.

An. He meant by that brightness to give them a taste of immortality for an
hour. The end of the transfiguration
But he had not a double body: but it was his own, garnished with new glory.

18 Go to, if they will tie and fasten the body and blood of the Lord to the
bread and wine, the one must needs be plucked away from the other.

Object. The blood is in the body, and the body in the blood.

An. That is a frivolous starting hole. For they be distinct in signs.

A Caution.
19 Furthermore let us never suffer these two exceptions

20 Object. The Pronoune, This, does only note the form of bread.

Popish transubstantiation.
An. But Christ did testify that that which he reached to his Apostles, namely
bread, was his body.

Object. The bread must needs be changed into the body of Christ, because it
was said, This is my body.

An. This word, is, is never taken for to be changed and turned into an other
thing.

Object. This is my body, signifies as much as that the body of Christ is
with the bread, in the bread, and under the bread.

An. These speeches are too diverse, that the bread is the body, Absurdities.
and that the body is with the

21 But the name of the thing is given to the sign because of the alliance
which is between the things signified and their signs. So Circumcision is the
covenant Exodus 12.43. Mat. 3.16
. Genesis 17.13.
The lamb is the Passover*. The sacrifices of the Law are the putting away of
sins; the dove is the holy Ghost 1 Cor. 10.4.
. The stone is Christ.

22 Object. The force of the verb substantive is so great, that it admits
no figure.

An. And yet Paul expounds it, where he calls bread the communicating or
partaking of the body of Christ*. 1 Cor. 10.16.


23 Object. We may not depart one whit from the letter.

An. Then God is a man of war*. Exo. 15.3. Absurdities.
God has eyes, ears, hands, feet.

Object. When Christ did comfort his Apostles, he spoke not darkly or
figuratively.

An. It is true. For unless the Apostles had remembered that the bread was
figuratively called his body, they should have been troubled with a thing so
strange or monstrous, that Christ should sit at table in their sight, and
should be included in the bread being invisible.

24 Object. The infinite power of God must not be made subject to the laws of
nature. The power of God.


An. The question is not what God could do, but what he would do. And it
pleased God that Christ should have a true body.

25 Object. We have the word wherein the will of God is made manifest. The will
of God must be joined with his power


An. The gift of interpretation must not be banished out of the Church, which
brings light to the word.

Object. We have the word.

An. Such as the Anthropomorphits had in times past, when they made God to have
a body. The error of the Anthropomorphits. Mat. 28.20.


26 Object. Christ said, Behold I am with you until the end of the world*.

An. He said in another place, Mat. 26.11.
Me shall you not have always with you*. For he is present every where by his
divine majesty: whereas in body he is at the right hand of the Father.

Quest. Shall we then appoint Christ some certain country of heaven?

An. This is a curious question: we believe that he is in heaven, it is enough.

27 These words show the same, to go away, to ascend, to be lifted up on high,
whiles the Disciples did behold*. Act. 1.9. Mar. 16.9. Luke 24.51
And Paul likewise affirms*, that we must look for him from heaven.

28 Object. Augustine says, that the body and blood of Christ are distributed
in the Supper Phil. 3.20. Epist. 23. ad Bonifa.
.

An. He expounds him self when he says, that the Sacraments take there names
of the likelihoode of the things which they signify. Take away, says he,
spaces from the bodies, and they shall be no where: and because they shall be
no where, they shall not be at all.

Seruetus.
29 Object. The body of Christ is in it self visible in heaven: but in the
Supper it is invisible by dispensation.

An. Yea Peter says that the heaven must contain Christ until he come
again*. Act. 3.21


Object. His body was swallowed up of his godhead after his ascension.

An. There should remain no difference between his divinity, and his
humanity.

A glorified body.
Object. His body is glorified.

An. It is not therefore infinite. Because Christ said, Luke 24.39
See and grope*.

Object. Stephen saw him after his ascension Act. 7.55.
.

An. It was not needful for Christ to change his place, who could make the
eyes of his servant so quick of sight, as that they should pearce into the
heavens. Act. 9.4. Mat. 28.6 Ioh. 20.19.
The same must we also say of Paul*.

Object. Christ came out of the grave, when it was shut*: and he came in to his
Disciples when the doors were shut*.

An. As Christ walked upon the water even as upon an hard pauement: The
miraculous coming out of the grave Luke 24.31
so no marvel if the hardness of the stone did yield when he came against it.

Object. Christ vanished away suddenly out of his Disciples sight as they went
to Emaus*.

An. He became not invisible, that he might take away the sight of him self
from them, but he did only go out of sight, as before he had holden their eyes
that he might not be known*. Ibid. 16.


30 Object. Where soever the godhead of Christ shall be, there shall his body
be also.

An. The one only person of Christ does so consist upon two natures, that yet
notwithstanding either of them has still her own properties remaining.

Object. No man ascends into heaven, but he which came down from heaven, the
Son of man which is in heaven*. Ioh. 3.13. Communicating of properties.


An. We must not despise the communicating of properties. Christ was in heaven
as he was God, upon earth as he was man.

31 Object. There shall be no presence of Christ in the Supper, unless it be
in the bread. How we enjoy the presence of Christ.


An. As if, if Christ lift us up unto him self by his Spirit, we do not as well
enjoy his presence.

32 Christ pronounces that his flesh is the meat of the soul: his blood the
drink of the soul. He commands us to take, I doubt not but he does indeed
reach it, and I do receive it. It is an higher mystery then that it can be
uttered in words.

Object, Then there shall be a mixture of the flesh of Christ with our soul, A
pouring out.
or a pouring out thereof into the same.

An. No truly. But let it be sufficient that Christ does breath out life into
our soul from the substance of his flesh: How our souls are nourished by the
body of Christ
yea that he does pour out into us his own life, though the very flesh of
Christ do not enter into us.

33 Object. This doctrine is contrary to the true and real eating.

The true eating.
An. The true eating is spiritual.

Object. So then we touch only the fruit or effect of the flesh of Christ.

Christ is the matter of the Supper.
An. Christ is the matter of the Supper, thereupon follows the effect, the
purging of our sins.

Object. Who so ever are made partakers of the Sacramental eating they are made
partakers of the body and blood of Christ. The vnbeeleuing receive only the
sign.


An. The unbelievers receive the signs, not the thing signified.

Object. Man's unthankfulness can not diminish the faithfulness of Gods
promises.

An. I grant: but some receive the spiritual meat when it is offered them,
some reprochfully refuse it, which are destitute of faith.

Object. Hereby the word is diminished, This is my body, if the wicked receive
nothing but corruptible bread.

An. God will not be known to be true, in the very receiving, but in the
constancy of his goodness.

Quest. How shall Christ come to the comdemnation of certain, 1 Cor. 11.29.
unless they receive him unworthily*?

An. Men do not purchase to the^ selves death by receiving Christ unworthily,
but by refusing him.

Homil. in Ioh. 59
34 Therefore Augustine says, that the rest of the Disciples did eat the bread
the Lord: but Judas did eat the bread of the Lord, where he does plainly
exclude the unbelieving from partaking of the body and blood of Christ.

35 This knowledge will likewise easily draw us away from carnal worshipping,
Carnal worshipping.
which some have erected in the Sacrament through perverse rashness.

Object. If it be the body, then the soul, and the godhead must be together
with the body. Therefore we must worship Christ.

An. It is a false acco^panying. Accompanying.
For the body of Christ is not Christ. Again the body is in heaven, not in the
supper. Therefore the Apostles did not worship it prostrating Act. 2.42.


36 The Nicene synod meant to prevent this mischief when it forbad us to be
humbly intentive to the signs set before us. The Nicene synod.
Neither was it ordained in times past for any other cause, Why it was said
lift up your hearts.
that ye people should be admonished before the co^secratio^ to lift up their
hearts

37 Object. We give this worship to Christ.

An. Then we need no sign, seeing Christ sits in heaven. And whereas they
carry about pompously the consecrated host: They carry about the consecrated
host.
which they show forth in a solemn spectacle to be beheld, worshipped, called
upon, it is too superstitious. We have hitherto showed how the mystery of the
holy Supper serves for our faith with God. 2 Outward confession is the second
end of the Supper.
Now let us speak of the outward confession: Paul interprets that to be to
show forth the Lords death, which was instituted by the Lord before, that the
disciples should do it in remembrance of him Luke. 22 19.
. And that is publikly, 1 Cor. 11.26.
and altogether with one mouth openly to confess, that the whole confidence of
life and salvation is placed in the death of the Lord:

38 Thirdly the Lord also would have it to be to us in steed of exhortation:
then which none other can more vehemently animate and inflame us both to
pureness and holiness of life, 3 End exhorting to love.
and also to love, peace, consent. For he does so impart to us his body, that
he is altogether made one with us, and we with him. Paul did plainly teach
that: The cup of blessing is the partaking of the blood of Christ*. The bread
of blessing is the partaking of his body. 1 Cor. 10.16.
Therefore Augustine does oftentimes call this Sacrament the bond of love. The
Supper is the bond of love.


39 Hereby is that very well confirmed whereof I spoke, that the right
administration of the Sacraments is not without the word. For what soever The
Mass.
and of other toys?

40 Furthermore like as we see that this holy bread of the Supper is spiritual
meat and wholesome to the faithful: To whom the Supper is poy^on.
so again it is turned into most hurtful poison to all those whose faith it
does not nourish: and whom it does not provoke to the confession 1 Cor. 11.29.
The trial of a man's self.


41 Object. They do eat worthily which are in the state of grace, namely pure,
and purged from all sin.

An. By such an opinion and doctrine all men should be kept back from the use
of this Sacrament.

The Supper is a medicine for the sick.
42 But let us remember that this holy banquet is a medicine for the sick: a
comfort for sinners: a reward for the poor: which should nothing profit the
sound, righteous, and rich, if any such could be found. Thefore we shall
draw nere worthily, if we know our own unworthiness, and seek our
righteousness in Christ.

43 But as touching the outward rite of the action, Man's worthiness. The
outward rite. Prayers.
all things shall be well done, if they be done with love and edification. Let us
begin with common prayer: the^ let a sermon be made: then let the minister
having set bread and wine upon the table repeare the institution The form of
ministering the Supper.
let him also excommunicate all those which by the Lords inhibition are
forbidden to come thereto: let prayer be made, that When the Supper must be
celebrated.
when the thanksgiving is ended, let the Church be dismissed. If that were
done at least every week, it should be more allowable.

44 This was an evil ordinance that it should be received but once in a year,
and that but for fashions sake. Luke shows that it was oftener used in the
Apostolic Church: when he says that the faithful continued in the doctrine
of the Apostles, Act. 2.42.
in fellowship, in breaking of bread, and prayers*. Which thing was long time
observed in the Church: as we may gather out of the Canons of Anacletus, and
Calixtus.

45 By these constitutions the holy men meant to retain and maintain the
often use of the communion, delivered by the Apostles them selves: The canons
of Anacletus.
which they saw to be most wholesome for the faithful, and to grow out of use
through negligence of the people. Augustine testifies of his age, How the
often use of the Supper grew out of use by little and little. In sex. cap. Ioh.
tract. 26.
that this Sacrament was prepared and received in some places daily, in some
places certain days coming between*. The same does Chrysostom teach*.

46 And surely this custom which commands to communicate but once in the
year, is a most certain invention of the devil: In cap. 1. Hom. 26. ad Ephesians.
through whose ministry soever it was brought in.

47 Out of the same shop came that other constitution also, which did either
steal, or take from the better part of the people the half of the Supper:
namely the sign of the blood, The sign of the blood was forbidden the lay
people.
which being forbidden the lay and profane men (these titles do they give to
Gods inheritance) it became proper to a few shauelings and anointed persons.
For this is the commandment of eternal God, that all drink.

Object. It is to be feared lest the consecrate wine be shed.

An. As if all dangers were not before seen by the eternal wisdom of God.

The body is distinguished from the blood
Object. One does serve for both. For the body is not without blood.

An. As if the Lord had for no cause distinguished his body from his blood,
both in words and signs. We must retain the profit which we reap in the
double earnest by the ordinance of Christ.

48 Object. We must not fet a rule from one fact, whereby the Church may be
tied to continual observation.

The partaking of both signs is necessary.
An. It is no simple fact. Because Christ appointed that the Apostles should do
so afterward. For these are the words of one that commands, Drink ye all of
this.

Object. The Apostles alone were admitted to be partakers of this Supper, whom
he had already chosen into the order of sacrificing Priests.

An. He commanded that they should so distribute the bread and wine, which was
afterward observed by the faithful after the Apostles time for the space of a
thousand years, and all without exception were made partakers of both signs.

49 Neither did this custom grow out of use so long as any drop of
integrity remained in the Church. Gregory the last Bishop.
Gregory whom you may by good right call the last bishop of Rome, says, that
it was kept in his time. Yea it endured as yet, four hundred years after his
death, when all things were grown out of kind.

50 Neither did the Apostle lie when he told the Corinthians, that he had
received that from the Lord which he had delivered to them. For afterward he
declares the tradition, that all of them both one and other should be
partakers of the signs.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Popish Mass, by which sacrilege the Supper of Christ
has not only been profaned, but also brought to nothing.
1 HEreby it appears how far contrary the Mass is to the holy institution
of the Supper.

Ob. It is a sacrifice to obtain remission of sins.

An. Yea it blasphemeth Christ: it burieth his cross: it makes his death to
be forgotten: The virtues of the Mass.
it takes away the fruit thereof: and it weakneth the Sacrament

2 First, 1 Blaspheming of Christ.
those which say Mass must needs be priests. And that cannot be done without
horrible blaspheming of Christ, seeing he is appointed of his Father to be the
only and eternal priest*: Heb. 5.5. and 10.7 Psalm. 110.14.
and such as has no need to have a vicegerent under him.

Object. Sacrificing priests are not appointed under Christ as if he were dead,
Suffragaines.
but they are only Suffragaines or helpers.

Heb. 7.23.
An Christ who is not hindered by death, is one, and needs no parteners.

Object. Melchisedech offered bread and wine to Abraham, which was a
preparation to the Mass.

An. That is falsely referred to bread and wine, which the Apostle refers to
blessing.

2 Fruit of the Mass.
3 Another virtue of the Mass, is: that it does bury the cross and passion of
Christ.

Object. The Mass is only a repeating of the sacrifice which was once offered.

An The Apostle teaches, that no repetition is necessary*, Heb. 9.26. and 10
10.
saying: The remission of sins being once obtained, there remains no more
offering.

The sacrifice of Christ is not repeated.
Ob. The Mass is the application of the sacrifice.

An. The true application is made by the preaching of the word, and the
administration of the holy Supper.

4 Object. It shall come to pass that incense and a clean oblatio^ shall be
offered to his name, through out the whole world*. Mat. 1.8.


An. As if it were a new and unwonted thing with the Prophets to depaint out by
the external rite of the Law, the spiritual worship of Cod, whereto they
exhort the Gentiles, Joel. 2.28. Ies. 16.21.
when they speak of their calling*.

5 The third office of the Mass, is, to blot and raze out of men's memories the
true death of Christ. The third office of the Mass What the Mass is.
For what is the Mass but a new and altogether a diverse testament, seeing
that it promises new remission of sins?

Object. This sacrifice is unbloody.

An. Therefore contrary to the nature of sacrifices, because there is none
without sheding of blood, 4 Office to draw men back from Christ.
lest washing be wanting.

6 The fourth office of the Mass is to take from us the fruit which came to
us from the death, of Christ. For who can think that he is redeemed by the
death of Christ, when he shall see new redemption in the Mass?

Object. We obtain remission of sins by none other means in the Mass, save
only because it is already purchased by the death of Christ.

An. That is, An absurdity.
we are redeemed by Christ upon that condition, that we our selves may redeem
our selves.

7 Last of all the holy Supper wherein the Lord left a remembrance of his
passion, is taken away, 5 Office to take away the Supper. The co^trarietie
between the Supper and the Mass.
when the Mass is set on foot. For the Supper receives, the Mass gives and
offers: the Supper teaches that we obtain salvation by the death of Christ
alone, the Mass chalengeth that to it self: the Supper is the bond of unity,
the Mass of division: For in the private Mass, there is no partaking of the
Supper, though there be many present.

8 Object. But the priest eats in the name of the whole Church.

An. Who commanded him so to do? Christ will have the bread to be broken and
divided. In the Mass it is showed and worshipped.

9 Moreover this perverseness was unknown to the purer Church. Therefore let us
say that they do err filthilie, which take the Mass for a sacrifice.

10 Object. The men of old time called the holy Supper a sacrifice.

An. But they declare therwithall that they mean nothing else, How the Supper
is a sacrifice. Aug. lib. 20. con. Faust. cap. 18.
but the remembrance of that only sacrifice, which Christ our only Priest did
offer upon the cross*.

11 Moreover they did more near imitate the Jewish manner of sacrificing, then
either Christ ordained, or the nature of the Gospel did bear: and they turned
aside too much unto the shadows of the law.

The comparison of Moses his sacrifices, and our thanks giving.
12 For there is difference put between Moses his sacrifices and the Lords
Supper, because though they did represent to the people of the Jews, that
efficacy of the death of Christ, which is given to us at this day in the
Supper: yet the manner of representing was diverse. Because there the Priests,
the sacrifice, the Altar, did figure the sacrifice of Christ which was to come:
but the signs of the Supper as bread and wine, do celebrate the remembrance of
the sacrifice already past.

Two kinds of Sacrifices.
13 Furthermore the word Sacrifice being taken generally, does comprehend what
soever is offered to God. And though there were diverse forms of Exodus 29.30.
to testify the thankfulness of the mind. To this are referred burnt
offerings, and drink offerings, oblations, Ioh 19.30.
first fruits, peace offerings*, but the sacrifice of cleansing was so offered
by Christ alone, and so finished, that there is no place left afterward for
any other sacrifice.

1 Sacrifice of purging.
14 Wherefore the shauelings by Massing commit blasphemy, and that such as is
not to be suffered, both against Christ and against his sacrifice, when they
think upon the repeating of the oblation, and of new remission of sins.

15 Even Plato does sufficiently reprove their vanities, when he derideth them
very wittily, Platoes scoff.
which thought that their wickedness was covered with these as with veiles:
and having made as it were a covenant with God, did more carelessly pamper
themselves: he seems altogether to allude to the use of the cleansing of the
Mass.

16 Under the other kind of sacrifice which we called the sacrifice of
thanksgiving, 2 The sacrifice of thanksgiving.
all offices of love are contained, which when we do toward our brethren, we
honor the Lord himself in his members: again, all our prayers, praises,
thanksgiving, and whatsoever we do to the worship of God: which is so
necessary for the church, that it cannot be absent from the same*. Mat. 1.11.
Romans 12.1. Ph. 4.18.


17 Such works had the name of sacrifices given them, not only in the new
testament Heb. 13.15. 1 Pet. 2.9.
, but also in the old Osee. 14.3. Psalm. 51.21. The abomination of the Mass.
: and in this sense all the faithful are called Priests.

18 What remains but that the blind may see the deaf may hear, and very
children may understand, this abhominatio^ of the Mass? Which being offered in
the golden cup, has made all kings of the earth, and people so drunk, that
being more blockish then very beasts, they have placed the ship of their
saftie in this one only deadly gulf. This is that Helena for whom the enemies
of the truth fight so courageously.

19 These are the things which we thought good to speak concerning the two
Sacraments: There be but 2 Sacraments. Baptism is the entrance into the
Church.
the use whereof was delivered to the Church of Christ from the first
beginning of the new Testament, to the end of the world: namely, that
Baptism should be as it were a certain entrance into the Church, and the
entering or beginning of faith: and the Supper is as it were continual food,
The Supper is the daily food.
wherewith Christ does spirituallie feed the family of his faithful. For that
cause it is often repeated, but baptism is not so.

20 Therefore let the church of Christ be content with these two: neither let
it not only admit any third for the present time, but not so much as desire
it, or wait for it, until the end of the world. For it belongs to God alone
to erect a sacrament, seeing it belongs to him alone both to promise and also
to give salvation.

CHAP. XIX. Of the five sacraments falsely so called, where it is declared that
the five other be no sacraments which have been hitherto commonly taken for
sacraments: and also it is showed what manner of things they be.
1 NOW let us come to the other 5. Sacraments whereto the Papists have falsely
given the name of sacraments, seeing they have neither commandment nor promise.

God alone does institute a Sacrament.
2 Furthermore we must hold this strongly, that it belongs to God alone to
institute a Sacrament.

Object. The old church did hold that there be seven Sacraments.

An. That cannot be proved: for when they speak of those signs, which ought to
be testimonies of gods grace toward us, they are content with these two,
namely Baptism and the Lords Supper

1. Of confirmation.
What confirmation is.
4 It was a custom in times past, to present the children of christians to the
Bishop: that they might fulfill that duty, which was required of those which
being grown up, did offer themselves to be baptized. For they sat among
those that were to be catechized, until being well instructed in the
mysteries of faith, they could make confession of their faith before the
Bishop, and the people, Catechism.
then they were examined according to the form of the Catechism which was
then common. And to the end this action might have more reverence and dignity
they laid their hands upon them. Laying on of hands.
Which ceremony I commend, and could wish it were restored at this day to his
pure use.

5 But the latter age, has put I wot not (...) feigned confirmation for a
Sacrament of God, Feigned confirmation.
having in a manner blotted out the thing it self.

Object. Confirmation gives the holy ghost for increase of grace, which is
given in baptism for innocence: it strengthens them to the battle, which
in baptism are regenerate to life: which is done with anointing, and this
form of words: I sign thee with the sign of the holy cross, and I
confirm thee with the Chrisme of salvation, The form of popish confirmation.
in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy Ghost.

An. It is trimly and handsomely done. But seeing there is no word of God,
this sacrilegious boldness cannot be excused.

6 Object. We might imitate the Apostle, Act. 8 15. To give the holy ghost.
which by laying on of hands gave the holy ghost.

An. This was an especial gift in the Apostles, and lasting but for a time.
Furthermore they gave the spirit visiblie: which the shauelings do ^ot.

7 Object. Our ointment is the oil of salvation. Popish ointment.


An. Who taught you to seek salvation in oil.

Ob. It has force to strengthen.

Gal. 4.9 Col. 2.20.
An. But Paul draws us far from the elements of this world, who condemns
nothing more then to stick to such petie observations*. Surely they which
call oil, the oil of salvation, do renounce the salvation which is in Christ.

8 Again, whereas they attribute more to confirmation then to baptism,
because baptism cannot well be made perfect without confirmation: Christians
anointed.
do they not enforce upon us their diuelishe wickedness?

9 Object. All the faithful must receive the holy ghost by the laying on of
hands, after baptism, that they may be found perfect Christians, because he
shall never be a Christian, unless he be anointed with the Bishops
confirmation.

An. Then Christ does only begin Christians, the oil does make them perfect.
By this sentence the Apostles, Martyrs, and a great sort of christians are
condemned, which were not anointed.

The dignity of the popish annoynting.
10 Object. Holy anointing must be more reverenced then baptism: because it is
administered properly by the hands of the chiefest bishops, Baptism is
distributed commonly by all Priests.

An. O sacrilegious mouth dare thou set fat or oil defiled only with the
stinch of thy breath, and charmed with mumbling of words against the sacrament
of Christ, and compare it to water sanctified by the word of God?

Object. It must have greater reverence given it not for the greater virtue
which it gives, but because

An. First do they not bewray themselves to be Donatistes.
which esteem the force of the Sacrament by the worthiness of the minister.

11 The other reason is foolish. For we say that in Baptism the forehead is
likewise dipped in water. In comparison of this we set not one piece of dongue
by their oil, either in baptism, or in confirmation.

Object. Oil is deerer.

An. This inhaunsing of the price is theft, iniquity, and deceit. In the third
reason they bewray their own ungodliness: when as they say that there is
greater increase of virtues given in confirmation then in baptism. By laying
on of hands the Apostles gave the visible graces of the spirit: wherein does
the fat of these men show it self fruitful?

12 Object. The observation of confirmation is most ancient, and confirmed by
the consent of many ages.

An. It is no whit the better. Because a sacrament comes not from the earth,
but from heaven. Not from men, but from God alone

13 Therefore let us conclude that the true use of confirmation is the manner
and order of catechizing, or a form written for this use: The true use of
confirmation.
which contains a familiar sum in a manner of all points of our religion:
wherein all the whole Church of the faithful must agree together without
controversy. The form of catechizing.
When a child is ten years old let him offer himself to the Church to
make confession of his faith: let him be examined concerning every point, let
him make answer to every point, if he be ignorant in any let him be taught.

2. Of repentance.
14 The men of old time observed this order in public repentance, that those
which had done and ended those satisfactions which were enjoined the^ were by
solemn laying on of hands reconciled. Laying on of hands.
Cypr. lib. Epist. 1. Epist. 2 Lib 4. sent. did. 22. cap. 2.
that even in private absolutions they used this ceremony.

15 The Romish schoolmen take great pains to find a sacrament here.

What a Sacrament is.
Ob. Outward repentance is a sacrament and sign of the inward repentance, that
is, of the contrition of the heart.

An. If it were a sacrament, it should be an outward ceremony instituted by
the Lord for confirmation of faith.

The absolution of the Priest.
16 It might with a fairer color be objected, that the absolution of the priest
is rather a sacrament, then either outward or inward repentance. For they
might easily have said, that it is a ceremony to confirm our faith,
concerning remission of sins, and that it has the power of the keys.

17 Therefore let us conclude that repentance cannot be a sacrament: because
there is no particular Lib. 4. sent. did. 14. cap. 1. *De poenis did. 1. cap.
2.


Object. Jerome says*, that it is the second board after shipwreck: because
if any man have marred his garment of innocence, which he had in Baptism,
he may repair it again by repentance.

An. This is a wicked saying: because baptism is not blotted out by sins.
Mar. 1.4. Luke. 3.3.
Moreover baptism is the sacrament of repentance for the remission of sins*.
Therefore there is no cause why we should make an other sacrament for
repentance.

3. Of the last annoynting, as they call it.
18 The third feigned Sacrament is extreme unction, which is done only by the
priest, The form of extreme unction.
and that in extremity: and with oil consecrated by the Bishop: and with this
form of words, By this holy anointing, and his most holy mercy, God does
forgive thee whatsoever thou have offended, by seeing, hearing, smelling,
tasting, touching, they feign that it

Ob. The institution is set down by James*. Iam. 5.14.


19 An. That was a temporal gift: and through the unthankfulness of men it
did quickly cease. The anointing which the Apostle used was temporal, and
but for a season.
For by the same reason Siloah, the clay, spittle, dust, might be a sacrament.

20 Furthermore they be injurious to the holy ghost, which make that rotten
oil which is of no force, his power. But seeing the ceremony is not
instituted by God: neither has the promise of God, it cannot be a sacrament.

21 Furthermore, James will have all sick men to be anointed: these anoint
with their grease, The end of annoynting.
bodies which are half dead. James will have him that is sick to be
anointed by the Elders of the Church: these men will have none to anoint but
the mass priest. It was common oil which they used: Consecration of oil.
these men use charmed oil, and such as in niene times saluted in this manner,
thrice, Hail holy oil: thrice, Hail holy ointment: thrice, Hail holy
balm.

4, Of ecclesiastical orders.
22 The Sacrament of order possesses the fourth place, The plenty of orders.
being so fruitful of it self that it brings forth seven petty
Sacraments: which when they reckon up, they reckon thirteen. And they be
dorekeepers, Readers, Exorcists, Acoluthes, Subdeaco^s, Deacons, Iesa. 11.2.
Priests. They say there be seven, because of the seven fold grace of the holy
ghost*. Some others make niene after the similitude of the triumphant Church:
some will have shauing of clarks to be the first order of all, and the order of
Bishops to be the last. Shauing of clarks.
Some excluding shauing reckon up the order of Archbishops. Othersome add
Psalmistes, and singers. Thus do men disagree when they dispute and reason
about divine matters without the word of God.

23 But this surpasses all folly, that in every one they make Christ their
fellow in office.

24 They make Readers, Psalmistes, Dorekeepers, Acoluthes, with great pomp:
that they may take upon them a vain title, and do nothing of that which their
name requires.

Object. This must be ascribed to the perverseness of times.

An. Then there is at this day no fruit of their holy orders in the church.

25 Now let us speak of the ceremonies. First whomsoever they take to be of
their soldiers, they enter them into the Clergy with a common sign. For
they shave their crowns, that the crown may signify princely dignity. The
crown of their head is made bare that their mind may freely behold the
glory of God: or that they may be taught, 2 Significatio^s of the crown of
clearkes.
that the vices of their mouth and eyes must be cut of: or shauing is the
laying away of temporal things. The compass about the crown is the remnant
of their goods serving for sustentation of their life. All things are done
in figures. Yet there is no kind of men more greedy, blockishe, or more given
to lust.

26 Object. The crown of Clerks has the beginning from the Nazarites.

An. What else do they allege, but that their mysteries are mere Iudaisme.

Object. Paul shaued his head*. 1 Cor. 9.20.


An. Not for sanctificatio^s sake, but that he might bear with the weakness
of his brethren.

27 Dorekeepers when they are made they receive the keys of the Church door:
Readers, Lesser orders. 2 Doorekeepers. 3 Readers. 4 Exorcists. 5 Acoluthes.
the Bible: Exorcists, the forms of co^iuring: Acoluthes, Tapers and a Cruet.
Lo what be the ceremonies of the lesser orders, wherein on Gods name there is
so great hydden virtue, that they may be not only signs, but also causes of
invisible grace. Being such Sacraments as were unknown to the fathers, and
invented without commandment, or promises.

28 There remain three orders which they call greater. Priests. Greater orders
It belongs to the priests to offer the sacrifice of the body and blood of
Christ upon the altar, to make prayers, and to bless Gods gifts. Therefore
they receive the Pattin and the Hoasts and their hands are anointed. The
ordering of a Priest
Thus they do corrupt the priesthood of Christ, and the order by God appointed:
and as concerning laying on of hands which must be used to comme^d the office
of a true Elder, surely I do greatly allow that. Notwithstanding whereas I
have not put it in for a third Sacrament, Laying on of hands.
I did it for this cause, because it is not ordinary with all the faithful,
but a special rite for one certain function.

29 The ceremonies agree very well with the thing it self. When the Lord sent
the Apostles to preach, Ioh. 20.22.
he breathed upon them*: by which sign he represented the power of the holy
ghost. These good men retained this breathing, Popish breathing.
and they whisper over their silly Priests, as if they did put forth the
holy ghost out of their throat: Take, say they, the holy ghost. And so by
their foolish gesture they mock Christ. Experience likewise teaches how true
that is, which cries that of horses they are become Asses: of fools, frantike
persons, which are made priests.

Annoynting of Priests.
30 They say that they received anointing from the sons of Aaron. Therein
they show themselves injurious to the Priesthood of Christ, which alone was
figured by all the old priesthood. Therefore they fall away from Christ, and
they deprive themselves of the office of pastors.

31 This is the holy oil, which makes such a print as cannot be blotted
out, A printe which can not be put out.
as if the oil could not be wiped away with dust, and salt, or soape.

Object. But that print is spiritual.

An. What has oil to do with the soul? where is the word?

Exodus 30.30.
Object. Moses was commanded to anoint the sons of Aaron*.

An. There is commandment given there likewise touching the Coats, the
Ephod, the Hat, the Crown, the Girdles the Miters, touching the killing of a
calfe, and the burning of the fat thereof, and wh^ do they not observe it?

32 It is the office of the Deacons to assist the Priests in all things which
are done in the Sacraments: namely in Baptism, in Anointing, 2 The office of
the popish deacons.
in the Pattine, in the Chalice: to bring in the oblations, and to set them
upon the Altar, to prepare the Lords Table, and to cover it with the clothes:
to bear the cross, to pronounce and sing the Gospel and Epistle to the
people. Is there one word here touching the true ministry of the Deacons?
What is the ceremony? The Bishop lays his hand upon the Deacon: he lays
a stoale upon his left shoulder: he gives him the text of the Gospel: I pray
what do these things belong to the Deacons?

33 To what end should I speak of Subdeacons? 3 Popish subdeacons.
They were in times past appointed to have the charge of the poor. They have
at this day a trifling function: to bring the Chalice and Patten, the Cruet
with water, and the towell to the altar, Popish toys.
to power out water to wash the hands, etc. What rite was this? He receives
of the Bishop the Patten and Chalice: of the Archdeacon the Cruet with water,
the Manual and such other baggage. In such toys the holy ghost is included.
This is the care they have for the poor. No word, no promise: therefore this
can be no sacrament.

5. Touching Matrimony
34 The last is matrimony, which as all men grant to be instituted of God, so
no man, until Gregory's time, did ever see it given for a Sacrament.

Object. It is a sign of an holy thing, that is of the spiritual conjunction
between Christ and his church*. Ephesians. 5.29.


An. Matrimony was not instituted for us of God for this purpose, that it
might lift up our faith. Also it were an absurd thing to call all those
sacraments, which are signs of holy things: otherwise the stars*: 1 Cor.
15.41. Mat. 15.31.33.
a grain of mustarde seed* leaven, a shepherd Ies. 40.11. Absurdities.
, a giant, and infinite other things should be Sacraments.

35 Object. This is a great sacrament says the Apostle Ephesians. 5 29 Mystery for
a Sacrament.
.

An. He calls it a mystery, that is a secret: neither does he speak of
matrimony, but in Christ and the church.

36 The Latin interpreter has oftentimes put the word sacrament for an hidden
thing, in no other sense, then Paul called it a mystery: as in the Epistle to
Timothe, the Ephesians*, and else where. But if matrimony be a sacrament, 1 Timothy 3.9. Ephesians. 1.9.
Why do they call it the defiling of the flesh? Why will they not suffer
Priests to marry?

The Papists call Matrimony the defiling of the flesh.
37 Why do they forbid marriage from Septuagesima to the vtas of Easter: three
weeks before the nativity of S. John: from Aduent until the Epiphanie? That
we may rid our selves out of their mire, let us conclude that there be only
two ordinary and common sacraments in the Church of Christ, Baptism and the
holy Supper of the Lord.

CHAP. XX. Of civil government.
A double government in man.
1 FVRTHERMORE seeing there is a double government in man, and we have spoken
sufficiently of the one which is placed in the soul and inward man, and does
respect eternal life: it remains

2 Object. What have the civil laws to do with a Christian man? We are dead
by Christ to the elements of this world, and we are translated into the
kingdom of God, and we sit among the heavenly ones. Therefore it is an
unmeet thing for a Christian man to be occupied with these profane and
unclean cares.

An. These two governments are distinguished, Anabaptists.
they are not contrary. If the kingdom of God did extinguish this present
life, civil laws should be superfluous. But if it be the will of God that we
should be as pilgrims upon the earth, those which take away these helps from
man, they take from him his manhood.

Ob. There ought to be such perfection in the church that the own moderation
thereof ought to be a law.

An. That is foolishlie to imagine that perfection which can never be found in
the fellowship of men.

3 Therefore there is no less use of civil policy, The necessity of civil
policy.
(which causes not only that we live well together: but that no offense of
religion arise) then of bread and water. And it has 3. parts: the magistrate
who is the keeper of the laws: The laws according to

4 The Lord does not only allow the office of Magistrates, 1 The Magistrate.
but he gives the same most honorable titles, and has wonderfully commended
the same to us. For they are called Gods, because they bear the person of God,
Exodus 22.8 Psalm. 92.1.6.
whose vicegerents they are after a sort*. Such were David, Josias, Iosaphat.

Kings are nurcing fathers of the Church. Ies. 49 23.
5 Kings are therefore called noursing fathers, and Queens noursing mothers*,
of the Church, neither are they deposed from their honor. After that Paull
had admonished Timothee that prayers should be made in the common assembly,
for kings, he adds forthwith the reason, that we may lead a quiet life
under them with all godliness and honesty. In which words he commends to
their patronage the tuition of the church.

What things stir up a Magistrate to do his duty.
6 Which cogitation ought continually to exercise the Magistrates: partly that
they may be raised up to do their duty, that they may represent unto men
integrity, wisdom, continency, innocence, seeing they know that they are
appointed

7 Object. The Lord said to the Disciples. The kings of the nations reign
over them, but among you it is not so, Luke 22.25.
where he that is the chiefest must become the least*.

An. He speaks there of Ecclesiastical policy and government, and not of
the civil and outward. Romans 13.1.
But Paul says that there is no power but of God*.

8 Furthermore there be three kinds of civil The kinds of civil policy.
Democracie, or common government. If you compare is our duty to show our
selves yielding, and obedient to those whom the Lord has set over us.

9 The office of Magistrates, The office of Magistrates.
as it is described in the word of God, reaches unto both tables of the law.
For no policy is happily framed unless the first care be of godliness: and
they are disordered Ier. 22.3. Deuteronomy. 1.16. Ier 17.16.
Therefore they are armed with power to defend the good, and to keep under the
wicked with sharpness.

10 Object. Are all forbidden by the law of God, Exodus 20.13. Deuteronomy. 5.17.
to kill*. Therefore it is not lawful for a Magistrate, and him that is
godly, to be blooddie.

An. The Magistrate in executing judgments, does nothing of himself, but does
execute the very judgment of God. Exodus 2.12.
So Moses slew the Egyptian*. And the best Magistrate must beware of these two
rocks especially: that he do not rather wound Rocks to be fled. Note.
It is an evil thing to live under a prince, under whom nothing is lawful:
but worse under whom all things are lawful.

11 Thence we may gather that it is sometimes needful, Kings may make wary.
and lawful for kings to take weapons in hand, to repress the unquiet
motions of seditious men: to help the oppressed: and to punish the wickedness
of the wicked.

12 Object. There is no testimony or example extant in the new testament,
There is the same reason to make war now which was intimes past.
which teaches that war is a thing lawful for Christians.

An. There is the same reason to make war now which was in times past:
neither is there Luke 3.14.
neither did he command Soldiers to cast their weapons from them*. But and
if war be lawful, Garrisons, Leagues, Munition, Fortresses and other such
things shall be permitted by the law of God. A Caution.
In the mean season they must beware that they be not more led by their own
affection, then by common feeling.

13 It likes me also to add that last of all, that tributes and taxes are the
lawefull revenues of princes: which they may bestow indeed, especially to
maintain the common charges of their burden. Notwithstanding let Princes
remember that their treasure chambers are not so much private cofers, as
treasuries of all the people, which they cannot ryotouslie bestow or wast,
without manifest injury.

14 In policies, laws are next to the Magistrate, being the most strong
synowes of common wealths, 2 Laws.
or rather the souls thereof, without which the magistrate cannot be: as they
cannot be without the Magistrate. The law is a dumb Magistrate.
For the law is a dumb Magistrate: as the Magistrate is a living law.

Object. A common wealth can not be well framed, wherein the politic laws of
Moses are neglected, The Magistrate is a living law.
and it is governed by the common laws of the Gentiles.

An. This saying is false and foolish: which thing shall easily appear by
dividing the law given by Moses into the Moral Law, The division of the law.
the Ceremonial to us: and what not.

15 Therefore seeing the moral Law is contained in two points whereof the
one does simply The moral law
it Gal. 4.4. 2 Ceremonial.
The ceremonial Law was the schooling of the Jews, until God gave his
Christ, who was then shadowed by figures. 3. Judicial.
The Judicial Law which was given to them in steed of policy, delivered to
them certain forms of equity and righteousness, whereby they might live
innocently and quietly among themselves. And as the Ceremonial did appertain
unto the first part of the Law: the Judicial to the second: yet either of
them had properties distinct from both tables of the Law. The distinction of
Laws.
Therefore as ceremonies might be abolished though godliness remained safe and
sound: so the offices of love may be done, though these Judiciary constitutions
be taken away. Which thing if it be true, surely every nation has free
liberty left to make such laws, as it shall see to be profitable for it
self: which notwithstanding must be framed according to the perpetual rule
of love.

16 Wherein we must diligently mark two The making of a Law. Equity thereof.
and the equity thereof. The latter is natural for all laws. But the former
does consider the circumstances of times, places, and nations. Therefore it is
diverse.

17 It remains that we speak of the people, 3 The people.
which the Magistrate governs by the law, and how he ought to use both.

Object. The office of Magistrates is superfluous among Christians, who are
forbidden to revenge, require, to go to law.

Romans 13.4.
An. Paul testifies the contrary, that he is to us the minister of God for
our good*. Therefore we may use his hand against the injuries of wicked men.

18 For laws are lawful, if a man use them well. And there is a right use
both for the plaintiff to plead: and also for the defendant to defend: but
with this affection only, that every one defend by right that which is his
own.

19 So Paul defended him self against the false accusations of his accusers:
and he challenged before the judgment seat the prerogative of the Roman
liberty: Act. 22.1. and 24 12. and 15.10.
and he appealed from an unjust deputy, to the judgment seat of Caesar*.

Object. Men are forbidden to be desirous of revenge*. Number. 19.18.


An. The vengeance of the Magistrate is not man's, but Gods.

20 Object. We must not resist evil: but we must turn the right cheek to him,
which gives us a blow on the left.

Mat. 5.39.
An. Christ will have those which are his to abstain from desire of rendering
like for like, that they may rather put up injury then repay it.

1 Cor. 6.6.
21 Object. Paul condemns suites generally.

An. He reproves the immoderate fury of the Corinthians in going to law,
which caused the wicked to speak evil of the Gospel.

The office of subjects.
22 The first duty of subjects toward their Magistrates, is, to think most
honorably of their function, namely, which they acknowledge to be a
jurisdiction committed of God: and for that cause to reverence them as the
Ambassabours of God: and that with a sincere and quiet mind, not constrained.
1 Reverence.
Which Paul expounds: that we must obey not only for wrath, but for
conscience sake*. Romans 13.5.


23 Another thing is, that with minds bent to the honoring of them, they
approve their obedience to them: whether they must obey their decrees, or pay
tributes, or take upon them public offices and burdens, which appertain to
common defense*. Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 1.13.
The third thing is, that they commend the safety and prosperity of those
under whom they live, 3 Love with prayer. 1 Timothy 2.1.
to God by prayer*.

24 Hitherto touching the Magistrate who is indeed the father of the country,
the pastor of the people, the preserver of peace, the president of justice.
But if there shall be any which shall change power into tyranny, what must
we do? Surely that sense and feeling has always been bredde in the minds of
all men, no less to hate and abhor tyrants, then to love and reverence
lawful kings.

25 But if we look into the word of God, it shall lead us thither, that we be
subject to the government of all Princes, although they do nothing less then
that which was their duty to do*. Ioh. 34.30. Ose. 13.11.
This is hard and yet true, that subjects must as well reverence a tyrant, as
concerning public obedience, as the best king, if they had him.

26 Because such are not given without Gods providence, The providence of God
in appointing kings.
the singular working whereof we see in distributing kingdoms, and in placing
of kings. In Daniell it is said. The Lord changes the times and the courses
of times: he casts away kings, and he appoints kings*. Dan. 2.21.37. Ezech
29.19. Dan. 2.27.
God gave to Nabuchadnezar the land of Egypt*.

27 Therefore Nabuchadnezar is called the servant of God. Nabucadnezar the
servant of God. Ier. 17.5. Seditious cogitations must be expelled.
Also God commands that he be reverenced with great reverence and obedience*:
for none other cause surely, but because he had the kingdom: into the princely
throne and palace whererof he was taken by the heavenly decree. Therefore let
those seditious cogitatio^s never come into our mind, which may turn us away
from that true and sincere obedience.

28 Object. That commandment did belong to the Israelites.

An. But we must mark with what reason God does establish the commandment. I
have given, says he, Ie. 27.17.
the kingdom to Nabucadnezar*: wherefore serve him and live. Therefore to whom
soever it shall be certain that the kingdom is given, let us not doubt that
we must serve him. And so soon as the Lord does advance any to the kingdom,
We must obey a tirant because he reigns by the will of God Pro 28.2. Job.
12.19.
he makes his will known to us, that he will have him to reign Ier. 29.7.
. Therefore God commands his people to pray for the Babylonians*. And David
being appointed to be king would not smite Saul, who did unworthily pursue
him, 1 Samuel 14.7. and. 26 9.
but he called him honorably his Lord, and the anointed of the Lord.

29 Object. Governors owe mutual duties to their subjects.

An. If the Magistrate do not his due office toward his subjects, yet it
stands them upon to think upon and perform that which belongs to them,
and which is commanded by God: that this may more easily be done, let us call
to mind our offenses*: and then humility shall bridle our impatince: Things
stirring up to obedience.
Last of all let us crave help at the hands of the Lord, in whose hand the
hearts of kings are, and

30 And here both his marvelous goodness, and also power, and providence
show them selves. For sometimes he stirs up of his servants manifest Pro.
21.1. Psalm. 82.2. and 2.10. How God delivers those that be his.
and furnishes them with his commandment, that they may punish a wicked
government: sometimes he directs to that end the fury of those which think
upon and go about an other thing. So he delivered the people of Israel from the
Exodus 3.7. Iud. 3.9.
So he tamed the pride of Tyrus by the Egyptians: so he bridled the insolency
of the Egyptians by the Assyrians: he brake the cruelty of the Assyrians by the
Chaldeans: he tamed the hautinesse of Babylon by the Medes and Persians:
Examples of Gods providence in disposing kingdoms.
when as Cyrus had now subdued the Medes. And he beat down the
unthankfulness of the kings of Judah and of Israel sometimes by the Assyrians,
sometimes by the Babylonians, albeit not after one manner. For the former sort
followed the lawful calling

31 Notwithstanding the Lord did execute his will, when he brake the bloody
scepters of kings, A Magistrates authority must not be offended.
and ouerthrewe their intolerable governments. Therefore let us never despise
or offend the reverent authority of the Magistrate. I speak of private
persons. For if there be at this day any Magistrates, for the behalf of the
people appointed to tame and moderate the lust of kings, (such as the Ephori
were among the Lacedemonia^s: the Tribunes of the people which were set against
the Consuls: or the Demarchi against the Senate of the Athenians: or at this
day in every kingdom the three estates) I doubt not, but that according to
their office, Three estates in kingdoms.
they may withstand the outrageous licentiousness of kings.

A caveat.
32 But in that obedience of subjects we must We must first obey God Dan. 6.22.
and then afterward those which are in authority: but no otherwise but in
him. Daniell obeyed not the wicked commandment of the king*. On the other side
the Israelites which did too much obey the wicked commandment of the king are
condemned. Ose. 5 13. Act. 5.29.
That decree was pronounced by the heavenly crier, that we must obey God rather
then men*. Let us comfort our selves with this cogitation, that we do then
perform that obedience which the Lord requires, when we suffer any thing
what soever it be, rather then we will swerve from godliness.

The love of God ouercometh all things.


