A Commentary of M. J. Calvin upon the Epistle to the Galathians: And
translated into English by R. V.

Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee. Psalm.
122.6. AT LONDON, Jmprinted by Thomas Purfoote, and are to be sold at his shop
over against S. Sepulchers Church. 1581.

To the right Reverend Father John my Lord the Bishop of London, R. V. wishes
health of soul and body, together with happy success in setting forth the
glory of God. etc.
IT is not long since right Reverend Father that J purposed the Dedication of
a sermon of M. Iuel by me translatd out of the Latin, unto your Honor, which
for the brefenesse and smalnesse of the volume thereof J passed vndedicated for
a season, notwithstanding the worthy matter therein contained might
sufficiently commend it as a thing of very great importance: And now having
translated also this commentary of that learned man and godly Father I.
Calvin upon the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Galathians, I thought it my
duty (especially in that I take my self to be bound to render an account of
my study in part unto your Honor) joining the same together with the Sermon
before specified to dedicate both at once unto your Lordship, desiring that you
will vouchsafe to accept of them with such an affection as the authoures of
both (J mean Juel and Calvin) have both for their godliness in life,
excellency in knowledge, and painfulnesse in vtteringe the truth, full well
deserved, whereof I make in doubts. And therefore without troubling your
Lordship any further with more circumstaunces being otherwise occupied in
weighty and great matters, J commend the same together with your affairs to
the defense and protection of the most highest who ever preserve your Honor.

The first of August. 1581. Your most bounder R. V.

The Argument upon the Epistle to the Galathians by M. John Calvin.
IT is sufficiently known what part of Asia the Galathians inhabited, and with
what limits their Country was bounded: but whence they had their beginning,
appears not so well among Writers. All agree that they were Gauls: and
thereof they were named Gaulegrecians. But out of what part of Gaul (or
France) they came, they do not so well agree. Strabo thought that the
Tectosages came out of Gaul Narbon, and that the other were Celtae: whom all
for the most part have followed. But vvheras Plinius reckons the Ambiani
with t e Tectosagi, and beside that, by the consent of all, that they had the
Tolistobogi to their fellows, who dwelt upon the borders of the Rhine: it
seems to me more likelye that they were the Belgae, inhabiting the farmost
coast of the Rhine, toward the Britain Sea. For the Tolistobogi held that
portion in which now the Cleueners and Brabanders do inhabit. But hereof
sprung the error, in my opinion: that whereas some band of the Tectosages had
made an inroade into Gaul Narbon, they retained their name, and called the
Region which they by force possessed, by it. And this does Ausonius show, where
he says, Even so far as to the Teutosagi who at the first were called Belgae.
For he both calls them Belgae: and testifies that in the beginning they
were called Teutosagi, who afterward were named Tectosagi. And whereas Caesar
does place the Tectosagi in the wood called Hercinia, I understand that to be
done by going out of their own country thither: and by the story you may also
gather it. But as touching the original of the Nation, more tha^ sufficient
has been spoken, as in regard of the present place. The Galathians which held
that portion of Asia which took the nam of the^, as they were divided into 3.
principal peoples, namly the Tectosages, Tolistobogi, and the Trocmi, so also,
says Pliny, they had three principal Cities. They flourished with so great
force once among their weak neighbors, that a great part of the lesser Asia
was tributarie to them: at length their Countries virtue wearing out, they
gave themselves to delicacie and excess. So with no great ado they were
overcome in battle, and subdewed by Cneus Manlius, the Roman Consul. in
Saint Paul his time they were under the Romans. Furthermore whereas he had
purely and faithfully instructed them in the Gospel: there came, while he was
away the false Apostles, who corrupted the true seed (of the Word) with false
and corrupt Doctrines. For they taught that the observing of ceremonies was as
yet necessary. It might seem a thing of light account in show. but Paul
contendeth about it as a principal point of the christian faith: and not
without a cause, for it is no small evil to smother the brightness of the
Gospel, to lay a snare upon the consciences, to take away the difference of
the old and new Testament. he did see besides this, that unto these erroures
there was joined also a wicked and hurtful opinion of deserving
righteousness. This is the cause why he strives with such vehemencye and
contention. that we also being admonished how waightye and serious a matter is
here handled, may be the more attentive to read it. If a man estimate the
cause by the Commentaries of Origin or Jerome, he shall wonder that Paul was
so greatly moved for certain outward customs. but whosoever shall look upon
the beginning it self, shall confess that they were matters not unmeet to be
so sharply contended about. For in that the Galathians by over swift credit,
nay rather by lightness and folly suffered themselves to be lead away from the
truth: therefore he reprehendeth them the more sharply* for I am not of their
opinion, which suppose that they were the hardlyer handled for because of the
dullness of their wit. The Ephesians and Colossians were assayed also. and if
they had so lightly yielded to their deceites, think we that Paul would have
dealte any more mildely with them? The nature of the people then moved him not
thus franklye to chide them, but it was rather the hatefulness of the matter
that enforced him. Now that we understand the cause why he wrote this Epistle:
let us come to the order of the handling thereof. He contendeth in the two
first chapters about the authority of his Apostleship: saving that by
occasion, about the end of the second chapter, he enters into the principal
(state of the matter): that is to say into the question of the justification of
man: whereof nevertheless at the last in the third chapter he openly frames
a full disputation. Although he seem to entreat of many things in these two
Chapters: yet this one thing he indeauoureth, to prove himself equal with the
highest Apostles: and that he lacks nothing but that he may be reckoned an
Apostle in like degree of honor, as they. But it is worth the while to know
why he took so great pains about the trial of his estimation. for so that
Christ reign, and that the purity of doctrine remain sound, what skilleth it
whether he be above Peter, or less then Peter, or whether they be all equal
among themselves? If all must decrease, that only Christ may increase,
unfruitful is the contention about the dignity of men. Moreover this may be
demanded, why he compares himself to the other Apostles, for what
controversy had he with Peter and James, and John? to what purpose then did it
belong, that those who were of one mind and good friends among themselves,
should be at odds against themselves? I answer, that the false Apostles,
who had beguiled the Galathians, to the end they might the better advance
themselves, pretended the names of the Apostles, as though they had been sent of
them. This was a notable shouldring in of themselves, for that they were
believed to be the Apostles deputies, and spoke as it were out of their mouth:
and in the mean while did pluck away from Paul the name and right of an
Apostle. For they did object that he was not chosen of the Lord, one of the
twelve, that he was never acknowled to be such an one by the college of the
Apostles: and that not only he had his doctrine not from Christ, but not so
much as from the Apostles, so came it to pass that not only the authority
of Paul was diminished: but that he was as some one of the multitude, much
baser then themselves. If the matter had been concearning persons only, it had
been no great matter for Paul to have been reputed some common Disciple: but
when he did see his Doctrine thereby begin to grow out of credit, and to be
set less by: he ought not to hold his peace, but stoutlye speak against it.
This is the wiliness of the Devil, when he dares not assail the Doctrine
manifestly, with crooked mines to hurl down the majesty thereof. Let us
remember than, that in the person of Paul the truth of the Gospel was
assaulted, for if he had suffered himself to be spoiled of the honor of
Apostleship, it followed that he had usurped more hitherto than was his right.
and this false boasting would have made him been suspected in other things
also. And thereupon also did hang the estimation of his doctrine, in that it
should have the beginning and was received not as proceeding from an Apostle of
Christ, but from some common disciple. On the otherside he was overwhelmed
with the majesty of great names and styles. For they whereas they boasted them
of the title of Peter and James and John, did challenge to themselves
Apostolical authority. And had not Paul manfully resisted this boasting, he
should have given room for a lie, and moreover should have suffered in his
own person the truth to have been trodden down. Therefore does he seriously
contend about both, (namely) that he was an Apostle appointed of the Lord, and
also that he was nothing inferior to the rest: but that he was of like right
and dignity as they, even as he had like name with them. He might have denied
either that they were sent by Peter and his fellow Apostles, or that they had
any commandment from them: but this defense has much more weight, that he
gives not place to the Apostels themselves: for if he had shunned that, he
should have been thought to have distrusted his own cause. Jerusalem in those
days was the mother of all Churches, for that the Gospel did flow from thence
into the whole world, and it was as it wear the principal seat of the
kingdom of Christ. Whosoever came from thence into other Churches he was
reverently received, and not without good cause. But many were swollen with a
foolish glory, because they were familier with the Apostles, or at the
leastwise instructed by their teaching. Therefore nothing liked them, but that
which they saw (done) at Jerusalem. all other rites or vsages not there used,
they not only rejected, but hardily also condemned. Such vvaywardnesse is a
plague very evil: when we will have the fashion or custom of one Church
to stand as a general law. And it rises of a preposterous zeal when we are
so vvedded to some teacher or place, that without vvaying the matter, we
would bind all places and all persons to the sense and will of one man, and
to the orders of one place, as to a general or common rule, although ambition
is always mingled to it: yea rather overmuch vvaywardnesse is full of ambition.
But to return to these false Apostles: if only upon an ill emulation they had
assayed in every place to thrust in the usage of the ceremonies, which they saw
kept at Jerusalem: in so doing they had done no small offense. for it is
injurious of a custom straight way to make a rule. But there was more evil
in their Doctrine being ungodly and pernicious, for that they would hold the
consciences bound by a religion, for that they placed righteousness in the
observation thereof. Now we perceive why Paul was so stout in the
avouching his Apostleship, and why he does set himself (by way of comparing)
against the other Apostles. And that does he til the end of the second
Chapter, where he makes away over unto the handling of the matter: namely
that we are justified freely before God, not by the works of the law. For he
uses this argument, If ceremonies have not power to justify, then the
observing of them is not necessary. although he speaks not of ceremonies
alone, but reasons generally of works: or else all his argument were
caycolde. If this seem unto any to be far fetched, he must consider two
things. First that he could not otherwise dispatche the question, but by
taking the general principle (which is) We be justified by the mere grace of
God: which excludes not ceremonies only, but also other works. Secondly
that Paul made not so much ado concerning ceremonies, as about the wicked
opinion of getting salvation by works. Let us mark then that Paul
begins not at the egg (as they say): but he shows of necessity the very
spring head: that the readers may know, that contention is not moved here
about the shadow of the ass* but about the greatest matter of all, (namelye)
By what way we shall get salvation. They are beguiled than who think that
the Apostle keeps himself in the compass of the particular question
concearning ceremonies: for he could not vvinde him out of it by it self. We
have the like example Act. 15.2. Strife and contention was moved about
ceremonies, whether they were necessary to be kept: about discoursing vvherof
the Apostles preach Of the yoke of the Law not able to be borne, Of the free
remission of sins. To what purpose are these things? for it seems to be an
absurd digressing from the purpose: but it is not so. for the particular
error could not otherwise be soundlye confuted, but by taking in hand the
general principle. As for example, If I must reason about the forbidding of
eating flesh, I will make mention not only of meats, but I will arm my
self with the general doctrine: how far man's traditions ought to prevail
to the binding of the consciences. and this will I take hold of, that there is
one law giver, which has power to save and destroy. Let this be the sum:
Paul in this place reasons from the general to the special negatiuely:
which is an ordinary and most natural manner of disputing. But with what
testimonies and reasons he proves this sentence, We are justified by the only
grace of Christ, we shall see in his place. This he prosecuteth even to the end
of the third Chapter. In the beginning of the fourth chapter, he entreats of
the right use of ceremonies, and why they were ordained: where also he
shows that they are now abolished. For he must prevent this absurdity,
which straight way might have come in any man's mind, To what end than were
ceremonies? were they unprofitable? did the Fathers occupy themselves in the^
in vain? He determines both breefelye. (namelye) that in their time they
were not superfluous and also that now they are abrogated by the coming of
Christ: because he is the truth and end of them, wherefore he teaches that we
must abide in him. where also he briefly touches, what our state differs
from the state of the Fathers. whereof it follows, that the doctrine of the
false apostles, which darkeneth the brightness of the Gospel with the shadows
of the old Law, is a perverse and hurtful doctrine. with his doctrine he
mingleth certain exhortations to move the affections. About the end of the
Chapter he sets out his matter with a fine and pleasant allegory. In the
fifte chapter he exhorts to hold fast the liberty purchased by the blood
of Christ, that they deliver not their consciences to be entangled with the
doctrines of men. but yet withal he admonishes what is the lawful measure of
liberty. And upon this occasion he shows, which are the true exercises of
Christians: least whileste they are in vain occupied about ceremonies, they
pass over those things that are principal.

Finis.
A Commentary of M. John Calvin Upon the Epistle to the Galathians, and
translated into English by R. V.
Cap. 1. 1 Paul an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ
and God the Father, which raised him from the dead,

2 And all the brethren which are with me, unto the Churches of Galatia:

3 Grace unto you and peace from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ:

4 Which gave himself for our sins, that he might take us from this present
evil world, according to the will of God, and of our Father,

5 Unto whom be glory for ever, Amen.


1. Paul an Apostle.

I Have said in another place, that Paul in his salutations is wont to
ascribe unto himself ye name of an Apostle, that by his person he might get
authorytie unto his doctrine. The authority of the person does depend neither
of the judgment nor yet of the will of men: but of the only calling of God, and
therefore he requires to be heard, because he is an Apostle. Let us always
hold this, That God alone is to be heard in the Church, and he which is
appointed by him a Teacher, even Jesus Christ. Therefore whosoever he be that
will take upon him the place of a Teacher, must speak in the name of GOD or
of Christ: but because among the Galathians Paul's calling was more doubted
than elsewhere it was: therefore to confirm the same, he does express
somewhat more here than in other Epystles he does: for he does not only
affirm yt he was called by God: but on the contrary part, he denies that he
was called either of men or by men. Here note that he speaks not of the
common office of Pastors, but of the office of an Apostle, the slaunderers
durst not utterly spoil him of the honor of the Ministry: only they did
take away from him the name and right of an Apostle. I speak now of the office
of an Apostle in a proper signification: for it is two manner of ways taken,
sometime it signifies any ye preachers of the Gospel: but in this place
specially it signifies a principal order in the Church, so that Paul is
equal to Peter, and the rest of the twelve. That first member, That he was not
called of men, he had common with all the true Ministers of Christ. As no man
ought to take unto himself the honor: so is it not in the power of men to
give it unto whom it pleases them. It belongs to God alone to rule his
Church: therefore Calling cannot be lawful but of him. And although a man be
rightly sometime called in respect of the Church, who notwithstanding through a
wicked desire, and not of a good conscience, does come unto the Ministry: yet
nevertheless Paul does here speak of the perfect approbatio^ of his
Calling, in ye which nothing is lacking. Some man will object, Paul might
openly show. The second member, That he was not called by man, does peculierly
belong to the Apostles: neither should this (namely to be called by man) have
been at that time a fault in a Pastor. Paul himself with Barnabas did make
Elders by election in every town Act. 14.23. the same he does command to be
done of Titus and Timothy. 1. Tim. 5.17. Tit. 1.3. And this is the ordinary
way to elect Pastors: for we must not wait, till God does reveal from heaven,
those whom he will chose. Why then does Paul reject from him that which is
not only not evil, but also laudable? I have already showed that Paul
thought it not sufficient, if he had taken himself either a Pastor or any one
of the Ministers of the Gospel: for he speaks (and the controversy was)
about the office of an Apostle, and Apostles must be otherwise chose^ than
Pastors, yt is to say immediately (as they term it) of the Lord himself, Mat.
10.1. So Christ himself chose the twelve: Act. 1.23. and when a successor was
to be pacled in stead of Judas, the Church durst not choose one by election
but, flies to lottes. Certain it is that there was no lottes used in the
chosing of Pastors: why do they it then in the ordayning of Mathias? forsooth
that he might be chosen of God: because the office of an Apostle must be
discerned from the other ministeries (or offices.) Therefore to the end that
Paul might exempt himself from the common order of Ministers, Luke does show
Act. 22.21.26. that he an5d Barnabas were called by the Church of Antiochia?
Some answer, Gentiles: in which number the Galathians were. Therefore the truer
and playner answer is, that he would not exclude here utterly the Calling of
the Church: but only show that his Apostleshyppe rested upon a greater
prerogative, the which is true: For the Antiochians did not lay their hands
upon Paul of their own heads, An oracle is a spech from god.
but being commanded by an Oracle. Because therefore that he was called by
Divine Revelation, and after that was appointed and called the Apostle of the
Gentiles by the holy Ghost: it follows that he was not brought in by men,
howsoever the solemn usage of ordayning was afterward added. If the indirecte
contrarietye between Paul and the false Apostles please any manne, I gainesay
it not: because they boasted of the name of men, it shall be thus, as though
he said, Of whomsoever they boast themselves to be sent, I certainly will be
above them, because I have a commandment from God and Christ. By Jesus
Christ and God the father. He makes God the Father and Christ the authors of
his Apostleship. He names Christ first, because it belongs to him to send,
and we do our embassage for him. But to amplify it, he adds also the father:
as if he should say, If the majesty of Christ suffice not, let them know also,
that my office is enjoined me by God the Father which has raised him. Not
without cause in this place does he make mention of the resurrection: for it is
the beginning of the kingdom of Christ. Therefore did they lightly esteem
Paul, in that he was not conversant with Christ upon earth: he on the
contrary part does signify, that Christ, as by his resurrection he is
glorified, so verily and in deed at length showed forth his power in ruling
the Church. Therefore more dignity has Paul his calling, than if he had been
ordained of Christ while he was yet mortal. And this circumstance is worthy
noting, because Paul does covertly show the wonderful power of God, which
appeared in the resurrection of Christ, to be hatefully spoken against of his
backbiters: because the heavenly father which has raised Christ from death,
even he has appointed Paul a preacher of that his power.

2. And the brethren which are with me. He seems to have written in ye name of
many: (for this cause) yt if they did attribute little to him alone, that yet at
the leastwise they should harken to many, and not despise the whole
congregation. And he is accustomed rather about the end to write salutations
from the brethren, than to join them to him in the beginning as partners of
his writing, at the least he names not above two at any time, which two are
well known, but here he does otherwise, for he comprehends all, which I
think is not done without cause: for the consent of so many godly persons
ought somewhat to prevail with the Galathians, to make them apt to be informed
and to be tractable. To the Churches. It was a large country, and therefore
had many dispersed congregations: Galathians, who almost were shronke away
from Christ, for where the Church is, there is unity of faith. Church. Paul
in this place does teach us another manner of kindness, nevertheless so are
those Congregations which are faulty to be acknowledged as the Churches of
Christ, that we notwithstanding condemn whatsoever is evil in the^: neither
is it thus, that where there is a Church, whatsoever one it be, there is
perfection of all those things which are to be wished in the Church. This I
speak therefore, because the Papists catching this word (Church) will have
establyshed whatsoever they lust to thrust in: although there be great
diversity between the estate and fashion of the Church of Rome and Galatia. If
Paul lived at these days, he should perceive there miserable ruins of the
Church, and horrible waste and spoil, but no building. If you had rather have
it more briefly, it is called the Church by the figure Synecdoche, where there
is some portion of a Church, Synecdoche is a Figure whereby part is put for
the whole.
although all things answer not fully in it.

3. Grace be unto you and peace. I have spoken of this manner of salutation in
other epistles. I remain in opinion, that Paul wishes God merciful to the
Galathians, and after that, all things to be prosperous: since that out of God
his benevolence, flows unto us the happy success of all things. He wishes
both, from the Father and also from Christ, because that without Christ there
is neither grace nor any good success.

4. Which has given himself. He commends here from the beginning the grace
of Christ, that he may call back ye Galathians unto him, and retain the^ in
him. For if they had worthily considered this benefit of redemption, they
would never have fallen to strange observations. For he which knows Christ
aright, holds him with tooth and nail, embraces him with both arms, is
occupied wholly in him, desires nothing beside him. This therefore is a very
good remedy, wherewith we may purge our minds of all kind of errors and
superstitions, (namely) to bring into mind what Christ is unto us, and what he
has brought unto us. Neither is it a small thing that is signified in these
words, Which has given himself for our sins: for he would premonish the
Galathians that the purging of sins, and by that means perfect
righteousness is no where else to be sought, but in Christ: because he has
offered himself for a sacrifice to his Father, and such an Host, as to set any
other satisfactions against it, were wrong and wickedness: moreover that this
Redemption is of so great worthiness, that it ought wholly to ravish us into the
admiration thereof. But that which in this place Paul ascribes to Christ, the
scripture elsewhere applies to God the father, and both properly. For both the
Father by his eternal counsel has determined this Purging and satisfaction
for us, and in this has witnessed his love toward us, that he has not spared
his only begotten son, but has given him for us: And Christ he offered
himself a sacrifice to reconcile us to God, Romans 8.31. whereof follows yt his
death is a satisfaction for sins. That he might take us. He also declares
the end of our Redemption: that Christ has gained us unto him by his death to
be his own. That comes to pass when we are separated from the world, for
as long as we are of the world we partayne not to Christ. This word World is
taken here for the corruption that is in the world as, 1. Io. 5.19. where it is
said, That the whole world is laid in wickedness, and in many other places. It
is otherwise taken in the Gospel, whereas Christ says, I pray not that thou
take the^ out of the world: but that thou keep them from evil. Io. 17.15. for
there he signifies the present life. What then is the World in this place? Men
separated from the kingdom of God and the grace of Christ. For a man as long
as he lives to himself, is totally damned. The World then and Regeneration
are things opposite or contrary: as also Nature and Grace, the Flesh and the
Spirit. And therefore they that are borne of the World, have nothing but
sin and wyckednes: not by creation, but by corruption. Christ then has died
for our sins, that he might redeem or separate us from the World. Wicked. He
adds this epithete or title, to show that he speaks of the corruption or
wyckednes that comes of sin, and not of the creature of God, or of
corporal life. And yet with this one word, as with the stroke of a
thunderbolt he hurleth down all the pride of man. For he witnesses, that
without the renewing which is by the Grace of Christ, there is nothing in us
but mere wickedness. For we are of the World: and until Christ take us out
of it, the World reigns in us, and we live unto it. How much soever then
men please themselves, they are but mischeuous and wicked with all their
iolittye. Unto themselves they seem not such: but let it suffice us, that the
Lord does so speak it by the mouth of Paul. According to the will. He
shows the first spring of grace to be the purpose of God: for so God loved
the world that he gave his only begotten son, Io. 3.16. But it is to be noted
that Paul is accustomed to set the purpose of God against all deserts or
merits of men. So Will signifies here in this place that which commonly they
call the Good Pleasure. The sense than is, That Christ suffered for us, not
because we were worthy, or because we brought any thing which might provoke
him: but because the Counsel of God was so. Of God and our father, is as much
as if it had been said of God which is our father.

5. Unto whom be glory. He brasteth forth into sudden thanks giving, to
quicken their minds to consider this inestimable benefit of God: to that end
that they may show themselves afterward more apt to learn. Although it be
also a general exhortation, that as often as that mercy of God comes in
mind, strayghtway it should provoke us to glorify him.

6 I wonder that you are so sone carried over from Christ, which has called
you in grace, unto another Gospel:

7 Which is no other thing, but that there are some which trouble you, and are
willing to overthrow the Gospel of Christ.

8 But although we, or an Angel from heaven, preach a Gospel unto you beside
that Gospel which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

9 As we have said before, now also say I again, If any shall preach a Gospel
unto you, beside that which you have received, let him be accursed.

6. I wonder that. He begins with chiding, which chiding is somewhat more
gentle than they deserved: but his vehement chiding he had rather bestow upon
the false Apostles, as we shall see. He reprehendeth them for their shrinking
away, not from his doctrine only, but from Christ. For they might not otherwise
hold Christ, than to acknowledge us by his benefit to be set at liberty from
the bondage of the Law: but the necessity which the false Apostles did put in
ceremonies was utterly contrary, and so they were carried over from Christ, not
because they did altogether cast away Christianity, but because in such
corruption there was only left unto the^ a counterfeite Christ. So at these
days the Papists, because they will have a half Christ, and a torn Christ,
have no Christ: and therefore they are carried over from Christ, for they are
full of superstitious, which are directly contrary with the nature of Christ.
This must be dilligently marked, That we are carried over from Christ, when we
fall unto those things which are contrary to his office: for light cannot be
mingled with darkness. After the same reason is it, that he calls it another
gospel, that is, contrary to the true gospel: and yet the false apostles did
profess themselves to preach the gospel of Christ: but whereas they did
mingle their feigned devises, wherewith they destroy the principal force of
the Gospel, therefore they had a false, a corrupt, and a counterfeyte gospel.
He uses the word of the present time, as though their fall were now in ye
doing: as though he should say, I say not that ye are already carried over, for
then it were more hard for you to return into the way: but now, whilst you
are yet in the midst of your course, draw back your feet rather than go
forward. Some read, From him that has called you in the grace of Christ,
meaning of the father: but the reading which I follow is more plain. In that
he says, that they were called of Christ by grace, it serves to vpbrayde
their unthankfulness. To fall from the Son of God, of it self is evil and
wicked, but to fall from hyme when he has called us freely to salvation, is
much more hateful, for his goodness toward us augmenteth the greatness of
our wyckednes, if we be unthankful. Soon. He augmenteth the foulenes of
their inconstancye. There is no time fit to fall from Christ, but so much the
more are the Galathians to be dyspraysed, in that they were led away even so
soon as Paul was departed from them. Therefore as before he amplified their
unthankfulness in respect of their free calling: so now he does augment their
lightness by the circumstaunce of time.

7. Which is not another thing Some do thus expound it, seeing there is not
another gospel, as though it were a kind of correction, least any man should
think there were more gospels. I, as touching the exposition of the words,
take it more simply: for he speaks contemptuously of the doctrine of the
false Apostles, that it is only a matter of troubles and destruction, as
though he should say, What bring these men? What cause have they to gaynsay the
doctrine by me taught? Forsooth they trouble you, and overthrow the Gospel,
and naught else do they. The sense notwithstanding comes to one point: for I
grant that by this kind of speaking is corrected that which was spoken of
another Gospel. He denies it therefore to be the Gospel, but a mere
perturbation and trouble. Only I was willing to admonish that Aliud here in
this place is (after my judgment) taken for Alia res, that is in English,
Another thing, as we are accustomed to say, That is no other thing but that
you will play the deceiuer. Are willing to overthrow. He lays the second
accusation against them, that they do Christ wrong, willing to overthrow his
Gospel. It is a wondrous great accusation, for overthrowing is more then
corrupting. Neither yet does he vndeseruingly lay it to their charge. For
Christ does not stand, and the doctrine of the Gospel falls, where as the
praise of man's justifying is transposed to other, and where the consciences are
snarled and entangled. We must always behold what are the speciallest things
in the Gospel, surely he that overthrows these is a destroyer of the
Gospel. The name of Christ which is added, may be two ways expounded, other
for that it comes from Christ the Author: or that it does purely show
Christ. But no doubt he would show by this epithet the true and natural
gospel, which ought to be accounted but one.

8 But although we.) Here he assayleth them with great boldness, to defend
the authority of his doctrine. And first he affirms the doctrine by him
preached, to be that only gospel, which to empeyre were great wickedness. Or
else the false Apostles might answer him and say: We also wish the Gospel
to remain pure and vncorrupt, neither judge we less honorable of it the^
thou. As at these days the Papists exclaim, that the gospel is holden holy
among them, and that they embrace the name thereof with great reverence: but
when you come to the trial of it, then do they turmoile the pure and plain
doctrine of the Gospel as they were wood. Therefore Paul not content with
that general testification, does define what manner of thing that Gospel is,
and what it contains, and he pronounces his doctrine to be the true Gospel,
lest it should be sought else where. For what shall it profit to give our
consent to the Gospel, and wot not what it means? Among the Papists
peradventure it might serve, A folded or hidden truth
where Fides implicita is in force: but among Christians there is no faith,
where there is no knowledge. Therefore lest the Galathians, being otherwise
ready to obey the Gospel, should waver hither and thither, and being in doubt
should not find where to set fast footing, Paul bids them bide in his
doctrine. Further he will have such credit given to his preaching, that he
pronounces a curse upon all them that dare speak against it. Yea and he
begins with him self, because it was needful, for so he preuenteth the
reproach wherewith his ill willers would have burdened him: (as thus) Thou will have received without controversy whatsoever comes from thee, because
it is thine. Therefore to show that he makes no account of him self in this
case, he takes even from him self power, whereby he might dare do any thing
against this doctrine. He does not by this means make other his inferiors or
subjects: but with him self he brings all others into frame, as meet it
is, to be subjects to the word of God. But to the intent that with greater
force he might cast down the false Apostles, he climbeth up even to the
Angels: neither does he simplye deny them to be heard, if they bring any
other thing, but he says they ought to be cursed. This may seem unto some an
absurdity, that he joins the Angels in trial with his doctrine: but he that
does rightly way all things, shall see that he did it needefully. Sure it is
that the Angels of heaven can bring no other save the certain truth of God:
but where the contention was about the credit of the doctrine revealed by God
for the salvation of men: he thought it not inoughe to exempte the same from
the judgment of men, except he affirmed it also about the Angels. Wherefore
when as he pronounces the judgment of a curse upon Angels, if they teach
any other thing: although it be an argument Of that which is impossible.
ab impossibili, notwithstanding it is not superfluous. Neither does this
excess smally avail to amplify the credit of Paul's preaching. He saw both
him self and it, to be preassed with the high titles of men, he answers,
that not even the Angels have any weighte or authority to tread down his
doctrine. Neither does he injury to the Angels, for sith they were created
to set forth the glory of God by all means that may be, he which to this
end does holily abuse their name, diminishes nothing their dignity. And
hereof we not only gather how great the Majesty of the word of God is, but
our faith also takes a singular confirmation, whylest that we using the word
of God, may safely triumph over the Angels and curse them.

9 As I have said before.) When he says let him be Anathema id. accursed
these words Of you must be understood, I have spoken of this word Anathema
1. Cor. 12.3. which in this place signifies a curse, and is used for the
Hebrewe word Chorem.
Now letting pass the mention of him self and the Angels, he does again
generally repeat, that it is lawful for no manner of man to deliver any other
thing then that which they had learned. Note this verb Accepistis, You have
received, for he always endeavors, that they hang not upon an unknown
Gospel of their own imagining, but hold the certain definition thereof, and
be earnestly persuaded, that that which was delivered unto them and they had
embraced, is the true Gospel of Christ. For nothing is less agreeable with
faith then supposing or imagining. What then if any man doubt, not knowing what
thing or what manner of thing the Gospel is? He does therefore command that
they should be held for devils whatsoever they be, that dare bring an other
gospel contrary to his, calling that another, unto which the inventions of
others are patched. Neither was the doctrine of the false Apostles altogether
repugnaunt or contrary, but it was corrupted with false additions. The shift
therefore of the Papists is childish, whereas they dally thus with Paul's words,
First that his whole preaching is not extant: neither that it can be known
what it contained, except the Galatians which heard it might be raised up from
the dead for to be witnesses: moreover that it is not forbidden, but that
somewhat may be added: but only this ye other gospels are condemned. As for
Paul's Gospel, we gather, and that not darkely, out of his writings, what
manner a one it was, as far forth as skilleth us to know: It is manifest that
the whole Papacy is an horrible ouerthrower of this Gospel. Lastly by the
circumstaunce it is plain, that every falsified Doctrine is contrary to Paul's
preaching, and therefore they help themselves nothing by cauilling on this
manner.

10 Do I now persuade after men, or after God? or do I seek to please men? if
I should as yet please men, I were not the servant of Christ.

11 I make it known unto you, brethren, as touching the Gospel that was
preached by me, that it was not after man.

12 For I neither took it, neither learned it of man: but by the r^uelation of
Jesus Christ.

13 And ye heard of my conversation, which in time past was in Jewish
Religion: that above measure I did persecute the Church of GOD, and spoiled it.

14 And I did profit in Jewish religion above many my companions in my
kindred, when as I was greatly studious Studiosus desirous or diligent to
attain any thing.
of the traditions of my fathers.

Because he had so boldly extolled his preaching, now does he without vain
boasting, show that he did it lawfully: and he uses two Arguments to show it:
The first is of the effect of his mind, because he does not apply himself
unto men ambitiously or to flatter. The second is much more forcible, in that
he himself is not the author of this Gospel, but having received it of God,
has faithfully delivered the same by hand.

10 Do I now persuade.) This place for the ambiguitie of the Greek
construction, is diversely expounded. Some do thus translate it, 10. Do I
persuade men or God? Others do take God for godly things, and men for humane
things, which sense would very well agree, if it were not somewhat far
disagreeing from the words, I had rather therefore to follow that sense which
was less forced, for it is a common thing with the Greeks to understand the
preposition (...). Paul speaks not of the argument of his preaching, but of
the purpose of his mind, that he has regard unto God rather then unto men,
although the doctrine be aunswerable to ye affection of him that teaches. For
as corruption of doctrine springs of ambition, avarice, or any other wicked
desire, so a right conscience makes yt the pure truth is retained. Therefore he
enforces yt his doctrine is true, in that it is not conformed unto men. Or do
I seek to please men? This second differs not much from the first:
notwithstanding it differs somewhat: for the desire to get favor is the cause
why we speak after men. Where such ambition reigns in our hearts, that we
covet to frame our speech to win the favor of men, it may not be that we can
teach sincerely. Therefore Paul does testify himself to be pure and free from
this vice, and that he may with the more boldness attempt himself also from
slander he speaks asking the question: For questions have more weight, for
that we give our adversaries leave to speak against us if they have any thing
(to say.) For that was a sign of great suertie, which the testimony of a good
conscience gave to Paul: because, indeed, he knew himself so to have done
his duty, that he was not in danger of such a reproach. For if I should
please men. A sentence worthy of remembrance: that the ambitious, that is,
they which hunt after the favor of men, cannot serve Christ: Notwithstanding
he speaks of his own person singulerly in this sense, that he has
willingly put himself out of favor with men, yt he might give himself to
serve Christ: and compares the state of his life before, with his life now. He
was in very great estimation, he was received in every place with great
applaudings and welcomes, wherefore if he would have pleased men, he needed not
change his estate, But hereof is to be gathered that general doctrine which I
spoke of: Whosoever will faithfullye serve Christ, they must courageously
contemn the favor of me^. This word, Men, has in this place a certain note:
for the Ministers or servants of Christ may not purposely desire to please
men: but there are diverse sorts of men. Look whom Christ is pleasant unto,
let us study to please them in Christ: they that will have true Doctrine set
behind their affections, them in no wise must we obey. And truly this battle
must always be sustained of Godly and sound Pastors, that they set naught by
the offending of them, which will have what they list in all things. For the
Church shall always have Drones and wicked persons, which will prefer their
own will before the word of God. Yea and the good men are sometime tempted of
the Devil, so that they be angry with their Pastor that advises them rightly:
whether they do it of ignorance, or of infirmity. It is our parts therefore
not to be afraid of any offense, so that thereby we do not alienate the weak
from Christ. Many do otherwise expound this place, as though it were
Concessio, (that is a granting or yielding) and they think this the sense, If
I did please men, Then I were not the Servant of Christ: I grant it. But
who will vpbrayde this unto me? Who sees not that I seek not the favor of
men? But that former sense does more please me, in that Paul makes
mention, of how great favor of men, he has bereft himself: that he might
wholye give himself to Christ.

11 I make it known unto you.) This is a most strong argument, and a special
stay on which his cause depends, That he received not his Gospel of men,
but it was revealed unto him by GOD. And because this might have been denied
him, he joins an expositiue proof, that is, a proof which consists in the
declaration of the thing done. But that this declaration may have the more
force, he protests that he speaks not of an obscure or dark thing, but
such as he is ready to make proof off, for such an Exordium or beginning is
meet for an earnest matter. He denies it to be after man, because it
sauoureth of no humane thing, or else because it was not forged or made by man:
for proof whereof, he does straighte way put too, that he was not taught
of any earthly master.

12 For I neither took it of man.) What than? shall a man's authority be
therefore the baser, if he being taught by the ministry of man, do
afterward so become a teacher? But it is requisite always to consider with
what engines the false Apostles invaded him, videlicet, that he took an
halting and counterfeyte Gospel of some no very good master, or at the least
of some base teacher, and understanding it but weakelye, now rashlye to
preach it. In the mean while they boasted themselves the Disciples of the
highest Apostles, the sense of whose minds they had perfectlye. It was
therefore needful for Paul to set his Doctrine against all the World, and
to stay him upon this shore. viz. That it was revealed unto him by GOD, and
not taught him in the school of any man, otherwise he should never have been
delivered from the slanders of the false Apostles.

13 For ye have heard my conversation.) All this Narration is added in steed
of a probation or proof, for he shows that all his life long he did so
much abhor the Gospel, that he was an hateful enemy thereof, and a
spoyler of Christians, thereof we gather that his conversion was of GOD, And
certesse he appealeth them as witnesses of a thing not doubtful, that that
which he speaks of may be out of doubt.

He calls them his Companions which were of the same time, for if he had made
the comparison with the Elders, it had been improper. The traditions of my
Fathers. He means not those additions with which the law of GOD was
corrupted, but the law of God it self, in which he was brought up from his
childehoode, and which he had received from his Fathers and Graundsires by
mouth. When as therefore he was greatly addicted to the customs of the
Fathers: it was not easy for him to be removed from it, except the Lord had
drawn him by miracle.

15 And after that it pleased God which had separated me from my mothers womb,
and called me by his grace.

16 To reveal his son unto me, that I might preach him among the Gentiles,
straight way I conferred not with flesh and blood.

17 Neither returned I to Jerusalem to them which were Apostles before me: but I
went into Arabia, and again I returned to Damasco.

18 Three years after that I came back to Jerusalem, that I might see Peter,
and I remained with him fifteen days.

19 Other of the Apostles I saw none but James the brother of our Lord.

20 Furthermore the things which I write unto you, behold before God, I lie
not.

21 After that I came into the Countries of Syria and Cilicia.

22 And I was unknown in face to the churches of Jury, which were in Christ.

23 But only this report was among them. He that in time past persecuted us,
now preaches the faith, which in time past he overthrew.

24 And they glorified God in me.

15 After it pleased God.) The second piece of his Narration, is of his
wonderful conversion: but here must be made a resolution in yt he was called
by the grace of God to preach Christ among the Gentiles: and in that, straight
way after his calling, not consulting with the Apostles, he prepared him to the
work enjoined him without any doubting, being certain of God his
determination. Erasmus disagreeth in the construction of the words from the
common translations (in Latin) for thus he ioineth it, When it seemed good
unto God yt I should preach Christ among the Gentiles, which called me to this,
yt he might reveal him by me. But ye old translation is more apt in my
judgment, for first the revelation of Christ was offered unto him: and after
that the preaching was committed. Or else if it like you to follow the
translation of Erasmus so that (...) do signify in english by me, yet for all
that this piece, that I should preach, is added to express the manner of the
revelation. But at the first blushe, the reasoning of Paul may seem not so
firm, for howsoever he was converted to Christianity, he did by and by take
upon him, without asking counsel of the Apostles, the office of preaching the
Gospel, and does it not for all that follow therefore that he was appointed
unto it by ye revelation of Christ, but he endeuoreth with many reasons to
prove it, all which if you gather into one, they will be sufficient to make a
full argument, first that he was called by Gods grace: secondly, that his
Apostleship was approved of the rest of the Apostles: and so forth. Let the
Readers therefore remember to read his whole narration together: and so
thereupon to conclude of the whole, and not of the singular parts. Which had
separated me.) This separation was the council of God whereby Paul was
appointed to the office of an Apostle, before he did know himself to be borne
a man: His calling afterward followed in due time, when as the Lord manifested
his will as touching him, and commanded him to be in a readiness unto his
work. But there is no doubt, but that God, before the world was made,
determined what he would do with every one of us, and assigned by his secret
judgment to every one his duty and charge. But otherwhile the scripture does
use to place these three degrees: The eternal predestination of God: his
appoynting from the mothers womb: and calling which is the effect and
fulfilling of both. The Lord speaks somewhat otherwise, Jeremy the first
chap. the fifth ver. that the words of Paul do sound: and yet in the same
sense or meaning. Before yt I did shape thee in thy mothers womb, I did know
thee: before thou came out of thy mothers womb I sanctified thee: I gave
thee to be a Prophet to the Nations or Gentiles. God also sanctified Paul not
yet borne, to the office of an Apostle as he did Jeremy to ye office of a
Prophet, but he again is said to separat us from our mothers womb, because yt
to this end we are brought forth into ye world, that he might fulfill in us yt
which he has determined. And our calling is deferred even until it be a fit
time to execute, when as God has made us meet to fulfill that office which he
enioyneth us. Thus therefore may you resolve Paul's words, When it pleased God
to reveal his son by me, which called me, as before he did separate me. For
he would declare his calling to depend upon the secret election of God:
neither that he was therefore appointed an Apostle, because he had prepared
himself by his own industry to take upon him so great an office: or else
because God had found him meet, as to whom he might commit this business: but
because he was appointed thereunto by the hidden counsel of God, and that
before he was borne: For so he is accustomed to ascribe the cause of his
calling, to the free pleasure of God: which is diligently to be marked. For
thereby we are taught, that it is to be referred to the grace of God, not only
that we are elected and adopted unto eternal life: but also that he
vouchsafes to use our help, whereas otherwise we are utterly unprofitable: and
that he assigns us a lawful calling, in which we may exercise our selves.
For what had Paul being not yet borne that was worthy of so great honor?
Thus then must we make our count, that this is altogether the gift of God, and
not gotten by our power, that we are called to govern his Church. Finally in
that some do more subtly dispute in the word, Separated, they do it without
cause, and out of season. Neither is God said to separate us, because he does
put into us some habit or form, whereby we may differ from other: but because
he does order us by his counsel. Although verily he had already manifestly
inoughe attributed his calling to the grace and favor of God, when he made the
beginning thereof that voluntary separation from his mothers womb: yet again
by name does he express it, partly that the commendation of the grace might
take away al opnio^ of bosting, partly that he might testify his thankfulness
to God. For he is accustomed willingly to do thus, even where he has no
controversy with the false Apostles.

16 To reveal his son. If you read, To reveal his son by me: it shall be
ye final cause of the Apostleship, to make Christ manifest. How? by preaching
him among the Gentiles, that which the false Apostles laid to his charge as a
fault. But whereas in Greek it is (...), I take it to be an Hebrew phrase for
mihi, for with the Hebrews is often superfluous: which is well enough known to
the^ that are expert in ye tongue. The sense then is, that Christ was revealed to
Paul, not yt he alone should have the fruition of the knowledge of him, and that
he should keep him close in his bosom: but that he should preach him being by
him known among ye Gentiles. Straightway I conferred not. To confer With flesh
and blood, is to take flesh and blood to counsel. And as touching the
signification of these words, his mind was simply to exclude all counsels of
men: for generally in this place he comprehends all men, and whatsoever
wisdom or counsel they have, as by and by will appear by the text: nay
rather he does by name show or note the Apostles, and that with that purpose,
that ye immediate calling of God may more clearly appear. He therefore using
only the authority of God, and being content therewith, prepares himself to
the office of preaching.

17 Neither returned I to Jerusalem. It is an exposition and also an
amplification of the former sentence: as if he should say, I have desired no
man in the world to be mine author, no not eue^ the Apostles them selves. They
are therefore deceived which say that the Apostles are not comprehended under
flesh and blood, because he does name them now apart. For he does not adioyne
any new or contrary thing, but only does expound more plainly that which was
darkly spoken. Neither is he therefore reprochful to ye Apostles in such manner
of appellation: because, to ye end that he might show him self not to have bin
moved by man, it was needful for him to set the^ opposite unto god, for cause
of ye forged braggings of lewd persons. And whereas ye creature is compared with
God, although it (I mean the creature) be pressed down with low and base
titles, it has no wrong done to it. But I went into Arabia. Luke in his
history of the Acts has passed over these 3. years, as neither also he does
recke^ up al other things: cold therefore is their false surmise, which seek
in this place some pretense of contrariety. But let the godly readers way
what a grievous battle of temptation took hold of Paul immediately after his
first service while he was yet but a young soldier, who ye day before
forhonors sake was sent with a goodly band to Damasco, and to day like a
banished man is compelled to wander in a strange country: and yet for all
that faints not.

18 Three years. The third year at last after he exercised the office of an
Apostle, he went up to Jerusalem, therefore he began not by the calling of
man. And nevertheless lest he should seem to have his considerations contrary
from others, and therefore to fly the sight of them: he says that he came for
this purpose, to see Peter: therefore although he waited their authority in
taking upon him his office, yet he held not his degree of Apostleship, they
being against it, but agreeing to it, and allowing it, and this is that which
he intends, yt neither he was at any time of contrary opinion to the other
Apostles, and moreover yt he did well agree with them. He notes the short time
that he spent there, to show yt he came not thither to learn, but only that
they might common one with another. To that end belongs that which he
adds, that he saw no other, because that he going somewhether else, made his
journey that way only.

19 But James.) Who this James was we must see. The old writers for ye most
part do agree yt it was one of ye Disciples, by surname Oblias and Iustus,
which ruled the Church of Jerusalem. Although some think him ye son of Joseph
by another wife: some (which is more like to be true) think him cosine German
to Christ of his mothers sister: but seeing he is reckoned among the Apostles, I
allow not ye opinion. Neither is ye excuse of Hierome of any force. That this
name is otherwhile set over from ye xii. unto other, seeing yt here he speaks
of the highest dignity, and we shall hear yt the same (James) is a litte after
accounted among the principal pillars, therefore it seems to me much more
probable to be the son of Alphaeus of whom he speaks. As for the rest it is
likely that they were then dispearsed through diverse Countries, for they
rested not in one place idle. Although Luke do show Act. 11.15. that he was
brought by Barnabas to the Apostles: yet that is not to be understood of the
xii. but of these two, which then were alone at Jerusalem. 20 Fathermore the
things which I write unto you.) This affirmatio^ is exte^ded to the whole
narratio^: and it shows how seriously Paul co^te^deth about this matter in
yt he puts to an oath, the which it is not lawful to use, but in great
causes and those of much weight. And it is no marvel though he stay long in
so great a contention, for we saw before what the deceauers did go about,
by taking away from him the name and honor of an Apostle. But the fashions of
swearing which the Saints use, must be marked of us: that we may understand
that with an oath we do nothing else but call before the judgment of God,
the fidelity and truth of our sayings and doings: the which when we do
it, needful it is that religion and the fear of God should govern.

22 I was in face unknown.) This seems to be added, that he might the more
largely set out the malice and ill will of his backbiters. For if only
heresay did move the jewish Churches to give glory unto God because he had so
wonderfully wrought in Paul: how detestable a thing is it, that they, unto
whom his maruailous virtues were manifest by their effect, should not do the
like? if only report suffised them, why were not these content with the sight
of the things? He is said to have overthrown the faith, not because faith of
it self is able to be overthrown, but because he destroyed the same in weak
persons. Finally the enterprise is more respected then the effect.

24 They did glorify.) This was a manifest token, that his ministry was
approved of all the Churches of Jury, and so approved that with great wondering
and praise they acknowledged the great power of God. So glauncingly he nippeth
his ill willers, in that they by their spite and slanders only profit
herein, that they darken the glory of God, which the Apostles had acknowledged
and openly confessed to shine in the Apostleship of Paul. In the mean space
here is by the way prescribed unto us a rule, how much we ought to reverence
the Saints of God. For such is either our wickedness, or our unthankfulness,
or our readiness to superstition, that look whom we see garnished with the
gifts of God, those we worship as it were Gods, not remembering of whom they
had those gifts. And therefore we are warned in this place rather to cast our
eyes upon the Author, yt we may ascribe unto him that which is his. And also
we are taught that it was an occasion to praise God, in that Paul of an enemy
was become a Minister.

The second Chapter. 1 Fourteen years after that I went up again to
Jerusalem together with Barnabas, taking Titus also with me.

2 And I went up according to revelation, and I conferred with them the Gospel
which I preach among the Gentiles, but privately with the^, which were in
price, least by any means I should or had run in vain.

3 But neither Titus which was with me, being a Greek was compelled to be
circumsised.

4 For because of false brethren being entered in, which came in to spy out
our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus: that they might bring us into
bondage.

5 Unto whom, no not for an hour gave we place by subjection, that the truth
of the Gospel might remain in you.


Fourteen years after.) Scarslye can any man affirm for a certainty whether
he mean that going up which Luke mentions Act. 15.2. nay rather the order of
the History leads us to the contrary part: for there it is showed that
Paul came four times to Jerusalem, of his first coming is already said: his
second coming was when he and Barnabas brought the alms collected in the
Congregations of Graecia, and Asia, as it is read Act. 12.25. of the which
that I should rather understand this present place, many reasons move me, or
else it must needs be that the one of them must tell an untruth. Moreover the
conjecture does more move me that Peter was reprehended at Antiochia what time
as Paul did abide there, and that was before he was sent to Jerusalem of the
Churches, to dispatche ye disse^tion arisen about ceremonies. Beside that it is
not agreeable to reason, that Peter would have used such simulation, if that
controversy had been ended, and the decree of the Apostles published. Paul in
this place writes that he came to Jerusalem: and after he adds that Peter's
simulation was reproved by him: which [simulation] he would never have used but
in doubtful things: That is Paul.
furthermore he would scant at any time have enterprised that voyage taken by
the common consent of the faithful, letting pass the cause, and suppressing
so memorable an end. And it appears not sufficiently at what time this
Epistle was written: but that the Greeks do conjecture it to be sent from
Rome: and the Latins from Ephesus. But I suppose that it was not only written
before yt Paul saw Rome: but also before ye counsel was held where the
Apostles gave sentence as touching the use of ceremonies. For where as the
adversaries did falsely pretend ye name of the Apostles, and did lean chiefly
thervpo^ to burden Paul withal: what great negligence had it ben to pass over
the decree every where published and among all men, wherewith they were
confounded? Surely this one word would have stopped their mouth, ye object to me
ye Apostles: but all men know what they have judged: therefore I hold you
convict of a shameless lie. You put upon the Gentiles necks necessity of
keeping ye law, as though ye did so by their commandment, but their writing
is extant, whereby they set the consciences at liberty from it. Moreover this
is to be added, yt in the beginning he did check ye Galathians, in yt they fell
so soon from the gospel which he delivered them. And a man may readily gather
that some space there was from that time which they were brought unto the
gospel, before that controversy of ceremonies was moved. Finally I take the
fourteen years, not from the one journey to the other: but that the account
may begin always from Paul's conversion. So were there xi. years between his
two iorneyes.

2 I went up according to revelation.) Here he does approve his Apostleship and
doctrine, not only by works, but also by divine oracle. For whereas God did
govern that journey, ye cause whereof was the confirmation of his doctrine: it
is not now by the consent of men confirmed only, but also by the authority of
god, which ought abou^dantly to break their obstinacy who did burden Paul by
obiecting ye Apostles names, for although before there were some shadow of
co^te^ding, yet tha^ when gods judgment sets in foot, al quarrelling has
an end. I co^ferred with the^. First ye must note this word Confer, for they
do not prescribe unto him what he ought to teach, but he shows what he has
t^ught, yt they may prescribe unto him, and give their consent, because his
adversaries might slanderously talk, by dissembling many things craftily, yt
he went about to get ye Apostles favor: he does namely express that he
co^ferred the Gospel, as he preached it among the Gentiles, whereby he turns
away all suspicion of deceit, and ouerthwarting. We shall see what follows
at last, for the Apostles did not think it blame worthy, in that he had begun
without their commandment: but without controversy or quarelling, they
ratified that which he had done, and that by the instinction of the same
spirit, who being guide, Paul came unto them. He was not therefore made of
them an Apostle, but so acknowledged: but these things shall be mentioned
afterward. Least by any means. What then? shall the truth of God fall, except
it be stayde by the testimony of men? but although the whole world be
faithless, yet for all that the truth of God remains sure and uncorrupted,
neither do they lose their labor which by the commandment of God do teach
the Gospel, although they bring forth no fruit by their labor, neither do
the words of Paul tend to this end: but for that, as touching men, the
ministry of the word is unprofitable to doubtful and wavering consciences.
To run in vain, is taken to labor without profit, when as that edifiing
which ought (to follow) does not ensue. Farthermore here was a strong engine to
shake weak consciences, when as the deceauers did falsely say that the
Doctrine which Paul did preach, was contrary to the doctrine of the Apostles:
in so much that many did fall. The certainty of faith depends not upon the
consent of men: but rather so must we rest in the naked truth of God, that
neither men, neither all the Angels should remove us from it. Notwithstanding
to the rude, and those which have scarsely yet a small taste of sound
doctrine, and have not utterly drunk in the same in their heart and marow,
this temptation can scant be born when they hear the principal teachers to be
at ods among themselves. Nay rather sometimes Satan by his subtlety provoke
and stirs those that be strong, when as he lays before them the
contentions and dissentions of them, whom it most became to think and speak
one thing. It can hardlye be told, how many that unlucky contention as
touching the He means the sacrament of the body of Christ.
body of Christ, stopped from the Gospel, how many men's faith it shaked: for
that they saw men of principal authority so enuiously to strive about the
greatest question, again it is no small help to establish faith when all
teachers consent in one. Therefore whereas Satan went about with such subteltie
to let the passage of the gospel, Paul would stop him. for after that it
appeared that he agreede well with all the Apostles, this let was utterly
taken away, the minds of the unlearned were not tossed any more with shifting
and changing whom they should follow. This is then that which he speaks,
Least my pains which before I took had been lost, and finallye least I
should go forward without commodity: I took away that doubt that troubled
many: whether they might believe me or Peter. for with one consent have we
(both) embraced that which I had always taught. And if so be it were so great
pleasure to many at these days to edify as it was to Paul, they would be
touched with greater care to agree among themselves.

3 But neither Titus.) He proves by another reason, that the Apostles are not
of contrary judgment unto him: for he brought unto the^ a man uncircumcised,
who^ they doubted not to acknowledge as a brother. He adds a cause why he was
not circumcised: Res media.
for whereas circumcision was a mean thing or a thing indifferent, it might be
either omitted or used as it served to edify. We must always hold fast that
rule, If all things are lawful unto us, that we see what is expedient.
Therefore did he circumcise Timothy, least his vncircumsion might be an
offense unto the weak, for at that time he was conuersante among the weak,
whom he ought to favor. And he would gladlye have done the same in Titus: so
never wearied was he in bearing with the weak: but the reason was contrary:
for certain false brethren were ready to take occasion to slander his
doctrine, which straight way would have spread abroad (this) report, Behold
this so bold a defender of liberty, as soon as he comes into the Apostles
sight, he lays down that manlye courage and fierceness wherewith he is
puffed (up) among ye unlearned. As it is meet for us to temper our selves
toward ye weak, so must we stoutly resist the malignaunt, and those that of
set purpose do lay to entrap our liberty, neither ought the duties of
Charity hinder the offices of Faith. Charity than in the use of things that
are indifferent or mean, shall be a very good moderator, if only first you
have respect of faith.

4 For because of false brethren.) The sense hereof may be two wais taken.
(1) that he was not circumcised, when as notwithstanding ye false brethren did
importunately require it, and would have compelled him: (2) or else yt of set
purpose Paul circumcised him not, because he saw yt it would straight ways
come to pass that they would take occasion thereof to slander. For, for this
purpose they did thrust themselves into Paul's company, yt they might catch the
one or the other of these two things: That is, if he did freely contemn
ceremonies, that they might bring him thereby into hatred with the Jews: but
if he did wholly abstain from liberty, they would by and by triumph over him
among the Gentiles: as though being ashamed he had recanted his doctrine. This
second sense likes me. that Paul, understanding their laying in weight, would
not circumcise Titus. He says that he was not compelled, that the readers may
perceive that Circumcision of it self was not condemned, as though it were a
thing evil: but that they contend about the necessity of keeping it. as though
he should say. I would have been ready to have circumcised him, had it not
been that there had been a greater matter in it. For they would have laid the
Law unto us: but to such compulsion I might not give place.

5 Unto whom no not for an hour.) This constancy was a zeal of Paul's
doctrine For whereas the false brethren were earnest upon him, and desired
nothing else but to accuse him, and again that he stood stoutly in it, he
took away all doubt thereafter to come. Neither can he now be accused that he
deceived the Apostles. he does deny therefore that even for a space he gave
place to them by subjection: that is to say, after the manner of subjection, so
that, that deed should be as it were a document of liberty oppressed:
otherwise with gentleness and sufferaunce he was always ready, even unto his
lives end to give place to all men. That the truth of the Gospel.) There was
no danger, least ye Paul should be robbed of his liberty, yea even with
submitting himself unto other, but ye example would have hurt other. He did
therefore wisely consider what was expedient. We see than both how far
offenses are to be avoided, and also what is always to be considered in
things indifferent: that is to say Edification. The sum is this, that we be
servants of our brethren: but yet to this end, that we all may together serve
the Lord, and that the liberty of our consciences may remain safe and
sound. for in that the false brethren would have brought the godly into
bondage, they were not to be obeyed. The truth of the gospel, is to be taken
for the natural purytie thereof, or else which is the very same, for the pure
and sound doctrine thereof. for the false Apostels did not utterly abolishe the
Gospel, but they did falsify it with their expositions. so that now it began
to be feigned and visarded, as always it is when as we bow, but even a little
from the simplycitie of Christ. With what face than will the papists boast
that they have the true Gospel? which is not only corrupted with many
figments, but more than counterfeit with many wicked doctrines. Let us remember
than that it is not enough to hold the name of the gospel, and a kind of sin
thereof, except the purity of it remain firm and unspotted. Where are them
that would with painted moderations reconcile us to the papists, as though it
were lawful to cut of ought from the doctrine of Religion as it were from
money or land? We see haw far Paul abhors this kind of Transactio.
agreement which avouches yt not to be the true Gospel, which is not the pure
gospel.

6 From those which seemed to be somewhat (what they were in times past it is
no matter to me. God accepts not the person of a man) for unto me they which
seems to be accounted off, added nothing.

7 Nay rather contrariwise, when they saw the Gospel of uncircumcision
committed to me, as the Gospel of Circumcision was committed to Peter.

8 For he that was mighty or effectuous in Peter to the Apostleship of
Circumcision, was also mighty in me toward the Gentiles.

9 And when James, and Cephas, and John, who seemed to be pillars did know the
grace given unto me, they gave the right hands of fellowship unto me and
Barnabas: that we should exercise Apostleship among the Gentiles, and they upon
the Circumcision.

10 Only that we should be mindful of the poor, in the which also I have been
diligent, to do the same.

6 From them which seemed.) Paul is not as yet content, except the Galathians
do also know, that he learned nothing of Peter and the Apostles. hereof it is
that Porphirius and Iulianus acccuse the holy man of pride, because he does
take so much upon him. that he may not away to learn any thing of other:
because he boasts himself to be made a teacher or Doctor, having no master
or helper: because he so greatly indeauoreth to seem inferior to no man. But
whosoever shall consider how necessary this boasting was, will acknowledge that
it was holy and worthy of very great praise. For if he had granted this to
his adversaries. that he had profited under the Apostles, he had armed them
with two slanders: for by and by they would have said, At length thou have
something profited, that thou might correct that which thou had before
offended (in) and that thou might pluck back thy foot from thy rash
enterprise. So first of al his whole doctrine of former time should have been
suspected, and his building cast down, secondarily in time to come also he
should have had less authority or estimation, because he should have been taken
for a common disciple. We see tha^ yt he is carried away into this holy bosting,
not so much for his own cause, as by a necessity of auouching his doctrine.
Here is not contention of ambition, for that in no wise he reasons about
the Persons: but Paul will not that his Apostleship, unto which the authority
of his doctrine was adioined, should be blemished with ye greatness of any
man. And if this be not enough to stop those dogs mouths, yet does it
sufficiently confute their barking.

What they were in times past.) These words are to be read by themselves. for
to the end that his adversaries should know that he cared not for the
judgment of men, he put in this Parenthesis. But this place they do diverse
ways expound. Ambrose does think that their folly is by the way
reprehended, which did lay the Apostles in Paul's dishe, to way him down
withal, as if he shouid say: As though I might not make exception that they
were poor idiots, which knew nothing but fishers craft: but as for me I was
instructed (with learning) even from my childehoode under my Master Gamaliel:
but I let all that pass, because I know, God forces not of any men's persons.

Chrysostom and Hierome do understand it more hardlye: as though after a
sort he threatened also the chief Apostles, according to this sense: Whatsoever
they be, they shall not escape the judgment of God, if they go aside from
their office: neither the dignity of their office, or else the estimation of
men shall deliver them. But unto me this exposition seems plainer, and more
agreeable to Paul's mind, That he grants them to have been the first or
chief in deed in order of time, but he denies that to be any hinderaunce
unto him, whereby he should not now hold his degree in like manner. He does
not say, that he cares not what manner of men they be at this present, but
he speaks of the time past, in which they were already Apostles, he
himself being a stranger from the faith of Christ. In sum: He will not
have them judge after the time past, nor yet that that proverb should be of
force in this cause: That he which is before in Time, should be more abled in
Right. The person of a man.) Besides the expositions which I have already
brought, this third also has some show, That in the Worlds policy or
government persons have place: but in the Spiritual kingdom of Christ they
ought to give place. That is plausiblye said. but the Lord speaks of
Worldelye policye or government when he says, Thou shalt not accept a
person in judgment. Deuteronomy. the tenth Chapt. and the seventeenth ver. But I
enter not into that Disputation: because it makes nothing to this present
place. for Paul does simply understand, that that degree of Honor into
which the Apostles were come before, did not let that he should not be
called of GOD, and of a man of no accounte, should of a sudden be made equal
unto them. (and) although there were great difference, that that auayled
nothing before God, who is not led with the accepting of persons. and whose
calling is in danger of no preiudices. But this as yet he may seem to have
spoken without reason: for grant that it be true. that persons are not to
be respected in the Lords business (as that in deed must dilligentlye be
taken heed of) What is this to Peter, and to his fellows the Apostles, who
were not in person alone reverent, but also in true holiness and psiritual
gifts for a person, or the respecting of a person is opposite or set against
the fear of God and a good conscience, Act. 10.34.35. and 1. Pet. 1.17. and
this is the common usage of scripture. But godliness, a right zeal,
holiness, and other like gifts did get unto the Apostles special favor and
honor. and Paul truly speaks as contemptuouslye in this place, as though
there had been nothing in them but outward shows. I answer, That Paul does
estimate in this place the Apostles after the value they were of, but according
to the vayn boasting of his adversaries. for to the end they might sell their
smoke, with full mouths they thundered out the names of Peter, James, and
John: and that reverence which the Church did give unto them, those (his
Adversaries) did ambitiouslye abuse, to the contempt of Paul. He does not
therefore in this place dispute what kind of men the Apostles were, ne yet
what his opinyon is of them, this contention being fet aparte: but he confuteth
those outward shows which the false Apostles did pretend. Therefore even as
afterward he will entreat of Circumcision, not according to the proper fence
thereof, but according to the false and ungodly opinyon which those deceauers
devised: even so now also pronounces he of the Apostles. that the outward
shows wherewith they shined in the world are nothing in the sight of God. and
that appears by the words. for why did they prefer them before Paul?
forsooth because they were before him. This was meerelye an outward show.
Otherwise no doubt but Paul according to his singular modestye would have
honored them with his heart, and have embraced the gifts of GOD in them, who
1. Cor. 15.9. of his accord does grant himself to be the lest of the
Apostles, and unworthy to be accounted of so noble an order. Conferred nothing
to me. It might also be thus read Conferred nothing with me. for it is the same
word which twice before he has used. The sense notwithstanding is certain,
that the Apostles having heard Paul's Gospel, pronounced not their Gospel
against it (as men accustomed when any thing they have better and more
perfect) but being content to expound the same, have embraced his doctrine
simplye and without delay: so that as in a thing never a whitte doubtful,
there was no alteration between them. And yet that Paul took not upon him
the first place in speaking, as excelling (the rest) as they do which
prescribe a form (of speaking) unto others: but he expounded his faith, of
which there was sprung sinister reports: and they (I mean the Apostles)
allowed the same with their assent.

7 Nay rather contrariwise. They did straight way give unto him the right
hands of fellowship. therefore they did give their testimonye to his
doctrine, and that without exception, because they brought nothing against it,
as is accustomed in matters of controversy. and they professed that his and
their Gospel was all one: and therefore they did vouchsafe him the honor and
degree of fellow in commission with them. Moreover the manner of this fellowship
was such, that they parted the Provinces or charge among them. therefore they
were equal, therefore Paul was no whit under them. To give the right hands
of fellowship, does signify in this place, to be covenant fellows. When they
saw the Gospel.) He does deny the Apostles to have gratified him in this
(respect) that he was by their beck or grant made an Apostle: but that the
honor of the Apostleship was yielded to him by them: lest they should take
away that which God had given. He does always urge this, that he was made an
Apostle by the gift and ordinance of God: but he adioyneth here in this
place, that he was of the Apostles acknowledged to be such an one. and
thereof it follows that those Varlets did endeavor that which the
Apostles durst not, least they should resist the election of God. And here he
begins to challenge unto himself, that which was proper and peculier unto
him before (all) others: that is to say the Apostleship of uncircumcision. for
in this point did Paul and Barnabas differ from the residue, for that they
two were appointed Apostles to the Gentiles. That was brought to pass by the
Oracle of God: the which to be ratifyed, the Apostles not only suffered it,
but also willed it, because it was ungodly not to obey (it). We see than after
what fashion according to the oracle they divided their offices among them:
that is, that Paul and Barnabas should be the Apostles of the Gentiles, and
the other should be the Apostles of the Jews. Mar. 16.15. I answer, Act.
10.1. But because the other Apostles were in that Country whose inhabitauntes
were almost all Jews: Paul went about Asia, Graecia, and other far
Countries: by this occasion he was peculiarly ordained the Apostle of the
Gentiles. Yea rather when as the Lord in the beginning commanded him to be
set aparte, his will was that he should leave Antiochia, and Syria, and go
over the sea into far countries for the Gentiles sake. Therefore his ordinary
Apostleship was over the Gentiles, and his extraordinary Apostleship over the
Jews. Contrariwise, the other took unto them properly the (charge of the)
Jews: but under this condition, that unto the Gentiles, when occasion was
offered, their ministry should not be shut up. but this later, was as it
were, extraordinarye unto them. But if the Apostleship of Peter did peculyerly
belong unto the Jews, let the Romanistes consider by what right they draw or
derive the succession of the Primacie from him unto them. For if the Pope of
Rome do therefore challenge unto himself the supremacy because he is the
successor of Peter: he must exercise the same over the Jews. In this place
Paul is declared to be the chief Apostle of the Gentiles, whom they deny to
have been the Roman Bishop. therefore, that he may enjoy some possession of
his Supremacy, he must get him churches among the Jews. for it becomes us
to acknowledge him (our) Apostle, which both by the determination or
appointment of the holy Ghost, and by the consent of the whole College of
the Apostles, is expressly named unto us. He that does pass over this right to
Peter, does confound the ordinance both of God and man. The figure Metonymya
in the words circumcision being meant for the Jews, and uncircumcision for
the Gentiles, is sufficiently known, and therefore I pass it over.

8 He that was effectuous. He affirms the charge given unto him, by right to
have belonged unto him, because the Lord had showed forth his power in his
ministry. Such manifestation of God his working or efficacy, as we have
often seen, is as it were a seal to seal the certentie of doctrine, and to
confirm the office of teaching. But it is doubtful whether Paul do refer
the efficacy of God to the success of his preaching, or to the graces of the
holy Ghost, which then were given unto the believers. I do not take it to be
meant of the bare success, but of the spiritual energie or effectual working
of which he makes mention 1. Cor. 2.4. The sum is, it was no vain covenant
that the Apostles had among them selves, but a judgment sealed of God.

9 And when they did know the grace. In displeasure does he defame their proud
disdaynfulnes, who made little account of the grace of God, which drue the
principal Apostles to have him in admiration and reverence. For their winking
was not to be borne withal, if they would pretend that they knew not that
which the Apostles in the beginning did manifestly see. Here are we admonished,
to give place to the grace of God, wheresoever it is seen, except we mean to
war against the holy Ghost him self, who will not have his gifts to be idle
and fruitless. Therefore the grace which the Apostles did see to be given to
Paul and Barnabas, did provoke and move them to establish their fellowship in
the ministry. James and Cephas. I have before showed that this James was the
son of Alpheus: neither could he be the brother of John, which Herod had a
little before slain, and that he should be one of the disciples, which should so
much excel the Apostles, in my judgment, is very unlikely. And that he (I
mean James) was a principal among the Apostles, Luke also does show, who does
attribute unto him the conclusion and the defining of the cause in the
Council. Act. 15.13. and 21.18. he shows that all the Seniors of the Church
of Jerusalem were gathered together unto him. That they seemed to be pillars,
he speaks not it in contempt, but he alleges the common opinion: because
thereof it follows, that that which they did, might not be refused or
rejected rashly or lightly. Seeing that the question is here touching dignity
it is marvel that James is preferred before Peter. it may hap that it was
because he was ruler or bishop of the Church of Jerusalem. As touching the name
Pillar, we know that the nature of things does so bear or suffer, that they
which excel in wit, in wisdom, or in other gifts, are also superiors in
authority. In the Church of God the matter stands thus, that as every one
excels in greater grace, so the more honor should be given unto him. For
it is unthankfulness, nay rather impiety, not to worship the spirit of God,
wheresoever he appears in his gifts. Moreover as the people cannot lack a
Pastor: so every company of Pastors does require some moderatour or ruler. But
let that always be in force, that he which is chief of all, be as though he
were Minister. Mat. 23.11.

10 Only that he should.) It appears that the Brethren which were in Jury
were very pore: otherwise they would not have burdened other Churches. That
might happen partlye for because of the sundry calamities of the whole
nation: partly for that they were spoiled of their goods, their own
countrymen cruelly raging against them. It was meet that they should be aided
with the relief of the Gentiles, who were indebted to them for the Gospel, a
treasure indeed incomparable. Paul does say that he has faythfullye
performed that which the Apostles required of him, and therefore he takes
away from his adversaries the pretense or color which they sought.

11 And when Peter was come to Antiochia, I manifestlye resisted him, because
he was worthy of reprehension.

12 For before that there came some from James, he did eat meat together with
the Gentiles, but when they were come he conuaied himself away, and separated
himself from them, fearing those which were of the Circumcision.

13 And the other Jews did dissemble also with him: in so much that Barnabas
also was led away into their simulation.

14 But when I saw that they went not forward, Recto pede.i. with a right
foot.
rightly to the truth of the Gospel, I said to Peter before them all. If thou,
seeing thou art a Jew, do live like a Ge^tile and not like a Jew, why
compellest thou the Gentiles to play the Jews?

15 We by nature are Jews, and not sinners of the Gentiles.

16 Knowing this, that man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by
the faith of Jesus Christ: and we have believed in Christ Jesus, that we
might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law:
because that all flesh shall not be justified by the law. No flesh shall be
justified.


11 When Peter was come.) Whosoever shall prudently way al circumstances, shall
agree to me (as I hope) that this happened before the Apostles had pronounced
that the Gentiles should not be molested about ceremonies. For Peter would not
have been afraid to offend James or those which were sent from him: seeing
that that determination proceeded from his judgment. but now Paul is carried
further, for that he avouches his gospel against the simulation of Peter. In
the beginning he said, that the certentie of his Gospel did not hang upon
Peter and the Apostles, that by their arbitrament it should stand or fall.
Secondarily, he said that it was approved of all without any exception or
gaynesaying: specially of them which by all men's consentes were the principal.
Now (as I have said) he goes farther, showing that Peter was reprehended by
him, because he inclined to the contrary part: by which occasion also, he
enters in to the handling of the cause it self. And hereof it appears how
sound his doctrine is, of which he has not only obtained a voluntary
subscription or consent: but also how constauntly he has avouched it against
Peter, and how in the controversy he was superior. What more doubt does
there then remain, that it should not be received for a certain and an
invincible truth? That slander also is beaten down, That Paul was a common
disciple far distaunt from the degree of Apostleship. For this reprehension
is a sign of equality. I grant that the highest are reprehended of the
lowest, and that by right. and so it follows not that they which reprove any
man, be straightways equals unto them. For this liberty is of God permitted
the inferiors toward their betters. but the quality of the reprehension is in
this place to be marked. For Paul did not simply reprehende Peter as one
Christian does another: but he did it as they say Ex officio, that is to say,
according to the right or prerogative of the Apostolic person which he
executed. And here the Papacy of Rome is thrown flat down with an other
thunderbolt: specially that shamelessness or impudency is convinced and
manifestly showed in that the Roman Antichrist does boast himself free from
giving an account, and in that he does exempt himself from the judgment of
the whole Church. In this place one man, not rashly, not with an unlawful
boldness, but according to ye power and authority granted him of God, does
rebuke Peter before the whole Church: and Peter does submit himself obediently
to the rebuke. nay rather the whole disputation of these two Chapters, was
nothing else then a manifest overthrowing of that tyrannical supremacy, which
the Romanists do babble to have been founded by the law of God. But if they
will have god to be the author thereof, they must needs then forge a new
scripture. And if they will not have him to their professed enemy: of
necessity they must wipe out these two chapters out of the holy scripture.
Because he was worthy of reprehension.) The greek Participle signifies
reprehensus, that is, reprehended, but I am out of doubt that it is put in
steed of the Nowne, for him that deserves a just reprehension. for whereas
Chrysostom does enterprete it thus, That that complainte and the accusation did
arise of others, truly it is a cold or weak exposition. For it is often used
of the Greeks, to give unto participles the signification of nownes, the which
every man sees to agree to this place. and hereof a man may readilye gather,
how unapt the exposition of Hierome and Chrysostom is, who thought the
Apostles of a set match to have played this part or pranke before the people.
Neither do these two words (...) help them, which signify that Peter being
reprehended to his face had never a word to answer. Whereas Chrysostom does
judge, that they, to avoid offense, would have talked together privately, if
they had had any dissension, it is of no weight: for other small offenses were
little to be regarded in respect of this most pernicious offense, because the
Church (by this) should be divided, because (by this) the Christian liberty
was in hazard, because (by this) the grace of Christ was overwhelmed. openly
therefore must this open or public sin be reprehended. The cheifest argument
or reason whereto Hierome leans, is to be frivolous and vain. Why would
Paul have condemned [sayth he] in an other, that which he counts praise
worthy in himself? for he boasts that to the Jews he was become a Jew, 1.
Cor. 9.20. I answer, That Peter did far otherwise. for Paul did not in
any wise conform himself to the Jews, but that the doctrine of liberty
should remain safe and sound. whereby neither would he circumcise Titus, that
the truth of the Gospel might remayn whole. But Peter did so play the Jew,
that he drove the Gentiles into bondage and servitude: and also as it were with
this prejudice he did abase the doctrine of Paul. He did not therefore hold
the mean: because he had more regard to gratify, than to edify, and he did
more respect what pleased the Jews, then what was expedient for the whole
body. More rightly therefore has Augustine judged, which says that nothing
was done of a set matehe; but that Paul did sincerelye of a Christian zeal
set himself against the naughtye and unseasonable simulation of Peter:
because he deemed it harmefull to the Church.

12 For before certain came.) The state of the cause is here described, that
Peter for the Jews sake had made a departing from the Gentiles: so that he
would drive them from the communion of the Church, except they would renounce
the liberty of the Gospel, and put their necks under the yoke of the law. If
Paul should now have held his peace, his whole doctrine did fall, his whole
building erected through his ministry did lie aground. therefore it was need
for him both stoutly to resist, and sharply to fight. Here we behold how
warily we must attemper our selves to please men: lest we swerue aside from the
right course, with too much desire to please, or else with preposterous fear
to offend. If that might happen to Peter, how much more easilye shall it
happen to us, except we take very good heed?

14 When I saw they went not forward rightly.) Some expound this of the
Gentiles, who being troubled with the example of Peter, did now begin to faint:
but it is more convenient to understand it of Peter and Barnabas and their
followers. The right path or way to the truth of the Gospel, keeping sound the
true Doctrine, was to unite and bring in one the Jews and the Gentiles. but to
bind the consciences of the Godly with the necessitye of keeping the law,
and in silence to burye the Doctrine of liberty: were an unworthy reward of
unity. The truth of the Gospel. Paul takes in this place as before he
did: unto which he sets opposite the color, wherewith Peter and other did
deforme the Gospel: Which since it is so, it is not to be doubted that Paul's
contention was serious and waightye. As touching doctrine they did very well
agree: but because Peter having no respect of Doctrine did too too seruilely
follow the Jews mind, therefore is he reproved of halting. There be some
which with another pretense may excuse Peter: for that he being the Apostle of
the Circumcision, ought to have had more care of the Jews sauegarde or
salvation: and nevertheless they may also grant, that Paul did well in
taking upon him the Gentiles cause. but it is a fond thing to defend that
which the holy Ghost has condemned by the mouth of Paul. Neither was man's
business talked of here, but the purity of the Gospel was brought into
danger* least it should be defiled with Judicial leaven. Before all. By this
example we are admonished, that they are openly to be chastised, which to the
hurt of many have offended: as far forth as it is profitable for the Church.
The end is, lest if such a fault should be left unpunished, it should by
the example thereof do harm. and Paul does teach 1. Tim. 5. ver. 20. that
that ought to be observed namely in Priests or Elders, that is to say for
that, in respect of the office which they bear, they do by their example
more greeuouslye hurt. but specially it was profitable to defend constantlye
before the people a good cause which did belong to all, whereby Paul might
make it more manifest that he did not fly ye light.

If thou seeing thou art a Jew. Paul's Oration to Peter consists of two
parts. in the first he does expostulate for that he does the Gentiles wrong
because he does drive them to keep the law, from which he himself would be
free. For beside this that every man ought to keep that Law which he
prescribes unto other: in this yet he offended the more, for that he would
compel the Gentiles to Iudaisme, and he being himself a Jew permitted to
himself liberty. For the Law was given to the Jews and not to the Gentiles.
Therefore he uses an Argument a minori ad mains from the les to ye more,
furthermore this was an hard and a violent coaction, that he did renounce unto
the Gentiles communion or partaking except they would receive the yoke of ye law,
which was an unjust offer and condition. And the whole force of ye reprehending
consists in this word That is, the law.
: which of Chrisostom and Hierom was not perceived. for the use of ceremonies
was free to edification: so yt the faithful were not robbed of their liberty
nor necessity laid upon the^. from ye which ye gospel has set the^ free. 15
We are by nature Jews.) I know that to some it seems to be a figure called
Anthypophora in English an objection: as though Paul did prevent in ye person of
ye adverse party that which he might object: that is, yt the Jews have a
greater privilege (as they commonly say). not that they might boast immunitie
or freedom from the law. for it should have been more then vnlikelye for them
unto whom the law was given, to boast of that: but because they ought by
certain notable tokens to be distinguished from the Gentiles. That, therefore I
neither wholly reject, neither yet altogether allow, as by and by it shall
appear. Some do understand this as spoken in the person of Paul, but in
this sense: if thou would lay the burden of the Law upon the Jews. it
were more agreeable to reason, for it comes unto them by inheritance. but
this exposition does not agree neither. It is rather, than, the second part
of the sentence which begins with the figure Occupatio. Occupatio is a
Figure whereby in preventing our adversaries Objections we confute the same.
for whereas there was a difference between the Jews and the Gentiles, for that
the Gentiles were unholy and unclean, but the Jews holy, as far forth as
God had adopted them for his people: the Jews might contend as touching this
prerogative. But Paul by preventing does wisely wreste it to the contrary.
for seeing that the Jews themselves with all their dignity were constrained to
fly to the faith of Christ: how much more behooved it the Gentiles to get
salvation by faith? The mind of Paul than is thus, We which seem to excel
other, which have bine through the benifite of his covenant always nighe God;
have never the later found no reason or mean to get salvation, but vy
believing in Christ; why than should we prescribe any other mean unto the
Gentiles? For if the Law were necessary, or else could prevail the folowers
thereof unto salvation: it would most of all have prevailed us, unto whom it
was given. and if so be that we have left it and are gone unto Christ, much
less are the gentiles to be urged to take it upon the^. The word Sinner does
signify here, as it does often in other places, unholy or lost and estraunged
from God. such were the Gentiles, who had no fellowship with God: but the Jews
were by adoption the Children of God, and therefore segregate or set apart into
holiness. Whereas he says* by nature, he does not mean that they are by
nature free from the corruption of mankind: for David who descended by lineage
from Abraham, confesses that he was begotte of unclean seed. Psa. 51.7. but
the remedy of grace wherewith they were sanctified, did suppress the
corruption of nature to which they were in danger. And because the promise
made the blessing an inheritance, therefore it is called a good thing,
natural or by nature. So to the Romans, Chap. 11. ver. 16. he says they
were sprung out of an holy root. Therefore when he says, We are by nature
Jews, is as much as if he should say, We are borne holy not by our own
desert, but because we are chosen of God to be his people. We than which by
nature were Jews, what have we done? we have believed in Christ. To what end
have we believed? that by the faith of Christ we might be justified. For
what cause? Because we were convinced and put out of doubt that men could not
obtain righteousness by the works of the Law. He than reasons after the
nature and effect of faith, that the Jews are not justified by the Law. For
as they who would establish their own righteousness of works are not
subject to the righteousness of GOD, Romans 10.3. so on the contrary part they
which believe in Christ, do confess themselves to be sinners, and renounce
the righteousness of works. He is busied here in the chiefest questyon: nay
rather in the whole sum almost of the controversy, is included in this
proposition: wherefore it is meet the more dilligently to stand upon the
discussing of this present place. First and foremost this is to be noted, that
righteousness must be sought by the faith of Christ, because we cannot be
justified by works. Now it is demanded what he means by Works of the Law.
The Papists being beguiled by Origin and Hierome do suppose that the
controversy is of shadows only: nay rather they do firmly define so. and
therefore they do always by the Works of the Law interpret ceremonies: as
though Paul did not dispute of the free righteousness which is given unto
us by Christ. neither do they hold it to be an absurdity that no man is
justified by the works of the Law: Without rhyme or reason.
and yet (they hold) that we are accounted righteous before GOD through the
merit of works. To be short they account no mention to be made of moral
works, in this place. But the Text does plainelye show, that the moral law
is comprehended also in these words: for almost whatsoever things Paul will
afterward add or speak, they do pertayne to the moral law rather than to
the ceremonial, moreover he does always set the free accepting or allowing,
wherewith God does vouchsafe to accept us, against the righteousness of the
law. But the adversaries object, his disputation of the whole Law: although
the false Apostles did only contend about Ceremonies, for therefore did they
urge Ceremonies, that men should seek salvation in the keeping of the Law:
because, forsooth, they feigned it to be a meritorious worshipping or service.
wherefore Paul does not lay against them the Law moral, but the only
grace of Christ. Neither is the whole Epistle spente in this universal
contention, for he comes at length to Ceremonies by name. but because this
was a principal Knot and Doubt, Whether righteousness happened unto us by
Faith or by works, it behooued that it should first be dispatched. The
Papists at these days, because it greeueth them, if we wring out of them that
men are justified by faith only, do hardly grant moral things to be
comprehended under the works of the Law. yea many of them obiecting the gloss
of Hierome think they have handled the matter very handsomely: but the text
will evidently show yt he speaks of the moral law also. But by the faith.)
He does not mean ceremonies only or any manner works not to suffice, except
the help of faith be joined: but unto the negative proposition he does
counterset the exclusive: as if he should say, Not by works, but by the only
faith of Christ. Otherwise it were an unapt sentence, and clean came from his
purpose. for ye false Apostles did not refuse christ, nor yet faith: but they
required that ceremonies should be joined with the^. If Paul would have allowed
such a manner of ioining, there had been a full agreement between the^. and
than Paul had in vain troubled the Church with so hateful a contention. Let
this than remain determined: that in this place there is an exclusive
proposition, That we are not justified otherwise than by faith: or, That we are
not justified but by faith, unto ye which, this is equivalent, We are justified
by faith only. Whereby it appears how childishly the Papists at these days
do dote, brawling with us about the word Only, as though it were ours, but
forsooth the Papists Divinity was unknown to Paul. they say a man is
justified by faith, but they place part of the iustifiing in works. Paul was
ignorant of such half justifying. for when he teaches yt we are righteous
through faith, because we cannot be so by works: he takes it as a thing
granted which is (also) true yt we are capable of Christ's righteousness no
otherwise, than if we be in our own righteousness pore and needy. Therefore
either nothing, or all ought to be ascribed to faith or works. As touching
the word righteousness or justifying, and in what manner, faith is the cause
thereof, afterward shall be seen. All flesh shall not be justified. He has
before cited the conscience of Peter and of other to be witness, now he does
more confyrme it by pronouncing that it is so: that is, Not one mortal man
shall obtain righteousness by the works of the law. This is the foundation
of free righteousness, when we are made naked and bare of our own
righteousness. Finallye in denying any mortal man to be justified, is as much,
as if he should say, that all men are shut out from the righteousness of the
law, nor that it can be, that any man should attain thereunto.

17 Farthermore if we seeking to be justified in Christ, are our selves found
also sinners: is Christ therefore the minister of sin? God forbid.

18 For if I build those things again which I have destroyed, I make my
self a trespasser.

19 For I by the law am dead to the law, that I might live to God: with Christ
I am crucified.

20 And I live no^ any more, but Christ lives in me, in as much as I live now
in the flesh, I live in the faith of the son of God, which has loved me and
given himself for me,

21 I cast not away the grace of God. for if righteousness be by the Law;
than Christ has dyed Gratis, in vain.
for nothing.

17 If we seeking.) He returns (his talk) now to the Galathians, lest any
man should join this sentence with the former, as though it were a part of
the communication had with Peter. for to what end should these things
need for Peter? Although this be nothing, or a very little to the matter.
therefore let every man choose whether of them he list. Furthermore some read it
affirmatively, among whom is Chrysostom: and they make this the sense, If we
seeking to be justified in Christ, are not yet fullye just, but are as yet
unclean, neither (yet) Christ does suffice us unto righteousness: it
follows that Christ is the minister of doctrine which leaves men in sin.
as though having propounded this absurdity, Paul should accuse of blasphemy
those who do attribute part of justification to the law. But because the word
absit, which is God forbid does by and by follow, which Paul is not accustomed
to use but after interrogations or questions: I suppose it is rather spoken to
remove the absurdity which seemed to follow of it. According to his custom
than, by asking (the question) he uses the figure Occupatio, as in the person
of his adversaries: If, says he, the righteousness of fay^h do bring this,
that we which be Jews, and sanctified from our mothers womb, should be
deemed guilty and polluted: shall we say that Christ is the author of
sin, as he which makes the power of sin to flourish in his? Thereof sprang
this doubt, for that he had said that the Jews, by believing in Christ, had
given over the righteousness of the Law. for if Christ be taken out of the
way, the Jews being separated from the common pollution of the Gentiles, do
seem in that respect to be after a sort exempted out of the number of
sinners. The grace of Christ does make them and the Gentiles equal, and the
remedy which is to both common, does show their disease and sickness to be
like (in equality). The word Also makes to this purpose. We our selves also,
says he, we speak not of every body, but of those who are notable such as the
Jews were. God forbid.) Deseruingly does he reject that, for Christ, in
uncovering of sin which lay hidden, is not the minister of sin: as though
making justice of no force, he should open the gate unto sin. nor yet as
though he should establish the kingdom of sin. This did deceive the Jews
that they did without Christ challenge to themselves some holiness, which in
deed was none at all. thereof (grew) their quarrel and complaynt, Did Christ
therefore come, that he should take from us the righteousness of the Law? that
of holy he should make us unholy? that he should make us in subjection to sin
and guiltiness? Paul denies it to be so, and therefore he rejects this
blasphemy with detesting (it). for Christ did not being sin but he did
reveal sin: neither did he take away justice or righteousness, but he drew
away the false visar from the Jews.

18 For if I build again.) The answer is double. This former answer is
vndirecte, whilst he shows, that that is repugnaunt to his whole doctrine:
seeing that he had so preached the faith of Christ, that he joined withal
the ruin and abolishing of sin. For as we are taught, 1. Ioh. 3.8. that
Christ came not to build up the kingdom of sin, but to destroy it: so Paul
does witness here that he in preaching the Gospel has restored true
righteousness, that sin might be destroyed. That is Christ.
Than was it very disagreeable, that of one and the self same, sin should
be both flayne and reuyued. By the Obiecting of this absurdity, he puts
away the slander.

19 For I by the Law.) Now follows the direct answer. That that ought
not to be imputed to Christ, which properlye is the work of the Law. for
there is no need of Christ to make void the righteousness of the Law:
because the Law it self does kill the Disciples thereof: as though he
should say, You deceive poor miserable men with a false imagination, as
though they should live by the law, and by that pretense you detayne them in
the Law: in the mean while you make the Gospel to be spyted, as though it
brought to naught the righteousness which we have by the Law. but it is
the Law it self which compels us to die to it. for whereas it threatens
destruction unto us and leueth nothing unto us but despair, by that means it
drives us from trusting to it. A more easy understanding of this place is to
be sought out of the seventh chapter to the Romans, for there Paul does
plainly describe, that no man lives to the law, but he unto whom the law
is dead, that is to say, idle and without working. or for as soon as the law
begins to live in us, it strikes us with a deadly wound whereby we perish:
and with all it inspireth life, sin being first dead. They therefore which
live unto the Law, have never felt the strength of the Law, no nor yet have
once tasted what the law means: for the law being truly understood, does
compel us to dye to it, and hereof is sin, and not of Christ.

To die to the Law, is either to renounce it and to be set at freedom from
the power and dominyon thereof, so that we have no confidence in it, nor
again that it hold us Captyues under the yoke of bondage: or else thus, for
that it alotteth us all to destruction, we can find no life in it. and this
latter sense is more convenient. For he denies Christ to be the author of
this evil, because the Law is more hurtful then profitable: but (he
affyrmeth) that there is included in the Law it self, the curse which kills
us. Whereof it follows, that that stroke or wound which is stricken by the
Law, is in deed deadlye: against this is set another kind of death being
lively, in the fellowship of the cross of Christ. And therefore he says
that he is crucified together with Christ, that he might begin to live.
That distinction that commonly has prevailed does darken the natural sense
and meaning: if they read I by the Law am dead to the Law that I might
live to Christ. but the contrary Text sounds better (namelye) I by the
Law am dead to the Law: and than by it self, that I might live to Christ
I am crucified vyith Christ.

That I might live to God) He shows that kind of death to be worthy the
wishing, whereof the false Apostles took occasion of spighte. for he
declares that we do not therefore dye to the Law that we should live to
sin, but to GOD. To live to GOD sometime is (taken) to frame our life after
his will: so that we study nothing else all our life long, but to be accepted
of him. but in this place, it is to live the life of GOD (if I may so say)
whereby the things opposite may answer the one the other. for by that
reason that it is said we dye unto the Law, by the same it is said that we
live unto GOD. In sum, Paul does admonish us that that death is not
mortal, but rather a cause of a better life: for God takes us out of the
Shipwreck of the Law, and by his grace restores us to a better life. I let
pass other expositions, me thinks this is the natural meaning of Paul.
Whereas he says he is crucified with Christ, he expresses the mean how we
being dead unto the Law live unto God: when as forsooth we being grafted into
the death of Christ, do draw an hidden power from thence, as a grafte does
from the root. Farthermore Christ has fastened to his cross the handwriting
of the Law which was against us. therefore we being crucified with Christ are
delivered from all the curses of the Law and guiltiness, he that goes about
to make this deliverance vain, does make void the cross of Christ. But let
us make account that we are not otherwise losed from the yoke of the Law, than
while we are made one with Christ, even as the grafte does not otherwise draw
moisture from the root, except it grow together into one nature (with it).

20. And I live not any more.) The name of death is always healthful to the
understanding of man. and therefore after he has taught that we are fastened
to the Cross together with Christ: he does add this that it brings also
unto us life. And also he does declare, what he meante before (by these words)
to live to God: that forsooth now he lives not by his own life, but that he
is so lived with the hidden virtue and power of Christ, that Christ may he
said to live and to flourish in him. For as the soul nourishes the body
(with life): so also does Christ inspire life into his members. A notable
sentence. That the faithful live without themselves, that is to say in
Christ. which cannot be but they must have a true and a substa^tiall
communicating with him. Finally Christ lives in us two manner of ways: One
life is when he governs us with his spirit, and does direct all our
doings. The other is, that he makes us pertakers of his righteousness: that
when we be not able in our selves, (yet) in him we may be acceptable unto
God. The first belongs to regeneration or new birth: the second belongs to
the free accepting of righteousness, of the which we may understand this
place (to mean): although, if any man had rather understand it of both, I
willingly will embrace it. In as much as I now live in the flesh*) There is
here almost no sentence which has not been torn with sundry expositions, as,
some expound flesh in this place to be the evil of nature corrupted. But Paul
does mean it more simply to be the bodily life. For the faithful by living in
the flesh, do nevertheless not live after the flesh, although it do also
comprehend the infirmities, in which we are now held enwrapped. Or else there
had been another objection in a readiness, A Paradox is a sentence or opinyon
strange and contrary to the opinyon of the most part.
1.20. He has placed us in heavenly things, etc. Also, Now ye are the
Citizens of the Saints, and of the household of God. Ephe. 2.19. Also to the
Philippians, 3.20 Our conversation is in heaven. Also to the Colossians, We are
dead, and our life is hid with Christ in God* to be short, Paul is full of
such testimonies, whereby he affirms that we do so live in the world, that
nevertheless we live also in heaven: not only because there is our head, but
also that by the right or interest of unity, we have a life common with him:
as S. John speaks, cap. 14. ver. 1. In the mean while let us note that here
he brings his reason from the nature of faith, that he may teach us that it
is no absurdity if that life be hid which is graffed or placed in faith:
because that thing which we hope for does not yet appear, that faith may be
named the knowledge of things invisible. Which has loved me. These words are
added to express the force of Faith, or else this thought would come into
every man's mind, Whence comes such virtue of faith that it should shead out
upon us the life of Christ? therefore the hypostasis whereon faith leans,
Substance or foundation.
does declare the love and death of Christ: for thereof is the effect of faith
to be estimated. How comes it to pass than that we live by the faith of
Christ? because he has loved us, and given himself for us. the love I say
wherewith Christ has embraced us, did cause that he did make himself one with
us, that has he done by his death: for in giving himself for us, he has
suffered no otherwise than in our person. and therefore whatsoever faith finds
in Christ, of the same it makes us partakers. Whereas he makes mention of
Love, he means that which is taught, 1. Ioh. 4.19. Not because we loved him
first, but that he has prevented us first with his love. For if he being
provoked with merits had redeemed us: the cause thereof would have been told.
but now Paul ascribes all unto love: it is therefore free or without merit.
For the order must be marked, He has loved us and given himself for us. which
is as much as if he had said, There was no other cause wherefore he
should dye, but because he loved us. and that at such time as we were his
enemies: as he teaches, Romans 5.10. And given himself.) We cannot well express
with any words how great a thing this is* for who can declare in words how
great the excellency of the Son of GOD is? he has appointed himself to
be the price to redeem us. Under the word (given) is included the whole
commodity which comes unto us by the death of Christ: that is to say,
that it is the Sacrifice of Purging, the Washing, Satisfaction, etc. Neither
have these words (for me) a small force in them, because it was not enough, to
consider or think that Christ died for the salvation of the world, except
every one do challenge priuatelye unto himself the effect and possession of
this grace.

21 I cast not away.) There is a great emphasis or vehemency in those
words: for what and how horrible unkindness is it to contemn so inestimable
grace of GOD, and purchase with so great a price? He accuses the false
Apostles of this sacrilege (which is robbing Christ of his honor) which
being not contence with Christ alone, do thrust in also other helps of
salvation. For the grace of GOD is refused, except that we renounce all other
things, and embrace Christ alone finallye what has a man left him, after he
has refused the grace of God and made himself unworthy of it? For if
righteousness.) Gratis which I have translated for nothing is taken for frustra
which is in vain; that is, there should be nothing much worth in the death of
Christ: or Christ died for nor reward. For this is the reward of (his) death,
that by purging of our sins, he has reconciled us unto his Father. hereof it
follows that by his grace we are justified, and therefore not by works. The
Papists interpret it of the ceremonial Law, but who sees not that it has
respect to the whole Law? for it is as much as Paul should say, If we
our selves deserve righteousness, than Christ has suffered in vain. for
therefore suffered he that he might obtain righteousness for us. and what
needs that to be gotten us of another, that we can give to our own
selves? Truly if the death of Christ be our redemption, than were we
Captives: if our satisfaction, than were we Debtors: if our purging, than
were we guilty: if our washing, than were we unclean. And so on the
contrary side he that does attribute unto works his cleanness, his
forgiveness, purging, righteousness, and deliverance: does make the death
of Christ vain. Here perhappe somebody will Object, against the holy Ghost,
let us try the matter with the Papists. They mock us, when according to Paul
we reason, That Christ dyed in vain if righteousness be by works* for they
think themselves armed with a trim answer, when they bring out of their
Sophisters, That Christ deserved for us the first grace, that is to say the
occasion of deserving: and that the merit of his death does concur (and
meet) together with the satisfactions of works, to the daily forgiveness of
sins. Let them than mock Paul, out of whose mouth we speak: for they must
confute him before they confute us. We know that he had to do with men which
did not utterly shut out the grace of Christ: but did place the one half of
salvation in works, against whom he reasons thus, Christ died in vain, if
righteousness be by the law: and in so doing he leaves not one drop of
righteousness unto works. The Papists differ not from them a whit, and
therefore it is lawful unto us also to use the argument or reason of Paul to
confute them.

The end of the second Chapter.
The third Chapter. 1 O foolish Galathians, who has bewitched you, that you
should not obey the truth? unto whom Jesus Christ is painted forth before
(your) eyes, being crucified among you.

2 This only will I learn of you, Have you received the Spirit by the works
of the law, or by the preaching of faith?

3 Are ye so foolish, that having begun in the spirit, ye will now be made up
in the flesh.

4 Have ye suffered so great things in vain? if yet also in vain.

5 He therefore that ministers unto you the spirit, and works in you
virtues: (does he that) by the works of the Law, or by the preaching of
the faith.


O Foolish.) Unto doctrine he ioineth, or rather puts in, chiding. If any
man does marvel why he deferred it not till the end: without dought those so
grave sentenses which he pronounced, stirred him suddenly to be angry. For
whereas we hear that the Son of God is rejected with all his goodness, and
that his death is accounted as nothing: what godly heart is not broken with
indignation. He pronounces them therefore (...) that is to say, out of their
wits, which suffered themselves to be enwrapped with so great sacrilege.
neither does he reprove them only for that they suffered themselves to be
deceived, but to be deluded as it were with a certain Magical enchauntment:
which is far worse. for he shows that their fall was more nigh unto
madness then foolishness. Some think that Paul had respect to the
disposition of the nation, for they having their original of Barbarians, were
to be handled the more hardlye: but I had rather refer it simply to the the
thing it self. for it is a wondrous thing, that in so great clearenesse of
the Gospel, there should as yet a place be open to the bewitchinges of the
Devil. For he does not therefore only say that they are bewitched and out of
their wits, because they obey not the truth: but because they being taught so
certainly, so manifestly, so familiarly, to be short so effectuallye, do
straight way fall away. Erasmus has the Verb Crederetis (Believed): the
which although I do not utterly reject, yet more agreeable to the Text is
that which I have used (namelye Obediatis, obayed): because Paul does not
accuse them, that in the beginning they refused the Gospel: but he chideth
them because they stood not steadfast in obaying it. Unto whom before the
eyes.) This belongs (as I have already touched) to augment their fault: for
the better known that Christ has been to us, so much the more grievous is
our fault of falling away (from him). He says therefore that the
perspicuitie or playnesse of his Doctrine has been so great that it has not
been so much a bare teaching, as a liuelye and express Image of Christ.
their knowledge then was such as might be compared to a seeing. The exposition
of Augustine is hard, and far from the mind of Paul, who says that
Christ was set forth as though he should be put out of possession, Some
read for Proescriptus, Whereof the Grecians call those tables Programmata,
wherein they show abroad such possessions as are to be sold, that the matter
might be apparent to the eyes of al men.
proscriptus, which word would not ill agree (to the purpose) if it be taken,
for, Set forth to open sale or spoil. But in the word depictus (painted out)
there is less ambiguitie or doubtfulnesse: and in my judgment it does very
well agree. for, that Paul may show how great the force of his preaching has
been, first he compares it to a picture or paynting, which has expressed to
them lively the image of Christ: after that being not content with this
similitude, he adds that Christ was crucified among them. Whereby he
means, that they should not have been more touched with the present sight
of the death of Christ, than with his preaching. for me thinks it is somewhat
hardly (expounded) of some, where they understand the Galathians to have
crucified again and mocked the Lord, when they went back from the purity of
the Gospel: or else had given ear and credit to those deceauers which had
crucified him. Let us therefore keep this sense that they were no otherwise
instructed of Christ by the doctrine of Paul, than if he had been showed them
in a table, nay rather crucified among them. Such a representation can be done
with no eloquence, with no colors of Rethoricians, except that efficacy of
the Spirit, of which has been spoken in both Epistles to the Corinthes, be
present. Therefore they which will duelye do their Office in the Ministry
of the Gospel, let them learn, not only to speak and preach often, but
also to pierce into the consciences, that Christ crucified may be perceived and
felt, and his blood may distill or drop into them. Where the Church has such
paynters, it does not any more need dead Images of Wood and Stone* it does
not require any payntinges or pictures* and then truly first of all among
Christians were the Doors of Temples opened to Images and pictures, when as
partlye the Pastors were dombe, and become mere Idols: partly they spoke a few
words out of the Pulpit so coldely and slightlye, that the force and efficacy
of the Ministry was vterly extinguished and put out.

2 This only will I know.) Now afresh he confirms his cause with reasons.
The first reason is, of their experience. for he brings them in mind what
manner of beginning the Gospel had with them. They received the Spirit as
soon as they heard the Gospel: therefore they ought to ascribe this
goodness as taken from faith, and not from the Law. Peter does use the same
argument or reason, when he excused himself before the brethren, that he
baptized those that were uncircumcised. And so does Paul himself and Barnabas
in the disputation which they had at Jerusalem about this matter. Act. 15.2.7.
It is manifest than that they are unthankful which yield not to the doctrine,
by the benefit whereof they received the holy Ghost. That he takes from them
the answer, is a sign not of doubting but of greater confidence in the
assurance (of his cause). for they were compelled to grant it to be true,
being co^uicted by their own experience. This Figure is Motonymya.
Faith in this place he figuratively calls ye gospel which else where he
calls ye doctrine of faith, To. 3.27. because yt in yt place is propounded
and set forth unto us yt mere favor of God in Christ, without desert of
works. The spirit I take in this place for the Grace of regeneration, which
is common to all faithful persons. although if any had rather take it for the
particular gifts, wherewith the Lord did than garnish the preaching of the
Gospel, it shall be free for them so to do for all me. Spirit was not given to
al after this faishon: I answer 1.13. After you heard the true Gospel of God,
you were sealed with the spirit. etc.

3 Are ye so foolish, that.) Here also it is doubtful, what he understands
by the Spirit, what by the flesh. the Interpreters do differ. It seems to
me that Paul alluded to that which he spoke of the Spirit: as if he should
have said, Seeing that the doctrine of the Gospel has brought unto you the
holy Ghost: your beginning than was spiritual. but now you are fallen into the
worst: even as they which from the Spirit fall into the flesh. Therefore he
uses this word Flesh either for extearne or outward things and those which
are frail and mortal, such as ceremonies are, specially when they are
separated from Christ: or else for dead and frail doctrine. for it is a foul
thing that they which have begun well, should not go forward well.

4 Have you suffered so great things.) Another reason: seeing that they have
suffered so many things in the behalf of the Gospel, that they should not
loose it all now in a moment. nay rather after the manner of vpbrayding them,
he asks if they will lose unto themselves so many notable onsets which they
have sustained for the faith. for except the right faith had been delivered unto
them of Paul, it was a point of rashness to suffer any thing for the defense
of an ill cause. but they had tried that God was present with them in
persecutions. he does therefore burden the false Apostles with envy, who
spoiled the Galathians of such precious ornaments. But to mittigate
bitterness, he adds, If yet in vain, to correct it: whereby he raises up
their minds: that they conceyuing the better hope might aspire to repentance
For this is the end of all chasteninges, not to hurl men headlong into
despair, but to encourage them to do better.

5 He therefore that ministers.) He speaks not now of the grace of
regeneration but of the other gifts of the spirit. for the order it self does
show that it is a contrary reason from the former: because he has but another
reason or argument between (them). He warns them than that all the gifts
of the holy Ghost wherewith they excelled be fruits of the Gospel, and the
same that was preached among them with his mouth. therefore they did spoil
themselves of those gifts, when as they left the Gospel and did fly to
another kind of Doctrine. Again look how much they esteemed those gifts, so
much also ought they to regard with tooth and nail to retain the Gospel. to
those kind of gifts he joins virtues, that is to say miracles.

6 Even as Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness.

7 Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, those are the sons of
Abraham.

8 For the scripture because it did foresee that God would justify the Gentiles
by faith, did before show glad Tidinges to Abraham (saying) in thee shall all
nations be blessed.

9 Therefore they which are of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham.

After that he has given them the overthrow, by the things themselves and by
experience, he passes to the Testimonies of the scripture. First of all he
brings the example of Abraham, although at all times arguments (taken from)
examples are not so firm, nevertheless this is most forcible: be cause
neither in the thing, nor yet in the person is there any difference: for there
are not many ways unto righteousness: and therefore is Abraham called the
father of all the faithful, because he is a common example unto them all. nay
rather in his person there is a general rule how to obtain righteousness
prescribed or set out unto us.

6 Even as.) Here must be understood these words, But rather: for when he
had asked the question, he would sodaynlye cut off the occasion of doubt. or
else the words Even as are referred only to that which is next before. that is
to say, that by the hearing of faith lhey had the ministration of the Spirit
and of virtues. as if he would say, that there shined in the grace given unto
them a similitude or likeness with Abraham. Believed God.) With this
Testimony he proves as well in this place, as in the fourth Chapter to the
Romans, that men are justified by faith: because Faith was imputed to Abraham
for righteousness. First brieflye is to be understood what Faith in this
place means with Paul: secondlye, what righteousness: thyrdlye, why faith
is deemed the cause of justification. Faith is not taken for every persuasion
which men may have of the truth of God. for be it that Caine had a hundred
times believed God when he told him he would punish him, he had not been
the nere to obtain righteousness. Abraham therefore was justified by
believing, because whereas he had of God a promise of his fatherly goodness,
he did certaynely and surely embrace the same. than Faith in this place has a
relation and respect unto such a word of GOD, as men having it (in
possession) may rest in it, and stick fast to it. As touching the word
Righteousness, the manner of speaking of Moses is to be marked. for whereas he
says, It was imputed to Abraham for righteousness, because he believed, he
declares thereby that he is righteous that is so taken with GOD. And whereas
men have not righteteousnesse laid up in themselves, they obtain the same by
imputation. because GOD does impute Faith unto them, for righteousness. We
are said than to be justified by Faith, not because faith does pour into us
an habit or quality: but because we are accepted before GOD. And why is there
so great honor attributed to faith, that it is called the cause of our
righteousness? First we must know, that it is the isntrumental cause
only: for, to speak properly, our righteousness is nothing else, but a free
accepting of GOD, in which lies the foundation of our salvation* but because
the Lord, in giving unto us a Testimony of his love and grace through the
Gospel, does communicate unto us that righteousness which I have spoken off:
therefore we take hold of it by faith. Therefore when we attribute man's
justification unto faith, we dispute not of the principal cause: but we note
only the manner whereby men come to true righteousness. For this
righteousness is the mere gift of God, and not a qualitye which sticks or
is in man: but is possessed only by Faith, neither yet that by the deserte or
merit of Faith, that it should be as a due reward: but because we receive by
Faith, that which GOD of his own accord and good will does give. therefore
all these speeches are of like force, That we are justified by the grace of
God, That Christ is our righteousness, That the mercy of GOD is the cause of
our righteousness, That righteousness is gotten unto us by the death and
resurrection of Christ, That righteousness is given unto us by the Gospel,
That we obtain righteousness by Faith. Whereby it appears how childishlye
they err, which would make these propositions agree together, We are
justified by Faith and Works both: for he that is just by Faith, he being
bare and void of his own righteousness, rests in the only grace of GOD.
And this is the reason why Paul to the Romans does conclude. that Abraham is
destytute of Glory before GOD, because he has obtained righteousness by
Faith, Romans 4.2. for it is not said that Faith was imputed unto him for part
of righteousness, but for righteousness simplye without more words*
therefore Faith was unto him in the whole for righteousness. Fynallye Faith
beholds nothing beside the mercy of GOD and Christ dead and raised again.
Therefore all merit of works is shut out from the cause of justification,
when as all is assigned to faith. For faith, for yt it contains in it self
the free goodness of God, Christ with all his good things, the testimony (and
witness) of our adoption which is given in the Gospel: is utterly opposite
and set against the law, the merits of works, and the worthiness of men. for
whereas the Sophisters do think that it is only set against ceremonies, the
order of the disputation or reasoning shall by and by with small ado thoroughly
reprove them. We must therefore bear in mind that they that are just by faith,
are just without themselves, that is, in Christ. whereby also the foolish
cauillation of some, which dally with Paul, is confuted: because (say they)
Moses calls righteousness goodness or honesty: and so it signifies nothing
else, but Abraham was accounted a good man because he believed God. Such
frantike sprites does Satan at these days raise up, to overthrow the
certayntie of the Scripture with crooked slanders as it were with mines, But
Paul, who knew that Moses in that place taught not children grammar, but that
he spoke of the judgment of God: did not without cause take the word
Righteousness after the manner of a Divine. for we are not deemed righteous
before GOD, after the like reason wherewith we have praise of goodness before
men: but when we bring perfect obedience of the Law. For righteousness is
opposite or set against the breaking of the Law, yea even in the least jot
or tittle. but because we have not it (I mean righteousness) of our selves,
God does freelye give it unto us. 17.1. Thy reward is exreeding great, Genesis
15.1. And in thy seed shall all nations be blessed, Genesis 22.17, 18. And
therefore when Abraham heard this, Thy seed shall be as the sand of the sea. etc.
he stayed not in that word, but rather he included it in the grace of adoption,
as the part in the whole. moreover whatsoever promise was given, he did not
otherwise receive the same than (as) a testimonye of the fatherly grace of God,
that thereby he might take sure confidence of salvation. For even in this do
the Children of God differ from the unbelievers, for that they in deed have
the use of God his benefits together with the children of God, but yet like
beasts they regard not that which is higher, but as for God his Children,
because they know all benefits to be sanctified by the promises of God, they
acknowledge him in them to be a father. So it comes to pass that they be
always directed to the hope of eternal life, because they begin from the
foundation, that is, from the faith of their adoption. Abraham then was not
justified because he believed God touching the multiplication of his seed
only; but because he embraced the grace of God, using the Mediator promised,
in whom all the promises of God are Yea and Amen, 2. Cor. 1.20. as also in
another place Paul teaches the same.

7 Know ye therefore.) or Ye know for the greek word agrees to both ways:
but because one sense remains, it skilleth not much whether way you read
it, but that the old translation, which I have followed, has more pith. To be
short he says that they are of faith, which renouncing the confidence of their
works, rest in the only promise of God. If any man ask who is our Author
that we so expound it: forsooth even Paul himself. for thus he writes to
the Romans. To him that works it is not given freely, but a reward is
rendered, Romans 4.4. and whereas nothing is due to him that has no work. says
is (to him) imputed for righteousness. Therefore to be Of faith is to place
their righteousness and confidence of salvation in the mercy of God. He
inforceth out of the former sentence that such are the Children of Abraham.
for if Abraham be justified by faith: whosoever will be his children, must in
like manner stand fast and stay themselves in faith. He passed over that which
was easilye understood, (namely) that there is no place for any in the
Church, who is not the child of Abraham.

8 The scriptures because he did foresee.) That which before he had spoken
indefinitely, now by name he stretches to the Gentiles: for the calling of
the Gentiles was a thing both new and unaccustomed. Therefore it was doubted of
the manner how they should be called. Circumcision and the observing of the Law
seemed requisite: or else that they should be shut out from the partaking of
the covenant. But Paul on the contrary part (teaches), that they attain or
come to the blessing by faith, and that by faith they are of Abraham's
household. How proves he that? because it is said In thee shall al nations
etc. these words without doubt has this meaning, Like as Abraham, so must all
be blessed. for he is a common example, nay rather a rule, and he got the
blessing by faith. faith is than ye way whereby all get it. There is therefore
a great emphasis or force in the word Faithful, for it is as much as if he
should say. Not with Abraham circumcised, or endowed with the works of the
law, or an Hebrew, or staying himself upon his own worthiness, but with
Abraham that obtained the blessing by faith only. for no quality of the person
is here accounted off, but faith only. The word blessing is diversely taken in
the scriptures: but in this place it is taken for the adoption into the
heritage of eternal life.

10 For whosoever are of the works of the Law, are under the curse. for it is
written, Cursed is every man that does not thorowlye abide in all things that
are written in the book of the Law, that he may do them.

18 And that no man is justified before God in the Law, it is manifest because
the just shall live by faith.

12 But the law is not of faith: but, The man that shall do these things,
shall live in them.

13 Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made for us a
curse, for it is written cursed is every one that has hanged on a tree.

14 That the blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles by Christ Jesus:
whereby we may receive the promise of the Spirit by faith.

10 Whosoever are under the works.) It is an argument or reason of contraries:
for out of one fountain does not spring hot and cold. The Law does shut in
all men under the curse. in vain than out of it is blessing sought. He calls
them that are under the works of the Law. those that do place their
confidence of salvation in them. for these manners of speaking ought always to
be referred to ye state of ye question. for we know that he disputes or
reasons here of the cause of righteousness. They therefore that will be
justified by the works of the law, he pronounces them all to be under the
curse. but how does he prove it? It is the sentence of the law, That all they
which transgress any part of the law are accursed Deu. 17.16. Now let us see
whether there be any one man that satisfies the law. but it is evident yt
there is not one found, neither can be found. therefore all, small and great
are (in this place condemned). Here want the Minor and Conclusion (of the
agreement): for this were the whole Syllogismus.

Mayor. Whosoever shall fail in any part of the law is accursed. Minor. But all
are holden guilty in this (point). Conclusion. Therefore all ar cursed.
Furthermore this argument of Paul would not stand if our strength would
serve to fulfill the law: for straight way in the Minor there would be given
an instance. Therefore either Paul does reason foolishly, or else it is
impossible for men to fulfill the law* by and by the adversary would catch hold
and say, I grant, That all transgressors are accursed* but what than? there
shall be found those that observe the law* for men have free choice of good and
evil. But Paul does put in this place out of controversy, that which the
Papists at these days do account as an accursed opinion: (namelye) that men
should be destitute of strength to observe the law. And so boldly he
concludes that al are accursed, because it is commanded unto al to keep the
lawfully and wholly. that is to say, because ability fails them in this
corruption of nature. Hereof we gather, in as much as the law accurseth, it
does it accidentlye, but that accidental is perpetual, and cannot be
separated (from us). for the corruption and faultiness of our nature does
separate us from the blessing that the Law sets forth unto us and therefore
the curse only remains.

11 And that no man is justified in the Law.) Again he reasons by comparing
of contraries, after this sort, If we be righteous by faith: than is it not by
the law but we are righteous by faith: and therefore not by the Law. He proves
the Minor by the testimony of Habacuc the which he also alleges 1. Romans 17.
He proves the Mayor by the diverse or contrary mean of justification. For
the law does then justify when as a man does fulfill whatsoever it
commands. but Faith does justify them which being destitute of the merits
of works, do rest upon Christ only. These two cannot come together at once: To
be justified by our own deserte, and, to be justified by another grace or
favor: therefore the one is overthrown of the other. This is the sum: now
let us touch every part. The just shall live by faith. Because I have
expounded this place of Abacuc. 2.4. in the Epistle to the Romans 1.17. it
shall not be now needful to repeat every thing that belongs to the
exposition thereof. the Prophet in that place does set the arrogant confidence
of the flesh opposite or against true faith, he pronounces that by it (namely
Faith) the just shall live: whereby he declares, that they are not sustained
only for a time, that they should fall when any storm came; but that they
stand for ever, so that they cease not to live even in the midst of death And
so gibers with their cauillations avail nothing, when they allege, that the
prophet in that place does take the word Faith more largely than Paul does
in this place, for simply without more ado he calls faith a quiet certentie
of the conscience, which leans upon God only. therefore Paul has aptly used
this testimony.

12 But the law is not of faith. Sure it is that the law is not repugnant (or
contrary) to faith: or else God should be unlike to himself: but we must
always respect this, that Paul speaks as the circumstaunce of the cause in
hand did require. Therefore the repugnancie or contrariety of the Law and
Faith, is in the cause of justification. for more easilye shall you couple fire
and water together, then make these two agree: Men are justified by Faith and,
Men are justified by the Law. The Law than is not of faith: that is to say it
has a way to justify men that is clean contrary from faith. But he that
shall do these things. The diversity is in this point, that a man by
fulfilling the law is accounted righteous by the righteousness of the Law,
which he proves by the testimony of Moises. Leuit. 18.5. And what shall be
the righteousness of faith? He defines it, Romans 10.9. If we believe Christ
to have dyed for our sins, etc. And yet notwithstanding it follows not
thereof, that either faith is idle, or that the faithful should cease from
good works. for the question is not in this place whether the faithful ought
to keep the law, so far forth as they can (which is not to be doubted) but
whether they obtain righteousness by works: the which is impossible.
Finallye if any object, Since God promises life to the doers of the Law,

13 Christ has redeemed us. He had made all who were under the law guilty to
the curse. And thereof sprang a great difficulty, for that the Jews could
not rid themselves from the curse of the Law* and therefore setting forth a
remedy, he resolves this doubt by teaching that we are delivered by christ.
whereby he does the more confirm his intent and purpose. For if we be
therefore saved because we are delivered from the curse of the law: than is
not righteousness by the law. afterward he ioineth the manner of
deliverance. It is written, cursed is every one which shall be hanged on Tree.
Deuteronomy. 21.23. Christ was hanged, therefore he went under that curse. and now
it is certainlye true that he suffered not this punishmente for his own cause:
it follows then, that either he was crucified in vain, or else that our
curse was laid upon him, that we might be losed from the same. And he says
not that Christ was cursed, but a curse, which is more, for he signifies that
the curse of all men, was included in him. If this seem hard unto any man let
him also be ashamed of the cross of Christ, in the confession whereof we
boast. neither was God ignorant what end (of death) his sons death should
be, when he pronounced this, Cursed is every one that shall hang on tree. But
some man will obiecte, 1 Corinthians. 1.18. to be wondered at even of the Angels:
which does not only overcome, but also swalowe up all the wisdom of the
world.

14 That the blessing of Abraham. He does more nerely apply to his purpose that
which he said, (namely) That we are delivered by Christ from the curse of
the Law: that is to say that the blessing promised to Abraham had the
foundation in him; and therefore to come to the Gentiles. For if the Jews must
be delivered from the Law, that they may be the heirs of Abraham, what shall
let the Gentiles that they should not obtain that same good thing? Moreover if
this blessing be in Christ alone, it is faith alone in Christ which makes
us partakers thereof. Whereby we may receive the promise. I take the promis of
the Spirit. to be spoken after the Hebrewe fashion, for spiritual promse*
for although this promise pertayne unto the new testament, I will pour out, of
my spirit upon all flesh, Esa. 44.3. yet Paul in this place respects
another thing. for he seems to me to set the Spirit opposite to all externe
or outward things: not to ceremonies only: but to carnal generation also: so
that in this place there is no respect of persons. Therefore he shows that by
the nature of the promise the Jews differ nothing from the Gentiles: because if
it be spiritual, it is received by faith only.

15 Brethren (I speak after the manner of men) although it be a man's
Testament.
couenante, yet if it be allowed, no man refuses it or adds any thing (to
it).

16 Furthermore unto Abraham are the promises Said.
appointed, and to his seed, he says not, and to seeds, as of many, but as
of one, And so thy seed which is Christ.

17 This I say, the law which began four hundred and thirty years after,
makes not void the Testament.
covenant allowed of God before toward Christ, that it should make the promise
of none effect.

18 For if the enheritaunce be by the law, than is it not new by promise, but
God gave it to Abraham by promise.

15 After the manner of men.) His will was to show them with this manner of
speaking. for it is too too heinous and filthy, that God should have less
authority among us than a mortal man, therefore in that that he requires
they should give no less authority to the holy covenant of God, than is
accustomed to be given to the common couenantes of men: he does not therein (I
say) make men and God equal. for he leaves to be considered of them how
much difference there is between God and men. Although it be a man's
covenant. It is an Argument from the less to the more. (that is) men's
contractes or Couenauntes are held firm without controversy: and how much
more ought that which God appoynteth? whereas the Latins have (in this place)
Testamentum, Paul has in the Greek (...) with which word oftentimes the
Greeks signify a Testament: and sometime also any contract or bargain.
Although the plural number is more used in the second sense. It skilleth not
much as touching this present place, whether you translate it a Contracte or a
testament. There is another reason in the Epistle to the Hebrews. 7.22. where
the Apostle without doubt does allude unto Testaments. in this place I had
rather take it simply for the Couenaunte which God made. for the similitude
with which the Apostle contendeth in this place, would not so properly agree
to a testament as to a covenant or bargayne. Let us therefore follow this,
that the Apostle makes his reason from men's couenaunts to that solemn
covenant which God did make with Abraham. for if they remain firm and
sure, so that nothing may be added (to them), how much more ought God his
Covenant to remayn inuiolate and unbroken.

16 Unto Abraham are the promises.) Before that he follow his argument, he
puts in somewhat of the substance of the covenant, that is that it is
stayed on Christ alone. and if so be that Christ be the foundation of the
covenant: it follows than that it is free, and that is it he means by the
word Promise, For as the Law has respect to men and their works: so the
promise has respect to the grace of God and faith. He says not, And to
seeds, That he may prove that God speaks there of Christ, he puts us in
mind that in the singular number there was some certain seed appointed. I
have often maruayled that the Christians when they saw this place trounced of
the Jews with so great frowardness, that they made not more diligent
resistaunce: for all do lightlye pass by it as by a peaceable country.
Notwithstanding their Objection has a great show* for whereas seed is a
Nowne collectiue: Paul seems to do foolishly, In Hebrew Zera, in Latin
Semen.
when he urges that one man is signified in this word, under which all the
offspring of Abraham is comprehended in the place lately cited, Thy seed shall
be as the Sand of the Sea, and as the stars of Heaven. and so, as though
they had found out our false dealing, they disdaynfullye triumph over us. And
so much the more do I maruayle than our Christians did in this place keep
silence: seeing that there wants not a firm defense to confute their
slander. for even in the sons of Abraham there began such a division that
the one of them was cut off out of the family. In Isaac shall thy seed be
called. Genesis 21.12. therefore Ismaell is not counted of. Let us come unto the
second degree will the Jews grant that the posterity of Esau is the
blessed seed? nay they will contend that their father (I mean Esau) was
wiped out: although he was the first begotten. and how many peoples came out
of the stock of Abraham, which obtain no place in this calling? At length
twelve Patriarchs, were so many heads or principals: not because they descended
of the lineage of Abraham, but because they were ordained by the special
election of God. for since the time that the ten trybes were led away
Captyue, how many thousands have so gone out of kind, that they obtain no
name in the seed of Abraham? Lastly the tribe of Judah also was in danger:
that the true succession of the blessing should not remain in a small people.
And so it was showed before of Esa. 10.21. The residue only shall be saved.
Hitherto I have spoken nothing which the Jews grant not. Let them therefore
answer me, how it happens that the thirteen Tribes, sprung of the twelve
Patriarchs, have been the seed of Abraham rather than the Ismaelites or
Idumeans? why do they alone now boast of this name, and reject other as an
adulterous seed? They will boast that they obtained it by their own desarte:
but the scripture on the contrary side cries out (against them) that it
depends all on God his calling, for always must there be recourse to that
prerogative, In Isaac shall thy seed be called. The continual force of this
prerogative ought to be of force even until Christ. for the Lord renewed the
promise made to Abraham, afterward in David, as in a long time after. Paul
therefore does not stand upon the singular number, to prove that this was
spoken of one man: but only to show that this word Seed rests upon one,
which is not only borne of Abraham according to the flesh: but also ordained
hereunto by the calling of God. and if the Jews deny this, they do nothing
else by their stubbornness but make themselves laughing stocks. But because
Paul gathers out of those same words also, that the covenant was begun
in Christ, or toward Christ: let us discourse what this manner of speaking
means, In they seed shall all Nations be blessed. The Jews cavil saying it
is a comparison:

17 The Law which began.) If we hearken to Origin and Hierome and all the
Papists: there will be nothing ado to overthrow this reason. For thus Paul
reasons, The promise was given to Abraham four hundred and thirty years
before the Law was given: therefore the law which came after, could not put
away the promise. and thereof he concludes that ceremonies are not necessary.
(thoroughly) to the vttermoste. For were it not for the controversy about
obtaining of righteousness, about merit of works: and snaring of the
consciences: ceremonies would well stand with the promise. What means than
this putting away of the promise, against which the Apostle contendeth?
because the deceauers did deny, salvation to have been promised freely unto
men, and to be obtained by faith* but they urge ceremonies as things necessary
to deserve (salvation): as by and by shall be seen. I return to the words of
Paul: The Law, says he, is after the promise: therefore it makes not it
void: for a covenant once confirmed ought to abide inviolate and unbroken.
Again I repeat it, Except you understand the promise to be freely given, the
sentence is more than needs. for the law and the promise disagree not, saving
in the cause of justification. because the law makes a man righteous by the
deserving of works, and the promise gives righteousness freelye. and he does
playnelye expound himself, when he names the covenant to have his
foundation in Christ. in the hand of Moses. the former was founded in Christ:
and therefore free. therefore the law stepping in could not bring to pass that
men could have salvation without grace: because by this means the promise
should be made of none effect. That the sense is thus, even that which
follows next of all does show.

18 If the inheritance be by the law.) Lest the adversaries should cavil,
saying that that which they taught, did not belong to the dissoluing or
abrogating the covenant of God: he preuenteth all their shifts affirming these
two to be contrary, namely, that salvation comes unto us by the Law, and by
the promise* who dare expound this of only ceremonies, seeing that Paul does
comprehend generallye all whatsoever is against the free promise? It is not
than to be doubted, but that he excludes all kind of works. and so he says
To. 4.14. If the inheritance be by the Law, faith is done away, and the
promise of none effect. Why so? because salvation should hang upon this
condition, If thou satisfy the Law. and therefore he does by and by conclude,
that (salvation) is of faith, that the promise may be certain. Let us
therefore dilligently remember why in the comparing of the promise and the
law, the putting of the one overthrows the other: namely because the promise
has respect unto faith, and the Law has respect unto works. Faith
receaueth that which is freelye given: but unto works reward is given. and
that is it which by and by he joins, GOD gave unto Abraham not requiring
the like recompense as it were, but promising freelye. for if you understand
it to be conditionally, this word Gave will never agree with it.

19 For what is the Law than? it was added because of transgressio^s, until
the seed should come to which it was promised, ordained by Angels in the hand
of a Mediator.

20 Furthermore a Mediator is not of one: but GOD is one.

21 Is the Law than against the Promises of God? God forbid. for if there had
been a Law given which might have made alive, than righteousness should have
been by the law indeed.

22 But the Scripture has shut all under sin, that the promise by the
faith of Jesus Christ, might be given to them which believe.

When we hear that the Law does nothing avail to bring righteousness, by
and by diverse cogitations come in our brains: either than that it is
unprofitable, or to no use, or contrary to the Covenant of GOD, or some such
like thing. yea rather that might come in mind: Why should we not say that
of the Law, which Jeremy chap. 31. ver. 31. has said of the new Testament,
that the latter was given to correct the weakness of the former doctrine.
Such Objections as these be, must Paul answer, if he would satisfy the
Galathians. First than he requires what the use of the Law is. for in as
much as it followed the promise, it seems that it ought to supplye that
which was wanting in it: and certaynely it was doubted hereof, whether that the
promise by it self were of none effect except it were helped of the Law. We
must mark that Paul speaks not only of the moral law, but of the whole
Ministry of Moses. which truly was proper to Moses. and that was to
prescribe a rule how to live, and Ceremonies whereby they might exercise
themselves in the service of GOD, and after that to join promises and
threatninges. And whereas many promises of Gods free mercy and of Christ are
included therein, which belong unto faith: that happens accidentally as it
were, and is taken from else where, as far forth as the Law is compared with
the Doctrine of grace. You must therefore bear in memory, that this is the
sum of the Questyon, Why, after the promise being made, does Moses step in
with that new covenant. He that does these things shall live in them. Deuteronomy.
4.1. Cursed is he that fulfilleth not all things. Deuteronomy. 27.26. does he it that
he might bring that which were better and perfecter?

19 Because of transgressions.) The use of the Law is manifold: but Paul
touches that alone, which served the turn present. For it was not his
purpose, to discourse how many ways the Law might profit men* whereof the
readers must be admonished. For I perceive many to be deceived herein, that
they allow no other profit for the Law to serve too, beside that which here
is noted. but Paul himself 2. Tim. 3. ver. 16. does apply the precepts of
the Law to Doctrine and exhortations. this than is not a full diffinition of
the use of the Law: and they do ill who do acknowledge no other thing in the
Law. What do these words because of transgressions mean? so also do the
Philosophers speak, that the Law is made to bridle evils. and so says the
old proverb, that Of ill manners sprung good Laws. But Paul has a deeper
meaning than the words seem to show. For his mind is that the law was
made, that it might make transgressions to appear playnelye: and by that
means it might constrayne men to confess their guiltiness. For as they do
naturallye favor and pardon themselves, (so) except they be urged by the
Law, they have sleepye consciences. and hereof is that saying of Paul. Before
the Law although sin were in the world, yet was it not imputed. Romans 5.13.
The Law came than to wake those which were a sleep* for this is the true
preparation unto Christ. By the Law says he, Romans 3.20. is the knowledge of
sin, Why? that sin might be above measure sinning. for so he answers
in the seventh chapter, and the thirteenth verse. The Law than is put for cause
of transgressions, that it might uncover them, or (as he says, Romans 5 20.)
that it make them abound. This manner of speech troubles Origin: but in
vain. for what absurdity is it if God do cite their consciences before his
tribunal seat, to humble them through guiltiness, who else would please
themselves in their evils? if he shake of that numnesse which overthrew all
feeling of his judgment? if he draw out into the light, sin, which like a
Thief lay hid in the Den of hypocrisy? transgressions are increased by the
Doctrine thereof, until the spirit of regeneration come, which writes it in
our heart. and this is not given by the Law, but is taken by faith. Therefore
the readers must bear in mind, that this saying of Paul is not
Philosophical or political: but that of the law it notes the end, which
always has been unknown to the world. Until the seed came.) If he have
respect of the seed in which the blessing had his foundation: than does he
take nothing away from the promise. for this Until is as much as though he
should say, In the mean space while the seed is looked for. whereof it
follows, that (the Law) ought to serve, and not to obtain the
principality. For so far forth it was appointed, that it might raise men up
to look and wait after Christ. The Jews were called the old people, in
respect of the Gentiles who were Gods new people.
and yet I do not yielde, that by the coming of Christ the whole law was
abrogate and done away. Neither means the Apostle so: but only that that
kind of gouernmente, that came in between [the promise and Christ's comming]
should take an end in Christ, who is the fulfilling of the promise. But I
will speak more hereof by and by. Ordained by Angels. It belongs to the
commendation of the law, that it was delivered by Angels. And Steven affirms
the same Acts 7.39. for where as some understand by Angels, Moses and Aaron
and the Priests: It is a point more niece then firm. Furthermore it is no
wonder, that unto Angels, by whom God does destribute all small things unto
us, this office is also joined, that they should be witnesses present at the
setting forth of the Law. In the hand of a Mediator.) To take the hand for
the ministry, is a thing often used: but whereas he made the Angels
ministers of bringing or setting out of the Law, I take the hand of a
Mediator, for the principality of the ministry, because he was the
principal of the Embassade: and had the Angels adjoined unto him as
Companions or writers. Some think this to be spoken of Moses, as though here
should be a comparison between Moses and Christ. I am rather of the opinyon of
the old writers, who expound it of Christ. for it shall straighte way appear
that this sense agrees better with the text. although I disagree in like manner
from the old writers in the signification of the name. for a Mediator in this
place is not, as they suppose, a Pacifier, as in 1. Tim. 2.5. but an intier
messenger in setting forth the law. Thus must we account, that there has been
no communicating or conference of God with men from the beginning of ye world
to this day, but that his everlasting wisdom or Son has wrought between
them, whereof it is said, 1. Pet. 1. ve. 11. that the holy Prophets spoke by
the spirit of Christ: and Paul makes him the Captain of the people in the
Wilderness, 1. Corinthians. 10. ver. 4. And certaynlye the Angel which appeared
unto Moses, Exodus 19.3. cannot be judged any other, seeing that he takes unto
himself the proper and essential name of God, which never is given unto
Creatures. As then he is the Mediator of reconciliation by whom we are
accepted unto GOD: as he is the Mediator of defense or safetye, by whom we
have access to call upon the Father: so has he been always the Mediator of
all doctrine, because God has always made himself known unto men by him.
And this he would by name express, that the Galathians might learn, that
he that is the foundation of the free Couenaunte, held also the chief place
in setting forth the Law.

20 Furthermore a Mediator is not of one.) Although some do Philosophicallye
discourse here in this place the double nature of Christ, as though Paul
meant, not of one Essence, yet that Paul speaks even of those that make the
contracte, That is of God being the one party, and men being the other party.
no man that is of sound judgment doubts. and thus they commonly expound
it, That there is no place for a Mediator, but whilst one part has to do
with another. but to what end he has put in this sentence, they leave for
the most part in suspense: when as nevertheless it is a place worthy
dilligentlye to be marked. It may be a Prolepsis whereby Paul preuenteth the
wicked cogitation of those that think God his counsel to be chaungeable. For
some man would say within himself, Then as men are accustomed to call back
their couenauntes, whereof it repents them: that it is even so done also with
the couenauntes that God makes. If thou follow this sense, which I spoke of,
than Paul in the former part [of the verse] should acknowledge men, who are
rhaungeable and unstable, to make one party in this covenant: but yet that
God notwithstanding does remain one, that is to say, stands to his promise,
and not alters according to the inconstauncie of man. But when I view all
things more nighlye, I judge rather the diversity between the Jews and the
Gentiles to be here noted. Christ than is not the Mediator of one: because the
state of them, with whom God by his aid makes covenant, is diverse and
contrary as touching the outward person. But Paul would not have the
covenant of God so to be esteemed, as though it were contrary to it self, or
chaungeable, according to the diversity of men. Now the words are apparent.
as in time past Christ has reconciled God unto the Jews, in making a
covenant (with them): so now also is the Mediator of the Gentiles. The Gentiles
differ much from the Jews: for by circumcision and ceremonies the wall was put
between them. they were nere unto God, when the Gentiles were far off, and
yet for all that, God cease not to be as good as his promise. And this is
brought to pass while Christ, bringing them to one God which before were at
variaunce between themselves, does make them to grow together into one body.
God than is one: because he remains always like himself, and with
perpetual hold keeps fast and sure that which once he has determined.

21 Is the Law than.) Although, after we know the assuredness and constancy
of Gods purpose, it be needful that we should withal determine, that those
things which come from him are not contrary one to another: yet this doubt
was to be resolved, for the apparaunce of contrariety which seemed between
the Law and the covenant of grace. It may also be an exclamation whereby
Paul, having taken away the doubt of speaking against it, might, as though he
had overcome in the cause, exclaim, inferring of that which went before, as a
matter out of doubt, Who now dare faigne disagreement between the law and the
promises? And yet this is no impediment, but that Paul in this place may
proceed to resolve the difficulties which as yet might come in place. Before
he answer to the question, he does after his manner take out of the way so
great an absurdity, that he might warn men how greatly Godly ears ought
to abhor, whatsoever is dispightfullye spoken against GOD. But herein is
another conning skill which is expedient to be noted* for he accuses the
adversaries of this crime, that they make GOD contrary to himself. For it is
manifest that the Law and the promises came from him* whosoever therefore
shall bring in any contraryetie to be between them, is a blasphemer against
GOD* but they are contrary if the law do justify. And so very fitlye does
Paul return against the adversaries, that which falsely and slanderously
they intended against him. For if there were a Law given.) The answer is
indirecte (as they say) which as yet does not plainly declare the agreemente
of the law and the promises: and yet it does contain it as far forth as is
sufficient to take away the disagreemente. At the first blushe you would say
that this sentence were clean came from the Text: and that it were nothing
worth to the soluing of the question: but it is not so. for than the law were
against the promises, if it had power to justify. for there should be two
contrary reasons or means of iustifiing man, and as it were two ways to
obtain righteousness disagreeing between themselves. And Paul takes this
from the law. so then the disagreement is taken away. I, says he, would
grant righteousness to be gotten by the law, if salvation might therein be
found.

22 The scripture has shut.) By the scripture he does principally mean the
Law it self. it does shut all men under guiltynesse: therefore it robs them
of righteousness, rather than gives them righteousness. It is a most firm
reason: Thou seek righteousness in the law: but the law it self, with the
whole scripture, leaves nothing unto men beside damnation: for it condemns
all men together with their works, of unrighteousness. who then shall live by
the Law? He alludeth to this, He that shall do these things shall live in
them. Deuteronomy. 4.1. Being, I say, shut out from that life by guiltiness, in
vain shall we seek salvation in the Law. In saying, all, he has expressed
more than if he had said all men: For he has comprehended not only men, but
whatsoever men have or may bring. That the promise by the faith, There is no
other remedy, but, putting off righteousness of works, to fly to the faith
of Christ. It is than a sure consequent: If works come into judgment, we are
all damned. therefore by the faith of Christ we obtain free righteousness.
But this sentence is full of noble comfort: for we are put in mind, that as
often as we hear in the Scripture that we are damned, we have help in Christ
prepared for us. so that we will go unto him. We are cast awayes although God
hold his peace. why then does he so often pronounce us cast-awayes? forsooth
that we should not perish with eternal destruction: but being shaken with
so horrible a judgment, and being at our wits end seek Christ by faith, by
whom we pass from death into life. In the word Promise there is a figure
called Metonymia, for that which contains is used for that which is contained.

23 For before faith came, we were kept under the law, being shut under faith
which was to be revealed.

24 Therefore the Law was our Scholemaister into Christ, that we should be
justified by faith.

25 But when Faith comes, we are no more under a Scholemaister.

26 For you are all the children of God, by Faith in Jesus Christ.

27 For whosoever you be that be baptized into Christ, you have put on Christ.

28 There is no Jew nor Greek, there is no Servant nor Freeeman, there is no
Male nor Female, for all you are one in Christ Jesus.

29 And if you be Christ's; you are then the seed of Abraham, and according to
the promise heirs.

23 Before faith came.) Here has he fuller diffinition of the question
propounded. for plainly does he expound, not only what the use of the law
is, but also why it was but for a season, because else it would always seem
an absurdity, that the law was given unto the Jews, from which the Gentiles
should be free. For if there be one Church of the Jews and the Gentiles, why
is the government diverse or contrary? from whence or by what right is this
new liberty, seeing that the Fathers had been under the subjection of the
law? therefore does he teach such a difference to be, which might not
hinder the unity and concord of the Church. The readers are again to be
admonished, that Paul speaks not of ceremonies only, nor yet of the law
moral apart by it self: but he comprehends all the government, wherewith the
Lord governed his people under the old Testament. For about this grew the
controversy, Whether the form of government instituted by Moses did avail to
the obtaining of righteousness. This Law does Paul compare first of all to a
prison or ward, after that to a Scholemayster, and with both similitudes does
he make it apparaunt, that the nature of the law was such, that it ought not
to be of force but for a certain time. Faith. He signifies the full
revealing of those things which than lay hidden, under the obscurenesse of the
shadows of the law. for he takes not away faith from the fathers who lived
under the Law. We have before seen of the faith of Abraham. the Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews makes mention of the ensamples of others in the
eleventh Chapter. to be short, the doctrine of Faith has testimonye from Moses
and all the Prophets: but because the clearenesse of faith did not than so
manifestly appear, therefore he calls the time of faith the time of the new
Testament, in way of comparison and not flatly. And that this was his meaning
he does by and by show, when he says that they were shut under faith, which
was to be revealed: for he testifies by these words, that they were pertakers
of the same faith, who were shut under the word of the Law. For the Law did
not keep them back from faith: but it did bridle them that they should not
wander out of the Limits of faith. and it is an ellegant allusion to that
which he had set down before, viz. That the scripture did shut all under
sin. As therefore they were besieged and held in on every side by the curse:
so had they a ward or defense against this siege, which might defend them
from the curse. wherefore he shows that the ward of the Law was in spirit
very free Faith at that time was not as yet revealed: not because the fathers
were void of al light, but because they had less light than we, for whereas
with them Christ was shadowed by ceremonies, as being absent: at these days
he is as it were set before us even to our face. so for the Glass which they
had to see him in, we at these days have the substance or thing it self.
Whatsoever therefore the obscurity of the Law was, yet the Fathers were not
ignoraunte in what way they ought to walk. for although the light about the
dawning be not so clear as it is about noone: yet those that are trauailers
tarry not till the son be full up, because it is enough for them to hold on
their journey. so their portion of light was unto them like the dauning, which
might guide them safely from all peril of error to eternal bliss.

24 Therefore the Law was our Scholemaister.) The second similitude which
declares the mind of Paul yet more clerelye. for also a Schoolemaister is
not appointed unto any for all their life: but is appointed only for the time
they be children, as appears by the Etymology or meaning of the word*
Pedagogies, is an instructor of a child.
moreover this belongs to the teaching of a child, that he may by childish
rudiments be prepared unto greater matters. Both which are agreeable under the
Law: for it had an age limttted which it might govern: moreover it ought to
move forward Disciples of it somewhat only, that they having passed the
principles thereof might proceed as it is fit for them that are at man's state.
Therefore he says Into Christ. for as a master of a Grammar Schole does
deliver the Boy framed by his diligence into the hands of him which may
furnishe him with higher learning: so the Law was a Grammar Scholemayster
which set over the Scholars entered by it, unto faith to be finished by it, as
it were unto Divinity. By this means Paul compares the Jews unto Children
or boys, but unto us he attributes man's state. But it is demanded what manner
of one, the doctrine or discipline of this Scholemaistership has been. First,
the Law by making the righteousness of God manifest, did reprehend them for
their own unrighteousness. for they might behold in the commandments of
God as it were in a glass, how far off they were from true righteousness. and
so they were put in mind, that righteousness was else where to be sought, The
like office had the promises of the law. For thus they ought to think with
themselves, If thou canste not obtain life by thy works otherwise then by
fulfilling of the Law, another new way is to be sought, for thy weakness
will never suffer thee to climb up thither: yea albeit thou art greatly
desirous and striuest, yet always shall thou be far from [hitting] the
mark. On the other side threatenings did urge them and stir them to seek to
escape the wrath and curse of GOD. nay rather they suffered them not to rest
till they had pricked them forth to ask the grace of Christ. To that purpose
tended all the ceremonies. for to what end were the sacrifices and washinges,
but that they might be excercised, in the continual thinking on their filth
and damnation? And now he that sees his uncleanness before his eyes, and has
set before him the representation of his death in an innocent beast: how shall
he take his rest quietly? how shall he not be moved to long after remedy? and
truly the ceremonies did avail not only to terrify and humble the
consciences, but also to raise them up into the faith of the Redeemer to come.
Whatsoever in the whole pomp of ceremonies was set before their eyes, they had
as it were a note or mark of Christ printed in it. To be short the Law was
nothing else, but a manifold kind of exercise, whereby the worshippers
thereof were lead by the hand unto Christ. That we should be justified by
Faith.) He has already taken perfection away from the Law, when he said
it was like to a Schoolemaystership, and it would make men perfect, if it
brought righteousness unto them. What remains than but that Faith come in
in place thereof? and it comes in place thereof, whilst it clotheth us. being
without righteousness of our own, with the righteousness of Christ, So
that saying is fulfilled, He has filled the hungrye with good things. Luke
1.53.

25 But when faith comes.) What the coming of faith is, I have alredie
showed: namely a more clear revealing of grace, after the veil of the temple
is rent in two, Math. 27.51. which we know was done when Christ was exhibited.
Therefore he affirms that childs age, which is to be governed by a
scholmaister, is not any more, under the kingdom of Christ: and therefore that
the Law has made an end of his office. Viz. of the Law.
and this is the other application of the similitude. For he took upon him to
prove these two things, that the Law was a preparation unto Christ, and that
it was but for a season. But here again a question is demanded, whether the
Law be so abrogated or done away, that it belongs nothing to us. I
answer, The Law, as far forth as it is the rule of good living, and a
Bridle wherewith we are healde back in the fear of the Lord, and a prick
to amend. the sluggishnesse of our flesh: to conclude, as far forth as it
is profitable to teach, to correct, to reprove, that the Faithful may be
instructed to every good work, is of no less force at this day, than in
time paste, and so to remain without touch. And how is it than done away?
I have already said, that Paul considers the Law with the qualities
thereof wherewith it is covered. and these are the qualities thereof, it
appoynteth reward unto works, and punishmente also: that is to say it
promises life to the worshippers thereof, it curses all transgressors: in the
mean while it requires of a man very high perfection, and exquisite
obedience: it forgets nothing, it pardons nothing, but calls all even
very small faults to account: it shows not Christ and his grace openly, but
it shows him a far off, and that shut up under Ceremonies, as under
Couers. Such qualities, I say, does Paul teach to be abolished, so that
already the ministry of Moses is ceased, so far forth as it differs in
outward show from the free covenant.

26 For you are all the sons of God) He proves with another reason, that it
were wrong and not agreeable that the Law should bind the faithful with
continual servitude or bondage, because forsooth they are the sons of God.
or else that were not sufficient which he said, that we were past child's
age: except this wear put to, that we are by condition free: For they are
servants still, although they ye never so old.
and age changes nothing in servants. he thereby proves freedom, because
they are the sons of God* how? by faith in Christ. for whosoever believe in
him, unto them is this prerogative given, to be the sons of God. And also
thereby it is brought to pass, that we are set at liberty by faith, seeing that
thereby we come into the adoption.

27 Whosoever you be that are baptized.) By how much as it is a thing greater
and higher, that we are the sons of God, so much the further off is it from
our understanding, and the hardlyer persuaded. And therefore the more briefly
does he admonish us how we be joined, or rather what unity we have with the
son of God, lest we should doubt, to make that which he has proper (unto
him) common unto us. He uses the similitude of apparel, when he says the
Galathians have put on Christ, but he means that they are so grafted in
Christ, that in the fight of God they bear the name and person of Christ,
and are deemed and taken rather in him than in themselves. This Metaphor or
similitude taken of Apparaile is usual, Upon the 13. to the To. ve. 14.
Objection.
and I have spoken of it else where. But it seems a weak reason, That they
have put on Christ because they are baptized. for how far of is it but that
Baptism is vneffectuous in all? This also should be an absurdity, for that so
the grace of the holy ghost should be tied to the outward sign. Therefore
this saying may by seeming be reproved as well by the perpetual doctrine of
the Scriptures, as by experience. I answer, Paul is accustomed to speak two
manner of ways of the Sacraments. with the signs according to the institution
of God. If any herevppon do enquire, May it be than by men's fault, that the
Sacrament is not that which it figureth? The answer is easy: Nothing is
taken away by means of the ungodly from the Sacraments, but that they
retain their nature and strength: although they (I mean the ungodly) feel no
effect. For the Sacraments offer the grace of God to the good and also the
bad, neither do they deceitfully promise the grace of the holy Ghost: the
faithful receive that which is offered: the ungodly, by refusing, do bring to
pass that that which was offered them does nothing profit them: and yet can
they not bring this to pass, but that God is faithful, and the signification
of the Sacrament true. Therefore not without cause does Paul whilst he
speaks to the faithful, say they have put on Christ in Baptism. as, Romans
6.5. he says we are grafted into his death, that we might be partakers also
of his resurrection. By this means neither is that which is proper unto God
passed over unto the sign, and yet the Sacraments have their force, least they
might be accounted for vain and fruitelesse gases. and we are admonished how
mischievous the unthankfulness of men is, whilst they make the healthsome
ordinances of God, by their abuse not only unprofitable unto them, but also
do turn them to their destruction.

28 There is no Jew.) The sense is, that in this case persons are of no force:
and therefore that it skilleth not of what Nation or state they be* nor that
Circumcision is of more valor tha^ sex or kind and civil state. why? For
Christ makes all one. howsoever therefore the other are diverse or unlike,
only Christ is sufficient to couple all together. Therefore he says you are
one: whereby he means that the difference is taken away. To this end te^deth
this speech. That neither the grace of adoption, nor the hope of salvation do
depend of the Law: but that they are contained in Christ alone. Only Christ
tha^ is al things. To put Greeks for Gentiles, and the specialtie for the
generaltie, is much used.

29 Then the seed of Abraham.) He did not therefore add this, because it was
greater to be the son of Abraham, then to be the member of Christ: but that
he might beat down the pride of the Jews, who boasted of their
prerogative, as though they alone were the people of God. They accounted
nothing more excellent than the kindred of Abraham. and therefore this same
very excellency he makes common to all them which believe in Christ. The
consequent leans upon this reason, that Christ is that blessed seed, in
whom all the children of Abraham are united: as it is said* and this he
prepares, because the enheritaunce is offered commonly unto al. whereof it
follows, that by promise they are numbered among the sons. And mark that
Faith is always relatiuelye joined with the promise.

The fourth Chapter. 1 And I say, as long as the heir is a child, he differs
nothing from a servant, whereas nevertheless he is Lord of all.

2 But he is under Tutors and governors, until the time determined of the
Father.

3 So also we when we were Children, were in bondage under the elements of the
world.

4 But when the fullness of time came, God sent his son, made of a woman,
brought under the Law.

5 That he might redeem them which came under the law, that we might receive
the adoption.


AND I say.) Whosoever he was that divided the Chapters, did ill pull away this
sentence from them which went before, whereas it is nothing else but a
finishing of yt went before, whereby Paul does declare and set forth the
difference which is between us and the old people. And that he does, whilst
he brings the third similitude of the Orphant and the guardian. The Orphant
although he be free, yea and also the Lord of his Fathers household, yet is he
like to a servant: because he is ruled by the government of tutors. And the
subjection to his tutor endures till the time appointed of his father, and
after that he enjoys his liberty. After this sort the Fathers under the old
testament, when as they were the sons of God, were free: but were not in
possession of freedom or liberty, because the law was unto them as it were a
tutor, which held them under the yoke. And this bondage lasted as long as it
seemed good unto God, who made an end thereof by the coming of Christ.
whereas Paul does make end the Tutorship at the only appoyntmente of the
Father, when as the Lawyers do reckon up more ways whereby the tutorship is
ended: he does it therefore because this way alone did agree with his
similitude. Now let us discourse every part. Some do apply this similitude
otherwise: namely unto every man: whereas Paul speaks of two peoples. I
grant, it is true that which they say, but it longs nothing unto the
present place. The elect, say they, although they be the sons of God ever from
their mothers womb, yet they abide under the law like unto servants, until
through faith they come into ye possession of liberty: but after that they
know Christ, they made no more this kind of Tutorship. But let me grant this,
yet deny I that Paul in this place speaks of every singular person: and I
deny that it puts difference between the time of infidelity and of the
calling unto faith, but hereof he entreats, whereas there is but one church
of God, how happens it that the state of us and the Isralites should be unlike
and contrary? whereas by faith we be free, how happens it that they who had
with us the same and like faith, shall not with us be enioyers of the same and
like liberty? whereas a like we are all the sons of God, how happens it
that we are free at this day from the yoke which they were compelled to bear?
hereof did grow the controversy and contention: and not (of his), how and in
what manner the Law has dominion over every one of us, before that by faith
we are set at freedom from the bondage thereof. Let this therefore be
determined above all, that Paul in this place does compare the Israeticall
Church, which was under the old testament, with the Christian Church: that
thereby it may appear wherein we agree, and wherein the one of us differ
from the other. This comparison contains a very plentiful doctrine, and the
same very profitable. First, hereof we gather, That the Fathers under ye old
testament had the same hope of inheritance, which we at this day have: because
they were partakers of the same adoption. for Paul teaches not (as some
braynsick fellows, and among others Seruetus, do dream) that they were for
this purpose only elected of God, that they should figure unto us some
certain people of God, but that with us they might be the sons of God: and
expressly he does testify, that the spiritual blessing promised to Abraham
does no less long unto them than unto us. Secondly we gather, that their
consciences were free nevertheless in that outward bondage. for the straight
tying to the keeping of the Law did not let Moses, Daniell, all ye godly Kings,
Priests and Prophets, and all the company of the Faithful, but that they were
free in Spirit. They carried than the yoke of the Law on their shoulders, so
that neuerthelater they might worship God with a free spirit: and cheefely
that, being instructed about the free forgiveness of sins, they might have
their conscience free from the tyranny of sin and death. Thereof we must
determine, that the doctrine has been always one and the same, and that they
were joined with us in a true unity of faith: yt they have enjoyed with us the
confidence of one Mediator, that they have called up God the Father, and that
they were governed with the self same Spirit. To all these it is agreeable,
that the difference between us and the old Fathers, is not in substance but
in accidents* for touching those things that are principal in the Testament or
covenant, in those things we agree. the ceremonies, and all that government,
in which we differ, are as it were additions. Moreover you must mark, that that
time was the child age of the Church. but now since Christ's coming the
Church is grown up, so that it is after a sort in the man age thereof. The
words of Paul are clear. but hereof grows some hardenes, because he
seems not to agree with himself. For to the Ephe. 4.13. he exhorts us to
go forward daily, until we come to a full age and the measure of fulness. And
to the Corinthians the first epistle. cap. 3.1. he mentions that he gave them
milk to drink, as unto children: because they could not brook strong meat.
and a little after he will compare the Galathians unto infants. I answer, that
there he speaks of every singular person, and of the private faith of every
man: but in this place he speaks of two bodies or companyes in a gross
sin, having no regard of the persons. This answer will serve to solue a
much harder question. For we see how incomparable the faith of Abraham was,
with how great light of understanding the holy Prophets excelled. with what
face than shall we dare set out our selves before them? are not they rather
noble Worthies, and we Boys? But let us pass over our selves. who among the
Galathians should be found like unto any one of them? but in this place, as
I have already said, he speaks not of every singular person, but the
general estate of both peoples is described. Some at the time were furnished
with more ample gifts, but they were but a few, it was not the whole body,
moreover, grant there were many, we are not to regard what they were within,
but what the gouernmente of GOD was in ruling and ordering them. but it is
manifest that it was a Scholemaystership, that is to say, a discipline for
Children. And what is it at this day? GOD having broken those bands, does
govern his Church more liberallye, and keeps it not under so straight a
word although we must by the way note also that notwithstanding they were
endowed with passing understanding yet it sauoured of the nature of the time,
so that in the knowledge which they had, there remained somewhat always
dark like a cloud. Upon which occasion are these words of Christ, Blessed
are the eyes which see those things that you see. many Kings and Prophets
have desired to see those things, and yet have not seen them. etc. Luke
10.23. Now we perceive how we be preferred before them, which passed us very
far. Neither is that attributed to the persons, but the whole depends upon
the rule of Gods government. This is a most forcible engine to hurl down all
the pompes of ceremonies, with which alone the Papacye glittereth. For what
other thing at this day does dazell ye eyes of simple people to have in high
estimation the kingdom of the Pope, or at the least wise to be moved with any
reverence thereof, were it not for that pompous show of ceremonies, customs,
gestures, and all kind of service, devised for this purpose to amase the
unlearned? but by this place it is manifest yt they are deceites counterfeited,
with which the Church of God is deformed. I speak not now of greater faults, and
which are more to be detested, of which sort is this, that they fayn the^ to be
the serving of God. Also yt they imagine the^ to avail to deserve salvation.
also yt the observation of such trifles is exacted with more severity, than the
observation of the whole law of God. I only touch yt excuse, wherewith the new
craftsmen, Papists he means.
cover so many abominations, as it were with a fair bewtifull color. Let
them, I say, object, as they will, that there is this day more rudeness and
ignorance in many, that in times past was in the Israelits: and that therefore
they had need of many helps. they shall never prove thereby, that they must
be governed with the like Scholemaystership, as was in force among the people
of Israel. for on the otherside I will always set this against them, that the
ordinance of God is otherwise. If they say it is expedient or needful, I will
say to them that they cannot better judge what is expedient, than God himself.
let us rather hold this as a certentie, that that is not only very good but
also very profitable. that God has decreede. wherefore unto ye unlearned there
are helps to be sought, not such as it has liked men of their own heads to
invent: but such as God himself has appointed, who without doubt has let
pass nothing that was meet to help the infirmity of his. Let this one
Buckler suffice to fend of all Objections, It seemed good unto God otherwise,
whose counsel may serve in steed of all reasons* except perhaps that men can
devise better helps, than those which God himself has provided: which
afterward he has done away as little worth. And here mark dilligentlye,
that Paul in this place does not only teach that the yoke which was laid
upon the Jews, is already taken from us, that now the use of ceremonies
might be free to us: but by name does put a difference of Government, that
GOD would have kept. I do grant in deed, that at this day all outward
things are free unto us: but so that the Church be not burdened with a
multitude of Ceremonies, except we would mingle Christianisme with Iudaisme.
I will show the reason afterward in his place.

3 Under the Elements of the world. etc.) Elements he calls either by
their proper name outward and bodilye things, or else Metaphoricallye,
rudimentes. I allow better of the second. But why says he they are of the
world, which had a spiritual meaning? it is as much as if he should have
said, We had not the truth bare and naked, but wrapped in earthlye figures he
teaches than, that that which was outward, was of the world, although there
were under it a heavenly mystery.

4 When the fullness came.) He proceeds in the similitude which he begone
with, and does apply unto his purpose the time determined of the Father. and
yet withal he shows, that that time which was ordained by Gods providence
was a ripe time and a seasonable. That therefore is a just opportunity and the
right dispensation of doing, which is governed by the providence of GOD. So it
belonged unto GOD alone to judge and determine, when it was expediente for the
Son to be revealed unto the world, whereby is restrained all curiosity,
that not any man, (who is not satisfied with the secret counsel of God) shall
dare move contention why Christ has not sooner appeared. Let the readers, if
they will know more, seek in the end of the Epistle to the Romans. God
has sent his son. Here in few words he has comprehended many things* for
the son which was sent must have been before* whereby is proved his eternal
Godhed. Christ than is the son of God, sent out of heaven. He says that he
was made of a woman, because he put on our nature. and so he makes it known
that he consists of two natures. Some Books have, borne: but that other
reading (I mean made) is more used, and, in my judgment, more agreeable. For
he would by name discern Christ from all other men: because he was made of
the seed of his mother, and not by the carnal copulation of man and woman. or
else this were Raye cold, and put in without cause. Of a Woman: this word is
generallye referred to the sex or kind. Brought under the law, word for
word it is thus. Made under the Law* but my mind was to set forth ye meaning
more familiarly. Christ therefore the son of God, who by right should have
been free from all subjection, was subject to the Law why? in our behalf that
he might purchase liberty unto us. For as he which was free does redeem a
captive, by making himself a pledge: and by putting on yrons, does put them
off from the other: so Christ would be in dangered to keep the Law, that he
might purchase unto us freedom or else in vain had he gone under the yoke of
the law. for certainly he did it not for his own sake. Furdermore we are not
so exempt by Christ's benefit from ye law, that we owe no more obedience to the
doctrine of the law, but that we may do what we list. for it is a perpetual
lesson to teach us to live well and holyly. But Paul speaks of the Law with
the appurtenances thereof. We are redeemed from the subjection of that law,
because it is not any more as it was. For liberty appeared openly, after the
veil was rent. and yt is it that straightway he adds.

5 That we might receive the adoption. For the fathers were assured of their
adoption under the old Testament, but they did not by their title so fully
enjoy it. Adoption in this place is taken as it is To. 8.23. Redemption, is
taken for the possession it self. For as in the last day we shall perceive and
take ye fruit of our redemption; so now we perceive the fruit of adoption, of
which the holy Fathers before Christ's coming were not possessed. They than
which now do burden the church with moderate ceremonies, do wrongfully defraud
it of the due right of adoption.

6 Now because you be sons, God has sent the Spirit of his son into your
hearts, crying Abba Father.

7 Therefore thou art no longer a servant, but a son. if thou be a son,
thou art also an heir of God by Christ.

8 But than when as yet ye knew not God, you served those things which by
nature are no Gods.

9 But now after ye have known God, or rather have been known of God: how are
you turned again to weak and beggarly elements, which you are willing again
to serve afresh?

10 Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years.

11 I am afraid for you, least happilye I have labored among you in vain.

6 Because you be sons.) He shows that the adoption which he speaks of,
belongs unto the Galathians, by an argument or reason gathered of the
consequent or thing following. For, to be adopted of God, goes before this, To
have the testimony of adoption, of the Spirit of God: but the effect is the
token of the cause. The spirit of Christ* says he, is the Author unto you,
and perswader to enbolden you to call God Father. than is it certain that you
are the sons of God. He means that which he often teaches 1. Cor. 1.22.
and 5.5. That the Spirit is unto us an earnest and guage of our salvation,
that we may be certaynlye persuaded of the fatherlye affection of God to us
ward. But some man will object, Do not ye wicked break out to that point of
rashness, that they boast God to be their Father? nay rather falsely with great
boldness do they often times boast in God I answer, Paul does not here speak
of vain boasting, nor of that which a man does arrogate unto himself by his
own spirit: but of the testimonye of a Godly conscience. which follows new
regeneration. Therefore this argument cannot be of force but among the
faithful: because the reprobates have no taste of the certainty hereof* as the
Lord himself witnesses: The Spirit of truth, says he, which the world
cannot receive because it knows him not. Ioh. 14.17. And thus much do these
words of Paul sound, God has sent (the spirit) into your hearts. For his
mind was not to teach what they foolishly presume through their carnal
reason, but what God within in the heart does witness by his spirit. This
also does better agree with the circumstaunce of the place, that he says the
Spirit of the Son of God, than if he had used any other epithete or title.
For therefore are we sons, Epitheton. i. a word more amply declaring the
meaning of that word unto which it is annexed.
because we are endowed with the same Spirit that the only son is endowed
with. And mark that Paul does attribute this alike to all Christians, as in
very deed there is no faith, whereas this guage of the love of God toward us,
is not. Hereof appears what christianity is among the Papists, whereas they
condemn a man of wicked presumption, if he say he has the Spirit of God.
For they imagine a faith without the spirit of God and without certainty.
This one opinyon is a notable proof, that the Diuill the father of infidelity
reigns in all the Schools of Papists. I grant in deed that the Scholemen,
when they will have the consciences to waver with continual doubting, teach
nothing else, but that which natural reason does show* and therefore must we
the more dilligently print in our minds this lesson of Paul, That No man is a
Christian but he that being taught in the schole of the holy Ghost calls upon
God as Father. Crying.) I do suppose he used this participle Crying to
express the greater confidence. for doubtfulnesse suffers us not to speak
boldlye, but holds our jaws shut as it were, so that scante half broken
words come out from our staggering tongue. on the other side crying, is a
token of security, and of confidence that wauereth not. For we have not
again received the spirit of bondage to fear (as he says. Romans 8.15.) but
of liberty to full assurance. Abba Father.) I doubt not but it means, that
the calling upon God is common to all tongues* for that properlye belongs to
this present argument, that God has the name of Father among both Hebrews and
Greeks, as it was prophicied before of Esaias 45.23. Every tongue shall confess
unto my name. Therefore whereas the Gentiles are accounted among the sons of
God, it is apparent that the adoption comes not of the merit of the law, but
by grace of faith.

7 Therefore thou art no longer a servant.) That is to say, there is not any
more bondage in the Christian Church, but a free estate of Children. How the
Fathers under the Law were servants, has already been said: namely because
their liberty was not yet revealed, but it was shut under the folds and yoke
of the law. He speaks again than of the difference of the old and new
Testament. The old Fathers were also the sons of God, and heirs by Christ*
but we are so after another sort: because we have Christ present, and
therefore we have the use of his riches. He prosecuteth this whole matter more
largely in the Epistle to the Romans, where you may seek that which here I
let pass, because I have there spoken of it.

8 When as yet ye knew not.) By this he does not so much teach, as reprove.
and surely he has already abundantly proved that which he would (prove), so
that his reprehensions cannot be frustrated, as though the matter were
doubtful. Furdermore he directs his purpose to this point, that by comparing
of the time past, he might make their present fall appear greater. whereas in
time past says he, ye did worship as Gods those which were not Gods, it is no
great maruayle: because whereas the ignorance of God is, there is horrible
blindness. at such time therefore ye wandered in darkness: but now at this
time in the midst of light how detestable a thing is it so foully to go out of
the way? It follows than, that the Galathians in the corrupting of the
Gospel were less to be excused, than they were in time past in time of
Idolatry. these are the contents. But here is to be noted, before we be
lightened into the knowledge of one God, that we always serve Idols: with what
color soever we cover (our) false religion. Wherefore needful it is that
sure knowledge must go before the lawful service of God. Nature is put here
in this place for the thing it self, or else the substance. For whatsoever
men imagine of God, it is but a feigned device, and nothing* and therefore al
Idols by opinion are Gods: but in very deed they are nothing.

9 Now after you have known.) It cannot be sufficiently expressed in words,
how foul an ingratitude it is, to shrink away from God. after we have once
known him. For what is it willingly to leave the light, the life, and
welspring of all goodness? as he complayneth by Iere. 2.13. He does yet
moreover enlarge their fault, when he says in correcting wise, Or rather ye
are known, for how much greater ye grace of God is to us ward, so much is our
fault more grievous, if we contemn it. Paul than puts the Galathians in
mind, from whence the knowledge of God came to them. He does deny the same to
be gotten by them of their own force, or by the sharpness of their own
wit, or by their industry: but because God by his mercy prevented them, when
they thought on nothing less than of him. But that which is spoken of the
Galatians, belongs as well to all for that saying of Esaias. 6 5. I am found of
them that sought me not: I have appeared manifestlye to them which asked not
after me, is fulfilled in all. Therefore the beginning of our vocation or
calling, is the free election of God, wherewith he does predestinate us unto
life, before we be born. hereof depends our vocation, our faith, and the
whole perfection of salvation. How are ye turned again.) They could never be
again turned unto ceremonies, unto which they were never used. he has used
this word therefore improperly, only meaning thereby that it was too too
fond a thing, to fall again to wicked superstitions, as though they had never
received the truth of God. In that he calls the ceremonies beggarlye
elements, he does it therefore because he considers them to be without
Christ, or rather against Christ. for they were not only whole some excercises
and helps of piety unto the Fathers, but also effectual instruments of
grace. but all the force (of them) was in Christ, and in the institution of
God. but the false Apostles, not regarding the promises, minded to oppose or
set them against Christ: as though Christ alone were not sufficient. It is no
maruayle than though Paul do repute them as trifles and things of naught,
whereof I have spoken somewhat before. With this word Serve he checketh the
necessity.

10 Ye observe days.) He mentions one kind of Elements, for examples sake,
namely the observing of days. Here is to be noted that in this place the
civil observation of times, which is joined with the course of nature is not
condemned. Finallye the course of nature is fixed and perpetual. for whereof
comes the reckoning of months and years, but by the going about of the
son and the Moon? what does make difference between summer and winter,
spring and autumn, but the ordinance of God? He has promised once that it
shall continue even unto the worlds end. Genesis 9.13. And now civil observing
(of days) serves as well to husbandry, as to political and household
government: yea it is also extended to the gouernmente of the Church. What
observation than was it that Paul disalloweth? forsooth that which might
discern day from day, as he says, Romans 14. When therefore proper holiness
is attributed to the days by themselves, when one day is discerned from
another for cause of religion, when a part of a holy day is deemed a
worshippping of God: than days are naughtilye observed. The false Apostles
than did enforce the Sabbath and new Moons, and the other festival days:
because they were observations of the Law. we at this day whereas we have
difference of days, put not on a snare of necessity unto the consciences, we
do not discearne between days, as though one were holier then another, we do
not place in them religion and the worshipping of God: but only we have regard
unto order and concord. So observing (of days) is amongste us free and clean
from all superstition.

11 I am afraid lest I have labored in vain.) This is a hard saying, and
such a one as ought wonderfully to abash the Galathians* for what hope had they
left if Paul's labor were in vain? But some do maruayle that Paul was so
greatly moved with the observation of days, that he calls it the
overthrow of almost the whole Gospel* but we if we way all things
rightly, shall see the cause to have been just. The false Apostles did not
only practice to put the Iewishe bondage upon the necks of the congregation:
but they cloyed their minds also with superstitions. Now this was no small
evil that Christians were driven to be Jewish, but this plague was much more
harmefull, that they set up holy days, as meritorious works, astainst the
grace of Christ: that they devised God to be served and pleased by this mean.
If ye receive these things the service of God is corrupted, the grace of
Christ made of none effect, the liberty of consciences oppressed. Do we
marvel if Paul be afraid least he have labored in vain? for what fruit
should there be any more of the gospel? but whereas at this day such impiety
reigns in the Papacy, What manner of Christ is there, and what Gospel
remains there? In exacting the observing of days, they are no less severe,
as far forth as belongs to bind the consciences, than Moses. They include
the worshipping of God in holy days, no less than the false Apostles* and
they apply to them also a diuilishe opinion of deserving (in them): Their
causes than are like: but in this respect the Papists have the worse: because
the Jews would have to be kept such days as have been appointed by the law of
God: and they command such days, as rashlye of their own receiving they have
appointed to be kept sacred and holy.

12 Be ye as I, because I am as you. Brethren, I desire you: You have done me
no injury.

13 You know that through the infirmity of the flesh, I have preached the
gospel unto you already.

14 And you have not despised nor refused the trial of me which was in my
flesh, but as an Angel of God you received me, as Christ Jesus.

15 Where is than your blessedness? for I give testimony unto you, that if it
had been possible, you would have plucked your eyes out, and have given the^
me.

16 Am I then made an enemy unto you by speaking the truth?

17 They are ielous over you, but not well: yea they mind to shut you out that
you might follow them.

18 But it is good to be jealous in that which is good always, and not only
when I am present among you.

19 My little Children, whom I am in travail of again, until Christ be shaped
in you.

20 I would now be present with you, and change my voice because I am
sorrowful in you.

12 Be you as I.) Now by fair speaking unto them, he mittigateth the
roughness which he used. For although he did not hardly enough inuey against
them, according as the greatness of the matter required: yet because he minded
to do them good, he frames his speech to the end to reconcile or win their
hearts. This is the duty of a wise Pastor, not to regard what they deserve who
have gone amiss, but what is meet for them to bring them into the way again.
Therefore he ought to rebuke in season and out of season, but yet with all
gentleness and patience, as the same Paul commands, 2. Tim. 4.2. According
to his reason, he falls from chidinges to intreatinges, I desire you, says
he, and he names the^ Brethren, yt they may understand, they were not
reprochfully in any wise vpbraided. But what means this, Be ye as I? it is
referred to affection. For his mind is, seeing he bends his goodwil to them
ward, that they should do the like. When therefore I am as you, that is to
say, when I seek nothing else but to show my self pleasurable unto you: so
is it meet that you should bend your selves to be governed, that you may in
like manner show your selves unto me, ready to learn, and also obedient. And
here again are Pastors put in mind of their duty: that as much as they may,
they apply themselves to the people, and conform themselves (as they say) to
their di^^ositions with whom they live, if they will have them obedient. For
this is always in force, Love that thou may be beloved. You have done me no
injury.) He reckons the suspicion, which might make the forenamed chidinges
hateful. for if we suppose a man to handle his own injuries, or to revenge
his own grief: from such an one our minds are utterly turned away, so that
whatsoever he says, it is wrested to a wrong meaning. Therefore Paul does
prevent the Galathians with this prevention, as touching that which privately
belongs unto me, I have no cause to complain of you. Therefore I chide not
so with you in respect of mine own cause, or for that I am offended with you*
and therefore if I be somewhat round with you, I do it because I must do it,
and not through hatred and anger.

13 Ye know that by the infirmity.) He brings them in remembrance after
what sort, that is to say, how friendlye and honorably he was received of
them. and that for two causes. first that they may understand that they are
beloved of him, and that so they might with indifferent ears allow of
whatsoever he should speak. secondlye that they might go forward in their
course well begone. The mentioning of this than, first of all is a testimonye
of good will: secondlye it is in steed of an exhortation, by means whereof
the last may counteruayle the first. By infirmity of the flesh, he means
(as else where he does) whatsoever might make him of no reputation and
contemned. For the flesh signifies the outward show: and Infirmity
signifies baseness. such was the coming of Paul, without pomp, without
boasting, without the glory and dignity of the world: but as an abject, and of
no account in the sight of men. And yet all that let not the Galatia^s, but
yt they received him with very great honor. This circumstaunce avails much
to the purpose. for what was it that they should extol and reverence in Paul,
beside the only power and virtue of the holy Ghost? and with what color or
pretense now will they begin to contemn it? moreover they are reproved of
inco^stancie, because no new thing has happened unto Paul, why they should
set less by him than they did. But he leaves these things to be considered of
them. only he does after a sort give them an occasion to think upon them. The
trial of me. That is to say, although you did behold a man according to the
world contemptible, yet you refused him not. He calls it a trial or
proof, because the matter was neither unknown, nor obscure, nor yet of him
dissembled: as men desirous of glory are accustomed, who are ashamed of their
baseness. For it often chances that even unto the unworthy there are given
great welcoms, before that their bareness be espied: but within three days
after that, they are sent away filthilye and with shame enough. but in Paul
the matter was clean otherwise, he beguiled the Galathians with no
legerdemayne, but like Tom tell troth he told what he was. As an Angel of
God. Namely in such reputation as every true Minister of Christ ought to be
taken, for as God by the means of the Angels does destribute his graces unto
us: so also by means of God, are godly ministers raised up, who minister unto
us that good thing which above al things is ye most excellent, namely ye
doctrine of eternal salvation. and therefore not without cause are they
compared to Angels, by whose hands God disposes unto us such a treasure.
moreover they are verily and in dead the messengers of God, by whose mouth
God speaks unto us. And this reason is had in Mala. 2.7. He goes as yet
higher by adding (these words) As Christ Jesus. for the Lord himself also
has commanded that his ministers shall be no otherwise accounted of, then
himself. He that hears you hears me: he that dispiseth you dispiseth me.
Luke 10.16. and no marvel. for they do their embassade for Christ. And
therefore they bear his person, whose turn they supply. With such titles or
elogies is the majesty of the Gospel commanded unto us: and the ministry
thereof garnished. Wherefore if according to the commandment of Christ,
ministers are so to be honored, it is certain and sure that the despising of
them comes by the instigation of the devil. and surely they cannot be
despised, so long as the word is had in estimation. But in vain do the
Papists by this pretense extol themselves. for whereas they are the manifest
enemies of Christ, what a toye is it, that they take the feathers of the
servants of Christ, to set out themselves withal? therefore they that will be
reverenced as Angels, must do the office of Angels, they that will be heard as
Christ, let them faithful bring unto us his pure word.

15 Where is your blessedness? He does show that than they were blessed, who
embraced the instrument of their blessedness with so Godly an affection: and
that now they are miserable, who suffer themselves to be robbed of his
ministry, unto whom they should ascribe whatsoever they received that was
Christ's. His mind is with this admonition to prick them. what? shall all this
be lost? shall it nothing avail you that you have in time past acknowledged
Christ speaking by me? were you in vain founded by me in the faith? shall your
shrinking away now, put out the glory of your obedience before God? The sum
hereof is, that by contempt of the pure doctrine, which they had embraced,
they would willinglye cast away that blessedness, which they had obtained,
and purchase to themselves destruction, whereby they should miserably perish.
I give you testimony. It is not sufficient to give reverence unto Pastors,
except they be also loved, for these two are necessary: because else the taste
of the doctrine would not be pleasant. he testifies that both was in the
Galathians. I have spoken already of the reverence: now concearning the love.
for it is a token of rare love, to pluck out their eyes, if need be, because
it is more than to spend a man's life.

16 By speaking the truth.) Now he comes to himself, and denies that it was
long of him, that they changed their minds. Although it be a common proverb,
Truth gets hatred: yet is it not hateful, but through the malice and
wickedness of them which will not abide to hear it: he purges himself than
of the fault of estranging, so that after a sort he nippeth their
unthankfulness. And yet it is withal a friendly admonition, that they should
not rashly and without cause reject his Apostleship, which before they dearly
loved: and that because they knew it deserved to be loved. For what thing can
there be worse tha^ because we hate the truth, of friends to become enemies?
and therefore has he said thus much, not so greatly to vpbrayde them as to
warn the^, to the end they may come to themselves again. 17 They are ielous
over you.) At length he comes to the false Apostles, whom he deciphreth
more hatefully by scilence, tha^ if by name he had uttered the^. for we are
accustomed to speak of the^ and suppress their names, whom to name it is
grievous and irksom. He admonishes the Galathia^s of the preposterous ambition
of the^: because they might deceive them under the color of zeal. And he
borrows a similitude of wooers, which woo maidens not chastely nor with
honest love, but yt they may abuse the^ after their lust. Let it not deceive
you yt they be suitors unto you or woe you: for they do it not of a right zeal
but of a wicked lust to get a name. that is contrary to holy jealousy whereof
mention is made, 2. Cor. 11.2. Rather to shut you out.) He augmenteth as yet
their preposterous deceits in correcting wise, They go not about only to catch
you, says he, but because they cannot otherwise obtain you, they go about to
set variance between us, that so ye being as it were forsaken, might yield
your selves to them. for they see that so long as godly agreemente shall
remain between us, there shall be no room for them. This practice is common to
all the Ministers of Satan, to pluck ye hearts of the people from their Pastor,
yt they may alure the^ unto them afterward: and after they have taken out of
the way ye counterwooer, they enter as it were into the possession being void.
If a man mark it attentively and wisely, he shall see yt so they begin always.
18 It is good to be jealous.) It is doubtful whether he speak of himself or
of the Galathians. for it becomes good ministers to burn with holy jealousy,
yt they may keep ye Congregatio^s in a chaste conioyning with their husband.
If we understand it to be spoken of Paul, tha^ ye meaning is thus, I confess
my self in deed to woo you also, but with another purpose and affection* and I
do that while I am away, no less than while I am with you, because I seek not
mine own commodity. Yet it likes me better to be referred to the Galathians,
and so also there shall not be so little as one sense, for it may be expounded
on this manner, These fellows purpose to estrange you from me, that so you being
forsaken may go to the^: but you that loved me while I was with you, proceed
to love me with like love also now I am away. The truer opinion is that Paul
used the doubtefull sense of the word* for whereas he had used this word
Aemulari (which I english to be ielous) For Ambire, (which is to woo): he
takes it now for to Imitate or follow, or else to endeavor to be as virtuous
as another. For by co^demning a preposterous emulation, he exhorts the
Galatians to exercise them selves in the contrary kind of emulation: yea and
that when he is away. 19 My little children. Here also he uses a more tender
name* for more is the name of Child than of brother: and he uses the
diminutiue, not because of contempt, but to speak them fair* although withal
he does somewhat show their tenderness, who ought to have been already
springaldes. And it is a speech broken of in the midste, as those are, that are
most full of affection. For the veheme^cie of affection breaks off words in
the midst, whilste we find not that which may sufficiently express the
thoughts of the mind: and our mind by boiling does as in were shut up our
jaws* whom I am in travail of again.) This also serves to declare his
vehement love, in that he abides mother like trauayles and pains for their
sake. And withal also he shows his sorrow, for a woman which is brought a
bed, is glad: but in ye travail she abides most bitter payns* they were
once already both conceived, and borne: now the second time must they be borne
after their backsliding. He makes the matter somewhat less hateful, when he
says, Until Christ be shaped. for he does not do away the former birth, but
he says, they must be nourished again in the womb, as vntimelye and
unshapen children. Finallye Christ to be shaped in us, and we to be shaped in
Christ, is all one. for we are borne that we may be new creatures in him and
he in like manner is borne in us, that we may live the life of him. Because
therefore that the true image of Christ was deformed or misshapen by
superstitions brought in of the false apostles, Paul laboreth about the
garnishing thereof, that it may shine purely without impediments. This do also
the ministers of ye Gospel, while they feed with milk, while they feed with
strong meat: to be short, they ought to be occupied thereabout throughout the
whole course of their preaching, but Paul here compares himself to one in
travail: because the Galathians were not as yet perfectlye borne. And this is
a notable place concearning the efficacy of the ministry. It is proper
indeed unto God spiritually to beget and to bring forth: but because he uses
the minister and preaching as instruments thereunto: he ascribes unto them,
that which is his: because that with the endeavor of man, he joins the force
of his spirit. We must always hold fast that distinction, that when the
minister is opposed or set against God, he is nothing, and he can do nothing,
but is an unprofitable instrument. but because the holy Ghost works
effectuallye by him, the praise and title of the deed is also passed over unto
him. But truly than is not declared of what force the Minister is by himself,
and apart from God: but what God does work by him. Therefore if Ministers
mean to be any thing, let them study to shape Christ and not themselves.
Here as though he were dead with sorrow, he fails in the middeste of his
talk.

20 I would now be present. This is a very grievous manner of fault finding,
when the father complains that he is in such a perplexity through the fault
of his children, that he is destitute of counsel, and knows not which way
to turn himself. and he wishes that he had liberty to speak with them.
because we can determine while we are present about any business, the better what
is expedient. for we do frame our speech as he that hears us is affected,
according as he shows himself either tractable, or else resists
stubbornely. although his mind was to express somewhat more by the Changing
of his voice, namely that he was ready wilingly to put on diverse shapes, to
feign also a new tongue: so that the reason [wherefore he should so doe]
might appear. which thing must be diligently observed of Pastors, least they
be given to much to please themselves, or their own wits: but let them
fashion themselves ever to the capacity of the people, as far forth as the
matter shall require, only so far as religion will suffer, least they turn
aside from the right way to please men.

21 Tell me, you that be minded to be under the Law, do you not hear the
Law?

22 For it is written that Abraham had two sons: the one by a bondmayde the
other by a freewoman.

23 But he that was of the bondwoman, was begotten after the flesh: but he
that was of the freewoman, by promise:

24 Which things are spoken Allegoricallie* As by an Allegory.
for there are two couenaunts, one from the mount Sina, which begets into
bondage: the same is Agar.

25 For Agar Sina is a mount in Arabia, and represents that which now is
Jerusalem: for it is in bondage with her children.

26 But Jerusalem which is above, is free: which is the mother of us all.

21 Tell me.) Having put in exhortatio^s to move affections, he adds to a
proper flourish of his former doctrine. It would not be in deed a sufficient
proof of it self: but seeing that he has sufficiently contended with
arguments, this kind of confirmation is not to be misliked. To be under the
law, in this place signifies to go under the yoke of the law, on this
condition that God may deal with you according to the covenant of the law.
and that you in like manner bind your self to keep the Law: for otherwise all
the faithful are under the law: but he treats here in this place of the Law
with the appurtenances thereof, as already is said.

22 It is written that Abraham.) There is no man so mad, that being put to
choice, will take bondage and leave liberty. But here the Apostle teaches,
that they be servants or bond that be under the Law whosoever they be. they
are in wretched case than, who of their own accord desire to be in this
state: when God is willing to set them free. He painteth out the picture hereof
in two sons of Abraham: whereof the one being borne of a bondwoman, is in the
same state that his mother: the other borne of a free woman, is free and
enjoys the heritage. Afterward he applies the whole history to his
purpose, and sets it out elegantly. First, for as much as the contrary part
armed themselves with the authority of the law, he sets the law flat
against them. and it is a thing used, to mean by the name of the law, the five
books of Moses. Secondly, because the story which he cites seems to belong
nothing to ye purpose he transposeth it to an Angelical exposition. But
because, he writes these things to have an Allegorical meaning, Origin and
many other more with him snatche occasion hereby to wrest the Scripture this
way and that way from the natural sense. for thus they gathered, that the
literal sense was to low and to base: that therefore under the bark of the
letter, there lay hidden greater mysteries, which otherwise could not be got
out but by devising allegories And that prevailed easilye. for the world has
preferred always, and will prefer speculations which have an outward show
or skill, before firm doctrine. by such liking men's boldness has increased
more and more: so that in handling of the scriptures, it was not only permitted
to dally without check, but also it was very highly praised. for soothlye they
thought for many years no man to have wit, but he yt could and durst finely
transfigure the most holy word of God. To transfigure is to change into another
shape.
Without doubt this was the invention of satan to abase the authority of the
scriptures, and to take away the true use from the reading thereof. which
profanation God has revenged with just judgment, in that he has suffered the
purity of understanding to be overwhelmed with the bastard and counterfeit
gloses. The scripture, say they, is plentiful, and therefore brings forth
manifold senses or meanings, I confess that the scripture is a very bountiful
fountain of al wisdom and such as cannot be drawn dry: but I deny that the
bounty thereof consists in diverse and contrary senses, such as every man may
devise of his own brain. Be it known therefore that that is the true sense of
ye scripture, which is natural and simple: and that let us embrace, and hold
with tooth and nail. As for fained or devised expositions which lead us away
from the literal sense, let us not only neglect them as doubtful, but stoutly
refuse the^ as deadly corruptions. But what shall we answer to that which
Paul says? certainly he does not understand yt Moses meant so when he did
write, yt he would turn a story into an allegory: but he shows how ye story
may agree to the present cause: namely if we mark that the picture of the
church is there painted forth unto us figuratively. Neither is that kind of
doctrine strange from the natural sense of ye letter, for yt the similitude is
taken from the household of Abraham unto the church. For as ye house of Abraham
was then yt true church: so there is no doubt, but yt the principal euentes
and such as were chiefly to be remembered above others, which happened in ye
same are unto us so many tipes or figures. as therefore in circumcision, in the
sacrifices, in the whole Leuiticall Priesthood there was an allegory as at this
day is in our sacraments: so also I say was there in ye house of Abraham. but
that makes not that we should go from the literal sense. The sum is as if
Paul should say the figure of ye two Testaments was painted unto us as it were
in a table, in the two wives of Abraham, and the figure of the two peoples in
his two sons. And certainly Chrisostom grants yt there is a Catechresis in
the word Alegoria which is very true. Catachresis English sounds an abuse.
23 Of the bondwoman. Each of them was begotten of Abraham after the Flesh. but
in Isaac was there a peculier respect, because he had the promise of grace.
There was than in Ismaell nothing beside nature: in Isaac was the election of
God. and that was shadowed when he was begotten. for he was begotten
miraculously, and not after a common manner. Yet after a sort he does insinuate
both the calling of the Gentiles and the refusing of the Jews: because the
Jews boast, they are the natural offspring, and the Gentiles are by faith,
without the help of man, made the spiritual descent of Abraham.

24 For there are two covenants.) Therefore had I rather so translate it, lest
it should lose the grace of the similitude. For Paul does compare the ii
covenants to the two mothers. It is hard yt a testament which is the newter
ge^der should be called a mother. Therefore the name of covenant is more apt,
yet have I not so much desired to show elegancie as perspicuitie or playnnesse.
finally he does now set forth ye very matter, yt as there were two mothers in
the house of Abraham, so likewise is there in the church of God. For doctrine
or teaching is ye mother, of whom God does beget us, and that is twofold, of
ye law, and of the Gospel. The law engenders into bondage: therefore it is
like Agar. But Sara represe^teth ye second (ye gospel) which inge^dreth into
liberty although Paul fetches it higher, making the first mother Sina, and
the second Jerusalem: therefore if it shall like any man to discuss every
point more narrowly, he shall make the law as it were the seed, whereof are
engendered the children of Sina, and the Gospel the seed, whereof are
ingendered ye children of Jerusalem. But this belonges nothing to the sum of
the matter: it is enough if we understand that the two Couenauntes are like
mothers, of which, unlike children are borne, because the covenant of the law
makes bond, and the couenante of the Gospel makes free. 8. ver. 15. Ye have
not again drawn the spirit of bondage into fear. Wherefore the holy Fathers,
howsoever within they were free before God, yet in outward show they differed
nothing from servants or bondmen: and so they did represente the state of
their mother. But the doctrine of the Gospel does as well both in the time of
birth give full freedom unto her children, as also brings them up as those
that be free. Yet I confess yt Paul speaks not here of such Children: as
shall appear by ye text. for he will show that he means by the children of
Sina, hypocrites, which at last are banished out of the Church of God, and are
put from the enheritaunce. What ingendring into bondage than is this that he
here reasons about? forsooth it is of them who frowardlye abuse the Law, so
that they conceive nothing of the law, but that which is servile and bond. So
did not the godly Fathers which lived under the old testament. for the
servile engendring of the Law, did not hinder but that they had Jerusalem
their mother in spirit. But they that stick in the naked and bare law, and
acknowledge it not a Schoolemaistership whereby they are lead unto Christ, but
rather make a let or stop thereof lest they should come unto Christ: they
are Israelites borne unto bondage.

25 Agar Sina is a mount.) I will not stay in confuting the exposition of
others. for vayn is the gloss of Hierome, yt the mount Sina had two names: nor
less childish is the device of Chrysostom taking on like a Philosopher about
the agreement of the names. for Agar is called Sina, because it is a tipe or
figure, as the Passover was Christ. he also sets out the situation of the
Mount by contempt. In Arabia, says he, that is to say, without the limits of
the holy land, which is the symbol or pledge of the everlasting heritage. it is
marvelous that men shot so far wide in so familiar an application. And
represents that.) In stead of which the old interpreter has set down on this
manner, Is joined unto, and Erasmus has set down bordereth. but I to avoid
obscurity, have translated it as you see. For certain it is that the Apostle
meant not here of the nighnesse, nor of yt situation of the places: but of the
similitude in ye figure whereof be treats. for among the Greeks those
things are called (...) which are so placed in order that the one have respect
or look toward the other. and (...) is a row, as well in trees as other things
set after a just proportion. I^ the same sense he said the mount Sina was
proportio^^^ or had respect to yt, which now is Jerusalem, in whi^^ Aristotle
writes ye rethorick is in likelyhoode to (...), by a metaphor taken from
minstrels, who use to set ii. parts one against another, whereof the one
answers the other in tune. In sum (...), is no other thing but to be
brought into one order or if I may so speak coordered. But wherefore does he
compare the present Jerusalem with the mount Sina? Although I was somewhile of
a contrary opinion, yet now I assent unto Chrysostom and Ambros, who expound
it to be the earthlye Jerusalem: and even so, as then it was, degenerate or
gone out of kind to servile doctrine and worshipping. and therefore he says,
Which now is, for it should have been a lively Image of the heavenly Jerusalem,
and should have expressed the disposition thereof. But such as now it is, says
he, it has respect unto the mount Sina. although they are far off the one
from the other, yet are they utterly like, and have between themselves a
perfect concordaunce. It is a very sore check to the Jews, who were fallen
away from grace and had to their mother not Sara, but the counterfeit
Jerusalem, Agars own sister, borne at one birth. and therefore bond borne of
a bondewoman, although proudelye they boasted themselves the sons of Abraham.

26 Which is above. He calls it heavenly, not as included in heaven, not as
though it were to be sought without the world. for it is a congregation
dispersed through the whole world, and is a stranger in the earth, why than is
it said to be of heaven? because she has her beginning from the heavenly
grace. for the children of God are not borne of flesh and blood, but of the
power of the holy Ghost. The heavenly Jerusalem therefore, which has her
beginning from heaven, and dwells above by faith, the same is the mother of
the faithful. For she has the incorruptible seed of life laid up with her,
whereby she fashioneth us, nourishes us in her womb, brings us into the
light, and she has milk and meat wherewith, after that she has brought us
forth, she continually feeds us. Lo wherefore the Church is called the
mother of the faithful, and truly he that refuses to be a child of the
Church, in vain does he require to have God his father. for God does (...)
^^get unto him children, whom he brings up til they be grown, and (...)
until they come to man's state, but by the ministry of the church^^ notable
praise or title of the Church without doubt, and the same b^^ ^^nourable. But
the Papists are fond and twice childish, who pretend it, to make it a burden
to us, for whereas they have an adulterous mother, which brings forth
children to the devil unto death, how unreasonable a thing is it to request
that the children of God should yield themselves to her, to be cruelly slain?
with how much honester pretense might the Sinagogue of Jerusalem have at that
day set up her self, then at this day the sinagoue of Rome may? and yet we
see that Paul, having plucked off all her gaye attire, makes her no better
than Agar.

25 For it is written, Rejoice thou barraine that bring not forth children,
break forth and cry, thou that trauailest not: for more are the children of
the forsaken, than of her that has an husband.

28 And we brethren, are after Isaac the children of promise.

29 But as he that was born tha^ after the flesh, did persecute him that was
born after the spirit: eue^ so is it now.

30 But what says the Scripture? Cast forth the bondwoman and her son for
the son of the bondwoma^ shall obtain no inheritance with the son of the
freewoman.

31 Therefore brethren, we are not children of the bondwoman, but of the free
woman.

27 It is written.) He proves by the testimony of Esaias, that legitimate
children are born of ye church according to promise. the place is in the 54.
cha. 3. ve. where the Prophet treats of both the Kingdom of Christ, and the
calling of the Gentiles, and it promises unto the barrain and widow a very
great offspring. for this is ye cause of mirth and joy to which he exhorts
the church. And it must be noted that the purpose of the Apostle tends to
this point, to take away from the Jews, this spiritual Jerusalem, of which
Esaias prophecieth. as to which the Prophet denounces children to be gathered
from every place out of all nations: and yet that not by any her own
preparation, but by the free blessing of God. and therefore he concludes by
and by that we are the sons of GOD by promise by the example of Isaac Hom. 9
8. and yt we obtain not this dignity by any other way. This conclusion
seems to be weak to the unlearned and such as are smally exercised in the
Scripture: because they hold not the principal or ground. which
notwithstanding is most certain, yt all the promises are freely grounded in
Messiah. Now because the Apostle did hold that as granted, therefore did he
so securely set the promise against the Law.

29 As he than that was according to the flesh.) Here does he confute the
fierceness of the false Apostles, who did frowardlye triumph over the Godly
which reposed all things in Christ. For such kind of fierceness troubled
the Godly, and therefore they had need of comfort, as also it was necessary
to keep sharpelye under the false Apostles. He puts them in mind than,
that it is no maruayle if the children of the law do at this day, that which
their Father Ismaell did in the beginning, who vexed Isaac the true heir,
which had his byrthrighte, and that his posterity with the like boldness now,
for outward ceremonies, Circumcision, and the whole preparation of the law, are
stout against the legitimate children of God, and do put them to grief:
Again he uses the word Spirit as being contrary to the flesh: that is to
say, the calling of God, as being contrary to the appearaunce of man. so he
yields the outward show to the followers of the Law and Works: but as for
the thing it self, he challenges it to them who leave on the only calling of
God. and depend on his grace. Did persecute. There is no mention made in any
place of persecution: only Moses does say that Ismaell was. with which
participle he means that he mocked his brother Isaac. For in that some of
the Jews do expound it to have been but bare laughing, it is not agreeable.
for what a rage had it been, so sharpelye to revenge harmless laughing? There
is no doubt than but that in reproach, he provoked the Infant Isaac with
tauntes. But how far is that off from persecution? yet Paul does not
amplify this in vain or without cause. For no persecution ought to be so
grievous unto us, as while we see by the skoffes and tauntes of the wicked our
calling to be decayed and shaken. neither the blows, nor the whippes, nor the
nails, nor the thorns brought so great vexation unto Christ, as that
blasphemy, He trusted in God, what does it avail him, seeing he is destitute
of all help? For there is under that more poison, then in all persicutions
else. for how much more is it, for the grace of the adoption of God to be made
void than to have this frail life taken from us? Therefore Ismaell persecuted
not his brother with the sword: but that which was worse, he proudly set up
himself against him by treading under feet the promise of God. This also is
the welspring of all persecutions, that the ungodly do despise and hate the
grace of GOD in the elect, of which matter we have a plain and pithie
Doctrine in the Story of Cayne and Abell. We are also admonished, that not
only outward persecutions, ought to be fearful unto us, when as the
enemies of Godliness do kill us with sword and fire: when they vex us with
banishmentes, prisonments, torments and scourginges: but when they go about
by their blasphemies to make void our confidence which rests in the
promises of GOD, when they jest at our Salvation, when malapartlye they scoff
at the whole Gospel. For there is nothing that ought so greeuouslye to wound
our hearts as the contempt of GOD, and as mockes against his grace (ought to
do): neither is there any more deadlye kind of persecution, than when the
Saluatyon of the Soul is assailed. The Swords of the wicked come not at this
day to us who are delivered out of the Tyranny of the Pope: but how
doltishe be we, if we have no feeling of that spiritual persecution, when
they go about by all means to quench that doctrine from which we have life:
when as by their blasphemies they resist our faith, yea and perilously, batter
too the faith of the unlearned? Truly the fury of the Epycures brings more
sorrow unto me at this day, than [that] of the Papists. They invade not with
force and arms: but look how much more precious the name of God is unto me
than mine own life, (so) it cannot be but that much more sorrowefullye am I
vexed, when I see a diuelishe conspiracy to be made to quench out all the
fear and worship of GOD, to bannishe the memory of Christ, or else to lay it
open to be mocked of all wicked persons, than if a whole country should at one
time be set all on a fire.

30 But what says the Scripture? Genesis 21.20. Cast forth etc. Now that was no
small comfort, that he sets forth the example of our father Isaac: but this
was somewhat more effectual, whiles he adds, that the hypocrites with their
boasting get nothing else, but that they be cast out of the spiritual
household of Abraham: and that nevertheless the heritage is saved for us,
howsoever braglye they hunche at us for a time. Let the faithful uphold
themselves with this comfort, that the tyranny of the Ismaelits shall not last
always. They seem indeed to have gotten the first place, and therefore they
despise us as borne out of time, and are puffed up with their eldership (in
that they were borne first) but at the length they shall be pronounced Agarens
borne of a bondwoman, and unworthy of the heritage. It is a very fine place (to
be noted) that we should not be troubled with the high looks of hypocrites, or
should envy their case, while they have an honorable mansion or being in the
church, although it last a but time: but that we should patiently wait the end
which bideth them. For many either bastardes or strange children usurp a
room in the Church: but they have not a faith that is perpetually fixed. as
Ismaell like a strange child was with his posterity cast out, who
notwithstanding was puffed up with his byrthright (as first born) and did bear
the sway at the first. But here some men wise as they think themselves, do
scorn the simplicity of Paul in that he compares the anger of a woman
rising of vain chiding, unto the judgment of God: but they do not perceive
that the determination of God came in place, whereby it might be made plain,
that all the whole matter was governed by heavenly providence. For in that
Abraham is commanded utterly to hearken to his wife that surely was
extraordinary. whereby we gather, that God used the ministry of Sara to
establish his promise. finallye the casting out of Ismaell was nothing else but
the executing and effect of this Oracle In Isaac shall thy seed be called: and
not in Ismaell. Although therefore it was a revenge of woma^-like chiding, yet
that hinders not, but that God by the mouth of his Church has in tipe
declared forth his judgment.

31 Therefore brethren. Now he exhorts the Galathians that they should choose
rather to be the sons of Sara than of Agar: nay rather he mentions that
they are alredie begotten into liberty by the grace of Christ, to the end
they may continue in their state. If we should at these days term ye
Papists Ismaelites and Agarens, and should boast our selves to be legitimate
children: they will laugh. but if we confer thing with thing, and cause with
cause, there shall be none so unskillful but that he may readily judge it so.

The fyft Chapter. 1 Stand therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has
delivered us: and be not entangled again in the yoke of bondage.

2 Behold I Paul do show unto you that if you be circumcised Christ shall
nothing avail you.

3 For I testify again unto every man who is circumcised, that he is a debtor
to do the whole law.

4 Ye are made empty of Christ whosoever you be that be justified by the law,
you are fallen from grace.

5 For we by the Spirit do look for the hope of righteousness through faith.

6 For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, neither
vncircumcisio^: but faith which works by love.


STand therefore in the liberty.) After he had said they were the children of
the frewoman, now he admonishes the^ how great the valor of this liberty is,
yt they conte^ne it not as a thing little worth. And certainly it is an
inestimable good thing, for which it becomes us to fight unto the death,
neither is he in hand here about fires only but also about alters too. Because
many at these days do not way this, they do condemn us that we be too
earnest, whiles they see us to sharpelye, and with so great contention auouche
the liberty of Faith against the Tyranny of the Pope, in outward things.
By this pretense also, the adversaries stir us up ill will among the
unlearned, as though we seek nothing else but licentiousness, which is a
setting loose of all Discipline. But they that are wise and skillfull know,
that this is one of the principal points in the doctrine of salvation. For
here we deal not about this, Whether you may eat this meat or that meat,
whether you make this day holy, or let it alone: (as many men do foolishlye
suppose, and some men do slaunderouslye report) but what is lawful for thee
to do before God, what is necessary to salvation, and what it is wickedness
to leave undone. to be brief, it is a contention about the estate of the
conscience, when we come before the tribunal seat of God. Finallye Paul in
this place means the liberty from the ceremonies of the Law, the observing
whereof the false Apostles did exact as a thing necessary. But withal the
readers must remember, that that manner of liberty is but a part only of that
liberty, which Christ has purchased unto us. For how small a thing were it,
if he had only delivered us from the ceremonies? This custom therefore
springs out of a deaper fountain: namely in that he was made a curse, that
he might redeem us from the curse of the Law, (above in the third chapter
verse 13). because he has abrogated the force of the Law, as far forth as
it hold us endaungered by the judgment of God, under the guiltiness of
eternal death: to conclude because he has set us at liberty from the tyranny
of sin, Satan, and death, so under one kind, is the whole comprehended:
whereof I will speak in the Epistle to the Colossians. Furthermore Christ has
purchased liberty unto us in the Cross: but he gives us the fruit and
possession thereof by the Gospel. Paul than does well when he monisheth the
Galathians, that they be not entangled again in the yoke of bondage: that is
to say, that they suffer not a snare to be put on their consciences. for if
men will lay a wrongful burden on our shoulders, it may be borne: but if they
will bring our consciences into bondage, we must resist it stoutly, and even
to the death For we shall be robbed of an inestimable benefit, if men may
bind our consciences. And withal injury shall be offered to Christ the
author of liberty. But of what force is this, again? for the Galathians
never lived under the law. It is meant simply for this, Even as though they
were not delivered by the grace of Christ. For although the law was given to
the Jews, and not to the Gentiles: yet without Christ there is no liberty to
either of them, but a mere bondage.

2 Behold I Paul.) He could show them nothing more grievous, tha^ that he
should shut them out from the grace of Christ. But what means this, That
Christ avails nothing to all that are circumcised? Did he avail Abraham
nothing? yea rather that he might avail, he took circumcision. If we say
that that auayled before the coming of Christ, what shall we answer
concerning Timothy? It must be marked that Paul in this place does not speak
of the outward cutting only, or of the ceremony, but rather he reasons
against the wicked doctrine of the false Apostles, who feigned the same to be a
necessary service of God, and withal they did beat in a confidence as it
were of a meritorious work. These devilish devises did make Christ fruitless
and unprofitable. not that the false Apostles did deny Christ, or would have
had him utterly taken away: but they did make such a partition between his
grace and the works of the Law, that but only half part of our salvation
should be by him. The Apostle cries out against that, saying we may not make
such a dividing: nor that otherwise he can avail us, except we embrace him
wholly. And what other thing do the Papists at this day, but thrust in
trifles invented by themselves, in stead of Circumcision? certainly to this
end is directed their whole doctrine, that the grace of Christ should be
mingled with the merits of works: which thing is impossible. For whosoever
will have but half Christ, shall lose all Christ. and yet the Papists seem
in their own eyes to be very sharp witted, when they allege that they
attribute nothing unto works, but by the grace of Christ being the mean, as
though the Galathians were in any other error. For they did not think or
believe that they ^ell away from Christ, or did refuse his grace: but yet
Christ was left unto them, for that the doctrine of the Gospel in that
principal point was counterfeyted and abased. This speech, Behold I Paul,
has no small force in it: for he does set himself against them even to their
face, and he gives out his name, lest he should seem to have a doubtful
cause. And although his authority began to wax less and less among the
Galathians, yet he avouches it to be sufficient to overthrow all his
adversaries.

3 For I testify again.) It is the proof of the former sentence, taken out
of the place of things repugnant. for he that is debtor to do the whole Law,
shall never escape death: because shall remain always under guiltiness. for
no man shall ever be found which may satisfy the Law. such an obligation
than, Binding.
is a certain condemnation of a man. so it happens that Christ helps him
nothing. We see than how these things are contrary the one to the other, That
we are pertakers of the grace of Christ, And again that we are bound to
fulfill the whole Law. But so shall it follow, that none of the Fathers were
saved. Moreover it shall follow that Timothy was cast away by Paul, when
he was circumcised. For woe to us, until we be set free from the law. and
where Circumcision is, there is subjection. It is to be noted that Paul is
accustomed to speak two manner of ways of Circumcision, and that shall be
easilye perceived of every one that is meanelye excercised in the reading of
Paul, For to the Romans cap. 4.11, he calls it the seal of the
righteousness of faith. and so he includes Christ and the free promise of
salvation under Circumcision. Now in this place he sets it against Christ,
faith, the Gospel, and grace: that it may be a mere covenant of the Law,
having the foundation in the merits of works. hereby is apparaunte that
which I have already said, that he speaks not of Circumcision always one
way: but that we must have regard of the diversity (thereof). I say that
Paul, whilst he considers Circumcision in it own nature, does worthily
make it a symbol or badge of grace: because so was the institution of God. but
when he has to do with the false apostles, who did abuse Circumcision to
destroy the Gospel: he does not regard whereto it was instituted of the Lord,
but he inuadeth the corruption that came from men. We have a very clear
example here in this place. When as unto Abraham was given the promise,
concerning Christ, concerning true righteousness, concearning eternal life:
Circumcision was added also for confirmation thereof it was therefore by the
ordinance of God a Sacrament which served unto faith. Now comes the false
Apostles, and they feign it to be a meritorious work: and they so set out
the observing of the law, that they make circumcision a beginning or entrance
in of such a profession. The Apostle does not here touch the institution of
God, but does fight against ye feigned devise of the false Apostles. But some
men will object, As active is when we we do: so passive is when a thing is
done to us.
in respect of us, is a work passive. for we bring nothing but faith, which
has all things laid up in Christ. But what do the Papists? they imagine a
work wrought, whereby men deserve the grace of God. and so what else do they,
but plainly quench out the truth of the Sacrament. Yet we retain and keep
Baptism and the Lords supper, because Christ would have the use of each of
them perpetual: but we sharply detest those ungodly dotages, as meet it is
we should. 4 Ye are emptied of Christ.) The meaning is, If you seek any part
of righteousness in the works of the law, Christ belonges not to you, and ye
are shut out from grace. Neither was their opinion so gross, that they did
believe themselves to be justified by the only observing of the Law: but
they did mingle Christ with the law. otherwise it were in vain that Paul
did terrify them with these threatninges, What do you? you make Christ
unprofitable unto you. you bring to naught his grace. We see tha^ that there
can no small piece of righteousness be put in the law, but (withal) we
renounce Christ and his grace.

5 For we by the Spirit through faith.) It is a prevention wherewith he
preuenteth an objection for forthwith this cogitation might come into any man's
mind, Is there than no profit of circumcision? To look for the hope of
righteousness, is to ground in this or that thing their confidence: or to
determine from whence righteousness is to be hoped, although withal, it be
probable, that perseueraunce is noted in these words: as if he should have
said, We stand constantlye in the confidence of righteousness, which, by
faith we obtain. In that he says, that righteousness abides by faith: that
is common to the fathers and to us both alike, for by faith they all pleased
God, as the Scripture witnesses, Hebr. 11. but their faith was wrapped under
the veil of ceremonies. therefore he makes a difference between us and them
by this word Spirit, which is set against the outward shadows. He means
than that it is naked and bare faith now which suffiseth to obtain
righteousness: and which is not set forth with the pomp of ceremonies, but is
content with the spiritual service of God.

6 Eor in Christ Jesus.) It is a reason showing wherefore they might now
obtain righteousness in the Spirit: because Circumcision with the
appurtinaunces thereof was abolished in Christ, that is to say in the kingdom
of Christ, or in the church of Christ. for by a Synecdoche, Sinecdoche is a
figure where part (...) whole.
in the word Circumcision he sets down the ceremonies, And so he puts in
mind, that there is no room left for them any more, and yet he grants that
they were not always unprofitable. for he teaches that they were not
abrogated, till after that Christ was revealed. And so withal is solued that
question, why he speaks hear so contemptuously of Circumcision, as though it
never had any thing auayled. for mention is not made here of Circumcision, as
in that it was once a Sacrament. it is not demanded of what force it was at
that time in which it was not as yet grown out of use: but he affirms that
under Christ's kingdom, it was made all one with uncircumcision. namely for
that the coming of Christ brought an end to all the ceremonies of the Law.
But faith working by love. He sets against Ceremonies another exercise,
namely of love. Lest that the Jews should flatter themselves too much, as
though they excelled in any notable thing. for about the end of the Epistle in
steed of this piece he will use this, A new creature. It is as much than as if
he had said, That God will not have us at these days to be occupied in
ceremonies: but it is sufficient if we exercise our selves in charity. In
the mean while he does not shut out our Sacraments, which are helps to
faith. but briefly he confirms that which he has touched, concearning the
spiritual service of God. This place has no difficulty, were it not that the
Papists did slaunderouslye wrest it to build up their righteousness of
works. for when they are minded to refell that saying of ours, Faith only
justifies, than take they up this weapon, with the cause of justification,
take heed you admit not any mention of charity, or of works: but firmelye
hold fast that which shuts them out. In as much as Paul here does not
entreat of justification, nor yet assigns the praise thereof to charity in
part, we may thereby readilye conclude, that by the same reason it should
follow, that Circumcision and ceremonies did justify in time past. For as he
commends faith with charity in Jesus Christ: so before the coming of Christ
ceremonies were required. But that was nothing to the deserving of
righteousness, which the Papists also will confess. and therefore we must not
think so of charity neither.

7 Ye did run well, who did hinder you that you should not obey the truth.

8 The Persuasion is not of him who has called you.

9 A little leaven leaueneth the whole lump.

10 I am persuaded of you in the Lord, that you will think no other thing: he
that troubles you, shall bear judgment, whosoever he be.

11 And I, Brethren, if as yet I preach Circumcision, why as yet do I suffer
persecution? the offense of the cross is done away.

I would to GOD they also were cut away which trouble you.

7 Ye did run well.) He does of a set purpose mingle the reproach of their
present backsliding, with the praise of their former course, that being ashamed
they may the more willinglye return into the way. It is a token of wondering
that he asks them who led them away from the right course: whereby he may
make them the more ashamed. I thought good once again to turn the Verb (...)
to Obey rather than to Believe: because now already they had embraced the
purity of the Gospel, and were carried away from obaying it.

8 The persuasion is not of him.) He contended before with reasons: now at last
he goes to it by authority, whereas he cries unto them, that this persuasion
came from some other place than from God. For this admonition should not have
very much weight, were it not vpholded by the authority of the person. But
Paul of his own right might so boldlye speak to the Galathians, for that
he was a Preacher unto them of that calling that GOD called them with* and
therefore he names not GOD but he signs him out by a Periprasis:
Periphrasis, (...) fight when a thing is signified in many words that may be
said in one, as, one that sells raysons. etc. for a grocer.
as if he should say, God is not at controversy with himself: he it is who
called you into salvation by my preaching. This new persuasion then came from
some other place. Therefore if you will have the calling of God ratified, take
heed you give no ear unto them, who bring in amongst you new inventions.
Although I confess the greek Participle be of the present tence: yet because
it is taken indifinitely, it liked me to turn it thus, Which has called you,
for to take away doubtfulnesse in the meaning.

9 A little leaven.) I refer it to the doctrine, and not to the men. for he
advises them how hurtful a thing the corruption of doctrine is: least they
should not repute it (as commonly men do) as a thing of no danger, or else of
no great danger. For Satan creeps in with this undermining, so that he does
not openly shake the whole doctrine, but infecteth the pureness thereof with
false and forged opinions. many because they consider not the greatness of the
evil, are less vehement in resisting the same, therefore the Apostle here
does cry out that no jot of safety does remain, after that the truth of God
is corrupted, and he uses the similitude of leaven, which, although it be but
a little does send out it sharpness into the whole lump. Therefore we must
carefully beware, that we suffer not any thing to be devised and put to the
pure doctrine of the Gospel.

10 I am persuaded.) He does again turn all his sharp speech from the
Galathians unto the false Apostles: he says they were the cause of the
evil, to them he threatens punishmente: he shows that he has good hope
of the Galathians, because they will return readylye and easilye to agree to
the truth. And that gives us a courage, when we hear that we are well hoped
of. for we count it a foul matter to deceive the opinion of them who judge
lovingly and friendly of us. And because it was the work of GOD to bring the
Galathians again to the pure Doctrine of faith from which they had swarued,
he says he hops in the Lord: whereby he monisheth them that returning or
repentance is a heavenly gift, that they also might ask the same of God.

He that troubles you.) It is a confirmation of the sentence going before,
because after a sort he lays a great part of the blame upon those deceivers,
by whom the Galathians were beguiled. for look what reuengement he
denounces against them, from the same for the most part does he exempt
the Galathians. But whosoever they be that give occasion of hurly bulyes to the
Church, whosoever break the unity of faith, whosoever make concord shake and
decay, let them hear: and if they be in their right wits, let them shake
for fear at this speech. for GOD by the mouth of Paul does pronounce, that
no such Authoures of offenses shall escape unrevenged. This piece Whosoever
held, has a force in it. for in as much as the false Apostles by their
great words did terrify the ignoraunte and unlearned multitude, it behooved
Paul on the other side, so loftily to extol his doctrine, that he should
spare none which durst quetche against him, whatsoever title otherwise they
were known by.

11 And I brethren.) An argument drawn from the final cause. I might,
says he, avoid the hatred of men, dangers and persecutions: if I would but
only mingle ceremonies with Christ. whereas therefore I contend so greatly
about this matter to (maintain) the contrary, I do it not for mine own
cause nor yet for mine own profit. But does it therefore follow that it is
true which he teaches? I answer, that the right affection and pure
conscience of the Teacher is of no small force to win credit. moreover it is
not credible, that any man is so mad, that he will willinglye procure hurt
to himself. lastly he causes his Adversaries to be suspected, for that by
preaching Circumcision, they provide for their own quietness, rather then
faythfullye to serve Christ. The sum is, that Paul detesteth al ambition
and covetousness, finally he respected not himself, in that he contemned
favor and praise: and that he offered himself to persecutions and to the
fury of many, rather than he would bend but the very breadth of a nail
from the purity of the Gospel. The slander of the Cross is done away. Paul
willingly does name ye Gospel the Cross, or ye preaching of the cross,
whilst his mind is to set the base simplicity thereof against the bubbles of
humane wisdom or righteousness. for both the Jews being pufte up with their
ungracious confidence of righteousness, and the Greeks with their foolish
persuasion of wisdom, did despise the baseness of the Gospel. When as
therefore he says now, that there shall not be any more any slander of the
cross, if the preaching of circumcision be allowed, he means that the Jews
will not molest him, but that he shall have a room to teach by their good
leave: because that painted and counterfeit Gospel compacte of Moses and
Christ shall no more offend them, but that kind of mingle mangle will be
tolerable unto them, because they shall remain in the possession of their
ancient dignity.

12 I would they were also cut away.) He is carried further through displeasure:
for he wishes destruction to those deceauers, by whom the Galathians were
beguiled. And he seems to allude unto Circumcision which they did urge. when
he says Cut of To which opinyon Chrysostom enclineth: as if he should say,
They rent the church for cause of circumcision. and men: and therefore had they
rather the whole world were lost, than any jot of God his glory should be
diminished. But let us remember that that desire springs hereof, for that
they being turned away from the consideration of men, have their minds fixed
upon God alone. Therefore he may not be condemned of cruelty, as though he
strane against charity. Further, if we compare the (whole) Church with one
man, or with a few men, how far more wayeth the Church? That is cruel pity
which prefers one man before the whole church: I see upon one side the
flock of the Lord which is in danger: on the other side I see a Woolfe, by
the setting on of Satan, in devouring: ought not the regard I have to the
Church so swallowe up my whole cogitations, that I should desire the safety of
the church to be purchased through the destruction of the Woolfe? And yet by
this means I would not have any man boast: but ye love and care for the
church, violentlye carries me as it were out of my self, so that I regard
(and care for) nothing else. There is no man than that shall be a true pastor
of the church, who burns not with the like zeal. Whereas I have translated it
thus, Which trouble you, the greek word signifies, to remove from their
degree or estate. for to amplify the matter he has put to, Also, wishing not
only that they were put down, but that utterly they were cut away and whipped of
clean.

13 For ye brethren are called into liberty: only give not liberty to be
an occasion to the flesh: but serve you one another by love.

14 For the whole law is fulfilled in one word, namelye in this, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self.

25 But if you bite and devour one another, take heed that you be not consumed
one of another.

16 Then I say walk in the spirit: and you shall not fulfill the lust of the
flesh.

17 For the flesh lusts against the Spirit: and the Spirit against the
flesh. these are between themselves enemies one to the other: so that ye
cannot do those things which you would do.

18 But if you be led by the spirit, you are not under the Law.

13 Ye are called into liberty.) Now he teaches after what wise we must use
liberty. I showed in ye first Epistle to the Corinthians, yt liberty was one
thing, and the use of it another thing for liberty is in the conscience and
respects God: but the use thereof is in outward things, and has to do with
men and not with God only. therefore after he has exhorted the Galathians
that they should suffer no part of their liberty to be abridged, now does he
bid them to be moderate in using it. And he prescribes a rule of the lawful
use thereof. namelye, that it be not turned into a pretense or occasion of
licentious life. For no liberty is given to the flesh, which rather ought to
be holden captive under subjection: but it is a spiritual good thing, which
godly minds only can comprehend. But by love. He declares the way how to
bridle liberty, that it run not into a wandering and licencious abuse:
namelye if it be ruled of charity. Let us always bear in mind that he now
entreats, not how we are free before GOD, but how we may use our liberty
amongst men. for an vprighte conscience does not allow of any bondage: but
the bondage or abstayning from the outward use (of a thing) has no danger
(in it). This is than the sum, if we serve another by love, we will make a
reckoning of edification. and so shall it be brought about that we shall not
be wanton, but shall use the grace of GOD, to his honor, and the salvation of
our neighbors.

14 For the whole law.) You must understand a close or vnvttered contrariety
between this exhortation of Paul, and the doctrine of the false Apostles. for
whereas they did stick in only ceremonies, Paul here by the way does briefelye
touch, what the true duties and excercises of Christians are. To this end
therefore belongs ye present commendation of love, yt the Galathians may
understand, that ye principal point of christian perfection is placed therein.
But it must be seen why he comprehends all the commandments of ye law under
charity: whereas the law consists of ii. tables, of which ye first is a
doctrine concerning the worshipping of God, and the duties of godliness: and
the later is a doctrine of love or charity. for it is an absurdity to make of
the part the whole. Some (in expounding this place) wynd away on this fashion,
saying, that no other thing is taught in the first table* but that we should
love God with all our heart. But Paul does plainly (speak of) charity toward
our neighbors, than must we seek another solution that is stronger. I grant
that piety toward God, stands before love toward our neighbors: and that
therefore the observing or keeping of the first table is of more weight in the
sight of God, than of the later. But piety or godliness is a thing hidden from
the sense or understanding of men: as God himself is invisible, and though
ceremonies were ordained to testify the same (I mean godliness): yet were
they no sure proofs thereof. for often it happens that none are more stout
and busy obseruers of ceremonies than be hypocrites. God therefore will take
a trial of our affection toward him, by our love toward our brethren, which
he sets down unto us one toward another. And this is the reason why love
is called the fulfilling of the law, not only in this place, but also To. 13.8.
not because it excels the worshipping of God* but for that it is a
confirmation thereof. I said eue^ now that God is invisible, but he manifests
himself unto us in our brethere^, and requires in the person of them that
which is due to himself. Love therefore toward men rises not but of the
fear and love of God. Therefore it is no marvel if the effect contayn, by
the figure Synecdoche, under it, the cause whereof it is a sign. He shall go
to work disorderly, whatsoever he be, that seperateth the love of God from
the love of men.

Thou shall love thy neighbor. For he that shall love, must yield unto every
one his right, he will do wrong to no man, he will hurt no man, he will do
good to all as much as lies in his power. for what else is spoken off in all
the second Table? and this reason also does Paul bring out in the Epistle to
the Romans. Finally under the name of Neighbor are all men contained* for
the nature that is common both to pore and rich does join us and makes us
one: as Esaias warns Cha, 58.7. Despise not thine own flesh. But specially the
Image of God ought to be a most holy band of knitting us together. and
therefore in this case there is no difference of friend and foe. neither may
the ungraciousness of men wipe out the law of nature. This parcel, As thy
self, means thus much, As every man is bent by the affection of the flesh
to love himself, so is commended unto us by God, the love toward our
neighbors. They overthrow the words of the Lord, but expound them not, who
gather thereof, (as all the Sorbonistes do) that the love of our selves ought
to be always first in order, because the thing ruled ought to be inferior to
that which rules or is the rule. They are Asses and have not a crumme of
charity. for if the love of our selves were a rule, it would follow, that it
were right and holy and allowed before God. but never shall we love our
neighbors sincerely and according to the mind of the Lord, until we have
amended and corrected that same love of our selves for the affections are
contrary and disagreeing: when as the love of our selves engenders as well the
neglecting as the contemning of others, engenders cruelty, is the Fountain
and wellspring of covetousness rapines, deceites, and of all such like
mischiefs, enforces us to impaciencie, and armeth us with the desire of
revenge. Therefore the Lord requires this, that it may be changed into love.

15 If you bite and devour.) A man may conjecture as well by the thing it
self, as also by the words, that the Galathians striued and were at odddes
among themselves, for that they did disagree in doctrine. he now declares by
the end of such dealing how deadly an evil strife is in the Church. Moreover
it is very like, that the Lord by false doctrines had revenged their
ambition, loftiness, and other their vices: as he is accustomed, and also
testifies by Moses Deuteronomy. 13. ver. 2. By bytinges and devouring he means, in
my judgment both hateful slanders, accusations, taunts, and such like
brawles: and also injuries and wrongs done by fraud or violence. What is the
end hereof at the length? consuming or devouring, says he. but yet it is the
property of charity, that one of us should defend and preserve another. I
would to god this would always come into our mind as often as the devil does
procure us unto contentions, namely that no other thing can come of the inward
dissentions of the members, but a destruction and consumption of the whole
body. And what a wretched and mad thing is it, that we, who are members of one
body, do willingly and of our own accord conspire one of us to destroy another.
I say then, walk in the Spirit. The remedy follows. the ruin of the
Church is no small evil, we must therefore dilligently prevent it as often as it
is at hand. But what is the mean or the way? forsooth if the flesh have not
dominion in us: but that we give our selves to be governed of the spirit of
God. And he does withal show that the Galathians are carnal, and void of God
his spirit, for that they led such a life as became not christians. for whereof
came it that one of them wounded another, but because they were led after the
lust of the flesh? This than he says is a token, that they walk not after
the Spirit. You must mark the word, Fulfill, whereby he means that the
children of God, although they be as yet endaungered unto vices, as long as
they are oppressed with the burden of the flesh, yet are they not utterly
addicted unto them or in bondage to them, but do endeavor to resist and fight
against them. neither is the spiritual man free from the desires of the flesh,
but yt he is often provoked of them: but he does not yield, that he may suffer
them to reign, which to do is to fulfill them. Look upon the eight to the
Romans.

17 The flesh covers against.) He puts the^ in mind of the difficulty, to
the end they may know that they cannot spiritually overcome without contending.
the difficulty rises hereof, that our disposition resists the spirit. For
under the name of Flesh, I have said in the Epistle to the Romans, that there
is meant the nature of man. for where as the Sophisters restrain it to the
inferior senses, as they call them, it is refelled by many places, and the
contrary takes away all the doubt. For the Spirit signifies a reformed
nature, or the grace of regeneration. What thing else than is the Flesh but the
old man? When as therefore the whole nature of man is rebellious and stubborn
against the spirit of God, we must earnestlye strive, and enforce our selves
to be obedient to the spirit. Wherefore we must begin with denying our selves.
Here may we see with what title the Lord sets out our dispositions and
nature, namely that it agrees no better with that which is right, than fire
does with water. Now what drop of goodness shall be found in free will? except,
may hap, that be called good which is contrary to the Spirit of God. This
is that whereof he speaks Romans 87. that all the thoughts of the flesh are
enmities against God. So that ye cannot do.) This, without doubt, belongs to
the regenerate. For they that are carnal have no fight with evil lusts, they
have no right desire whereby they may come unto ye righteousness of God. And
Paul speaks unto ye faithful: therefore this same You will, is not to be
understood of the inclination of nature, but of the holy affections, which
God by his grace does inspire into us. Paul therefore declares, that the
faithful. how much soever they strive, yet that they cannot wrestle so long
and so far, during the time they be in this life, that they can obey God
perfectly. They wish, truly, and they desire. but the full effect follows
not. which argument is more largely discoursed. Romans 7.15.

18 If you are led of the Spirit. Whereas the faithful do halte in their
balking in the way of the Lord: least they should saint in their hearts, for
that they have not a desire to satisfy the Law, they have need of such a
comfort as here they hear, where Paul says, They are not under the Law:
which he uses also Romans 6.14. For thereof follows, that that is not imputed
unto them which is yet wanting: but that their duties are as acceptable unto
God. as though they were full and perfect on all sides. But here he also goes
forth with yt which he has begone concerning liberty. For this is ye spirit
which before he called ye spirit of adoption: which for yt it makes men free,
it sets the^ at liberty from the yoke of ye law. It is as much therefore as
if he should say, Will ye once make an end of those controversies which busy
your heads? walk after the Spirit, for than shall you be loosed from the
dominon of the Law: because the Law shall be as a free doctrine, which may
admonish you: and shall not hold your consciences any longer bound. Finally
take away the guiltiness that comes of the Law, freedom from ceremonies
follows: which are simboels of a servile estate

19 The deeds of the flesh are manifest, which are (these), Adultery,
Whoredom, Uncleanness, Wantonness.

20 Idolatry, witchcraft, hatreds, contention, emulation, wrath, striuinges,
seditions, heresies.

21 Envy, manslaughter, drunkenness, Banquetinge, and such like: of which I
tell you before, as also I have foretold you, that they which do such
things, shall not possess the kingdom of God by heritage.

19 The deeds of the flesh.) Because in sum he has set down a mark for
Christians, whereunto they ought to leauel, that they may obey the spirit, and
resist the flesh: now does he paint forth unto us an Image as well of the
flesh as also of the spirit. If men knew themselves they should not need this
declaration: because they are nothing but the flesh but such is our hypocrisy,
which is bred by the bone, yt we see not our filthiness till the tree be made
manifest by ye fruit. Now therefore the Apostle puts us in mind, against what
vices we must war, yt we live not after the flesh. He reckens them not up
all, and that he shows in ye end: but of those which he reckons, it is
easy to gather what the rest be. He puts Adultery and Whoredom in the
first place: after yt he names uncleanness, which reaches to al ye parts of
vnshamfastnesse. Wa^tonesse is as it were ye instrument. for ye Greeks call
those wantons which behave themselves wa^to^ly and dissolutly. these four ar
referred unto one head, namely unchasteness. He joins worshipping of idols,
which in this place is taken for gross superstitions, which are manifest unto
the eyes of men. The seven kinds which follow next after, are of kin one to
another: unto which are joined two other afterward. He names Anger and Hatred,
which principally differ in this, that Anger is short: Autho. li. 2. Rethor.
and Hatred continues. Emulations and Envy are the causes of Hatred.
Furdermore Aristotle makes this difference between Emulation and Envy,
saying that he does Emulate, which takes it in greef that another excels
him or is better than he: not because his virtue or excellency greeueth him,
but because he would wish himself to be his superior or better. But he
enuieth, not which desires to excel, but which is grieved at the excellency
of others. and therefore he teaches that envy is a quallitie of base and
abject persons, and does attribute emulation to lofty and heroical hearts.
Paul pronounces them both to be a malladye of the Flesh. of Wrath also and
Hatred do spring Contentions, Shiftinges, Seditions or Vprores. at length come
manslaughters and Withcrafts or Poysoninges. By Banquettinges, he means
dissolute diet, and every vntemperatenesse of gluttony. Mark that he reckons
up Heresies among the works of the flesh. for thereof we gather that the
word Flesh is more largely extended then unto sensuality, as the Sophisters
feign. For what breeds heresies, but Ambition which occupies the principal
seat of the mind, and has no residence in a doltishe head? He says these
are manifest, least any by replying might think he had any thing profited. for
what avails it to deny that the flesh has dominion in us, when the fruits
do bewray the Tree?

21 Of which I tell you before.) With this so sharp a telling he meant not
only to terrify the Galathians, but also after a sort to girde at the false
apostles, who, setting aparte this doctrine that was far more profitable,
contended and iangled about ceremonies. And yet withal he also teaches us by
his example, to continue in these exhortaions and threatninges, according to
that in Esaye Cap. 58.1. Cry and cease not, tell my people their wickedness,
For what can be spoken more horribly, than that they, whatsoever they be, that
walk after the flesh are banished from the kingdom of God? who dare imagine
now that these vices be light and small, possess, is used in Paul this
greek word (...) which is to obtain by right of inheritance. Neither yet
do we obtain everlasting life, by any other right, but by the right of
adoption: as else where is seen.

22 But the fruit of the Spirit is charity, joy, peace, long suffering,
gentleness, benignity, faith.

23 Meekness, temperaunce, against such the law is not.

24 Those truly that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts.

25 If we live in the spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit.

26 Let us not be desirous of vaineglory, provoking one another, envying one
another.

22 But the fruits.) As before he condemned the whole nature of man, for that
it brings forth no fruits but faultye and reprobate: so now he teaches
that all virtues, all honest and well ordered affections do come of the
spirit: that is to say, from the grace of God, and from the renewing which
we have from Christ. It is as much therefore as if he had said, There comes
nothing of man but that which is evil, there is nothing that is good, but
comes of the holy ghost. For although there has often times appeared in me^
not regenerate, notable examples of meekness, faith, temporaunce and
liberality: yet for all that it is certain, yt they were but only deceiving
shows, there was a kind of notable virtue in Curious, in Fabricius, Temperance
in Cato, gentleness and liberality in Scipio, long suffering in Fabius: but
that only in the sight of men, but that only after a civil account or
estimation. but before GOD nothing is pure except it be out of the fountain of
all purity. I take Joy here not as Romans 14.17. but for the merinesse which we
show to our neighbors, and that which is contrary to waywardness: and so I
take faith for truth. that it may be contrary to suttlety, fraud, and lying. I
set Peace against brawlinges and contentions. Long suffering, is meekness of
mind, whereby it comes to pass that we take al things in good part, and
are not by and by ready to be angry. the rest are open enough. for the fruit
describes how it shall be manifest what every man's mind is. what than, will
some man say, shall we judge of the ungodly and Idolatours, which shined with
notoble show of virtues? for by their works they show to be espirituall. I
answer, as not all the works of the flesh are apparaunt in a carnal or
fleshly man, but they show them selves to be carnal with this or that vice: so
a spiritual man must not be deemed so, because of one virtue: for in the while
it will appear by other vices, that the flesh had dominion in him. which is
plainelye to be seen of all them whom I have named.

23 Against such.) Some understand simply, that the Law was not set out
against good works: because that of ill manners did spring good laws. but
Paul speaks this in a higher and more deep sense namely that where the
Spirit rules, the Law bears no longer the swaye, for the Lord by framing
our hearts unto his righteousness, delivers us from the rigor of the Law, so
that he will not deal with us according to the covenant thereof, nor hold
our consciences under guiltiness. The law in the mean while cease not to
do his office, by teaching and exhorting: but the Spirit of adoption
delivers us from subjection, and so he scorneth the false Apostles, who by
urging and enforcing the subjection of the Law, did not more bend themselves
to unloose the yoke thereof: which Paul teaches to be done, where the Spirit
of GOD bears swaye: whereof it follows, that they had no regard of
spiritual righteousness.

24. They that are Christ's. He adds this, that he may show that liberty
belongs unto all Christians, because they have renounced the flesh. And, he
warns the Galathians what true Christianitye is as touching their life: that
they should not profess falsely themselves to be Christians, (when they were
not Christians in life). He has used the word Crucified, that he might note
(unto them), that the mortification of the flesh is the effect of the cross
on Christ. neither is this the proper or own work of man, but we are grafted
by the grace of God, into the fellowship of the death of Christ, that we
should not any more live to our selves. Rom, 6. 5. Than therefore shall we
enjoy the privilege of the sons of GOD, if we be buried to gether with
Christ by the true denying of our selves, and in killing the old man. not
because the flesh is as yet utterly slain, but because it should not reign:
but rather give place to the spirit. The flesh and the lusts thereof. are
meant for the root and the fruits. For the Flesh is the naughtiness of
nature corrupted. from whenee all evils come* now it appears that the
members of Christ have wrong, if as yet they be brought in bondage under the
Law, from which they are loosed that are regenerate vy his spirit.

25 If we live in the Spirit.) Now Paul according to his custom, out of
doctrine gathers an exhortation. the death of the flesh is the life of the
spirit. and if so be the spirit of God lives in us it governs all our
doings. For always there shall be many which without shame will boast
themselves to live in the spirit: but Paul calls them back from words to
the trial of the thing. For as the soul does not live idlelye in the body,
but does send out moving and strength to the members, and all and singular
the parts: so the Spirit of God cannot be in us, but he will show forth
himself by the outward effects. Therefore by living is here meant, the inward
force or strength: by walking is meant the outward actions or doings. For this
is Paul's mind, that works are testimonies of a spiritual life. in the word
Walk there is a Metaphor which is often used.

26 Let us not be desirous.) These are special exhortations which were
needful for the Galathians: and never a whit less are they meet for our
time. Ambition is the mother of many mischiefs, not only in the whole
society or cominaltie of men, but chiefly and especially in the Church.
Therefore he teaches to take heed of her. For Vaineglorie is no other thing
here in Paul, but a desire of honor: where any desires to be above the rest.
For although the profane Philosophers condemn not every seeking after glory:
yet among Christians who soever is desirous of glory, for that he goes away
from true glory, is worthily condemned of vain and preposterous ambition. For
it is not lawful for us to boaste, otherwise than in God alone: for to boaste
without God is always mere vanity, mutual prouocations and enuiengs are the
daughters of ambition. For he that aspireth to the highest degree, of
necessity must needs envy the rest: thereof arise backbitings, bitings, and
prickings.

The syxt Chapter. 1 Brethren, although a man be prevented in any fall, you
which be spiritual, raise up such a man with the spirit of gentleness,
considering thee self, least thou also be tempted.

2 Bear ye one another burden: and fulfill ye so the law of Christ.

3 For if any man think himself to be any thing, when as he is nothing, he
deceives himself.

4 Let every man try his own work: and then he shall have glory in
himself, and not in another.

5 For every one shall carry his own burden.


ALthough a man be prevented.) As ambition is a very hurtful evil: so also
does importunate and overmuch rigor hurt greatly and that not sieldome which
is covered in deed with an honest color of zeal, but it arises often time of
pride, and of disdain and contempt of our brethren. For many, as though by
their brothers fault they had gotten occasion to triumpe (over them) do vex
and grieve the^ contumeliously and cruelly. and this they do, because they
bend themselves more to taunt than to amend them. They are in deed to be
reprehended that have offended: and many times severity and sharpness is
needful. It is convenient than to persist in reprehending, even until a man
come to importunity: but yet you must mingle your Vinegar with oil. That is,
use gentle perswasio^s as well as sharp reprehensyons.
And hervpon he teaches in this place that lenity must be used in the
correcting of our brothers faults: and that those are Godly and Christian
chidinges, which savor of gentleness. That he may the easilier obtain that,
he shows to what end godly reprehensions are used: namely to raise up him
which is fallen, that is, to restore him new. And that will never be wrought
with violence, nor with an accusing spirit, nor yet with sternenesse either of
countenance or words. it remains (then), to bring with us a quiet and
gentle spirit, if we mind to heal our brother. and, least any man should
show forth gentleness in gesture only, he requires the spirit. whereby he
declares, that they are meet to chasten their brethren, who have hearts
addicted to lenity. He commends gentleness about correcting our
brethren, with another argument, when he says, Prevented, for they that are
fallen unaware, or circumue^ted by deceit, to deal too hardly with such, were
small humanity or gentleness. But we know that the Devil is always ready to
deceive: and that we are beguiled of him a thousand manner of ways. when as
therefore we see any of our brethren fallen let us think that he is fallen
into the snares of Satan: and let us be touched with compassion, and withal
be the more ready to forgive. But there is no doubt but he makes a difference
between faults or falls, and inward wickedness, which is joined with a
deliberate and obstinate contempt of God. Such a wickedness and malicious
conspiring against God is to be taken up more seuerelye. for what shall
gentleness prevail there? yet the word, although which he puts in, means
as much as if he should bid to be forgiven, not only the weak which were
tempted, but them also which being tempted continued still therein. You that
are spiritual.) He does not speak iestinglye or in mockage: but howsoever
they were spiritual, although they were not utterly filled with the spirit,
yet it is the duty of such, to raise up them that are fallen. for to what
purpose are they better than other, but for the safety of their brethren? for
certainly, look how much more grace any man is endued with, so much the
more is he bound to them that have less, to spend himself about edifying
them. but because we are so backwarde, that we do amiss even in the best
duties: therefore he warns that they mingle withal no jot of the flesh.
Considering theeself.) Not without cause has he altered the number. for it is
an effectual admonition. while he appealeth to every one of them, and bids
them look into themselves. Thou whosoever thou art, says he, which playest
the correctour toward other, look upon theeselfe also for nothing is more
hard (to be done), than to bring us to the recounting or examining of our
own* infirmity. Whereas we are more than well sighted in marking other men's
faults: as touching our own faults, as Catullus says, We see not that end
of the Wallet that hangs on our back. therefore to the end he may sting
them the more sharpelye, he uses the singular number. The sense may be two
ways considered. for when we acknowledge our selves to be sinful, the
pardon of forgiveness which we would have to be given to us, we do
willinglye in like manner give unto other. Therefore some take the words of
Paul thus, Show not thy self unmerciful, or vnintreatable unto other, who
art theeselfe a sinner, and haste need of thy brothers mercy. Yet the other
Exposition does no less like me: whereas Paul commands us to beware,
lest while we correct other, we our selves offend. For it is a danger that
principallye we must beware of, and yet very hardelye can we beware of it:
because nothing is more ready then to pass measure. You may take, tempted,
for the present matter, or if you will, you may extend it to the present
matter, or if you will, you may extend it to the whole life. We must be
mindful than to begin at our selves, as often as we mind to correct vices: that
remembering our own infirmity, we may bear the more with others.

2 Bear you one another burden.) A very apt speech to commend humanity,
when he calls those infirmities or faults wherewith we are diseased, Burdens.
For nature does not teach us to help those that are ouerloded. He bids us
bear their burdens, not that we should by favoring or dissembling nourish
those evils wherewith our brethren are wayed down, but rather that we should
unburden them. and that is done with friendly and gentle correccions or
rebukinges. For there are many adulterers, which willinglye would make Christ
their baude: many Thieves which willinglye would make Christ their Receiver:
to conclude, there are many wicked naughtye packes of all sorts, which
willinglye would make him their patron: and all (they) would lay their
burdens upon the shoulders of the faithful that they should bear them. But
whereas he puts Bearing after raising up or repayring, there is no man but
he may see what Bearing it is that he requires of Christians. Fulfill the
Law of Christ.) This word Law while it is fitted to Christ, serves to the
circumstaunce of the reason. For there is a contrariety between the law of
Christ and that of Moses: as if he should say, If it be a pleasure to you to
observe the Law: lo, Christ does prescribe unto you a Law, which it becomes
you to prefer before all laws and that worthilye: namely that we should
hold mutual humanity among our selves. For he that has not this, has
nothing. on the contrary side he says the Law of Christ is fulfilled,
whereas every one eases his brother with mercy. whereby he shows that all
things are superfluous which belong not to charity: for the composition of
the Greek word expresses a sound and firm fulfilling. But because no man
perfourmeth in all respects that which Paul requires, therefore we are far
off all of us from perfection: and he that is least of all off in comparison of
others, yet in respect of God is very far off.

3 For if any man think. The construction of the words is doubtful, but the
meaning of Paul is certain. For this piece, when as he is nothing, at the
first show sounds thus, If any man, who otherwise is nothing, (as many men
there are of no account, and yet puffed up with a foolish persuasion of
themselves) attributes any thing to himself. but the sentence is more
general: and therefore may thus be resolved, Because all men be nothing: he
that will seem to be any thing, and persuades himself that he is somebodye,
he deceaueth himself. First therefore he pronounces us to be nothing:
whereby he means, that we have nothing our own of which we may boast: but
to be void of all goodness, that all our boasting may be mere vanity.
Secondely he gathers thereof, that they deceive themselves who challenge any
thing unto themselves. and it is a very absurd thing, whereas we take nothing
more in dogen, than to be mocked of others, that willingly we our selves will
mock our selves. The thinking upon this will make us much more favorable unto
others. for whereof comes fierce triumphing over other, whereof comes
stately severity: but of this that every man extolleth himself and
disdainefully despises others? take arrogancy out of the way, and we shall
all be very modest one to another.

4 Let every man try.) Paul has already bruised man's pride with a very sore
blow: but because it falls out for the most part thereby that while we
confer our selves with others, we make valuation of our selves according to
their base estimation: he says here there is no place for such comparison. Let
no man, says he, measure himself by another man's freedom, nor like of
himself therefore, because he more misliketh other than himself. but leaving
the view of other, let him search his own conscience: and consider what his
own work is. That is true praise, not which we get us by backbiting others:
but which we have without comparison. Some think it is an Ironia as though
Paul should say, Thou flatterest thy self because of other men's faults: but
if thou look upon thy self who thou art, than shall thou have the praise that
longes to thee, that is none at all: because there is no man that deserves a
drop of praise. Afterward they expound that which follows Every man shall
carry his own burden, as thus, Is accustomed to bear. etc. But the sense
hangs together better without any figure. for the words sound thus, As
concerning thee self alone, thou shall have praise, not by comparing thee self
by others. I know why the Ironia likes them, namely because the Apostle in the
next sentence has brought to nothing all the glory of men. But Paul in this
place speaks of the boasting of a good conscience, which the Lord grants
unto his, and whereof Paul rejoices Acts. 23.1. and that is nothing else but
a recknowledging of the grace of God, which in no wise does make a man proud,
but stirs him to glorify God. Such an occasion of praise do the Godly
find in themselves, which they ascribe, not to their merits, but to the
goodness of God. This is our boasting, says he, 2. Corin. 1.12. the
testimony of a good conscience, that we have faithfully been conuersaunt.
etc. And Christ says, Enter into thy Chamber, do well before thy father in
secret, and thy Father which is in secret shall reward thee, Math. 6.7.
Although to speak properly he affirms nothing, but teaches that this shall
be a legitimate and firm praise, if every one be valued acording to that
which he is himself, and not as another man is. It is then a conditional
speech: as if he should say that none else shall be accounted good, but that
they severally are found to be such.

5 Every one shall bear.) To the end he may shake off from us sloth and
disdain, he sets before us the judgment of GOD: where every one
seuerallye shall give an accounte of his life without comparing. For this is it
that deceives us: for that a poor blind man among blind men seems to
himself to be well sighted, and he that is brown among black men thinks
himself white. He denies that these imaginations shall have any place in the
judgment of God: because every one shall there bear his own burden, and
shall not acquit one another from their sins. this is the very right
meaning of Paul.

6 Let him which is taught in the word, minister unto him which teaches, in
all good things.

7 Be ye not deceived, God is not mocked. for that which a man sows, that
also shall he reap.

8 For he that sows for flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he
that sows for the Spirit, of the Spirit shall reap life everlasting.

9 But let us not be weary with doing that which is good. for if we shrink
not, we shall reap in due time.

10 Therefore where as we have time, let us do well toward all* but specially
toward them who are of the household of faith.

6 Let him minister.) It is very likelye that even than the Teachers and
Ministers of the word were not seen too. and yet for all that it is a very
foul unkindness. For how heinous a thing is it to hold back from them
bodilye food, by whom our souls are fed? or not to vouchsafe them an
earthly recompense, of whom we receive heavenly riches? But this is and has
been also in former times the manner of the World to paumper largelye the
ministers of Satan, but to godly Pastors to minister food hard and scante.
And albeit it is not meet for us, neither too much to complain, nor to be
too handfast of our right: yet ought Paul to exhort the Galathians to
perform their duty. wherein he was the more liberal and bold: because he
pleaded not his own cause privately, but provided for the common utility of
the Church, having no regard of his own commodity. He saw that the
Ministers of the Word were therefore neglected, because the Word it self was
contemned. for it cannot be, if the Word he had in estimation, but that the
Ministers are also honestly and liberalie handled. Moreover this is the
wiliness of Satan, to defraud Godly ministers of their living, that the
Church may be destitute of such. Paul for that he was careful as
touching the preservation of the Ministry, commands a care and regard to
be had of good and faithful Pastors. Take Word (...) for the Doctrine of
godliness. He monisheth that they are to be nourished, by whom we are taught
in the Word. by what right than are nourished in the Papacy either the idle
bellyes of dumme men, or else mad beasts, who have no fellowship with the
doctrine of Christ?

In all good things. Not because he would have superfluous abundance heaped
up without measure. but that nothing should be wanting to the necessary helps
of life. For Ministers both ought to be content with a spare living, and also
the danger of riot and pomp is always to be prevented. as much than as
need does require, let the faithful have all that is theirs ready for Godly
and holy Teachers to serve their turn. for with what reward shall they
recompense the inestimable treasure of everlasting life, which they obtain by
their preaching.

7 God is not scorned.) He did put this too, to do away excercises
wherewith many are wont to be turned away. one he lays that he must bring up
his household, another he says he has nothing left to bestow or give away.
so it falls out that but few do their duty, and they for the most part
are not enough, where so many beside are slack. Paul shows that these excuses
are but vain, because the matter touches or concearneth GOD: which the world
thinks not. neither is here touched only the living of man, but how much
Christ and his Gospel is esteemed of us. This place is a testimonye that the
fashion of despising faithful Pastors began not first in these our days. but
such despisinges shall not fall out scotfree to the wicked. For what a man
sows. That is to say, that which holds us back from liberality, because
we think that that is quite gone from us that passes into another bodies
keeping: besides that because we be always afraid for our selves in this
life, Paul on the contrary side does compare this life to the time of
sowing, and says, while we do well we make a seed season. whereof is spoken
in the second to the Corinthians: where he did use the same similitude. I
would this were thoroughly persuaded us, how willingly we should bestow our
selves and our goods upon our neighbors, bent always upon the hope of
Harvest: as husbandmen who do nothing with better will then sow (their Corn).
But whereas they abide nine months with a patient mind, to gather in a
corruptible Harvest: we in the waiting for blessed immortality do fainte and
shrink.

8 For he that sows to his flesh,) This is a distribution of the parts after
the general sentence. To sow to the flesh, is to provide and care for the
necessities of this present life, without any regard of the life to come. They
which do so, shall gather such Corn as their sowing deserves: for they shall
heap up that, that ill shall perish. Others do expound, To sow in the
flesh, for to cherishe the concupiscences of the flesh: and Corruption for
destruction. but the former exposition does better agree with the text In that
I have translated (it) otherwise than the old interpreter and Erasmus, I have
not done it without cause. The words of Paul in greek sound thus, sow into
the flesh, and what other thing is that but so to be addicted to the flesh,
that thou directest all thy study to the commodity and regard thereof? But
he that sows for the spirit.) I take Spirit for a spiritual life, to
which they are said to be sown who more respect heaven than the earth: and
do so order their life, that they aspire to the kingdom of God. they
therefore shall reap the incorruptible fruit of spiritual studies in heaven.
Furthermore he calls them spiritual studies, or excercises of their end:
howsoever otherwise they are outward and pertayne to the body. of which sort
is this very same whereof now he treats, namely to Nourish the Pastors. If
the Papists after their manner go about out of these words to build up the
righteousness of works, I have said else where how easy a matter it is to
confute their follies. For it does not follow hereof, if eternal life be a
reward, either that we are justified by works, or else that works deserve
salvation. for that this same very thing also is freelye given, because GOD
vouchsafes such works, which he has given unto us, worthy such honor
that he promises unto them a reward which they deserve not. If any man
require a fuller resolution, first I deny that we have any good works which
God should reward, but (those) which we have of his grace, secondly I say that
the good works which we do by the guiding and directing of the holy Ghost,
are the fruits of the free adoption: thirdly I say, that they are not only
unworthy of so much as a very small trif^ling reward: but that they are
utterly worthy of damnation: because they are blemished and spotted always
with many blots. and what have blots to do with the sight of God? fourthly I
say, that although a thousand times reward is promised to works, that yet
there is no reward due of covenant, except the whole law be performed. but
good Lord how far off be we from that performaunce: Let the Papists now
go, and assay to break into Heaven by the merits of works: but we do
willingly confess with Paul and the whole Scripture, that those things which
otherwise we cannot obtain, but by the mere gift of God, yet that the same
are repayed to our works* in the name of a reward.

9 Let us not be weary with doing that which is good.) Good in this place
signifies not ye same which right is, but benignity or kindness: and is
referred unto men* he monisheth than that we be not weary in helping our
neighbors, and in doing good turns, and in using liberallitie. A precept that
is very necessary. for whereas we are by nature more slow then needs to do
the duetyes of charity, innumerable stombling blocks come often in the way,
which hold us back when we are well minded. We happen upon many that are
unworthy, upon many that are unthankful: the great multitude of our own
necessities ouerwhelmeth us: We spend all that we have with giving here and
there: the cold devotion of others quenches our beat. last of all the whole
world is full of impedimentes and lets, which turns us away from a right
course. Therefore Paul does does well, when he hartens us, lest we be not
weary and sit down. If we faint not. That is to say, so at length shall we
reap the fruit which God promises, if we continue till the end. For they
which persevere not, are like unto loytering husbandmen, who after they have
plowed and sowed, leave their work half done, whereas harrowing is needful
(too), least either the Birds eat up the seed, or the sun scortche it, or
the cold consume it, so in vain do we begin to do well, except we proceed
till we come to the end. He makes mention of due time, least that any desire
to gather aforehand the fruit in this life, should be deprived of the
spiritual Harvest. Let the faithful therefore by hope and patience keep
under and bridle their desire.

10 When we have time. He follows still the similitude. for in as much as
every season is not meet for tylling and sowing, paynefull and thriftie
husbandmen set upon every occasion, and suffer it not like idle fellows to
slip away. Whereas therefore GOD has appointed all this present life, to
plowing and sowing, let us use the time least ability be taken from us, if
we shall be negligente. Notwithstanding Paul having begone at liberality to
be used toward the Ministers, does now extend his doctrine more largelye.
for he bids us to do well to all: but he specially requesteth for those
that be of the household of faith, that is to say, the faithful, seeing that
they are of the same household we be. For therefore has he used this
Metaphor, that the felowshipe, which necessaryly must be among the members
of one household, might the more provoke us. Than common humanity or
kindness makes us debtors unto all: but to the faithful, a more straight
band of spiritual kindred, which the Lord has hallowed between us. (makes
us bebters).

11 You see with what manner of letters I have written unto you with mine own
hand.

12 Whosoever they be that will please outwardlye in the flesh, they compel
you to be Circumcised, least they suffer persecution through the Cross of
Christ.

13 Neither do they which are circumcised keep the Law themselves: but they
would have you circumcised, that they might glory in your flesh.

11 Ye see.) The greek Verb has a doubtful termination, which agrees both
to the imperative and the Indicative mood. but it makes little or no matter,
as touching the sense. Paul to the end he may the more set forth his care
and diligence to the Galathians, shows that he has written so long an
Epistle with his own hand. and also that he may make them the more
attentive to read it, or hear it read. For so much the more pains as he
took in their behofe, so much the more should they be moved to read it, not
slightly, but very dilligently.

12 Whosoever they be that mean to please.) First, to mean to please in the
flesh, is ambitiously to hunt after the praise of men, not for edifiing sake.
and he uses a compounded verb, which signifies to be favored through the
allurements of a smothe and slattering countenance and words. He accuses
than the false Apostles of ambition, as if he should say, Will ye know what
manner of fellows they be, which lay upon you the necessity of
Circumcision? what they shoot at? what they hunt after? you are deceived, if
you think them to be moved with any Godly zeal: but their mind is to get
or else to maintain the favor of men by this recompense. For whereas they
were Jews, they meant by this means to keep still the good will of their
Nation, or at the least to escape their hatred. So for the most part are the
ambitious accustomed, by flattering like Slaves those by whose favor they
hope they may escape: they creep into their hearts, to the end that when
they have cast down better than themselves, they may play rex alone. He
discovers this wicked purpose unto the Galathians, that they might take heed
to themselves. Only least they should suffer persecution. Again he calls the
Cross of Christ, the pure preaching of the Gospel, but he alludeth to their
daintiness, in that they would teach Christ without the Cross. For this was
the cause why the Jews were moved with so hateful a rage against Paul, for
that they could not abide his falling away from ceremonies. these therefore
(I mean the false Apostles) did flatter the Jews, to the end they might
escape persecution. But if they had themselves kept the Law, it had been the
more to be borne withal: but they troubled the whole Church for their own
quietness sake: they made no stop at it to lay a tyrannical yoke upon
consciences, that they might escape scotfree from bodily vexation. Therefore for
fear of the cross they corrupted the true preaching of the Cross.

13 Neither they that have circumcision.) The old interpreter and Erasmus have
thus, which are circumcised,) but because I suppose Paul to speak of the
teachers only, and not generally of all: to avoid ambiguitie, I had rather to
translate it so. The meaning than is thus, They do not this for the zeal of
the Law, in that they bind you with the yoke of ceremonies. for with their
Circumcision they keep not the Law. With pretending the Law they require you to
be circumcised: but whereas they themselves are circumcised, they perform not
that which they inioyne to others. But there arises a doubt, whereas he says
They keep not the Law, whether he meant it of the whole law, or else of
ceremonies. for there are some that expound it thus, They truly fulfill not
the Law, because it is a burden not able to be born, but he rather accuses
the^ of falsehood, for yt they would quietly pass over ye law, as often as envy
was away, which plague spreads it self abroad also in every place. for at
this day you shall find many who defend the Popish tyranny through ambition
rather than of conscience. I speak of the Court Apostles, and them that love
their bellies. they will pronounce as it were out of an Oracle that the
statutes of the holy church of Rome are reverently to be observed and kept.
And what do they the whilst? they set no more by all the holy decrees of
Rome, than by the braying of an ass: but they will save one. To be brefe, such
controversy had Paul with those deceuers, as we have at this day with the
counterfeit professors of the Gospel, who mingling Christ with the Pope, do
frame unto us a monster. Paul therefore pulls the visor from ye face of
such, when he teaches that they do nothing sincerely: but command
Circumcision, that they may boast themselves to the Jews, because they have
brought with them young Scholars. for this is to glory in their flesh. They
will make a Triumpe of you, says he: and so they abuse your body to hunte
after favor, when they have showed unto the false followers of the Law, in
your mangled flesh a mark of peace and and agreement.

14 God forbid that I should glory, but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by which the world is crucified unto me, and I to the world.

15 For in Christ Jesus neither Cirrumcision avails any thing, nor yet
vncircmcision, but a new Creature.

16 And whosoever shall walk by this rule, peace be upon them and mercy, and
upon the Israel of God.

17 In the rest let no man work me grief. for I bear the marks of our Lord
Jesus Christ in my body.

18 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, Brethren. Amen.

It was sent to the Galathians from Rome.

14 God forbid.) Now he sets the sincerity of his heart against the
counsayles of the false apostles: as if should say, They least they should
bear any cross be compelled to bear any cross or any affection, deny the
Cross of Christ, and buy the favor of men by means of your flesh: to be
brief they make a triumph of you. But my triumph and my glory is in the
Cross of the Son of God. Except the Galathians had been clean without
common sense, ought they not to have detested those, whom they saw so to
rejoice even whilst they were in hasarde? To boast in the Cross of Christ is
as much as if he had said in Christ crucified, but that it shows more. for
it lignifieth that death that was full of slander and reproach, yea rather
accursed of GOD, that therefore which men abhor, and whereof they are
ashamed, in that, he says, he does boast himself, because he has a perfect
felicity in the same. for whereas the chiefest felicity is, there is the
glory. but why is it not else where? for although salvation be declared in
the cross of Christ: what shall we say of his resurrection? I answer,
that in the Cross is contained the whole redemption, and the parts thereof:
but the resurrection of Christ does not lead us away from the Cross. Note
also that he flees any other boasting no otherwise than a deadlye evil.
This word, Be it away, signifies as much every where in Paul, as thus,
God turn away this mischief, or, this monstrous thing. By which the World.)
Because (...) is the Masculyne Gender, the Relative in the Greek agrees with
both Christ and Cross, yet more fitlye is it, in my judgment, to refer it
to Cross. for by it properlye do we dye to the world. And what does World
signify? without doubt it is set opposite to a new creature. Whatsoever
than is contrary to the spiritual kingdom of Christ, is the World: because
it belongs to the Old man. or, that I may utter it at one word the World
is as it were the obiecte and mark of the Old man. Paul says the World is
crucified to him, in such a meaning as he witnesses Phillippians, Chapt. 3.
ver. 8. that he accounted all things as dongu^. For the crucifiing of the
World, is the contempt and forsaking of the World. He adds in like
manner, that he is crucified to the World: Whereby he means that he much
indeauoureth that he should be nothing, and that he should be brought to
naught. because nothing is that which belongs to a dead man. or else truly
he means that by the mortificatio^ of the Old man he has renounced ye
world. For whereas some expound it thus, If the world repute me a curse and
an outcast, I in like manner condemn it and hold it accursed: it seems to
me to be somewhat far off from the ^^^de of Paul, notwithstanding it shall
lie in the Readers to (...)

15 For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision.) The reason why he is crucified
to the world and the world to him, is: because only a new creature avails
in Christ, into whom he is grafted. All other things than must give place,
yea rather dye and pearishe. I mean those things which hinder the renewing of
the Spirit. and this is that he speaks of also in the second to the
Corinthians cap. 5.17. If any be in Christ let him be a new creature: that is
to say, if any man will be accounted in the kingdom of Christ, let him be
reformed or new shaped by the Spirit of God: let him not live any more to
himself nor to the world, but let him be raised up into a new life. But why
he infers thereof that neither Circumcision, nor yet uncircumcision
avails, is aforesaid. because in deed the truth of the Gospel swalloweth
up and makes void all the figures of the Law.

16 Whosoever shall walk by this rule.) Whosoever, says he, keep this rule,
well and happy shall it be to them. this is an happy prayer, and it is a sign
of approbation. He means than that they are to be beloved and to be embraced
with all favor, who bring such kind of Doctrine: contrariwise those that
depart from that doctrine are not worthy to be heard. He set down this
word Rule, to express a certain and perpetual tenure, to which, all Godly
Ministers of the Gospel ought to stick fast. For as the Master Carpenters
which build houses, do work them by the rule, that all the parts may join
together with a just proportion among themselves and agreement: so he assigns
a rule to to the Ministers of the Word, whereby they may rightlye and
orderlye build the Church. This place ought to cause wondrous
cheerfulness in both the faithful and sincere Teachers, and also to all
those that suffer themselves to be fourmed according to their rule, because
they hear by the mouth of Paul that they are blessed of GOD. there is no
cause wherefore we should so fear the Popes Thunderboltes, if GOD out of
Heaven do promise us peace and mercy. The word Walk, may belong as well to
the Minister as to the people, although specially it belongs to the
Ministers. The future tence of the Verb (namelye shall walk) is put to note
unto us perseuering.

Upon the Israel of God. He mocketh after a sort the vayn boasting of the
false Apostles, who bragged that they were lineally descended from Abraham. He
has made therefore two Isreal's, one that is counterfeite which appears in
the sight of man: and another of God. Circumcision was a visarde in the sight
of men: but regeneration, was the very thing it self in the sight of God. To
conclude, he now calls them the Israel of God, whom before he called the
sons of Abraham by faith: and so he comprehends the faithful, which were
grown together into one church, as well of the Gentiles, as of the Jews. On
the contrary side Israel that is of the flesh boasts his only kindred and
name, of which he entreats, Romans Chapt. 9. ver. 17.

17 Let no man work me grief. Here he takes upon him his authority to
bridle the adversaries. for as in the title of superiority he pronounces
this, Let them leave troubling me in the course of my preaching. He was ready
to suffer troubles for every ones sake: but he would not be troubled with
contradictions. Therefore to work grief, is to gaineset themselves to trouble
the proceedings of his labor. He says, In the residue, namely except in a
new creature: in this sense, That one thing is enough to me: as for the
residue, because they belong not to the purpose, I regard them not. let no man
therefore move any question unto me about these matters. And he extolleth
himself above all men, granting no man to be so bold, to gaynsay his
ministry or office. Word for word it is, the rest, or the residue, which,
Erasmus in mine opinion has ill translated, henceforth.

For I bear the marks. He shows with what confidence he takes upon him
that authority, namelye because he bears the badges of Christ in his
body. What are those? forsoothe prisons and bonds, whipping, blows,
stonings, finally all manner reproaches, which he had suffered for the
testimony of the Gospel. For as earthly warfares have their badges, whereby
Graund captains do ennoble the valiauncie of their souldioures: so our
Captain Christ beautifieth with his badges those whose notable labor he has
used, that they may notably shine out among others. But these latter do much
differ from those former. for they savor of the cross, and therefore are
ignominious in the sight of the world. which thing also the word stigma does
declare. For stigmata word for word sounds prickinges: but so in time paste
were marks called which were burned in the flesh of strange borne slaves, or
fugitives and runawayes, or evil doers. Therefore Paul did speak aptly, when
he boasts himself to be adorned with those marks, wherewith Christ is
accustomed to set forth his most valiant soldiers: that is to say, such as
are filthy in the eyes of the world and shameful, but in the sight of God and
his Angels do pass all worldly honors.

18 The grace of Christ be with your spirit.) He does so wish unto them
grace, that not only he may power out himself toward them largely, but that
they may take hold of grace also with a true feeling of the heart. For than
we truly enjoy it, when it is come even unto our spirit. God therefore is to
be prayed unto, that he will prepare a seat for his grace in our hearts. Amen.

FINIS.
Pa. Line. Faults. Corrections. 3 3 be pacled in be placed in 6 20 there he
signifies there is signifies 10 note. hidden truth hidden faith 11 13 read
the note, being Caluines words, 12 3 ouerthrower overthrow 12 34 it 10. Do it,
Do 13 4 doctrine be doctrine also be 13 15 attempt exemept 13 35 purposely
purposedlye 17 8 and does it not and yet it does not 17 29 that than 17 38
execute, when execute ye same, when 23 37 prescribe subscribe 27 15 sin sum
27 17 them they than 29 29 (and) (for) 29 30 that that that 30 9 after the not
after the 30 36 men accustomed men are accustomed 37 28 to be frivolous too
frivolous 41 22 rather in the rather the 43 22 came came or contrary 45 24 we
speak speak 46 31 or for for 48 15 healthful hateful 62 1 he did it did 63
16 agreemente argument 63 36 accidently, accidentally, 66 6 end kind 67 15
And so thy And to thy 67 24 show shame 69 36 finallye finely, or, very well 71
15 requires enquireth 71 35 bring that bring somewhat 74 2 writers waiters 74
30 place the place about the 75 20 is the is he the 75 22 was put was set in 79
Note. Paedagogies Pedagogus 79 26 under unto 79 27 forward forward the 81 24
worshippers obseruers 84 28 of the went of that which 85 19 made need 85 30 of
his of this 86 9 less long less belong 86 22 up upon 87 3 sin sum 87 9
But let But to let 88 11 that in times then in times 90 24 moderate
unmeasurable. 98 36 commanded commended 104 6 Angelical Allegorical 106 21
There Paul Therefore Paul 110 1 Hom. 9. Romans 9. 111 31 too the faith also the
faith 112 9 hunche hinche or repine 116 12 because shall because he shall 117
21 wickedness weakness 124 14 boast lost 129 18 balking walking 131 3
shiftinges striuings 135 37 new anew 137 7 of forgiveness or forgiveness 140
1 that they they that 140 6 poor blind man poreblinde man 140 17 for flesh for
his flesh 141 30 exercises excuses 147 32 affection affliction

FINIS.

