A Commentary of M. John Calvin, upon the Epistle to the Colossians.

And translated into English by R. V.

Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee. Psalm.
122.6. AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purfoote, and are to be sold at his shop
over against S. Sepulchers Church.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL and reverend fathers master Noel, Deane of Poules, M.
Mullins Archdeacon of London, master D. Walker, Archdeacon of Essex, and
master Towers professor of divinity, his singular good friends and Patrons,
R. V. wishes all health.
MAny in the dedicatio^s of their trauails are accustomed to set forth the
praises of such parsons as they do dedicate the same unto. And surely J think
it not amiss if flattery be absent. For who is ignorant that virtus laudata
crescit, praise virtue, and it shall increase. I speak not this right
worshipful and reverend fathers, to the end that J mean to do the like to
you, although no man that knows you but he will say you worthelye deserve the
same: for if J should either praise your learning or diligence in your
vocation which every where is known, or your, godly conversation which unto
your nighest friends is well tried, or your liberality which all those that
have need, but spetially the Godly poor have found and daily do find, who
might justly reprehe^d me: but letting pass these things to the consideration
of upright judges, I purpose to show and that very brieflye what has moved me
to dedicate this present book unto your worshippes. you know that I received
at your hands (that worthy man master D. Watts being then alive, whom with
reverence I remember) that living which J have: and although you sell not
your benefices (as many in these days do) yet reason would that J should not
remain unthankful for the same, though it were a great deal less then it
is. And whereas want of abilitye would not suffer me to recompense otherwise
your good will, yet rather then still I should continue unthankful, I chose
this little commentary of that worthy father M. Calvin to supply that which
else might be left undone: vvherin J vvish that my heart lay open to be vievved:
then would you not more regard the thing it self, which no doubt is worthy
the accepting, the^ the good vvil of him that presents the same unto you.
Fare you well. At high Easter the first of November.

Yours to command R. V.

The Argument upon the epistle of. S. Paul to the Colossians by master Calvin.
THere were three Cities one near to another in Phrygia, of which Paul makes
mention in this Epistle: Laodicea, Hierapolis, and Colossae, which Orosius
testifyeth to have fallen down while Nero reigned, with an Earthquake. And so
not long after this Epistle was written: three famous churches were destroyed
with a lamentable and fearful chance. A notable spectacle forsooth of God his
judgment: if we lacked not eyes. The Colossians indeed were first enstructed
in the gospel, not by Paul, but faithfully and purely by Epaphaus and other
ministers. But by and by Satan according to his solemn and perpetual custom,
crept in with his darnell and tares, that he might overthrow the right faith
there. Some think that there were two kind of men which assaied to lead away
the Colossians from the purity of the Gospel. For on the one side the
Philosophers by disputinge of the stars of destenye and such like tryfles, on
on the other side the Jews by urging and enforcing their ceremonies, cast
abroad many mistes to overthrow Christ, but they which think so are moved
thereunto by an ouerlight conjecture orgesse. because forsooth Paul makes
mention of thrones and powers and heavenly creatures. And whereas they add
also the name of Elements, it is more then ridiculous. But because I am not
purposed to confute the opinions of other, I will only speak mine own mind,
and that which by sound reasons I may gather.

First of all, it appears sufficiently by the words of Paul, that the
vaclets practiced this, (namely) to mingle Christ with Moses, and together with
the Gospel to retain the shadows of the Law: whereupon it is very likely that
they were Jews. And for that they painted out their crafty dealing with
beautiful colors: therefore Paul calls it vain Philosophy. Although
withal (in my judgment) he respected in this word the slye reasons wherewith
they dalyed, which in deed were sharp or subtle, but yet vain and profane.
For they imagined an entrance or access to God by the Angels, and many such
like revelations brought they in, as are contained in the books of Dionysuis
of the heavenly Hiera^chie, drawn out of the schole of the Platonicall
Philosophers. This is the principal mark whereunto he leueleth, that he may
teach all things to have their being in Christ: and that therefore he alone is
enough and enough to the Colossians. But he keeps this order. After his
accustomed superscription, by praising them, he makes them the more attentive
to hear him. After that, to the end he may shut up the way against all new
and strange inventions, he gives a testimonial to the doctrine which before
they had received by Epaphras. afterward whilst he wishes them increase of
faith from the Lord, he means that as yet somewhat is wanting: that he may
make a way for him self more firmly to instruct them. On the contrary part he
sets forth the grace of god to themward with the titles to the same
belonginge, lest they should make small account thereof. Then follows an
instruction, in which he teaches that all the parts of our salvation are
planted in Christ only, that they should seek nothing elsewhere, and he
mentions yt they have obtained in Christ, whatsoever ^ood things there are,
to the end they may the more diligently have regard to keep him to the end.
And truly even this one Chapter is utterly enoughe, to make us account of this
Epistle, although it be but short, as of an in comperable treasure. For what is
greater in all the heavenly doctrine, than to have Christ skilfully painted
out: that we pray see his virtue and power, his office, and all the fruits
and commodities which come from him to us? For even in this one thing ch^^fely
do we differ from the papists, that whereas we be both called Christians, and
profess our selves to believe in Christ, they devise to themselves a Christ
that is torn, deformed, made void of his strength and power, spoiled of his
office: to be short, such a Christ as is rather a ghost or shadow then a
Christ in deed: but we embrace him as here he is described and set out by
Paul, namely a lively and effectuous Christ. Therefore, to speak it at a word,
this Epistle shows the difference between the true Christ and the fained.
than which nothing can be wished either better or more excellent. About the end
of the first chapter, he seeks to win authority unto him again by means
of his calling and person: and he does honorably set out the worthiness of the
Gospel. In the second Chapter he opens more plainly the cause wherefore he
did write: namely that he might prevent the danger which he saw to hang over
their heads, where by the way he treats of his love toward them to the^de
they might acknowledge he had a care for their sauegarde. From that he passes
over to exhorting, wherewith he applies his doctrine before going as it were to
a present use: For he also bids them settle them selves in Christ alone,
and condemns it of vanity, whatsoever it is, that is without Christ. He
speaks by name of Circumcision, abstinence of meats, and other outward
exercises: unto which they do ouerthwartly and amiss bind the service of
God. He speak'th also of the preposterous service of Angels whom they dep^^ed
in Christ's room. And being moved by occasion of circumcision he does also by
ye way touch what office and nature of ceremonies was. Whereupon he
determines that they were abrogated by Christ. And these things does he fill
ye end of ye second chapter. In ye third chapter, he sets ye true duties
of godliness, wherewith ye Lord will have us b^fied, against those vain precepts
to ye observing whereof ye false apostle would constrayn the faithful. And he
begins at the spring head it self, that is to say, at mortification of the
flesh and newnes of life: from whence he draws brook, that is to say,
particular exhortations: some, which belong to all Christians alyke: and some,
which privately partayne to certain persons, according to the reason and manner
of their calling. In the beginning of the fourth Chapter he goes on still
with the same argument: after that when he has commended himself to their
prayers, he declares by many tokens how greatly he loves them, and is
desirous to poruide and care for their salvation.

A Commentary of M. John Calvin upon the Epistle of Paul to the Colossians,
done into English by R. V.
1 Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and Timothy a brother.

2 To the Saints which are at Colossa, and to the faithful brethren in
Christ: grace unto you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ.

3 We give thanks to God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, always
praying for you.

4 Having heard of your faith which is in Christ Jesus, and love toward all
Saints.

5 For the hope laid up for you in heaven, whereof you have heard before by
the word of truth, that is to say, of the Gospel.

6 Which is come unto you as also in the universal World it does bring forth
fruit and is increased, as in you also, from the day which you heard, and knew
the grace of God in truth.

7 As also you have learned of Epaphras our beloved fellow servant, who is
toward you a faithful Minister of Christ.

8 Who also has made known unto us your love in the spirit.

Paul an Apostle.) It has been already often declared to what purpose these
superscriptions do belong. Because the Colossians had never seen him: and
that therefore his authority was not as yet so firm among them that his
own name alone was sufficient: he does at the beginning tell them that he was
ordained the Apostle of Christ by the will of God. Whereof it followed that he
did not rashly in that he wrote to them he know not: because he did the
Embassade, committed to him of God. For he was not appointed to one Church, but
his Apostleship had way to all. The name of, Saints, which he attributes unto
them, is more honorable: but in that he calls the^ faithful brethren, he
does more gently allure the^ to hearken unto him. The rest you may seek out of
the former Epistles.

3 We give thanks.) He commends the faith and love of the Colossians, whereby
he may ye better confirm the^ cheerfully to go forward and to be constant.
Beside that whereas he shows yt he has such a persuasion of them, he wins
unto him their hearts, whereby they may be the more ready and apt to receive his
doctrine. Always must you mark, that in steed of gratulation or reioicing,
he uses giving thanks. whereby he teaches, that in all reioicing strayight
way the remembrance of Gods goodness ought to come in mind: because it is his
good gift whatsoever it is, that happens unto us joyful and happy. Moreover
by his example he does admonish us, that we not only be thankful for
those things which the Lord does bestow upon ourselves, but for that also
which he bestows upon others. But for what things does he give thanks to
the Lord? for the faith and love of the Colossians. Therefore he confesses
that both of them are given of God: or else his thanksgiving were [but]
feigned. And what have we but of his liberality? If so be that the very
smallest things that we have, come from him, how much rather must we
confess the same of these two gifts, in which the whole sum of our
excellency is planted? To god and the Father, Thus expound it, To God which is
the Father of Christ. For it is not lawful unto us to acknowledge any other
God, but him that has showed forth himself unto us in his Son. And this is
the Raye which alone does open the gate unto us if we will come unto the true
God. For even therefore he is a father unto us, because he has embraced us in
his only begotten Son, and in him has set forth his fatherlye favor to be
viewed of us. Always for you. Some do thus expound it, We give thanks unto
God always for you, that is to say continually, And some thus, Praying for
you always. It may also be thus expounded, As often as we pray for you we
do withal give thanks unto GOD. But this is the playner and more simple
meaning, We give thanks to God, and withal we pray. Whereby he declares,
th^^ the state of the faithful is never so perfect in this world, but that at
all times somewhat is amiss or wanting. For even he who has very well begone
may every day reuolte or fall a hundred times: and of necessity we must
continually go forward, whilst as yet we be on our journey. So than must we
mind ioying for graces received, and for the same give God thanks, that withal
we desire of him perseuering and increase.

4 Having heard our faith.) This was a provocation both of love toward them,
and of care for their salvation, when he heard that they excelled in faith and
love. And certainly such force ought the excellent gifes of God to work in us,
that wheresoever they appear, they should enforce us to be in love with them.
He calls it faith In Christ, to the end we should always remember, that Christ
is the proper or very mark (for the level) of faith. He puts Charity to
the Saints, not to ye end he would exclude or shut out other (therefrom), but
for that as every one is near joined unto us in God, so more neerelye ought we
to embrace him with a peculiar love. True love than will extend it self to
all men universally, because even all men are our flesh, and are created after
the Image of God: but as concearning degrees, it will begin at them that be of
household the of faith.

5 For the hope laid up for you in the heavens.) Never will the hope of
eternal life be idle in us, but will bring forth in us love. For needs must
it be that he, who is certainly persuaded that the treasure of life is laid up
for him in heaven, will set naught by the world, and will have a longing
thither. The meditating upon the heavenly life forces our affections both to
serve God and to seek after love. The sophisters abuse this testimony or
place to extol the merits of works, as though the hope of salvation depended
upon works: but their reason is frivolous. For it follow^th not, that hope is
therefore grounded on works, because it pricketh us up to desire to live well:
whereas nothing is more effectuous thereunto, than the free goodness of God,
which bring al ye confidence of works to naught. But there is a Met^^e^nya in
the word hope: because it is taken for the thing he^^tofor For hope in our
hearts is the glory which we hope for in heaven. But yet whereas he says, That
we have hope laid up in heaven, he means that the faithful ought to be as
sure of the promise of everlasting felicity, as if they had already a treasure
laid up in a certain and sure place. Of which you have heard before. Because
eternal salvation is a thing above the capacity of our understanding:
therefore he adds, that the certainty thereof was brought unto the
Colossians by the Gospel. and withal he shows them aforehande that he will
bring no new thing: but only that he means this, to confirm them in that
doctrine which they have already received. Erasmus has translated [it thus]
the true word of the Go^pell. Neither am I ignorant, that, after the manner of
the Hebrews, the Genitive case is often used in Paul in place of the Epithet
or Adjective: but here the words of Paul have a greater Emphasis or force.
For in the top or highest degree he names the Gospel, the word of truth,
for honors sake: whereby they might the more surely and firmelye abide in the
revelation taken from it. And so the word Gospel is joined appositiuely.

6 As also in the whole world it does fructify.) This avails as well to the
confirmation as to the comfort of the godly, to see far and wide the effect
of the Gospel, in gathering many unto Christ. In deed the faith thereof
depends not upon the success thereof, so that therefore we should believe,
because many believe. Although the whole world shrink, although heaven it
self fall, yet the conscience of a godly man ought not to waver: because God
notwithstanding, in whom the conscience is grounded, abides true. But this
lets not but that our faith may be helped, as often as it sees the power of
God: which does so much the more mightily show forth it self, as the number is
greater that is gained unto Christ. Add this too, that in the multitude of the
believers at that time was seen the fulfilling of so many prophesies, which
stretch out the kingdom of God from the east to the West. Is this a small
matter, or a vulgar and common help unto faith, with the eyes to behold
fulfilled, concearning the kingdom of Christ to be extended throughout all
countries, that which the Prophets long before had foretold? that which I say,
there is none of the faithful but by experience does find it himself. Paul
therefore with this sentence would more enbolden the Colossians: that seeing in
all places the fruit and increasing of the Gospel, they might with the more
joyous zeal. embrace it. (...) which I have traunslated, is increased, is not
read in some copies: yet because it was somewhat sit unto the text, I would
not omit it. And it appears by the Commentaries of the old Writers that this
reading was always more used. From the day that you heard and knew the
grace.) A praise of their aptness, in that they did by and by embrace wholesome
doctrine: a praise of constancy, in that they did abide in the same. And
properly is the faith of the Gospel called the knowledge of the grace of God:
because no man at any time has tasted the Gospel but he that knew himself
reconciled unto God, and took hold of salvation proffered in Christ. In the
truth, signifies truly and without deceit. for as before he testified, the
Gospel to be the undoubted truth: so now he adds, that it was sincerely
delivered unto them: and that of Epaphras. For whereas all do boast (of) the
Gospel, but many are evil Workmen, by whose either ignorance, or ambition,
or avarice, the purity therrof is corrupted, very requisite it is to make a
difference between faithful and trusty ministers and those that are naught.
Neither yet is it enough, to hold the name of the Gospel: except we know that
this is the true Gospel, which is preached by Paul and Epaphras. Wherefore
Paul by (giving) his voice confirms the doctrine of Epaphras: to the end he
may hold them in the same, and by that means might call tham back from
varlets, who went about to bring in strange doctrines. And withal he sets
out Epaphras himself with a notable title, whereby he may have the more
authority. Finallye he makes that he is the better beloved unto the
Colossians, in that he says he testified unto him their love. Paul in
every place is diligent in this, to make such as he knew faythfullye to serve
Christ, by his commendation to be most dear unto the Congregations: as on the
contrary side, the ministers of Satan are wholly occupied in this, to alienate
and estrange by their sinister speeches the hearts of the simple from their
faithful Pastors. Love in the spirit. I take for spiritual love as does
Chrysostom: unto whom I consent not in that which went before. Finally
spiritual love is that, which has no respect to the world: Is appointed to be
directed by Godliness.
but it is consecrate to the guidaunce and disposition of godliness, and has
as it were a root within, whereas carnal friendship depends of outward
cause.

9 We therefore also since the day we heard (thereof), cease not to pray for
you, and to desire that you may be fulfilled with the knowledge of his will,
in all wisdom and spiritual prudence:

10 That you may walk worthy of God into al obedience, bringing forth fruit
in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God.

11 Strengthened with all strength, according to the power of his glory, into al
long suffering. and patience with joy.

9 We therefore also.) As before in his gratulation he declared his love toward
them: so does he the same now in his earnest prayer for them. And certainly as
in every one the grace of God is more apparaunt: so peculiarly ought we to
embrace and reverence them, and be careful for their salvation. And what does
he wish unto them? That they may know God more fullye. whereby he shows,
that somewhat is as yet wanting unto them, that he may make a way for him to
enstructe them, and win them to hear him teach (the truth) more amply. for
they that think they have obtained whatsoever is worth the knowing, do
despise and disdain whatsoever else is brought them. He takes therefore this
persuasion away from the Colossians, lest it should be to them a let that they
should not willingly go forward, and suffer to be perfected and amended that
which was begone in them. But what knowledge does he wish unto them? forsooth
the knowledge Of the will of GOD. wherewith he overthrows all the inventions
of men and all those speculations that are contrary to the word of GOD. for
the will of GOD is not to be sought else where than in his Word. He joins,
in all Wisdom, whereby he declares that that will of God whereof he made
mention is the only rule of being rightly wise. For whatsoever he is that
simplye desires to know those things which it has pleased God to reveal,
he it is that knows what it is rightlye to be wise: and if we desire
further, that shall be nothing else but to be unwise as not content with the
mean. By the word (...) which I have: translated, Prudence, I mean judging or
discerning which springs from the understanding. Paul calls both of them
spiritual: because we atchieue them no otherwise but by the direction of the
Spirit. For the natural man perceives not those things that are of God. 1.
Cor. 2.14. As long as men are led by the sense of their flesh, they have in
deed their own wisdom, but such (wisdom) as is mere vanity, howsoever else
they flatter themselves in it. We see what manner of divinity there is in the
Papacy, what the books of Philosophers contain, what wisdom it is that
profane or Godless men have in price. But let us have in mind, that that
wisdom alone which Paul commends and sets out, is limited in the will
of God.

10 That you walk worthily in God. First he teaches what the end of
spiritual understanding is, and to what purpose we must profit in the
school of God: namely that we live worthy of God, that is, that it may appear
in our life, yt we have not in vain been taught of God. Whosoever they be
that level not their studies to this mark, it may be that they labor and
take great pains, but they do nothing but wander by by ways, and lose their
labor. Moreover he admonishes, that this principallye is to be done of us, if
we will walk worthy of God, that we direct the whole course of our life after
the will of God, renouncing our own sense and wit, and bidding all the
affections of our own flesh farewell. Which also again he confirms when he
adds (these words) into all obedience, or (as commonly they say) through
pleasing. Therefore if it be demanded what life it is that is worthy of GOD:
this diffinition of Paul must always be holden, namely that yt is it which
leaving the rules and ordinances of men, finally leaving the wit and
disposition of the whole flesh, is ordered after ye obedience of God alone, From
hence ensue good works: which fruits God requires of us Increasing in the
knowledge of God:) He does again repeat, that they are not so far come on, but
that they have need of new encreasements, with which admonition he prepares
them, and as it were leads them by the hand to the desire of going forward:
whereby they may show themselves ready to hear and apt to be taught. And
that which is here spoken unto the Colossia^s, let all the faithful take it as
spoken unto them: and hereof let them collect this common exhortation, We must
always increase in the doctrine of Godliness, even till our dying day.

11 Strengthened with all strength. As before he wished unto them both sound
understanding and the right use thereof: so now also he wishes unto them a
heart and constancy. By this means he admonishes the^ of their weakness and
imbicilitie, for that he denies they can be strong, but by the help of the
Lord. neither does he that only, but to the end he may the more amplify and
see out this grace, he adds (these words) According to his glorious power,
as if he should say, so far off is it that any man by means of his own power
can stand, but yt the power of God must wonderously show forth it self, by
helpiyg our infirmity. Lastly he teaches in what thing the strength of the
faithful ought to show forth it self, namely in all patience and long
suffering. For both continually are they excercised under ye cross in this
world: and a thousand temptations do daily thrust in themselves to oppress
them: and they see none of those things which God has promised. They must
therefore arm themselves with wonderful patience. that that saying in Esa.
30.15. may be fulfilled, Your strength shall be in hope and silence, To join
this piece, With joy, unto this sentence is better (than otherwise) For
although the contrary reading is more often used with the Latins: yet the
greek copies agree rather unto the reading (which I use): and certainly
patience is not retained but by joy: nor yet shall be stand with a strong
courage, who has not a joyful liking of his own estate.

12 Giving thanks to God and the Father who has made us meet to the
pertaking of the inheritance of the Saints in light.

13 Which has taken us away out of the power of darkness, and has set us
over into the kingdom of his beloved Son.

14 In whom we have redemption by his blood, the forgiveness of sins.

15 Who is the Image of the invisible God, the first begotten of all craatures.

16 Because in him are created all things as well which are in heaven, as
upon the earth: visible and invisible: whether (they be) thrones, or
dominations, or principalities, or powers.

17 All things are created by him, and into him: and he is before all things,
and all things have their being in him.

12 Giving thanks.) He returns again unto gratulation, that by this occasion
he may reckon up the benefits wherewith they are endowed by Christ, and so he
enters into a full description of Christ. For this was an only remedy for the
Colossians, against all the deceits of the false Apostles wherewith they
assayed them fully to understand what Christ was. For whereof comes it that
we are carried about with so many kind of doctrines, but because we do not
throughlye know the power of Christ? For Christ alone causes all other
things sodaynlye to vanishe. Therefore there is nothing that Satan so greatly
toileth about, as to cast mistes to darken Christ: because he knows that by
this means the gate is opened to al lies. This than is the only way as well to
retain as to restore pure doctrine, to set Christ before the eyes what a one
he is with all his goods and goodness, that his power may be truly felt and
perceived. I speak not here of the (bare) name. The Papists do commonly with
us confess one Christ: how much ods is there the while between us and them?
namelye because they while they confess Christ to be the son of God, by
setting his power over unto others, and by plucking it hither and thither, they
almost leave him naked and empty. at the least they rob him of a great
part of his glory: so that he is named the Son of GOD, but yet is not (in
deed) such an one as the Father would have him to us ward. And if so be
that the Papists would with their heart receive those things which are
contained in this chapter, we and they should by and by be at one: but the
whole Papacy would fall, because it stands not but whereas Christ is not
known. Whosoever shall consider and mark the state and issue of this first
chapter, will out of doubt acknowledge this (to be so). For nothing else is
here handled, but that we should know Christ to be the beginning, the midst,
and the end: that all things are to be asked of him: yt without him nothing
is, nor can be found. Now therefore must ye readers diligently and nighly mark
with what colors Paul painteth out Christ unto us. Who has made us fit. As yet
he speaks of ye father because he is the beginning and the efficient cause
(as they say) of our salvation. as ye name of God does more express (his)
majesty: so the name of Father (does express his) clemency and well willing
affection. It is meet that we should behold both of these in God, that his
majesty may strike a fear and reverence in us, and that his fatherly love
may procure a confidence and a boldness in us. Therefore has Paul not in
vain joined these two together: if yet ye reading please you. which the
Interpreter has followed, unto whom certain very old greek copies agree.
Although there will be none absurdity if we say he was content with ye word
father (alone) Moreover as it is needful that his incomparable grace be
expressed or declared under the name of Father: so also is it not less
needeful that we by the name of God should be carried into the admiration and
wonderful liking of so great goodness, for that he which is God has so far
abased himself. For what benefit or good thing does he give thanks unto God?
forsooth that he has made him and others meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of Saints. For we are born the children of wrath, exiles, and
banished from the kingdom of God: only it is the adoption of God, which makes
us meet. And adoption depends upon the free election. The Spirit of
regeneration is the seal of adoption. He adds in hight, that it might be an
Antitheton or contrary positio^ opposite and set against the darkness of the
kingdom of Satan.

13 Which has taken us away. Behold the beginning of our salvation, When God
takes us out of the deep pit of destruction in which we are drowned. For
where his grace is absent there is darkness: as is read in Esaias 60.2. Behold
darkness shall cover the earth, and mist the people: but upon thee shall the
Lord arise, and his glory shall be seen in thee. First we our selves are
called darkness: and then all the whole world. And Satan is the prince of
darkness, under whose tyranny we are held in bondage, until we be set at
liberty by the hand of Christ. Hereof gather, that the whole world, with the
painted wisdom and righteousness thereof, is in the sight of God reputed
nothing else but darkness: because there is no light without the kingdom of
Christ. Has set us over into the kingdom, This is now the beginning of our
happiness, when that we are set over into the kingdom of Christ: because
we pass from death into life. And this also does Paul ascribe to the grace of
God: lest any man should think he could by his own force attain such a good
thing. As therefore our deliverance from ye bondage of sin and death is the work
of God: even so is our passing over into ye kingdom of Christ. He calls
christ ye Son of love, or beloved of God ye Father: because it is he alone in
whom his soul delights as is in Mat. 17.5. and by whose means al other are
beloved. For thus must we think, yt we are not otherwise accepted of God but by
Christ. And there is no doubt but Paul meant after a sort to note the hostile
enmity and dissension that men have with God, until the love in the mediator
does shine out.

14 In whom we etc. Now does he in order discourse, yt all the parts of
salvation are comprehended in Christ, and yt he alone, as he is of al things ye
beginning and end, ought to excel and to be seen above all creatures. First
he says yt we have in him redemption: and the same does he by and by interpret
(to be) remission of sins. For these ii. do appositiuely agree together. for
certainly god in yt he does forgive us our sins, delivers us from ye
guiltiness or danger of eternal death. This is our liberty, this is our
boasting against death: yt our sins are not imputed unto us. He says this
redemption is purchased by ye blood of Christ: for by ye sacrifice of his death
al ye sins of ye world are purged. Let us remember than yt this is ye only
price of reconcilement: and therefore it is blasphemy whatsoever it be yt the
Papists trifle concerning satisfactions.

15 Which is the image etc. He climeth higher, and discourses of the glory of
Christ. He calls him ye Image of the invisible God, whereby he declares yt
it is he alone, by whom God, who otherwise is invisible, is manifested unto us:
according to ye saying, No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten
(son) who is in the bosom of the Father he has manifested him unto us, Ioh.
1.18. I know after what manner the old writers are accustomed to expound (this
place). for in that they were at variaunce and controversy with the Arrians.
they urge the equality that ye son has with the father, Coessence and
Consubstantialitie sound thus in english, to be of the say essence and
substance.
and the Coessence and Consubstantialitie: in the mean while they say nothing
of that which is most principal: how the Father does show forth himself in ye
Son to be known unto us. That Chrysostom, has placed his whole refuge in
the word Image, whilst he contendeth that the creature cannot be called the
Image of ye Creator: it is to weak. yea rather he is confuted of Paul whose
words are, the man is the Image and glory of God. 1. Cor. 11.17. Lest therefore
we should hold any thing but yt which is firm, we must note, yt the word Image
is not meant of the essence, but has relation unto us. For therefore is Christ
ye Image of God, because he causes God after a sort to be seen unto us
although thereof also is gathered the coessence and consubstanciallitie. For
Christ should not truly and in deed represent God, except he were the
essential Word of God: seeing that in this place he treats not of those
things which by communicating or participating accord also to the creatures:
but he treats of the perfect wisdom, goodness, righteousness and powers
of God: which to represent, no creature were of sufficiency. There shall be than
in this word a forcible weapon for us against the Arrians: but yet we must
begin at ye relation which I have spoken of, (viz) we must not stand in the
only essence. The sum is, that God in himself, that is to say, in his naked
majesty, is invisible: and that not only unto bodily eyes, but even to the
minds of men also: but yt he is revealed unto us in Christ alone, so that we
may behold him as it were in a glass. For he does show forth unto us in
Christ, his righteousness, goodness, wisdom, strength and power, to be
short himself wholly and totally we must take heed then yt we seek it not
else where: for whatsoever it is that shall without christ vaunt it self by the
name of God, it shall be an idol. The first begotten of al creatures. The reason
why he is thus called follows by and by: Because in him all things are
created, as in the third verse following he is termed the first begotten of
the dead, because we all rise again by him. Than he is not therefore only ye
first begotten, because he went before all creatures in time, but because he
was begotten of the Father for this, that by him they should be made. and he
should be as it were the substance or foundation of all. The Arrians dealt
foolishlye, who reasoned out of that, that he was therefore a creature. For it
is not here touched, what he is in himself: but what he works or brings
to pass in other.

16 Visible and invisible. The former division of heavenly and earthly things
comprehended both these kinds. But because he meant to auouche this
principally of Angels, he now makes mention of invisible things. That not
only the heavenly creatures which are manifest unto the eyes, but also such as
are spirits, are made by the Son of God. And whereas follows straightwaye,
Whether Thrones, etc. it is as much as if he should say, By what name soever
they be called. By thrones some understand Angels, but I think, that rather
the heavenly palace of the majesty of GOD is [thereby] meant, which we must
not dream to be such an one, as our mind or understanding may comprehend, but
such an one as is meet for God himself. We see the sun and moon, and the
whole orname^t of the heaven: but the glory of the kingdom of God is hidden
from our sense and understanding, because it is spiritual, and higher than the
Heavens. To be short, let us understand by Thrones that Seat of blessed
immortality, which is exempte from all change and alteration. By the other
names out of doubt he means the Angels. He calls them Powers,
Principallities, Dominations, or Lordships: not because they excersise any
regimente which is their own, or else he indewed with force and strength
which properly belongs to themselves: but because they are ministers or
servants to execute Gods power and Domination. And it is often used, that as
far as God does extend and put forth his force and strength in his creatures:
so far forth also does he set over his names unto them. And so he alone
is Lord and Father: but they also are Fathers and lords whom he vouchsaueth
this honor. And thereof it comes that both Angels and Judges are called
Gods. Wherefore in this place also are Angels set forth with great titles,
which declare, not of what force they are by themselves, or apart from God, but
what God does by them, and what functions and charge he has committed to
them, Which things must so be taken, that nothing be abated of the glory of
the only GOD. for he does not so communicate and impart his force and
strength unto the Angels, that he should diminishe himself: he does not so
work by them, that he resigneth or sets over his power unto them: he will
not have his glory so shine in them, that it may be blemished or darkened in
himself. Paul does purposedly so honorably extol the dignity of the
Angels, least any body should think, that that were a let whereby Christ
himself should be exalted above them. Therefore as by way of concession or
granting he usurps these names: as if he should say, al their excellency
derogateth and takes away nothing from Christ, although they be set out with
notable titles. They that subtillie after a Philosophical manner do descant in
these words, to the end they may pick out of them orders of Angels, may
have the fruition and use of their liking, but certainlye they straye far
from the mind of Paul.

17 All things are created by him, and into him.) By four reasons he makes
the Angels subject to Christ: (1) That they should not darken his glory,
because they were created by him. Secondlye, because their creation ought to be
referred unto him, as unto a legitimate end. Thirdly, that he was always
before they were created. Fourthly, for that he sustayneth them with his
strength, and preserves them in their estate. Although he affirms this not
of them alone, but of the whole world also. So does he place the son of God
in the highest seat of honor, that he may bear rule over both Angels and
men, and may bring under or into frame all the Creatures in heaven and in earth.

18 And he is the seed of the body of the Church, he is the beginning, the
first begotten from the dead: that he may be in all things holding the
principality.

19 Because it pleased (the Father) that al fullness should dwell in him.

20 And by him to reconcile all things unto himself, by pacifiing the row the
blood of his Cross, through him, as well those things that are upon the
earth, as those things which are in heaven.

18 The hedde of the body. After that he has generallye discoursed touching
the excellency of Christ, and of his high principallitie over al creatures:
he returns again unto those things which peculiarly belong to ye Church. In
the word Head, some do consider many things. And truly a little after he will use
the fame Metaphor [I mean Hedde] in this sense or meaning, that as head in the
body of man is in steed of a root, from whence the vital power is dispearsed
into all the members: so does the life of the Church proceed from Christ, etc.
But in this place he speaks, in my judgment, chiefly of government. He
teaches than that it is Christ alone, who has power to govern ye church to
whom alone, the faithful ought to have respect, of whom depends the
unity of the body. The Papists while they seek to prove the tyranny of
their Idol, find lackes that the Church is headless, unless the Pope as
head have dominy-therin But Paul does not yield this honor, no not to ye
Angels: and yet he maymes not the Church of her hedde: for that Christ, as he
challenges this title unto himself, so does he verily and in deed exercise
the office thereof. Neither am I ignorant of their cavil wherewith they wind
out themselves, [which is this] The Pope is the ministerial hedde. but more
splendent and noble is the name Hedde, than that it ought by any color, to be
set over unto any mortal man, specially without the commandment of
Christ. With more modesty behaueth Gregory himself, who writes that Peter
in deed was a principal member of the church, yet yt he and the rest of the
Apostles, were members under our hedde Lib. 4. Epi. 92. He is the beginning.
Because this word (...) does sometime signify, with the Greek, the end
whereunto all things are referred, we might in this sense take Christ to be
(...), yet had I rather thus xpounde. Paul's words, that he should be the
beginning because he is the first begotten of the dead. for in the resurrection
he is the renewing and building up of all things: and so the beginning of the
second and new creation, because the first was fallen utterly by the ruin and
fall of the first man. Because therefore that Christ in rising again, has
begone the kingdom of God, worthily is he called the beginning: because then
we begin to be in very deed in the presence of GOD, when we are renewed that
we may be new creatures. First begotten of the dead. He is so called, not
only because he did first rise again, but because also he restored other
unto life. as 1. Cor. 15.20. he is called the first fruits of them that rise
again. That he may be in all things. Thereof he concludes, that the primacy
in all things accords and belongs to him. for if he be the beginner and
restorer of all things, it is manifest that of right this honor is due unto
him. Although this piece In all, may be two ways taken, (1) either over all
creatures, (1) or else in every thing. But this skilles not much: because
simplye all things are brought under his Dominion and rule.

19 Because it pleased him.) To the end it may be the more firm which he has
preached touching Christ, now also he adds, that it was so established by
the providence of GOD. And certainly if we will reverently adore this misterye,
necessary it is, that we should be called back to that Wellspring. This,
says he, is wroughte by the counsel of GOD that all fullness should dwell
in him. And he understands fullness of righteousness, wisdom, strength or
power, and of al goodness For whatsoever God has, yt has he bestowed upon
his Son, that he might be glorified in him: as it is written John 5.20. And
withal he admonishes, that whatsoever goodness we require toward our
salvation, it must be drawn out of the fullness of Christ: because God has
thus determined, that he will no otherwise communicate or imparte himself and
his gifts unto men, but by his Son. It is than as much as if he should say,
Christ is to us all things, and with out him we have nothing. Whereof it
follows, whosoever derogate ought from Christ or minisheth his power, or
rob him of his offices, or to be short pilfer away a drop of his
fullness, they do as much as in them lies, shake and hutle down the eternal
counsel of God.

20 And by him to reconcile all things unto himself. This also is an
honorable elogie or title of Christ, that we cannot otherwise be joined unto
God but by him. First let us weigh, that our felicity or happiness is planted
in this, that we cleave unto God: again, that nothing is more miserable than
to be alienated or estraunged from him. He pronounces than, that we are by
Christ alone happy, because he is the hand that tyeth God and us together:
again, that without him we are most miserable, because we are shut out from
God. As for that which he attributes unto Christ, let us remember that it is
proper unto him: so that no portion or piece of this praise must be ascribed
over unto any other. Wherefore the Antithesis or contraries must be
understood: if this be the prerogative of Christ, it may not appertain to
others. For he manifestly disputes against those who devised Angels to be
pacifiers or peacemakers, by which an entrance is made open unto God. By
pacifiing through the blood of his Cross. He speaks of the Father, for that
he was made merciful and favorable to his creatures by the blood of Christ.
And he calls it the blood of the Cross, because therefore the blood of
Christ was the guage and a price of our peacemaking with God, for that it was
shead upon the Cross. For the Son of God must have been a purging or
cleansing sacrifice, and pass under the guiltiness or danger of sin, that
we might be the righteousness of God in him. The blood of the cross than,
signifies the blood of the sacrifice, which was offered upon the cross to
pacify the wrath of God. While he adds, By him, he meant not to speak of
any new thing, but to express more certainly that which already he had
said, and to imprint it as yet more deeply in our hearts: namely that Christ
is so the only author of reconcilement, yt he shuts out other means
whatsoever. For no body else was crucified for us. Than is it he alone by whom
and by whose grace we have God merciful unto us. As well which are upon. If it
like you to understand reasonable creatures only, the same shall be men and
Angels. Although it shall be now absurdity to extend it to all without
exception. but least I should he driven to reason the more Philosophicallye, it
likes me that it bespoken of men and Angels, and touching these there is no
great matter in it, to show and prove that they have need of a peacemaker
with God, But as concearning the Angels, the question is not easy to be
unfolded. For to what purpose is reco^cileme^t, where there was no dissension
or breach of love? many being moved with this reason, have thus expounded
this present place, The Angels were brought to agreement with men, and so the
heavenly (creatures) were made friends with the earthie. But the words of
Paul sound otherwise, (namely) that God has reconciled unto himself: that
then is a forced solution. It remains therefore that we see what manner of
reconcilement that of Angels and men is. I say that men were reconciled unto
God, for that they were alienated from him before by sin, for that they were
to feel him a Judge to their destruction. unless the grace of a Mediator had
come in the whilst to pacify his wrath. It was then a kind of pacifiing
between God and men, for that by Christ enmity was abolished and done away,
and so God of a Judge is become a Father. Between God and the Angels the
reason is far contrary: for among them there was no defect, no s^^ne, and
therefore no separation. But yet for two causes the Angels also ought to be fet
at peace with God. for seeing they were creatures, they were not without danger
of falling, except they had been made sure by the grace of Christ. This is of
no small weight to continue in peace for ever with God, to have a fixed and
sure estate in righteousness, that they need not any more fear falling or
defeating. Moreover in this self same obedience which they perform to God,
there is no such exquisite perfection, that they satisfy God in every behalf,
and without pardon. And to this purpose without doubt belongs this sentence
in the book of Job, He shall find iniquity in his Angels. for if it be
expounded as spoken of the Devil, what great thing is it? but the holy Ghost
does there pronounce the greatest cleanness and purity to be foul and
filthy, if it be measured according to the righteousness of God. We must then
determine, that there is not so much righteousness in the Angels, as is
sufficient to join them fully and perfectly with God, and therefore they have
need of a pacifier, by whose grace they may perpetually cleave unto God. Well
therefore does Paul, who denies the grace of Christ to have residence by
abiding in men only, but makes the same common unto Angels also. neither is
there any wrong done to the Angels, when they are sent away to a Mediator,
that by his benefit they may have perfect and firm peace with God. If any
man under the pretense of the universal note (all) shall move any question
touching the Devils, whether Christ be their peacemaker also, I answer that
he is not neither ye peacemaker of wicked men. Although I confess there is a
difference, because unto wicked men is offered the benefit of redemption, and
so is it not to the Devils. But this is nothing to Paul's words, which
contain nothing else, but that it is Christ alone by whom all creatures,
which have any joining at all to God, cleave unto him.

21 And you when sometime you were estranged, and enemies by cogitation in
evil works.

22 Now has he reconciled in the body of his flesh by death: that he might
make you stand holy and unreprovable in his sight.

23 If so be you abide grounded and firm in faith, and be not removed from
the hope of the Gospel which you have heard: which is preached among all
creatures which are under heaven: of which I Paul am made a Minister.

21 And you, when sometime. Now does he shape unto them a general doctrine by
an Hypothesis, that they may perceive themselves guilty of the greater
unthankfulness if they suffer themselves to be lead over from Christ to new
devises and inuentio^s. and this order must diligently be marked: because ye
application (if I may so say) of peculiar or special doctrine, does more
nearly touch ye quick. Afterward he calls the^ back to experience, yt they
might acknowledge in themselves the benefit of the redemption whereof he makes
mention, as if he should say, you your selves ar a docume^t or example of ye
grace which I preach to be exhibited and set (...) unto me^ through Christ. for
ye were estra^ged, namely from G^^. Ye were enemies, now ar ye received into
favor. and whence comes that? forsooth for that God being pacified and
appeased by the death of Christ, is again friends with you. Although in this
sentence is the changing of the person, for that which hitherto he has taught
touching the father, now he preaches of Christ. for so of necessity must it
be expounded, because he says, in the body of his flesh. I enterprete the word
(...) [which is translated cogitation] to be put to augme^t the matter, as if
he should have said, that they were utterly and with all the whole sense of
their mind estranged from God, least any body should philosophically fain
(this) estraunging to be in some part, as the Popish deuines restrain it to ye
inferior concupiscences. Nay rather, says Paul, because it made you hateful
unto God, it occupied the whole mind. To be brief his mind was to point
forth man, altogether as he is, utterly to disagree from God, and to be unto
him an enemy. The old Interpreter has translated, (...), sense, Erasmus has
translated it mind, and I have used the word cogitation, for yt which ye
Frenchmen call intent. For such is the force of the greek word, and Paul's
meaning does so require it. Furthermore yt word enemies, whereas it has as
well a passive as active signification, agrees with us iumply either way as
long as we be without Christ. for both are we born the children of wrath, and
all the cogitations of the flesh are hatred against God. In evil works He
proves by the effects the inward hatred that lies hidden in the heart. For in
that men contend to wipe themselves clean from all blame, so long till they be
manifestlye convinced; God even shows their impiety by their outward works:
as more largely is treated. Romans 1.19. Furthermore look what we hear in this
place of ye Colossia^s, belongs also unto us. for in nature we differ
nothing. This only ods there is, that some are called straightway from their
mothers womb, whose wickedness God preuenteth yt they break not forth into
manifest fruits: others after they have gone astray a good part of their life,
are brought back again into the sheepefold. Yet we all have need of Christ to
be a pacifier because we are the servant of sin: and whereas sin is, there
is enmity between God and men.

22 In the body of his flesh.) A speech in kind strange and absurd: but the
body of flesh, is as much (as if he had said) the humane body which the Son
of God has common with us. His mind than was to declare that the Son of God
has put on the like nature that we have, that is to say, that he had taken on
him a body that was base and lowlye, earthye and endangered to many
infirmities, that he might be our mediator. When he adds by death, he
calls us back to the consideration of the sacrifice. For the Son of God
must become man, and partaker of our flesh, that he might be our brother: by
dying he must become a sacrifice, that he might pacify the Father unto us.
That he might make you stand holy. The second principal part of our
salvation, namely newness of life. For in these two members or pieces cheefely
consists the whole power of redemption: viZ. in forgiveness of sins, and
spiritual regeneration. Iere. 31.33. That which already he said, was a great
matter, that righteousness was purchased unto us by the death of Christ, that
sin being done away, we might be acceptable unto God. But now he teaches
that another thing comes withal that is as notable, namelye the giving of
the holy Ghost, whereby we are newlye fashioned after the Image of God. And it
is a place worth the marking, that free righteousness is not given unto us in
Christ, unless we be borne anew also by the Spirit into the obedience of
righteousness: as he teaches 1. Cor. 1.30, that Christ is made unto us
righteousness and sancrification. And we obtain righteousness by being
freely accepted: but sanctification we obtain by the gift of the holy Ghost,
while we become new man. and of both these graces there is an inseparable
knot. But let us note that this holiness is but begone in us only, and that
it does daily profit and go on: but that it shall not be perfect, until
Christ shall appear to the building up of all things. For naughtilye and
frowardly did the Celestines and Pelagians in time past abuse this place, to
exclude the grace of forgiveness of sins. For they did shine a perfection in
this world, which might satisfy the judgment of GOD, so that mercy should
be superstuous and more than needs. But Paul does not here teach what is
fulfilled in this World: but what the end of our vocation i^, and what good
things are brought unto us by Christ.

23 If you abide.) An exhortation to persevere, whereby he admonishes that it
shall be in vain whatsoever grace hitherto has been bestowed upon them,
except they abide in the sincerity of the Gospel. And so he signifies that
they are as yet but in their course, and have not yet attained to the mark or
goal. For even then the stabilitie and firmness of their faith was in
hazard among them by means of the subtle dealings of ye false Apostles. and
lively and conningly does he paint forth unto them the certainty of faith,
when he bids the Colossians to be grounded and firm in the same. For faith
is not like supposing or thinking, which is shaken with diverse and sundry
motions: but it has a firm steadfastness and constancy, which resists and
beats back all the engines of the devils. And therefore all the popish
divinity will never give no not so much as a small taste of true faith: which
holds as a certain and approved rule, that we must always doubt as well of
the present state of grace, as that we shall persevere to the end. Afterward
also he notes the relation which is between faith and the Gospel, where he
says that then the Colossians shall be firm in faith, if they be not made
slip away from the hope of the Gospel: that is to say which shines unto us by
means of the Gospel. for where the Gospel is, there is hope of eternal
salvation. But let us bear in mind that the sum of all is contained in
Christ. Therefore in this place he commands to fly all doctrines which
lead away from Christ, to the end that the minds of men may be occupied
any where else. Which you have heard. Because the false Apostles also are
accustomed proudly to boast the name of the Gospel, who rent and tear Christ
in pieces: (and this is a conning of Satan often used, falslye under the
pretense of the Gospel to trouble the consciences, that the truth of the
Gospel may be confused): therefore by name does Paul auouche that this Gospel
which the Colossians had heard, namely of Epaphras, is the natural, true, and
undoubted Gospel, left they should open their cares to contrary doctrines. He
adds moreover a confirmation, that it is the same that is preached over all
the world. This is, I say, no vulgar or common confirmation, when they hear
that they have the whole universal Church ageeing with them: and that they
follow not any other kind of doctrine, than which the Apostles have in like
manner raught, and is every where received. Ridiculous iwis is the boasting of
the Papists, in that with this argument or reason they impugn our doctrine,
because it is not allowed and ratified every where to be preached, (and)
because we have few consenting to it. For if they would burste, they shall
never take this from us, (namelye) that we at this day deliver no other thing
than that was preached afortime by the Prophets and Apostles, and obediently
received of the whole company of saints. Neither meant Paul that the Gospel
should be approved by the consent of all times: so that if it were rejected or
refused, the authority thereof should stagger or be ready to fall. But he
rather respected or considered that commandment of Christ, Mar. 16.15. Go ye,
preach ye the Gospel to every creature, which depends of so many prophecies
of the Prophets, which did denounce that the kingdom of Christ should be spread
into all the world. What other thing than meant Paul by these words than that
the Colossians were also watered with those living Waters, which springing from
Jerusalem, should slow over all the World? We also, and that not in vain,
nor without notable fruit and comfort, do boast that we have the self and
same Gospel, which by the Edicte and commandment of the Lord was preached
amongst all peoples, which was received of all Churches, in the profession
whereof have lived and dyed all Godly persons. Neither is the consent and
agreement of the Church, which indeed is worthy so noble a Title, a vulgate
and base help to defend us against so many assaults. And willingly do we
subscribe unto Augustine, who with this argument principally does confute the
Donatistes, for that they bring a Gospel unheard of and unknown unto all
Churches, and truly it was deseruinglye: for if it be a true Gospel that is
brought in place, and the same not approved nor ratified by any Church, it
follows that vain and false are so many promises, wherewith is foretold
that the preaching of the Gospel should be carried into the whole world: and
which affirm that the sons of God shall be gathered out of all peoples and
countries. etc. But what do the Papists? They bidding the Prophets and
Apostles farewell, and passing over the old Church, will have their defeating
or falling away from the Gospel be taken for the consent of ye Catholic
Church. what is like this? Therefore when we reason about the consent of the
Church, let us return unto the Apostles and their preaching: as Paul here
does. But lest any take too straightly the universal note [all]; Paul
means no other thing than that the Gospel was preached here and there far
and wide. Of which I am made. He speaks also of his own person, which was
very needful. for we must always take heed, that we do not rashlye thrust
in our selves into the office of teaching. Therefore does he testify that the
office was enjoined him, that he might procure unto himself right and
authority And surely he does so join his Apostleship with their faith that
they cannot refuse his doctrine, but by forsaking the Gospel which they have
embraced.

24 Now rejoice I in sufferinges for you, and I fulfill those things that
want in the affections of Christ in my flesh, for his body which is the
Church.

25 Whereof I am made a Minister, according to the dispensatio^ of God, which is
given me toward you, to fulfill the word of God.

26 A mystery hidden from the beginning of times and generations, which now
is revealed unto his Saints.

27 Unto whom God would make known what the riches of the glory of this
mystery in the Gentiles is, which is, Christ in you, the hope of glory.

26 Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every manne in all
wisdom, that we may make stand every man perfect in Christ Jesus.

29 To which thing I also labor, striving according to his power, which
works in me mightily.

24 Now rejoice.) Before he challenged authority unto himself by means of
his calling: but now he uses prevention, lest the bands and persecutions
which he sustained for the Gospel, should minishe any thing of the honor of
his Apostleship. for Satan even abuses these occasions also, to make the
servants of God less set by. Beside that he enboldeneth them by his example,
that they should not be feared with persecutions: and he commends and sets
out his zeal, that he may be of the more authority. Moreover he does with no
base token make known his love toward them, whiles he affirms that he
willingly abides for their sakes the afflictions which he suffceth. But some
man will say, whereof arises this joy? Forsooth because he did see fruit
coming thereof. as if he should say, The affliction for you is pleasant unto
me: because I suffer it not in vain. As in the first Epistle to the
Thessalonians, 3.6.7 he says he rejoices in all necessity and affliction,
for their faith which he heard of, I fulfill those things that are wanting: I
take the copulative to be put for the causall. for he yields a reason, why he
is joyous while he suffers: viz. because he is a partner therein with Christ,
and nothing can be wished more blessed then this partnership. And he sets
down a common consolation to all the godly, that in all sorrows and troubles,
and specially if they abide any grief for the Gospel, they are partakers of
the cross of Christ, yt they may enjoy the fellowship of the blessed
resurrection. Moreover he does affirm that so are fulfilled the things that
are wanting in the afflictions of Christ. for as he speaks To. 8.29. whom
God has elected, those also has he predestined, yt they might be made like
fashioned to yt Image of Christ: to the end he might be ye first begotten among
the brethren. Beside that we know that the unity of the hedde and members is
so great, that the name, of Christ, does somewhile comprehend the whole body.
As in the first Epistle to the Corinthians. cap. 12. verse. 12. for whereas he
in that place had speech concearning the Church, in the end he concludes
that the matter is in Christ as it is in a man's body. As therefore Christ has
once suffered in his own person, so does he daily suffer in his members: and
by this means are fulfilled the passions and sufferings, which the father by
his decree and purpose has allotted for his body [to suffer]. The second
thinking hereof which ought to uphold and comfort our hearts in afflictions,
[is] that it is so determined and appointed by the providence of God, that we
bear a figure of Christ in bearing the cross and suffering affliction, and
that the communicating, or partaking which we have with him, might stretche out
it self to this point also. He adds also the third reason, namelye that his
suffringes are fruiteful, and that not to a few only, but to the whole Church.
Before he said he suffered for the Colossians. now he avouches more, viZ.
that the profit thereof reaches to the whole Church. Of which profit or
fruit is said Philippians cap. 1.12. What is more clear than this
exposition, what is less forced and more plain? That Paul therefore is
joyous in persecution, because he considers as else where he writes, that
the mortification of Christ is to be carried about in our body, that his life
may be made manifest in us. Also unto Timothy, If we suffer with him: we
shall also reign with him: if we dye with him, we shall also live with him:
our end than shall be happy and glorious. Secondly, that condition of state is
not to be refused which God has ordained to his church that the members of
Christ may have an agreeable likeness and proportion with their head.
Thirdly, that afflictions are willingly to be suffered, as being profitable unto
all the Godly, and which do further the salvation of the Church, by setting
forth the doctrine of the Gospel. But all these things set at naught and
not regarded, the Papists have coined a new devise, whereby they might prove
their indulgences and pardons. They call Indulgences the forgiveness of sins
which we have by the merits of Martyrs. For whereas they deny the
forgiveness of sins to be free, but feign the^ to be redeemed with
satisfactorie works: whereas (now) satisfactions be not so many as they should
be, they call for help the blood of Martyrs, that it may avail in the sight
of GOD to purge and cleanse with Christ's blood. And this mixture they call the
Treasure of the Church: the Kayes whereof afterward they commit to whom it
likes them. Neither are they ashamed to the mayntenaunce of so cursed a
blasphemy, to wrest this present place, as though Paul should here auouche
his sufferings to be available to purge and wash away the sins of men.
They urge the word, (...), afflictions, as though Paul denied those things
which Christ has suffered to be sufficient to the redemption of men. But there
is no man that sees not, that Paul so speaks, because by the afflictions of
the godly the body of the Church must be brought to her perfection, while the
members are made like fashioned unto their head. And I should be afraid to
be suspected to slander in rehearsinge such monstrous matters, were it not
that their own books be witnesses, that I charge them with nothing
falselye. They urge this also, that Paul says he suffers for the Churches.
It is a wonder, that none of the old Fathers once thought upon this sharp
and subtle sense or exposition. For they all expound it as we do, That the
saints suffer for the Church, because they confirm the faith of the Church. But
the Papists gather thereof that the Saints are redeemers, because they shed
their blood to wash away sins. But to the end the readers may thoroughly
see their impudency and shamelessness: I grant that as well the martyrs
suffered for the church as Christ did, but after diverse ways: which I had
rather express by Augustines words than by mine own. For thus he writes in
the 84. treatise upon John, Although brethren we die for the brethren: yet no
blood of a Martyr is shed for the remission of sins: which Christ has done
for us. neither has he in this point seete forth unto us, what we should
follow, but for what we should rejoice. Also in the fourth Book to
Bonifacius, As alone the Son of God was made the son of man that he might
make us the sons of God: so also he alone took for us punishemente without
fault, that through him without deserte we might obtain grace that was not
our due. Unto which sayings, that of Leo the Bishop of Rome is like, yt just
have taken or received Crowns, but have not given any: and of the fortitude of
the faithful are sprung examples of patience, and not gifts of righteousness.
For why their deaths were singular, neither does any man pay another debte
with his end. That this sense is in Paul's words, is easilye apparent by the
text for he joins by and by after, yt he suffers according to ye
dispensation committed unto him. And we know that the ministry not of
redeeming, but of edifieng the Church was committed unto him, and he does
plainly by and by confess the same. And that is it also that that he writes
to Timothy 2. Epistle and 2. Chap. verse 10, that he abides all things for
the elects sake, that they may obtain salvation which is in Christ Jesus. And
2. Corinthians. 1.4. that he suffers all things willingly for their comfort and
salvation. Let the godly readers than learn to hate and detest these profane
sophisters, who to the end they may smothe on a color upon their feigned
deuyses, do so notorioulye corrupt the Scriptures and falsify them.

25 Whereof I am made a Minister. Lo, in what respect he suffers for the
Church: namely because he is a minister, not to give the price of redemption
(as Augustine skilfully and godlily does speak it) but to preach. Furthermore
otherwise does he now call himself a Minister of the Church, than he does 1.
Cor 2.4. call himself the Minister of God, and a little before [the minister]
of the Gospel. For the Apostles serve God and Christ to promote the glory of
them both: they serve the Church for the salvation thereof, and minister the
Gospel it self. The reason of the Ministry therefore is diverse in those
kinds of speakings: but the one of them cannot stand without the other. And he
says, toward you; that they may know that the charge thereof belongs also
unto him. To fulfill the word. He joins the end or final cause of his
ministry: that the word of God might be effectuous, which is done while it is
obedientlye received. For this is the strength of the Gospel: that it may be
the power of God into salvation to every one that believes, Romans 1.16. God
therefore by his Apostles gives unto his word force and effect. For although
the preaching it self, whatsoever the happ^ be, is the fulfilling of the word:
yet the fruit at last does show, that the seed was not cast abroad in
vain.

26 A mystery hidden. A commendation of the Gospel, that it is a wonderful
secret of God. Not without cause does Paul so often extol the Gospel with as
great praises as he may. for he saw it was to the Jews a stombling block,
to the Greeks folishenesse 1 Cor. 1.^1. And we also at this day do see how
greatly it is hated of hypocrites, how proudely it is di^pised of the world.
Paul therefore to the end he may overthrow so wrongful and perverse
judgments, does honorably extol the dignity of the Gospel, as often as
occasion suffers him, and to that purpose he uses diverse arguments according
to the circumstaunce of the place. here he calls it an high or lofty secret
which was unknown from times and generations: that is to say from the beginning
of the world by so many circuites and turns of ages. And that he speaks of
the Gospel appears. To. 16.25. Ephe. 3.9. and such like places. But the
reason why it is so called, is demanded. Some judge, because Paul touches by
name the calling of the Gentiles, that this is the only reason why it is so
called. for that the Lord, as it were unhoped for, has poured out his grace
upon the Gentiles, whom he seemed to have deprived for ever of the fellowship
and partaking of eternal life. But to him that looks nighly upon al things,
it shall appear that this is a third reason, and not the only reason: as
touching this present place, and that other to the Romans, which I have cited.
For the first reason is, that whereas God had governed his Church before the
coming of Christ, under obscure and dark coueringes, as well of words as of
ceremonies, he suddenly shines out with great clearenesse by the doctrine of
the Gospel. The second is, that whereas before, nothing was seen but
outward figures, Christ was exhibited bringing with him the full truth, under
which he was hidden. The third is that which I spoke of, that all the whole
World which hitherto was estraunged from God, should be called into the hope
of salvation, and unto all should be offered like inheritance of eternal life.
The attentive consideration of these things shall constrayne us to honor and
reverence this mystery which Paul preaches: although it be contemptuously
regarded of the world, or else laughed at. Which now is reveled. Least that any
man should draw this word Mystery, to any other meaning, as though he spoke
as yet of a thing hidden in a corner, or unknown, he now at last adds that it
was published, to the end it should be known to men. That therefore which by
the nature thereof was a secret, was by the will of God made open and manifest.
Wherefore there is no cause that the obscurity or darkness thereof should
fear us, seeing God has reveled it. He adds, to the Saints, because the arm
of Lord is not revealed unto all, that they may understand his counsel.

27 Unto whom God would. Here he brideleth the boldness of men, that they
suffer not themselves to be more wise or else to search after more than they
ought: but that they learn to be content with this one thing, viZ. so it
pleased God. For the will of GOD ought to be enough, and enough unto us a cause
suffici^nt. yet this is principally spoken to commend the grace of God:
because Paul means, that men in no wise did minister cause unto God that
they should be partakers of this secret, while he teaches that of his own
accord he was moved hereunto, and because he would. For it is a common thing in
Paul, to set the good pleasure of God opposite and against all the merits
and outward causes of men. What the riches are. We must always mark how
highly he speaks about extolling the dignity of the Gospel. for he knew
the unthankfulness of men to be such, that they would for all this securelye
contemn, or at the least set little by, this inestimable treasure and far
passing grace of God. And therefore not being content with the word Mystery,
he adds glory, and the same not small or common. for what was more
wonderful, than that the Gentiles, who so many years were drowned in death,
that they might seem almost past hope, sodaynlye should be reckoned among the
children of God, and receive the inheritance of salvation? Which is Christ in
you, That which in generality he had said of the Gentiles, he now applies
even to the Colossians, that they may in themselves acknowledge more
effectuouslye, and embrace with the great reverence the grace of God. He says
than, Which is Christ; whereby he means that all that secret is contained in
Christ: and that all the riches of the heavenly wisdom are obtained when we
have Christ: as more plainly he will a while after affirm. He adds, In you:
because now they possess Christ, from whom a late they were so estraunged as
nothing could be more. Lastly he calls Christ the hope of glory: that they
may know that they want nothing to full and perfect blessedness after that
they have obtained Christ. And this a wonderful work of GOD, that in earthen
and frail vessels, should abide the hope of heauenl^ glory.

28 Whom we preach.) In this place does he set over and apply to his
preaching, whatsoever before he has uttered touching the wonderful and
honorable secret of God: and so he expounds that which already he had
touched as concearning the dispensation committed unto him. For this is his
purpose that he may set forth and garnishe his Apostleship, and that he may
procure authority to his doctrine. For after that he had highly extolled ye
Gospel, now he adds, that that which he preaches is a divine secret. But
not without cause did he of late put in, that Christ is the sum of that
secret: to the end they may know that nothing can be more fully and
perfectly taught than Christ. The words which follow, have also great weight.
He makes himself a teacher of all men: whereby he means that none excel
so highly in wisdom, that they ought to exempte themselves from taking him to
be their master: as if he should say, The Lord has appointed me in a
high place a public Preacher of his secret, that all the world without
exception might learn of me.

In all wisdom, is as much as if he should uphold his doctrine to be such, as
might bring a man to firm and perfect wisdom, and such as should want
nothing. And that is it which by and by he adds, whoso^uer they be that show
themselves true disciples, they shall be made perfect. Look the 2. cha. to the
Cor. 1. Epist. And what can we require that is better than this, that he
yields unto us very high perfection. He repeateth, In Christ, again, that
they should have no will to know any thing saving Christ alone. Out of this
place also may we gather a definition of true wisdom: namelye as by which
we are made to stand perfect in the sight of God: and that in Christ, and not
else where.

27 To which thing.) With two sentences he augmenteth the glory of his
Apostleship, and his doctrine. First he makes mention of his earnest mind:
which is a token of difficultye. For such thinks for the most part are most
excellent which are most hard and uneasy [to be atchieued]. The other is more
firm, viz. in that he reckeneth the power of God, to shine forth in his
ministry But he speaks not of the success of his preaching only, (although
therein also appears the blessing of God) but also of the efficacy of the
holy Ghost, in which God did show himself evidently. For justly does he
ascribe his indeauoures and labors, when as he surmounted the measure [or
abilitie] of man, unto the power of God, which he affirms to be seen to
work mightily in this behalf.

The second Chapter.
1 And I will have you know how great a contention I have for you, and them
which are at Laodicia, and whosoever have not seen my face in the flesh.

2 That their hearts may receive comfort when they are knitte together in love,
and into all the riches of the certainty of understanding, into the knoweledge
of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ.

3 In whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and understanding.

4 And this say I unto you, least any body should deceive you with persuading
speech.

5 For although I am absent in body, yet in spirit am I with you, rejoicing
and seeing your order, and the steadfastness of your faith in Christ.

AND I will have you know.) He testifies his love toward them, to the end he
may have the more credit and authority. for willinglye do we believe those
whom we know to be careful for our salvation. Neither is it a common or
vulgar sign of love for that he was careful for them in the midst of
death: that is to say, when he was in hazard of his life. And to the end he
may the more set forth the vehemency of his diligence and care, he calls it
a Contention or Strife. I reprehend not Erasmus for that he has translated it
Care or Carfulness: and yet the force of the Greek Verb is to be noted:
because (...) is put, whereas there is contention or resisting. With the same
reason he confirms, his ministry to belong unto them. for from whence came
so earnest a cogitation or minding of their salvation, but because the Apostle
of the Gentiles ought with love and care to embrace yea even those whom he
knew not? And because commonly there is no love amongst those that are not
acquaynted, he abaseth the knowledge that is gotten by sight, when he says,
Whosoever have not seen my face in the flesh, For among the servant of God
there is another sight, than is that which is of the flesh, which wins love.
Because it is almost by common consent allowed of, that the first Epistle to
Timothy was written from Laodicia: therefore certain alot this Laodicia,
whereof Paul makes mention, unto Galatia: whereas that other was the
metropolitan or mother city of Phrigya Paratiana. But unto me it seems more
likely to be true, that that is a corrupt and faulty inscription: as in his
place shall be noted.

2 That their hearts may receive comfort. Now he declares what he wishes unto
them: and he shows an affeccion which is truly Apostolic. For he affirms
that none other thing is so dear unto him, as that they be knit together in
faith and love. He shows therefore that he was moved with no preposterous
desire, (as in some it happens) to take upon him so great care for the
Colossians and others: but for that the manner of his office did so require.
Comfort is taken in this place for the true quietness and tranquillity wherein
they rest or repose themselves. He affirms that than at last they shall
obtain the same, if they be knit together in love and faith. Hereby appears
where summum bonum the cheifest felicity is to be placed, and in what things
it consists: namely while we agreeing together into one faith, may be also
joined together in mutual charity: this I say is the perfect joy of a Godly
heart: that is the blessed life. And as charity or love is here commended of
the effect, in that it sheaddeth true joy into the minds of the godly: so
again the cause thereof is showed, where he says. Into all fullness of
understanding. For this is the bond of holy vanity, even the truth of God,
while we embrace ye same with one consent. For peace and concord with men
flows out of that fountayn. The riches of the certainty of understanding.
Because most men being content with a small taste, have nothing but a confused
and vanishing knowledge, he does by name set down the riches of
understanding: by which word he means a full and pithie understanding and
perceauing. and withal he admonishes, that according to the measure of
understanding, we must profit and go forward in love and charity. By the
word, certainty, he shows the difference between faith, and thinking or
supposing. For he truly and in deed does know God, that wauereth not or
staggereth not by doubting: but that abides in a steadfast and constant
persuasion. Paul calls this constancy and steadfastness often time (...):
which word also he uses here in this place, and ioineth it continually with
faith: so that certaynlie it can no more be plucked away from it, then heat
or light can be from the Sun. Deuilishe than is the opinion and doctrine
of the Schoolmen, for that, in taking away certainty, they put in place
thereof a moral conjecture (as they term it). Into the knowledge of the
mystery. This piece is to be read appositiuely for he expounds what that
knowledge is whereof he makes mention: namelye that it is no other thing but
the knowledge of the Gospel. For the false Apostles also do set out their
deceites with the title of wisdom. but Paul retains the Children of God
within (the compass) of the Gospel alone: that they may desire to know
nothing else. Why he uses the word Mystery for the Gospel is already
said. But hereof let us learn that the Gospel can be received, by faith
alone, and not by reason, nor yet by the through sight of man's mind or
understanding: because otherwise it is a thing hidden from us. I interpret
Mystery of God, passiuely, as in which God revealed. For straight after he
joins, And of the Father, and of Christ, with which piece he means that God
cannot be known, but in Christ, as again the Father must needs be known,
where Christ is known. for John affirms both, He that has the Son has ye
Father also, he that has not the Son, has not the Father neither. Therefore
whosoever think they know any thing of God without Christ, they forge to
themselves an Idol in steed of God. As also on ye contrary side he knows not
Christ, who is not brought unto him by the father, and so embraces whole God
in him. It is the while a place worthy to be thought on to prove the Godhead of
Christ, and that he is of one essence with God. For after he has spoken before
of the knowledge of God, he does by and by apply it as well to the Son as to
the Father. whereof it follows, that the Son is God equal with the Father.

3 In whom are, or, In which are, The piece in quo (which may be englished in
whom or else in which) either has relation unto all that which is
comprehended, touching the knowledge of the mystery; or else to that only
which went next before, that is, Christ. Although there is small difference
between the one and the other, yet the latter likes me better, and is more
allowed and used. The sense is than, that in Christ lie hidden all the
Treasures of Wisdom and knowledge. whereby he declares that we are perfectly
wise, if we know Christ truly: in so much that it is madness, to wish to
know any thing saving him. For seeing that the Father has made manifest
himself wholly in him: he means to be wise without God, which is not content
with Christ alone. If it like you to expound it of the Mystery, the meaning
shall be, that all the wisdom of the Godly shall be included in the Gospel,
whereby God is revealed unto us in his Son. And he says that the treasures
are hidden, because they appear not out to be seen in great glittering and
gallant show, but they lie as it were hidden rather under the humility and
baseness of the cross, and under simplicity which is contemptible. For the
preaching of the cross (as we have it to the Corinthians) is always
foolishness unto the world. Between Wisdom and Understanding in this place
I put no great difference, because doubling of a thing so much avails to
augment the matter, as if he should have said there can be found else where
no jot of knowledge, instruction, learning, or wisdom.

4 This I say least any body. Because the devises and inventions of men (as
afterward we shall see) have a show or kind of wisdom, the minds of the
Godly must be prevented by this persuasion that the only knowledge of
Christ is enough and enough. And surely this is the Ray which may lock up the
gate against all wicked erroures. For what was the cause that men wrapped
themselves in so many ungodly opinyons, in so many idolatries, in so many
folish speculations, but because they despised the simplicity of the Gospel,
and were bold to aspire higher? Whatsoever errors than is in the papacy, they
may thank this ungratefulness of it, that being not content with Christ
alone, they gave themselves to strange doctrines. Well therefore does the
Apostle to the Hebrews, while he minded to exhort the faithful that they
should not suffer themselves to be carried away with strange or new doctrines,
use this foundation first of all, Christ yesterday, and to day, and for ever.
with which word he signifies that they are out of danger who abide in
Christ and that they are laid open to all deceites and subtelties, which
think not Christ sufficient. So Paul here wills, that whosoever he is that
will not be deceived, must be armed with that principle, (namely) It is not
lawful for a Christian man, to savor any thing but Christ. Although
whatsoever shall be brought afterward have never so bewetifull a color, yet
nothing will be done, it shall work nothing. To be brief there shall be no
likelyhoode nor persuading speech which shall bend but even the breadth of a
finger the hearts of them who have addicted their minds to Christ. A place
truly to be commended highly. for as he has prevented or stopped all wicked
opinyons and doctrines, who has taught men to know nothing beside Christ; so
the same is the way, whereby we may at this day destroy and hurl down the
whole Papacy, as that which evidently appears compact and made out of the
ignorance of Christ.

5 For although in body I am absent, yet in spirit am I with you. Lest any man
should object, that warning or admonishing were skant seasonable from a place
so far distaunt, he says that his love toward them causes that he is
present with them in spirit, and judges, as it were of the present case,
what is expedient for them. And by praising the estate they presentlye were in,
he warns them that they slide not nor bend therefrom. Rejoicing, says
he, and seeing, that is to say, because I see. For the copulative has the
force of a causall, which is much used of the Latins and Greeks. It is as
much as if he should say, Go on as you have begone, for I know that hitherto
you have healde a right course, for the distaunce of the place lets not
that I should not see you with the eyes of my mind. Your order and
steadfastness. He puts two things, in which consists the perfection of
the Church, viZ. order amongst themselves, and faith in Christ. Signifiing by
order as well consent, as, well ordered manners, and the whole discipline. He
praises their faith by their constancy and steadfastness, declaring that it
is a vain shadow of faith, whereas the mind wauereth and alters between
diverse opinions.

6 As therefore ye have taken on you Christ Jesus the Lord, walk ye in him.

7 Rooted in him, and builte, and confirmed in faith, as ye are taught,
abounding in the same with thanksgiving.

6 As.) Unto praise he joins exhortation, in which he teaches that it will
nothing profit them that they have once received Christ, except they abide
continuallye in him. Furthermore in that the false Apostles allege the name of
Christ, to deceive and beguile: he twice preuenteth this danger while he
bids them go forward as they had been taught, and as they had received
Christ. For with these words he admonishes, that so constantly must they
stick to the doctrine which Epaphras delivered and they embraced, that they
take heed to themselves for (admitting) any other doctrine and faith. As Esaias
said, chap. 30.21. This is the way, walk in it. And truly so must we use the
matter that the truth of the Gospel, after it is manifested unto us, must be
unto us a brazen wall, to fend of all deceites. And with three Metaphors, does
he set out what manner constancy of faith he requires of them. The first is in
ye word Walk. For he compares the pure doctrine of the Gospel, as they
learned it, to a certain and plain way: which whosoever keeps, shall be out
of danger of error and going awrie. He exhorts them then if they will not go
out of the way, that they turn not out of the course or walk which they have
begone. The second met^phor is taken of trees. for as a tree spreading his
roots deape in the ground has sustentation and defense enough to abide all
the forces of winds and storms: so if any be fixed in Christ deeply and
thoroughly, as in a strong rote, he can by no subtle devises of Satan be
hurled down from a right state. Contrariwise if any do not groundfaste his
roots in Christ, he will easily be carried about with every blast of
doctrine, no otherwise than a tree that is defenced with no roots, at the
first blast is turned up. The third metaphor is of building. for an house which
is not supported with a foundation, will quicklye fall. The like happens to
them who lean upon other shores then Christ: or else who are not stronglye
founded in him, but have the house of their faith as it were doubtful and
hanging by means of their weakness and lyghtnesse. These two things are to
be marked in the words of the Apostell: viz. that the firmenes of them who rest
upon Christ must be immovable: and their course or proceeding never a whit
doubtful, or endangered unto error. and this is an excellent praise of faith
by the effect. Secondlye, so long must we profit in Christ, as until we
have taken deep rooting in him. Whereof we may gather readyly, that they do
only go astraye by by ways and are disquieted hither and thither, that hold
not Christ.

7 And confirmed in faith. He repeateth the self same without figure, whith he
had spoken by metaphors: namely the goinge forward on the way, the defencing of
the root, and shoring or upholding of the foundation, to be the firmenes and
constancy of faith. And note, in that they were well taught, this reason was
set forth unto them, to the end that safely and surely they might fasten their
^oote in that faith which they had tried. Abounding. He will not only have them
stand immovable, but increase every day more and more. Whereas he adds, With
thanks giving, he will always have them myndfull whence faith it self
comes: that they be not puffed up with arrogancy, but rather that they
repose themselves with fear in the gift of God. And certainly unthankfulness
is very often in fault, why the light of the Gospel, as also other the graces
of God are taken from us.

8 Tak^ ^eede least any rob you through Philosophy and vain deceit, after
the tradition of men, after the elements of the world, and not after Christ.

9 Because in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

10 And ye are fulfilled in him, who is the head of all principality and
power:

11 In whom ye are also circumcised with Circumcision not made with hand by
putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by Circumcision I say of
Christ.

12 Being buried together with him by Baptism: in whom also ye are risen by
the faith of the efficacy of God, who has raised him from the dead.

8 Take heed lest any. Again it teaches them against what poison the
preservative which he gave them ought to be taken. For although that [I mean a
firm fayth] be a common remedy against all the deceites of the devil, as I
have said: yet had it at that time a peculiar use among the Colossians, unto
which it ought to be applied. Take heed, says he, lest any rob you. He
uses a very fit term. for he alludeth unto thieves, who when they cannot
violently steal the whole flock, than do they by subtletie drive away some of
the Cattle. So makes he the church Christ's sheepefolde, and the hurdles or
closures hereof, the pure doctrine of the Gospel. Us than that are the sheep
of Christ, he declares to rest in safety, as long as we hold the unity of
faith, and he makes the false Apostles like to Thieves which carye us away
from the foldes. Will thou then be reckoned in the flock of Christ, will thou
abide in his foldes? bend not the breadth of a nail from the purity of
doctrine. For undoubtedly Christ will do the duty of a good Pastor
Sheaphearde with shielding us, if we will hear his voice only, and refuse the
voices of others. To be brief, the 10. chapter of John, is an exposition of
this present place. By Philosophy. Because many have ^^te^ lie thought that
Paul in this place does condemn Philosophy, it must be defined what he
means thereby. In my judgment he understands, whatsoever men do invent of
their own heads, while they will have a smack of their ^^^ne sense: and that
not without some fair pretense or color of reason, that in show it may be
propable. For there is not much ado about rejecting the inventions of men,
when they have no commendation or setting out: but about them that deceive the
minds with a deceitful opinion of wisdom. Or if any had rather have it
spoken at a word, Philosophy is nothing else but a persuading manner of speech,
which insinuates or shouldreth in it self by fair and plausible reasons into
the minds of men. Such I grant shall all the sly reasons of Philosophers be,
if they put too ought of their own to the pure word of God. therefore
Philosophy shall be no other thing but a corrupting of pure doctrine, if it be
mingled with Christ. But let us bear in mind that Paul under the name of
Philosophy, has only condemned all forged doctrines, which spring out of man's
brayn, whatsoever color or show of reason (besides) they have. That which
follows next of vain deceit, I do thus interpret, Beware of Philosophy,
which is nothing else but a vayn deceyte. After the tradition of men. He does
more nighly show what Philosophy he misliketh: and also in two respects he
reproves it of vanity: because it is not according to Christ, but according
to the rules of men, and is placed in the elements of the World Note that he
sets Christ opposite and against both the Elements of the World, and
also the Traditions of men. whereby he means, that whatsoever is forged in
the brain of man, is not agreeable unto Christ, who is appointed to us an only
Teacher from the Father, to retain us in the simplicity of the Gospel. And
that (simplicity) is corrupted even with a little leaven of man's traditions.
He means in like manner that all those doctrines are contrary unto Christ
which place in the elements of the world the worshipping of God, which we know
by the rule of Christ to be spiritual: which doctrines also entangle the minds
of men with those trifles and toys, whereas Christ calls us straight unto
him. But what calls he Elements of the world? no doubt but he calls
ceremonies so. for by and by after for an Example he brings forth one kind
of them, namely Circumcision. And why he so calls them, two reasons are
vsuallye brought. some think it to be a Metaphor: so that elemenets are
rudimentes meet for Children, which bring not to perfection of doctrine. some
take them in a proper signification or meaning for outward things and such ss
are subject to corruption, which serve nothing to the kingdom of God. the
former exposition does more like me as also Galat. 4.3.

9 Because in him dwells. The reason why those elements of the world, which
are the traditions of men, agree not with Christ. for they are additions to
supply defect or want, as they say. But in Christ is perfection, to which
nothing can be added. Therefore whatsoever men mingle in of their own heads,
it fights with the nature of Christ because it condemns him of
imperfection, and insufficiency This argument alone is enough to confute all
the fained devises of the papists. For to what end belong they but to make up
and bring to perfection, ye which is begone in Christ? but this reproach against
Christ is not to be born. They say in deed that they add nothing to Christ:
because they (I mean elements) are a piece of Christianity which they have
tied or patched to (...) Gospel. but they escape not with that kind of
Cavil. For Paul speaks not of an imagined Christ but of a Christ preached,
who has revealed himself by a certain and sure doctrine. Furthermore where
he says that, The fullness of the Godhed dwells in Christ, he means no
other thing but that God wholly is found in him: so that he, longs after a
thing that is better and more excellent than God, who is not content with
Christ alone. The sum is that God has exhibited himself unto us in Christ
fully and wholly. The interpreters do sundry ways expound the Aduerbe,
bodily. I doubt not but that it is put vnproperlye, for substantiallie. for he
sets opposite this manifestation which we have in Christ, unto all other
manifestations yt ever were. For God has often exhibited himself unto men,
but that in part (only). but in Christ he wholye communicates himself unto
us. Otherwhere also he has manifested himself, but in figures, or power and
grace. but in Christ he has essentiallye appeared unto us. So is fulfilled
that, 1. John 2.23. He that has the Son, has also the Father. For they
have God truly present, and altogether have ye fruitio^ of him, who have Christ
in profession.

10 And ye are fulfilled in him. He adds that that perfect essence of the
Godhead which is in Christ, in this respect does avail us, yt we should be
also perfect in him: as if he should say, Whereas God wholly has his abiding in
Christ, therefore it is [that he has so], yt we obtaining him, may possess in
him a full and sure possession. Therefore they do double injury to God, who
content not themselves in Christ alone. for beside yt that they derogate from
the glory of God, by desiring and seeking after somewhat above his perfection:
they are also unthankful, in that they seek else where yt which already they
have in Christ. Yet Paul means not, that Christ his perfection is poured
over into us, but that it is in him wherewith we may be fulfilled, so that
nothing any more shall be lacking unto us. Which is the head. He has again put
in this piece for cause of the Angels, meaning that the Angels also shall be ours
if we have Christ. but hereof afterward. But in the mean while we must think
on this, that we are up and down enclosed with grates, lest our faith should
step but even a little aside from Christ.

11 In whom also ye are circumcised. Hereof appears yt he had controversy
with ye false Apostles who mingled ye law with the Gospel, and by that means
they made Christ as it were having two shapes or fashions. And he names one
kind for example sake. He proves the Mosaicall circumcision not only
superfluous, but also quite contrary to Christ, because it destroys the
spiritual circumcision of Christ. For to this end was Circumcision given unto
the fathers, yt it might be ye figure of a thing absent. they therefore that
keep still ye figure now that Christ is come, do deny yt to be fulfilled
which does figure. Let us remember than ye outward circumcision is here
compared with spiritual (circumcision) no otherwise than the figure with the
truth. A figure is of a thing absent. it does than put away the presence of
the very thing it self. This is it than that Paul contendeth for, because in
Christ is fulfilled that which was shadowed in circumcision made with hand:
(and) that now there is of the same neither profit nor use. Than he
pronounces it to be the Circumcision of Christ, which is made in the heart: and
therefore that that outward circumcision is not now in any wise required:
because that whereas the thing it self is extant, that shadowing sign
vanishes, as having no place but where the thing it self is away. By putting
of the body. He calls that mass or lump, which is compact of all vices, a
Body, by a fine Metaphor. For as we are closed about with our bodies: so also
are we enwrapped on every side with a stack or heap of vices. And as the body
is framed and compact of diverse members, all and singular which have their
proper actions and offices: so out of that heap of corruption all sins do
pour out as members and parts of the whole. There is the like manner of
speech To. 6.13. He takes flesh, after his manner for nature corrupted. The
body of the sins of the flesh, than is the old man with his works. Only in
the manner of speaking there is a diversity: because properly in this place he
blaseth out the mass of vices, which spring from nature being corrupted. This
he says we obtain by Christ, that regeneration wholly is his benefit. He it
is that circumciseth ye foreskin of our heart, that is, which mortifieth all
the concupiscences of the flesh, not with his hand, but by his spirit.
Therefore in him is extante and manifest the truth and very thing of the figure.

12 Being buried with him by Baptism. He declares as yet more plainly the
manner of spiritual circumcision. namely for that we being buried with
Christ, are pertakers of his death. He does by name teach that we obtain
that by Baptism that it may the better appear, that there is no use of
Circumcision under the kingdom of Christ. For some might else object, Why
put thou away Circumcision under this pretense, because the effect thereof
is in Christ? which God has ordained. for they that hold still circumcision,
devise a way of dispensation and gouernmente clean contrary to that which God
has appointed. In that he says, We are buried with Christ, is more than to be
cruci^^ed (with him). for burying sets out a perpetual progress or
continuance of mortification. Whereas he teaches this is done by Baptism, as
also he does, Romans 6 4. he speaks as he is wont, attributing efficacy to the
Sacrament, left in vain it should signify that which is not. By Baptism
than we are buried with Christ, because Christ does therewithal effectually
perform mortification which in Baptism he signifies: that the thing may be
joined with the sign. In whom ye have also risen. He amplifieth the grace
which we obtain in Christ, which goes far before circumcision. We are not
only grafted into the death of Christ, says he, but we rise again also in
newness of life. wherefore the more injurious are they against Christ, which
assay to bring us again to Circumcision. And he adds, By the faith. for
verily by it we take hold of that which is offered unto us in Baptism. But what
faith? (forsooth) of his Efficacy or working. whereby he means that faith
has here foundation in the power of GOD. But because Faith rometh nor straieth
not about in a confused and (as they say) an indefinite contemplation of the
power of God: he sets out what efficacy they ought to respect, namely that
wherewith he has raised up Christ from the dead. And he takes it as granted;
because it is impossible that the faithful should be pulled away from their
hedde, that that power which has showed forth it self in Christ, should in
like manner be proved out upon them all.

13 And ye when ye were dead by sins, and in the uncircumcision of the flesh,
has he together quickened with him, by forgiving you al your sins.

14 And having put out the handwriting in decrees which was against us, which
was contrary to us, and that has he taken out of the way being fastened to the
Cross.

15 Spoiling principalities and powers has led the^ along openly, triumphing
over them in it.

13 And ye when ye were dedde. That which in general wise he has discoursed,
he admonished the Colossians, to consider in themselves: which is a very
effectual manner of teaching. Fardermore seeing they were Gentiles when they were
converted unto Christ, he thereby warns them how strange a thing it were to
skippe over from Christ to the ceremonies of Moses. Ye were, says he, dead in
uncircumcision. This word may be taken either in a proper signification or else
metaphorically. if you take it properly, the sense shall be, Uncircumcision is
a symboll or badge of estrangement from God, for where the covenant of grace
is not, there is uncleanness, and thereof comes the curse and damnation. But
God has called you from uncircumcision to himself: and therefore from death.
So should he make uncircumcision not the cause of death: but a testimony and
witness that they were strangers from God. And we know that men live not any
otherwise, than while they cleave to their God, who alone is their life.
Whereof it follows that all the ungodly, while they seem in their own
conceits to be very lively and fresh yet are they spiritually dead. By this
means this place would agree with the second chapter to the Ephesians verse
11. where it is said, You must remember that in time past when you were
Gentiles, and called uncircumcision of that Circumcision which is made with
hand in the flesh, at that time you were without Christ, separated from the
government of Israel, and strangers from the promises. But Metaphorically it
should be an allusion to natural uncircumcision: but yet Paul should speak
here of the stubbornness of man's heart against God, and of nature distained
with naughty affections or motions. I rather hold the former exposition,
because it agrees better with the text. For Paul makes mention that
uncircumcision was no let but that they should be partakers of the life of
Christ. Whereof it follows, that Circumcision derogateth or takes from the
grace of God, that which already they had obtained. In that he ascribes death
unto uncircumcision, he does it not as unto the cause, but as to ye badge or
mark [thereof]. as he does in that other place to the Epesians, which I have
alleged. And it is often used in the Scripture, by privation of the sign, to
note the privation of ye thing, as Ge. 3.22. Least happilye Adam eat of the
fruit of life, and live. For the tree did not give life: but after it was
taken away it was the sign or badge of death. Paul in this place has breefely
set forth both, he says they were dead through sins. this is ye cause: for
sins do separate us from God. He puts too, In the uncircumcision of the
flesh. This was the outward uncleanness, a testimony of spiritual death By
forgiving you, God in deed does not quicken us by only forgiveness of
sins: but in this place he does peculiarly make mention thereof: because free
reconciliation with God, which overthrows righteousness of works, does
specially belong to ye present cause, wherein he discourses about abrogating
and doing a way of ceremonies as more largely he has treated in the Epistle to
the Galathians. For the false Apostles in establishing ceremonies, did bind
the consciences with a snare, from which Christ has loosed them.

14 Having put out the handwriting. Now does he hand to hand cope with the
false Apostles. For this was the state of the case, Whether the keeping of
ceremonies were necessary under the kingdom of Christ. But Paul contendeth,
that ceremonies were abolished, and that he may prove it, he compares them to
a handwriting, whereby God holds us as it were bound, so that we cannot
deny our guiltiness or debt. Now he says we have so been delivered from
guiltiness, that the handwriting also has been put out, that it should not
be extant in memory. We use to sub^^ribe our name or mark with our hand
whereby we ratify the bond or writing, and that here is termed Handwriting.
For we know that in all things while the handwriting remains the bond or
Obligation is of force: but after the handwriting is rased, or torn in pieces,
the debtor is free and acquitted. Whereof it follows that all they do
diminishe the benefit of Christ, which as yet urge ceremonies: as though we
were not by him acquitted and set free. for they restore to the handwriting the
force which it had, that they may still keep us endaungered. This therefore
is a true reason in divinity, to prove the abolishing of ceremonies: because
if Christ has fully and perfectly redeemed us from guiltiness and out of
danger, he ought also to take away the memorial of the Obligation, whereby
the consciences may be at peace, and quiet in the sight of God. for these two
are annexed and tied together. Whereas the interpreters do expound this place
diversely, there is none of them does satisfy me. Some do think that Paul
speaks simplye of the moral Law: but untruly. for Paul is accustomed to
call that portion (of the law) which is placed in ceremonies, decrees: as in
the Epistle to the Ephesians, and a little after. Specially the place to the
Ephesians chap. 2. ver. 15. manifestlye proves, that Paul in this place
speaks of Ceremonies. And therefore better do they which restrain it to
Ceremonies: but in this point they also are deceived, that they add not a
reason why it is called a handwriting, or rather they allege or assign a
cause that is contrary to the true cause indeed: neither yet do they aptelye
apply this similitude to the Text. But the (true) reason is, that all the
ceremonies of Moses had with them some confession of guiltiness, which
bound the followers of them as it were with a more straight band before the
judgment of GOD. As for example, What other things were the washinges, but a
testimony of filth and uncleanness: As often as any sacrifice was offered up,
did not the people that stood by, behold in the same an image or
representation of their own death? For when men did place in their steed a
harmless beast, they confessed that they themselves deserved that death. To
be breese, look how many rites or ceremonies there were, so many shows of
men's guiltiness, and handwritinges of obligation were there. If any object and
say, that they were sacraments of the grace of God: as at this day Baptism
and the Eucharist are unto us: the answer is easy. for two things are to be
considered in the old ceremonies: that which was agreeable unto the time, and
than that which lead men unto the kingdom of Christ. Whatsoever was than done,
did show forth nothing else but an obligation or binding. Grace was after a
sort suspended and deferred, till the coming of Christ. not that the fathers
were excluded from the same, but they had no present show thereof in their
ceremonies. For they did see nothing beside the blood of beasts in sacrifices:
and in their washings they did see nothing but water. Therefore as concerning
the present vewe or show, guiltiness remained: nay rather the ceremonies
themselves did seal up and sign guiltiness. After this manner also speaks
the Apostle in all the Epistle to the Hebrews: because he sets Christ
directly opposite and against the ceremonies. But how is it now? The Son of
God by his death has not only delivered us from condemnation of death, but to
the end our acquiting and discharge might be the more certain, he has
abrogated and done away those ceremonies, that there should appear no
remembrance or monument of Obligation or building. This is full and perfect
liberty, that Christ by his blood has wiped out not only our sins, but
every hand writing that might testify that we were guilty and endaungered
unto God. Erasmus in his translation has disordred and confounded the text set
down by Paul, while he thus places it, Which was contrary to us by decrees.
Therefore hold fast, as it is true and natural, this reading which I have set
down. He has taken out of the way, Having fastened it to his Cross, He shows
the way whereby Christ has rased the handwriting. for as he fastened to his
cross our curse and malediction, our sins, and pains also due to us: so
has he done in like manner that bondage of the Law, and what soever belongs
to the bynding of our consciences. For being fastened to the cross he took all
things upon him: and therefore he bound them, that they might have no more
right and power over us.

15 Spoiling principallities. Without doubt he means the Devils, unto whom
the Scripture signeth these parts, in that they accuse us before the presence
of God. But Paul says they are unarmed, so that they can bring forth nothing
against us, the witness and testee of our guiltiness being done away. And he
adds this by name, whereby he may declare that the victory which he has
gotten for himself and us over Satan, is deformed and blotted of the false
apostles: and that we are bereft of the commodity thereof, whenever they
(go about to) restore the old ceremonies. For if our liberty be the spoil,
that Christ has taken away from the Devil, what do other who will bring us
back into bondag, but restore unto Satan the spoils, whereof he was clean
stripped? Triumphing over them in it. The greek speech will abide that we may
read In himself. nay rather the greater number of books have (...) with an
aspiration: but the circumstaunce of the place does altogether require, that
we read it otherwise. for that which should but coldly be spoken of Christ,
is aptly and freelye referred to the cross. For as before he compared the
cross to a noble Monument of victory, or to the pomp of a triumph, in
which Christ lead about his enemies: so also now does he make it like to a
triumphant chariot, in which he has been seen over all the company. For
although in the cross there was nothing but a curse: yet it was so swallowed
up through the power of the son of GOD, that after a sort it put on a new
quality and nature. For no judgment seat was so honorable, no princely
throne so stately, no pomp of triumph so notable, no chariot so lofty, as
that gallowtree on which Christ has subdued death, and the devil the prince
of death, and therefore has utterly trodden them under his feet.

16 Therefore let no man judge you either in meat, or in drink, or in a piece
of a holydaye, or of the newmoone, or of the sabbothes.

17 Which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ.

18 Let no man take from you the victory, meaning to do it in lowliness and
in the service of Angels, thrusting himself into those things which he has
not seen, in vain being pufte up by the mind of his flesh.

19 And not holding the head, whereof the whole body being served or aided and
knit together by ioints and knittings, grows with the increase of god.

16 Therefore let no man. That which before he spoke of Circumcision, he now
extends to the difference of meats and days. For Circumcision was the first
order or degree toward the observing of the law: and then other things
followed. To judge, in this place signifies to make one guilty of a fault, or
to lay on religion, so that we may not any longer be free. He denies it than
to be in the power of men, to make us subject to the observation of rites and
ceremonies which Christ by his death has taken away, and has plucked our
necks from the yoke of them, that we should not suffer our selves to be
enwrapped with the laws which they make. And he does covertly set Christ
opposite and against all m^n, lest any should so boldly and rashlye extol
himself, that he would assaye to take away that which was given by him. In a
piece of a holiday. Some take (...) for participation or partaking. Chrysostom
supposes that therefore he said a Piece, because they kept not all the
festiual days or holidays: neither yet did they exactly keep holyday
according to the prescription and appointment of the law: which (prescription)
was put out. Consider whether it may not be taken for segregating or parting.
for they that make difference of days, do as it were divide one day from an
other. Such particion became the Jews, that they should keep holy the days
commanded by parting them from other. Among Christians such deuidinges are
ended. But some man will say, We do as yet retain some observation of days.
I answer, We keep not days, as though there were any religion in holydays,
or as though it were not lawful then to labor: but to have regard to policy
or government and order, and not to the days. And that is it which by and by
he joins.

17 Which are a shadow of things to come.) Therefore does he set at freedom
Christians from keeping them, because they were shadows at what time Christ as
yet after a sort was absent. For he sets shadows opposite to revealing or
manifesting: and absence or being away to exhibiting or showing forth. They
than which as yet follow those shadows, do even like, as if one would
consider the shape or fashion of a man by his shadow, when as he has the man
himself before him to look upon. For Christ is already made apparaunt unto
us: and so we have the fruition of him as being present. The body, says he,
is of Christ, that is to say in Christ. For the substance of those things,
which the ceremonies in time past did figure, is set forth unto us before our
eyes in Christ: for that he contains in himself, whatsoever they signed or
signified to come to pass. Therefore either he overthrows the manifest
showing or manifestation of Christ, or else robs Christ of his power and
virtue, and as it were makes him empty which calls back ceremonies to be
used again. Therefore if any man in the world shall usurp unto himself the
office of a judge in this behalf let us not obey him: seeing that Christ the
lawful judge has acquitted us and set us free. For where he says Let no man
judge you, he speaks not to the false Apostles: but he forbids the
Colossians that they put their necks under an unjust yoke. In deed of it
self to abstain from swynes flesh, hurts nothing at all: but the bynding
to do it is pernicious and hurtful, because it makes void the grace of
Christ. If any man will demand, What shall we think then of our
Sacraments? I answer that they differ far from the ceremonies. For as
Paynters do not paynte forth at the first draught the Image with lively
colors or picture like, but first do draw vnwroughte and diffusde lines out
with a cole: so under the law the representation or manifesting of Christ,
was unpolished and as it were of the first hand: but in our Sacraments he is
beheld as set forth liuelye. Although Paul did fetch the matter further of:
for he sets opposite the bare sight of the shadow against the firmness of
the body: and admonishes that it is the token of a doting or frantic
person, to take hold of vain shadows, when he may with his hands handle the
firm and solid body. Furthermore our Sacraments do so figure Christ being
absente as touching sight and distaunce of place, that they testify that he
was once exhibited and showed, and now also do offer him to be enjoyed. They
are not therefore bare shadows: but rather badges and tokens of the presence
of Christ. for they contain that Yea and Amen of all the promises of God,
which is manifested in Christ.

18 Lest any take from you.) He alludeth to rumors of wrestlers, unto whom the
victory is on this condition appointed, if they faynte not in the midst of
their course, or after they have begone to wrestle. He puts them in mind
than that the false Apostles go about nothing else but to take from them the
victory: because they lead them away from the rightnesse of their course.
whereof it follows that they are to be shunned no otherwise than most
contagious plagues. And the place is dilligently to be marked: that all they
who lead us away from the simplicity of Christ, do craftily bereave us of the
reward of supernall calling. Meaning in humility. Something must be
understood, and therefore in the Text I have put in To do it. For he shows
a kind of danger, that they ought to take heed of, as if he should say,
They mean to deceive you of the victory, whatsoever they are that under the
color of humility and lowliness, commend unto you the service of Ang^ls.
For this they purpose, that you leaving the only mark should wander clean
out of the way. I read lowliness and the service of Angels, joining them
together. for the later of these follows the former. As at this day the
Papists, while they devise like Philosophers about worshipping of Saints, do
pretend the same. For they gather their reason from the debasing or humbling
of man, therefore we must (say they) seek Mediators, that may help us. But
therefore has Christ humbled and debased himself, that we may go straight
unto him, although we be miserable and wretched sinners. I know that service
of Angels, is otherwise expounded of many: namely for such service as is
delivered unto men by Angels. for the Devil under this title does always
set out his iuggelinges and deceites. The Pope at this day boasts all the
trifles, wherewith he counterfeyteth the pure service of God, to be
revelations. Even likewise in old time did the Clergy auouche to be by
hand given them of the Angels, whatsoever superstitions they like lying
Marchantes told of or taught. And so they think that in this place are
reprehended all feigned and forged services or worshippinges, which are falsely
commended and set forth under the Authority of Angels, but in my judgment
he does rather reprehende the devise or lie of serving the Angels. For which
respect so diligently did he enforce himself to this even by and by after
the beginning of the Epistle, that he brought the Angels under subjection, that
they might not darken the brightness of Christ. To be short as he in the first
Chapter made his way to take away ceremonies: so did he in like manner to take
away al impedime^ts and lets which pluck us away from Christ alone. among
which which is the service of Angels. Superstitions persons have from the
beginning worshipped and served Angels, that by their help they might have
access unto God. The Platonicall Philosophers have infected the Christyan
Church also with this error. For howsoever Augustine sharply inueieth against
them in his tenth book of the City of God, and does greatly condemn
whatsoever they reason and dispute concearning the serving of of Angels: Yet we
see what has come to pass. If any man confer the writings of Plato with
the Popish divinity, he shall find that they have drawn from Plato
altogether those things which they prattle concearning the service of Angels.
This is the sum, Angels must be honored, such as Plato calls Demones,
(...). that is, Because of their happy or lucky intercession. This sentence he
puts down in Epinomide: and confirms it in Cratylus, and many other
places. And what do the Papists differ at all from the same? But they deny
not (say you) the Son of God to be a Mediator. No more do they with whom
Paul contendeth. but while they did feign that by the help and aid of
Angels, they came to God, and that therefore some service must be done to them:
in so doing they did place the Angels in the seat of Christ, and deck and
set them out with the office of Christ. Let us than know that Paul in this
place does condemn all forged and devised service and worshippinges, which
are given either to the Angels or to the dead, as though after Christ, or with
Christ, they should be helping mediators. For even so much do we depart and
withdraw our selves from Christ, as we do set over the lest portion of that
which is proper and belonging to him to any other, whether the same be Angels
or else men. Thrusting in himself into these things which he has not seen.
The Verb (...), the participle whereof Paul uses in this place, has sundry
significations or meaninges. Whereas Erasmus following Jerome has translated
it, Going loftily or proudly, it would not amiss agree (with the text), if in
any allowed author there were an example of this signification. For we see
daily with how great boldness, and with what a majesty and pride rash headed
persons do define or determine about things unknown. And surely in the
present cause which Paul has in hand, there is apparaunt a notable
doctrine. for when the Sorbonicall Divines do trifle about the intercession or
meditation of Saints or Angels, they do as it were out of an Oracle pronounce
that those that are dead know and see our necessities, because they see all
things [as they saye] by means of a light that respects or shyneth back from
God upon them. And yet what is less certain? nay rather what is more obscure
doubtful and intricate? But such forsooth is their masterlike licentiousness,
that boldlye and without fear they auouche that which not only they
themselves know not, but that which cannot be known of men. The meaning
than would well agree, if that signification of the word were any thing used:
but simplye with the Greeks it is taken for Jncedere. i. to go or to go on
it sometime signifies also to enquire or seek after. If it like you so to
take it in this place, Paul then reproves foolish curiosity, in searching
after obscure and dark matters, and such things as are hidden and far
above our understanding. But in my conceyte I have attained the mind and
meaning of Paul, and have truly and faithfully translated it, after this
manner, Thrusting himself into those things which he has not seen. For the
common signification of the Verb (...) is, to enter solemnlye into an
inheritance, or to usurp possession, or to set in foot to a place.
Therefore Budeus has thus translated this place, setting in foot, or entering
on the possession of those things which he has not seen: whose authority I
have followed, but I have chosen out a more proper and fit word. For in very
deed such fellows break through and thrust themselves into secrets and
hidden things, whereof God as yet will have no revelation or knowledge to come
unto us. A place to be marked to reprove the rashness of such as enquire and
search after more than they ought. In vain puf^ed up by the mind of the flesh.
He calls the mind of the flesh the through sight of man's wit, how great
soever it be. For he sets it opposite unto spiritual wisdom which is
revealed unto us from heaven: according to that saying, Flesh and blood has
not revealed that unto thee: Math. chapt. 16. ver. 17. Whosoever he is
therefore that leaves to his own reason, because the force of carnal wit
does wholye, and thoroughly flourish in him, Paul shows that he is puffed up
in vain. And surely it is but puffing and wind, whatsoever wit it be that men
have of themselves. nothing than is firm but in the word of GOD, and by the
illumination of the Spirit. And note, that they are called pufte up, who
thrust in themselves into favor under the show of humility. For it falls
out (as Augustine does elegantly write to Paulinus) by wondrous means in the
soul of man, that it is more puffed up and swells for false and dissembled
humility, than if openly or manifestly it were proud.

19 Not holding the head.) In one word he condemns whatsoever is not referred
to Christ. And he confirms his opinyon for that all things flow and
depend thereof. Therefore if any call us any whether else than unto Christ,
although otherwise he were great with heaven and earth, yet is he a vayn and
light person: and therefore let us be bold to bid him farewell. But mark
of whom he speaks, namelye of those who did not openly refuse and deny
Christ, but such as not well understanding his office and power, sought out
other helps of salvation and means, (as commonly they call them) and were not
firmly rooted in him. Whereof the whole body. This he simply means, that
the Church abides and stands no otherwise, than while all things are
ministered unto it by Christ the hedde: and therefore that all the safety
thereof is contained in him. The body in deed has his sinews, his beams,
and joints, or knittings: but yet al these have no strength or force but from
the head, so that the whole knitting and binding of them together comes of
it. What is than to be done? [forsooth] the constitution or whole order of the
body shall be right, if the head alone, which ministers unto all and singular
members all that they have, may without any let have the highest place. Paul
names that the Increase of God. whereby he declares, that not every increase
is allowed of God, but that which is directed unto the head. For we see that
the kingdom of the Pope is not alone tall and big, but that it swells with
a monsterous greatness. But seeing it is not there to be seen that Paul in
this place requires in the Church: what shall we say of it, but that it is a
knobbye and crookebacked body, and a disordred and il framed heap or pile,
which will fall down upon it self?

20 If therefore ye be dead with Christ, from the Elements of this Would: why
are decrees prescribed unto you, as though ye lived in the world.

21 Eat not, taste not, handle not:

22 Which all are into corruption by the abuse it self, after the precepts
and doctrines of men.

23 Which in deed have a show of wisdom in superstition, and in lowliness
of the mind, and in not regarding of the body: not in any honor to the
fulfilling of the flesh.

20 If ye be dead. He said before that the decrees or ordinances were fastened
to the Cross of Christ: now he uses another figure or fashion of speaking,
viz. that we are dead to them. as Galathins cap. 2.19. he teaches that we are
dead to the Law and the law in like manner is dead to us. The word Dead
signifies abrogating or doing away: but when he says Dead it is more lively
and effectually spoken. He says than that the Colossians have nothing to do
with decrees. Why so? for that they are dead with Christ unto decrees, that is
to say, after they are dead with Christ by regeneration, by his benefit they
are delivered from decrees: so that the same belong not any more at all unto
them. Hereof he concludes, that they are not bound by decrees, which the
false Apostles assayed to lay upon them.

21 Eat not, taste not.) Until this time they have translated it, touch not.
but whereas by and by follows another word that signifies the same thing:
there is none but he sees, how cold and strange a repetition it would be.
Furthermore the verb (...) among other things signifies with the Greeks
esitare to pickle or eat, as I have translated it. Plutarche in the life of
Caesar uses it, when he shows that his souldyers in extreme scarcity of all
things, did eat such things as were not before meet to be eaten. And this
order once is natural, and also very fit for the circumstaunce of the place.
For Paul does in using and immitating their own words, paynte forth, how
far their waywardness is accustomed to proceed, who by their laws do
entangle the consciences. Even from the beginning they are more rough than
needs. Therefore they begin with forbidding not only to eat, but also to
eat lightly or a little. After they have got that which they would, than go
they beyond that commandment: so that afterward they pronounce it to be a
great evil to taste that which they will not have eaten. At least for a man
but to touch it, they make it a Purgatory matter, to deserve the pains of
Purgatory. To be brief, there is no end when men have taken upon them
like tyrants over other men's souls, but there are every day new laws put to
the old, and many times there start up new decrees. What a plain and evident
view may a man have hereof in the Papacy. Therefore excellently well does Paul
who warns that men's traditions are a Labyrinth or mase, whereby the
consciences are more and more enwrapped: nay rather snares, which do so bind
in the beginning, that in process of time they will at length strangle.

22 Which all are into corruption. With a double argument he confuteth the
decrees whereof he spoke: first for that they put religion in outward and
frail things which belong nothing to the spiritual kingdom of God: secondly
because they are of men, and not of God. He contendeth with the first argument
also. To. 14.17. The kingdom of God is not in meat and drink. Also 1 Cor.
6.13. Meat for the belly, and the belly for meats, God will destroy both of
them. And Christ in himself [sayth], Whatsoever enters into the mouth,
defiles not a man. Math. 15.11. because it goes down into the belly, and is
cast forth. The sum is, that the service of GOD, true godliness and the
holiness of Christians consists not in meat, and drink, and apparaile:
which are things that pass away, are under corruption, and perish by abuse.
For abuse is properly said [or meant] of such things as use corrupts or
mareth. Therefore naught worth are precepts or decrees touching those things
which are set out to lay religion upon the consciences. But in the Papacy
you shall scarce find any other holiness saving in trifling observations of
corrutible things. The other confutation follows, namely that they came from
men, and have not God their author or beginner. with which flash of lightning
he hurleth down and consumes all the traditions of men. And why? This is
Paul's manner of reasoning, They do injury to Christ, and make void his
death, that bring again the consciences into bondage. For whatsoever is of
man's inuenting, byndeth not the conscience.

23 Which in deed have a show.) It it a prevention, in which while he does
yield to his adversaries that which they might allege, he does withal
account it every whit as nothing. For it is as much as if he should say, that he
wayeth it not that they have a show of wisdom. But show is opposite or
contrary to truth. for it is an appearaunce, (as commonly they speak it)
while beguileth because of likelyhoode. And mark of what colors this show
consists after the mind of Paul. He names three, a choice in serving or
worshipping, lowliness or humility, and a neglecting of the body.
Superstition with the Greeks is calle^ (...): which word Paul uses here in
this place. But he had respect to the etemologie and natural signification of
the word. For Ethelothrescia word for word is voluntarius cultus, a voluntary
service, which men of their own choice or determining do appoint and choose
to themselves without the commandment of GOD. Men's traditions do therefore
like us, because they are agreeable to disposition: for every man in his own
brain will devise and inuente forms and figures of them. this is the first
color. The second is lowliness, because obedience both to God and man is
pretended: so that men may not refuse, no not unjust and wrongful burden.
And for the most part this is in these manner of traditions, yt they seem to be
maruaylous good excercises of lowliness. They are well liked also in the third
color, because they seem to avail very much toward the mortifiing of the
flesh, while there is no regard had of the body. But Paul bids farewell
to these shows and colors. for even that which is high before men, is often
times abomination before God moreover yt is a disobedient obedience, and a
perverse and sacrilegious lowliness or humility, which passes over ye
authority of God unto men. and the neglecting of the body is not so much
worth that that it ought to be set out as a service of God. But some man will
marvel why Paul took no more pains in plucking off these visars. I answer,
First that he contented himself with the only word Show, and it was
inoughe. For those principles which he had taken from the contrary part, are
invisible, [namelye] that the body is in Christ. and that therefore they did
nothing else but mock sillye poor men, in that they did set before them
shadows. Moreover that the spiritual Kingdom of Christ is not occupied
about frail and corruptible elements. Thirdlye that by the death of Christ
such observations are dead, that they should not a whit belong to us.
Fourthlye, that GOD is our only Lawgiuer. Whatsoever may be brought on the
contrary side, although it have some fair show or brightness, yet is it a
vanishing and frail show. Secondlye he accounted it enough to monishe the
Colossians that they were not deceived with the show of vain and emptye
things: and it was not needful to stand longer about the disprouing of them.
It ought to be as commonly known as is a proverb, among all godly persons,
that the service of GOD must not be measured after our thought and meaning:
nor yet that any service is legitimate or lawful, for that it likes us. This
also ought to be as well known, that this is the humility and lowliness we
owe to God, that we simply obey that which he bids, that we lean not to
our own wisdom. etc. And that this is the bounds of lowliness toward men,
that by charity every one submit himself unto others. And whereas they
contend that the wantonness of the flesh is kept down by abstinence of
meats, the answer is easy: we may not therefore abstain from any
certain kind of meat, as being unclean, but we must sparingly eat those
things which we feed of: as well that we may soberly and measurably bestow and
order the gifts of God, as also that we lie not entangled in much eating and
drinking; and forget those things that belong unto God. Wherefore it was
enough for him to say these were visars and shows: that the Colossians being
warned might arm themselves against a false and colored pretense. So at this
day the Papists lack no fair shows, wherewith they may commend and set
out their laws, though partly they be ungodly and tyrannical, partly vain
and trifling. But when we have yielded all unto them: yet this confutation of
Paul must abide, which is enough and enough alone to discuss all their
vanities, and yet I will not speak how far differente they are from that so
honest a show, which Paul describes. The principal holiness of the Papacy
at this day is in Monkerie, but what that is, I am ashamed and agrieued to
speak of, least I should stir so foul a stink. Furthermore it is worth
while here to consider, how readily, nay rather how hastily and headdilye man's
nature and disposition is carried into feigned and devised worshippinges and
service. For in this place the Apostle lively and skilfullye paynteth out the
state of old Monkerie: which within an hundred years after his death did
so much prevail as though he had never made word of it. Therefore the
heat of men was wondrous mad to superstition, which could not be brideled
with so plain a lesson of God, but that it would break out, as the histories
do testify. Not in any honor. Honor signifies regard or care, after the
use of the hebrew tongue. Honor widows: that is to say have regard of them.
And Paul does dislike that, that they teach to cast away the care for the
body. For as God forbids that we should out of measure cherish the body: so
he commands to give it as much as is necessary. Therefore Paul Romans 13.14.
does not simply condemn care for the flesh, but such a care as serves for
the lusts. Have no regard of the flesh, says he, unto lusts. What than
does Paul note to be amiss in those traditions whereof he speaks? for
that they give no honor unto the body for enlarging the flesh: that is to
say according to the measure of necessity. For fullfilling in this place,
signifies a mediocritie or mean usage, which restrains it self to the bare
use of nature, and so it is used as the contrary to pleasure and all
superfluous dellicacie. for nature is content with a few things. Therefore to
deny that which nature requires to sustain the necessity of life, is no
less contrary to piety, than void of humanity.

The third Chapter.
1 Therefore if you have rise^ with Christ, seek those things that are above,
where Christ is sitting on the right hand of God.

2 Think upon those things that are above, and not which are upon the earth.

3 For you be dead, and your life is hidden with Christ in God.

4 But when Christ your life shall appear, then also shall ye appear with him
in glory.

HE sets against those vain excercises which the false Apostles did urge,
as though perfection were placed in the^, true exercise wherewith it becomes
true Christians to be occupied: which does not a little make for the cause.
For while we perceive what God would have us do, we do easilye afterward
set naught by the inventions of men. Whilst it appears that that which God
sets out for us is far more high and noble, than that which men beat into
our heads, we leave men, and our minds grow more and more ready and willing
to follow God. Paul in this place exhorts the Colossians to the
consideration and practice of a heavenly life. But what do his adversaries?
they would detayne them in childish rudimentes. This doctrine then causes
ceremonies to be more little set by. Whereof it appears that Paul does so
exhort in this place, that he confirms his former doctrine. For in describing
firm or sound Godliness and holiness of life, he directs his talk to
this point, that those vain shows of men's traditions may wast and wear
away. He does withal preuente an Objection wherewith the false Apostles might
burden him, What then? had thou rather that men should be idle then to
give themself to these excercises, what kind of ones soever they be? When as
therefore he bids Christians to apply themselves to far more excellent
studies, he cutteth of occasion from this malicious surmise, nay rather he
charge them with no small spite, for that with things of naught they call
away, and hinder the right course of the godly.

1 If ye are risen. Ascending follows rising again, if then we be the
members of Christ, we must ascend into heaven: because that he being raised
from the dead, is taken up into heaven, that he might draw us with him. And we
seek those things which are above, while in our minds we are truly
pilgrims in this world, and are not tied to the same. The word, think on,
does more express a paynefulnesse in taking care, and a vehemency: as if he
should say, Meditate this wholly: apply your wit to this, apply your mind
to this. But if we ought to think on nothing but that which is heavenly: for
that Christ is in heaven: how much less shall it be meet to seek Christ
himself on the earth? Let us remember than that this is a true thinking on
Christ, and an holy, which forthwith rauisheth us up into heaven, that we
may worship him there, and that our minds may dwell with him. As touching
that which belongs to the right hand of God, it is not shut up in heaven: but
it fills the whole world. Furthermore Paul made mention thereof in this
place, that he might show that Christ embraces us by his power: lest we
should think the distaunce of place to be a cause of separation or divorce
between us and him: and that withal, his majesty might wholly ravish us into
the reuerencing thereof.

2 Not which are upon earth. He does not understand, as afterward he does,
vicious desires which reign in earthlye men: neither yet riches, or Fields,
or houses, or whatsoever things else belonging to this present life, which we
must use as though we used them not: but he follows as yet his disputation
concerning ceremonies which he makes like unto trifling lets, which constrain
us to creep on the ground. Christ, says he, calls us up unto him: but those
lead you downward. For it is a conclusion and an exposition of those matters
which lately he touched concerning the dying of ceremonies by the death of
Christ. as if he should say, Therefore are ceremonies dead to you by the death
of Christ, and you unto them, that being lifted up into heaven with Christ, ye
should think only upon heavenly things. Therefore let go earthlye
things. I will not contend against other who think otherwise: but certaynelye
me thinks the Apostle does so proceed step by step orderly, that first
and foremost he sets opposite traditions touching trifling matters, unto the
meditation of an heavenly life: and after that proceeds further, as we shall
see.

3 For ye be dead.) He cannot rise again with Christ, who first has not died
with him. Therefore he brings his argument, from rising again to dying, as
from the consequente to the accedent, signifiing that we must be dead to the
World, that we may live to Christ. Why has he taught that we must seek
the things that are above? because the life and conversation of the godly is
above. Why does he teach that those things are now to be let pass, which are
upon the earth? because they are dead to the world. as if he should say,
Death goes before that rising again which I have spoken of. Therefore both of
these must be seen in you. This is worth the marking, that our life is hidden:
least we repyne or complain, if our life being under the ignominy of the
Cross, and buried under manifold sorrows, differ nothing from death: but
that we must patiently expect and weight for the day of revelation or
appearaunce. And that our waiting be not painful and grievous, let us note the
parcels, In God, and with Christ: which declare, that our life is out of
danger, although it appear not. For even God is faythefull and trustye, and
therefore he will not deny that which was laid up with him, The Latin is
dopositum, which also signifies a guage or pledge.
nor deceive in that he took to keep: and the society and felloweshippe of
Christ brings yet more securytie and assurance. For what is more to be
desired, than for our life to remain with the very wellspring of life?
Wherefore there is no couse why we should be terryfied, if while we look
about on every side, we see life on no side. For by hope we are safe. But
those things which are now seen to the eyes, are not hoped for. Neither yet
does he teach that our life is hidden after the opinyon of ye world only, but
also according to our own meaning or understanding: because this is a true and
necessary experiment and trial of our hope, whiles we as compassed about with
death, do seek life else where than in the world.

4 But when Christ shall appear.) A pleasant and godly comfort, that the
coming of Christ shall be the manifestation and appearaunce of our life. And
withal he admonishes how preposterous the desire of the life to come is, if
a man refuse to suffer patiently even until that day. For if our life be shut
up in Christ, until he shall appear, it must needs be hidden.

5 Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth, fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence and covetousness,
which is Idolatry.

6 For which the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience.

7 In which you also walked in time past, when you lived in them.

8 But now put you away also al wrath, fuming, maliciousness, cursed speaking,
filthy communication out of your mouth.

5 Mortify therefore.) Hitherto he has spoken of the contempt of the world:
now he goes farther, and entreats to an higher (kind of) Philosophy,
concearning the mortification of the flesh. That this may be done the more
plainly, let us note that mortification is twofolde or double. the first
respects those things that are about us, of which he has entreated
hitherto. the other is inward: namelye of the disposition and will, and of our
whole nature corrupted and infected. And he reckeneth up certain vices, which
he improperly calls members, but yet elegantly. For he imagines our nature
(to be) as a mass or sow cast out of many vices. They are then our members,
which stick unto us as close as it were, as burres. He also calls them
earthly, alluding to that which he spoke, in the second verse, viZ. Not which
are upon the earth, but yet in another sense. This kind of speaking is as much
as if he had said, I have warned you that earthly things are not to be
regarded: yet must you travail about this that you mortify the vices which
detayne you in the earth. And he means that we as long as the vices of the
flesh do florishe in us, are earthly: but we are made heavenly by the
renewing of the Spirit. After whoredom he puts Uncleanness, by which
word he puts all kind of wantonness, wherewith lecherous men defile
themselves. Unto these is added (...) that is in latin Mollities, which is
englished inordinate affection, which comprehends all the allurementes of
Lechery. Although this word does otherwise signify perturbations or trouble
of the mind, and intemperate motions contrary to reason: yet to this place
does well agree mollities. Why covetousness is called the worshipping of
Images, seek out of the Epistle to the Ephesians, lest I should do one thing
twice.

6 For which comes. I reprove not Erasmus for translating it, is wont to
come. Yet because the present tence is in the Scripture often taken in place of
the future tence, according to the manner of the Hebrew tongue: I chose rather
to leave you the reading that was the mean, which might be fitted to either
sense. Therefore he warns the Collossians either of the vsitate judgments
of God, which are daily seen: or else of the vengeance which once he has
denounced to the ungodly, and which hangs over their heads: and yet shall
not be manifested before the last day. Although I willingly allow that former
sense and exposition, that God who is the perpetual judge of the world, is
accustomed to punish the wickedness whereof he speaks. And by name he says
the wrath of God shall come, or is wont to come, upon unbelievers and
disobedient persons, rather then threatens to them such a matter. For God had
rather we should see his wrath in the reprobate, that feel it in our selves.
When the promises of grace are openly pronounced, every one of the godly
ought no otherwise to embrace them, than as properlye appointed for themselves.
And so let us fear the threatninges of wrath and destruction, that that
which is allotted which is allotted to the reprobate, may be unto us a document
or lesson. In deed God is often said to be also angry with his Children: and
sometime he does sharply chasten their sins. But in this place Paul is in
hand about eternal destruction, the view or Spectacle whereof appears in
the only reprobates. In sum, as often as GOD threatens he does as it
were trauerslye set out unto us the pain, that we beholding the same in the
reprobate, may be feared away from sinning.

7 In which ye did walk.) Erasmus did ill for that he referred it to men,
translating it thus, amongst whom. for Paul without doubt meant it of vices:
in which he says the Colossians were conversant, at what time they lived in
them. For Living and Walking differ one from another, as ability to do, and
doing: Living goes before, and Walking follows. Galathians the 5. chapter and
25. verse, If you live in the spirit, walk also in the Spirit. By these
words he declares that it is an heinous thing, if they being any longer
addicted to vices, to which they are dead by Christ, are given over unto the^.
Look the 6. chapter to the Romans. It is an argument taken from the privation
or taking away ye cause, to the privation or taking away the effect.

8 But now. etc. That is seeing you have ceased to live in the flesh. For this
is the force and nature of mortification, that all corrupt affections are
quenched in us, so that hereafter sin engendereth not in us his accustomed
fruits. Whereas I have translated it fuming, in greek it is (...), which word
signifies a more hasty or heady kind of heat, than is (...). And here he
reckons up kinds of vices that are contrary to the former, as you may
readily see.

9 Lie not one to another, seeing you have put off the old man with his deeds.

10 And you have put on the new man which is renewed into knowledge, after the
image of him which created him.

11 Where there is no Greek nor Jew, Circumcision nor uncircumcision:
Barbarian, Scythian, bondsman nor freeman: but Christ all things, and in all
things.

12 Put on therefore as the elect of God, holy and beloved the bowels of
compassion, courtesy, humility, kindness, long suffering.

13 Forbearing one another, and forgiving if any have a controversy against
another, as Christ has forgiven you, so [doe] you also.

9 Lie not. When he forbids lying, he condemns all manner of subteltie, and
all evil practices of deceit and falshoode. for I do not take it as meant of
slanders only, but generally I make it contrary to sincerity and true
dealing. therefore I might more briefly thus translate it, and I cannot say
whether also better, Lie not one to another. And he prosecuteth that his
argument of the society or fellowshippe which the faithful have with the
death and resurrection of Christ: but he uses other manners of speaking. The
Old man signifies that whatsoever it is that we bring out of our mothers
womb, and whatsoever we are by nature. Such put off him as are renewed by
Christ. contrariwise the new man is he which is reformed and fashioned again
by the Spirit of Christ into the obedience of righteousness: or else it is
nature restored into true soundness and integrity by the same Spirit. And
the old man in order goes before the new, because we are first borne of
Adam, after that we are borne again by Christ. And as that which we have of
Adam, waxes old, and enclyneth to ruin and decay: so that which we obtain
by Christ, remains perpetually, is not frail or mortal, but rather is
carried unto immortality. This place is to be marked, because out of it may be
gathered a definition of regeneration or new birth. For it comprehendtth two
parts, the putting off of the old man, and the buildinge up of the new of
both which parts Paul here makes mention. And it must be marked, that the
old man is discerned and judged by his works, as the tree by the fruits.
whereof it follows, that under the name of the old man is meant the
wickedness that is bredde in us.

10 Which is renewed into knowledge. First he shows that newness of life
consists in knowledge: not for that naked and simple knowledge is sufficient,
but he speaks of the illuminating of the holy Ghost, which is lively and
effectuous, so that not only it does lighten being kindled with the light of
truth, but does transform and newlye fashion the whole man. And this is that
which straightwaye he adds, that we are renewed after the Image of GOD. And
the Image of GOD has residence in the whole soul, when not reason alone, but
also the will is right. Hereof also we learn, as well what is the end and
final cause of our regeneration, that is to say that we may be made like
unto God, and that his glory may shine out in us: as also what the image of
God is, whereof mention is made in Moses Genesis 9.6. namely the rightnesse and
integrity of the whole soul, so that man does represent the wisdom,
righteousness and goodness of God as it were a loking glass. He does speak
somewhat otherwise to the Ephesians, but in the same sense: see the place cap
4.24. And withal Paul monisheth, that there is nothing more excellent
whereunto the Colossians may aspire, because this must be our highest
perfection and blessedness, (viZ) to bear the Image of God.

11 Where there is no Jew. This he added of set purpose, that he might
again draw away the Collossians from Ceremonies. For thus sound the words,
Christian perfection needs not a whit these outward observations. nay rather
they are things utterly contrary to it. For under ye difference of
Uncircumcision and Circuncision, of Jew and Greek, he comprehends all
outward things by the figure Synecdoche. Synecdoche, is when part of a thing
is used for the whole thing
These words which follow, namelye, Barbarian, Scythian, Bondsman, Freeman,
are added to amplify the matter. Christ all things, and in all things, That
is to say, Christ alone holds boeth foreshippe and poupe, (as they say)
beginning and end. Furthermore by Christ he understands the spiritual
righteousness of Christ, which abolisheth ceremonies, as before is seen. They
are therefore in true perfection superfluous: insomuch that they ought to have
no place, for else Christ were offered injury, as though it were needful to
call forth these helps to supplye his defecte and want.

12 Put on therefore. As he has reckoned up some parts of the old man, so
now also does he reckon up some parts of the new. Than, saytth he, shall it
appear that ye are renewed by Christ, if you shall be merciful and gentle.
etc. For these are the effects and testimonies of renouation or being a new
man. The exhortation than depends of the second member: and therefore he
retayneth a metaphor in the word put ye on. In the first place he puts
bowels of mercy, by which kind of speech, he notes an earnest and entire
affection of mercy. Secondlye he puts Courtesy (For so it likes me to
translate (...) (wherewith we are made amyable and beloved. Next to this he
joins Humility: because no man will be courteous and tractable, but he who
having put away pride and hautinesse of mind, has submitted himself unto
modesty, challenging nothing to himself. Kindness which follows, extends
largelier than Courtesy. for courtesy is principally in the countenance and
speech: and kindness is also in the inward affection. But in as much as it
falls out oftentimes that we happen upon wicked persons and unthankful:
patience is needful, which may nourish in us gentleness or kindness. At
length he expounds what he has meant by long suffering: namely that with
mercy we embrace one another, and forgive also when ought shall be done amiss.
But because it is an hard and difficulte matter, he confirms his doctrine
by example of Christ, and teaches that the like is required at our hands: that
we, as being so often and so exceeding faulty are notwithstanding received of
Christ into favor, should show the like kindness to our neighbors,
forgiving them whatsoever they have committed against us. Therefore he says,
If any have a controversy against another. Whereby he means, that not even
just revenge according to man's opinion is to be persued As the elect of God. In
this place I take elect for them that are segregate or set apart. as if he
should say, God has chosen you unto himself on that condition, and sanctified
you, and taken you into his favor, that you should be merciful. etc. He
that has not these virtues, does in vayn boast himself holy and beloved of
God: in vain does he reckon himself among the number of the faithful.

14 For all those things sake, put on charity, which is the bond of
perfection.

15 And the peace of God obtain the victory in your hearts to the which you are
called also in one body, and be you thankful.

16 Let the word of Christ dwell with you abundantly in all wisdom, in
teaching and warning your selves in Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs with
grace, singing in your hearts to the Lord.

17 And whatsoever you shall do in word or deed, do it all in the name of
the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him.

14 For all those things. Whereas some have translated it, Beside all those
things, in my judgment it is coldlye done. It would better accord to do it
thus, Before all these things. But I have rather chosen the used signification
of the word (...). For seeing that all those things which he has reckoned up
hitherto, do spring out of charity: he does rightlye now exhort the
Colossians, that they maintain Charity among themselves, for those things
sake: that is to say that they may be merciful, kind, and easy to
forgive. as if he should say, that then they should be such if they have
charity. For where as charity is missing, in vain are all those things
required. And to the end he may the more set it out, he calls it, The
bond of perfection: whereby he signifies that the whole company of all
virtues are comprehended under it. For this is the very rule of the whole life
and of the whole deeds, after which whatsoever is not ruled out, it is
faulty and naught, whatsoever fair show otherwise it has. That is the cause
why in this place it is called the band of perfection, because nothing in our
life is well framed that is not directed unto it: but whatsoever we take in
hand it is a mere scattering. But the Papists are to be laughed at, who
abuse this testimony to build up justification by works. Charity, say
they, is the bond of perfection, but perfection is righteousness; therefore by
charity we are justified. It is answered two ways. for Paul reasons not
here how men are made perfect before GOD: but how they may live perfectlye
among themselves. For this is the natural and true exposition of the place,
viz. that the other things shall fall out well concerning our life, if
charity flourish and grow amongst us. But if it be granted that charity is
righteousness, in vain and childishlye do they out of that contend, that
we are justified by charity for where shall perfect charity be found? And
we do not therefore say that men are justified by faith only, because to
observe the Law is not righteousness: but rather, that whereas we are all
transgressors of the Law and without righteousness of our own, we are are
compelled to borrowe righteousness of Christ. Therefore the only
righteousness by faith remains, because charity is in no wise perfect.

15 And the peace of God.) He names that peace which God has ordained and
established among us, as shall appear by that which follows, and that will
he have to reign in our hearts. But he uses a Metaphor that is very fit. for
as among wrestlers, he that has overcome all others, carries away the palm
or victory: so will he have the peace of God to be superior over the
affections of the flesh, which carry us away oftentimes to contentions,
disagreements, braules, and privy grudges. He forbids then to give the
bridle to such naughty affections. But because it is a hard matter to hold
them back, he also shows a remedy: [that is] that the victory may be in
the hands of the peace of GOD: because it must be a bridle, wherewith all the
affections of the flesh may be held back. Therefore he says in your
hearts, because in them we feel very often great battles, whilst the flesh
lusts against the Spirit. This piece, To which you be called, declares
what manner of peace this is: namely an unity which Christ by his guidaunce and
authority has consecrated and established among us. For God has so
reconciled us unto himself in Christ, that we should live among our selves and
be of one mind and one accord. And he adds In one body. Whereby he signifies
yt we can no otherwise accord with God, unless we agree together amonhst our
selves, as members of one body. Whereas he bids us be thankful, I do not so
much refer it to the minding of good turns, as to the mildness of manners,
therefore to take away doubtfulnesse [in the morning] I had rather have it thus,
Be you loving, or, Show your selves loving: and yet I confess, if
thankfulness possess our senses, it cannot be but we shall be very ready to
nourish love toward one another among our selves.

16 Let the word of Christ dwell in you.) He will have the doctrine of the
Gospel to be well known unto them. whereof we may gather with what spirit
they are led at these days, who bitterly forbid the same to the people, and
keep a seditious and ruffling stir, (saying) that no pestilence is more to be
shunned, than that the common people should read the Scripture. For in very
deed Paul in this place speaks to men and women of all sorts. neither will
he have them only take a light taste of the word of Christ, but he bids
that it dwell in them: that is to say that it have a sure seat (in the^) and
that largely, that they may have a desire to increase daily more and more. But
because there is in many a preposterous desire or affection in learning,
whilst they abuse the word of God to serve their own ambition, or else vain
curiosity, or else do falsify the same by some manner of mean: therefore he
joins withal, In all wisdom. That we being taught thereby, may taste and
savor that which we ought. Furthermore he defines briefly this wisdom or
taste, (namely) That the Colossians teach themselves. Teaching in this place
is taken for profitable erudition or instructing, which avails to edifiing,
as Romans 12.7. He which teaches (let him do it) in teaching. Also 2. Tim.
3.16, All Scripture is profitable to teach. This is the true use of the word
of Christ. Now because sometime doctrine or teaching of it self is cold: and
(as he says) while it is but only showed what is right, Virtue is praised and
is full ill a cold: he does withal put too an admonition, which is as it were
a confirmation of his doctrine, and a prick to prick them forward. Neither
means he that the word of Christ ought to profit only every singular person
of them, so that they should teach themselves, but he requires at their
hands that they should teach and warn one another.

In psalms and himnes. He restrains not the word of Christ to these
specialties, but he does rather express that all our speeches ought so
greatly to be framed to edification, that even those that do serve to mirth,
may savor of nothing that is vain. as if he should say, Leave unto unbelievers
this folishe delight, which they take of vain and trifling sportes and iestes.
As for your speeches not only which are grave, but also even such as be glad
and merrye, let them contain in them some profit. In steed of their bawdie,
or at least immodest and light and ioyish songs: Hymns and songs which may
sound out the praise of God become you. Furthermore under these three names,
he has comprehended all kind of Songs. which they commonly do thus
distinguish, that a Psalm may be that unto which in singing some musical
instrument beside the tongue is joined. A Hymn may be properlye a Song of
praise, whether it be song with a loud voice or otherwise. A Song does not
only contain praises, but admonitions too, and other matters. But he will
have the spiritual songs of Christians, not such as be endited of frivolous
trifles, and things of naught. For this has relation to the argument. This
piece In grace, Chrysostom diversely expounds: but I take it simply, as also
afterward in the 4. chap. 6. verse. when he says, let your speech be poudered
with salt, in grace. that is to say, poudered with such a dexterity or
^^^somnes as may be gracious or acceptable, and by the commodity and profit
thereof may please the hearers: that it may be contrary to scoffing or
knauerye or like Follies. Singing in your hearts. This belongs to the
affection, for as we ought to stir up others, so also must we singe from our
heart, that it be not an outward sound of the mouth only. Although it be
not so to be taken, as though he bad every one sing inwardly to himself: but
he will have both joined together, so that the hearts go before the tongues.

17 And whasoeuer you do.) These words and that which goes before, I have
already expounded in the Epistle to the Ephesians, where is the same almost
word for word. Because he had now begone to discourse of the parts of a
Christian life, and had touched only a few precepts: and that it was to long
by peecemeale to run through the rest: therefore in a gross sum he
concludes, that our life is so to be ordered, that whatsoever we say or do,
it may be all ruled by the guidaunce of Christ, and may have respect to his
glory, as to the mark. For we shall fitlye comprehend both these in this
word: namely that all our studies and indeauoures have their beginning at
inuocating or calling upon Christ, and sue to his glory. Out of invocation
follows the blessing of God: which ministers matter and occasion of
thanksgiving unto us. And it is to be noted that he teaches that thanks must
be given to the Fathe by Christ, as by him we obtain whatsoever good it is
that God bestows upon us.

18 Wives be subject to your own husbands, as is comely in the Lord.

19 Husbands love your wives: and be not bitter against them.

20 Children obey your parents in all things. for this pleseth the Lord.

21 Fathers provoke not your Children, least they be dismayed.

22 Servants obey in all points those which according to the flesh are your
Masters: not with giving obedience before their eyes, as seeking to please
men, but in simplicity of the heart, as you which fear God.

23 And whatsoever you shall do, do it from the heart, as unto the Lord, and
not unto men:

24 Knowing that of the Lord you shall receive a reward of inheritance, for ye
serve the Lord Christ.

25 But he that shall do unjustly, shall bear the reward of his iniquity:
and there is no accepting of persons.

18 Wives. etc.) Now follow particular duties, as they call them, which
depend of every ones vocation: in handling of which it were superfluous to
bestow many words: because I have already in the Epistle to the Ephesians
spoken almost as much as was needful. Yet in this place I will breefly add
such things as are properly agreeble to the opening of the present place. He
commands women that they be subject. This is plain: but that which follows
is doubtful, [that is] as is comlye in the Lord. For some do thus construe
it, Be ye subject in the Lord as is comelye. Yet I do rather otherwise
construe it, [that is] As is comelye in the Lord, that is, according to the
institution of the Lord: that he may confirm the subjection of women by the
authority of the Lord. Of the husbands he requires love, and that they be
not bitter: because it is dangerous least they abuse their authority and rule
in becoming tyrants.

20 Children obey your Fathers and mothers.) He enioineth unto Children that
they obey their parents without exception. But what if their Parents would
drive them to do any thing that is unlawful: shall they than without choice or
regard obey them also? But surely it were more then heinous, setting God at
naught, yt the authority of men should prevail. I answer, that here also
must be understood, that which is expressed, Ephe. 6.1. namely in the Lord.
But to what purpose is the universal note, All things? I answer again, that
he might show, that they must obaye not only their right and just
commandments, but also such as are wrong and unjust. For many do so forsooth
show themselves obedient to their parents, if it be not a burden or
disprofitable unto them. But children ought to remember this one thing,
whatsoever Parents they be that they have, that yet they happened unto them
by the providence of God, who has by his ordinance made subject the children
unto their Parents. In all things than is, that they refuse nothing, although
the same be hard or grievous: In all things, [is] that in things indifferent
they yield to their person: In all things, is that in seeking what belongs to
themselves, and in debating or being at variaunce, they take not upon them
that which is their right: but yet all this must be always as far as
religon will pirmitte. He forbids unto parents over much sharpness, least
so the children be feared away from abiding any liberal or convenient
correction. For we see by daily experience, of what force natural and kind
education is.

22 Servant obey. Whatsoever is here read concearning servants, needs no
exposition: because it is already opened Ephe. 6.1. except these two things,
for you serve the Lord Christ, And, he that shall do unjustly, shall receive
the reward of unjust dealing, By the former sentence he means thus, that
they must so serve me^, that Christ nevertheless must hold the souerayntie in
the Lord, and that he may be the head Lord. An excellent comfort truly to
all that are in subjection, whilst, for that they willingly serve their
masters, they hear their obedience as acceptable to Christ, as though it were
done unto him, whereof also Paul gathers that they shall receive a reward
of him: even the reward of inheritance. whereby he signifies that the self
same thing that is repayde for works, is freely given us of God. for the
inheritance is by adoption. In the latter sentence he does again comfort
servants, for that, if they be oppressed with the unjust cruelty of their
masters, God himself will revenge it, nether yet will he pass ever such
injuries as are done to them, because they be servants: seeing that with him
there is no respect of persons. For this cogitation or thought might kill
their hearts, if they thought that there were none or no great reckoning made
of them in the sight of God, or else that their miseries were not regarded.
Moreover it happens often that servants themselves will begin to take upon
them the revenging of evil and discourteous handling. He therefore preuenteth
this evil, when he admonishes that they must tarry for the judgment of God
with forbearing.

The fourth Chapter.
1 Masters give to your Servants that which is right, and mutual
uprightness, Equality.
knowing that you also have a master in heaven.

2 Be instaunt in prayer, watching in the same, with thanks giving.

3 Pray you in like manner for us, that GOD may open unto us the gate of
speech to speak the mystery of Christ, for whose also cause I am a prisoner.

4 That I may make it apparaunte, even as I ought to speak.

Masters give to your. etc. He puts, that which is just, in the first
place, by which he means that humanity whereof he gave commandment Ephe.
6.8. But for because that the state of Servants is viewed of masters as it
were from alofte, so that they think themselves to be bound by no Law: Paul
brings them into course and order: because both of them alike are under the
imperie and commandment of God. and hereof comes this equality or
rightnesse whereof he makes mention. And mutual or like equabilitie, or
indifferency. Some do otherwise expound it: but I doubt not but Paul in this
place put (...) for right that is aunswerable from one party to an other, or
that which one party gives to another: as to the Ephesians he used (...). For
masters have not so their servants under them, but that they in like manner
owe some duty unto them: as convenient and proportionable right and equal
dealing ought to be in force among all sorts of persons.

2 Be instaunt in prayer. He returns to general exhortations, in which we
may not look for an exact and stricte order: for if we did, he should
begin with prayer: but Paul has not greatly respected that [ viZ. order].
Furthermore in this place he sets out two things in prayer, first
continuance or often use thereof, after that readiness or an earnest intent.
For when he says, Be instaunt, he exhorts to perseueraunce. He sets
Watching opposite unto coldness and carelessness. He puts to
thanksgiving, because that in such wise God is to be prayed too for our
present necessitye, that in the mean while we forget not those benefits which
we have already received. Moreover we ought not to be so importunate, that we
repine and be displeased, if straighte way GOD fulfill not our desires and
prayers, but with patient minds to receive whatsoever he shall give. So there
is two manner of thanksgiving ne-necessarye. Of which point something has been
also said Philippians. 4.6.

3 Pray you in like manner for us. He does not counterfeite this: but because
he knew his own necessity, he did in earnest wish to be helped with their
prayers, and he was persuaded that the same would do him good. Who now dare
then set light by the intercessions of the brethren, of which Paul confesses
himself to have need? And certaynlye the Lord has not in vain ordained
this exercise of charity among us, that one of us should pray for an other.
Therefore every one ought, not only to pray for the brethren, but
interchaungeablye also to desire aid earnestlye of other folks prayers also,
as often as the matter so requires. But childish is the argument or reason of
the Papists, who gather thereof that the dead are to be called upon, that
they may pray for us. For wherein is it like? Paul commends himself to the
prayers of the brethren, with whom he knew that by the commandment of God he
had mutual communication, but who will not say that this reason (of mutual
communicating) cease in the dead? Therefore letting pass such follies, let us
return to Paul. as we have in Paul a notable example of modesty, in that
he calls unto others to aid and assist him, so also are we admonished that
it is a matter full of great difficulty, constantly to abide in the defense of
the Gospel, specially when danger does urge. And not without cause does he
desire the Churches in this cause to aid him. And withal consider his ardent
zeal how marvelous it is. He is not careful for his own sauegarde, he
desires not that prayers be poured forth by the Churches for himself, that
he may be delivered from the danger of death. He is content with this one
thing, if he abide invincible and unfearful in the profession of the Gospel.
so securely and vnfearefully does he prefer the glory of Christ, and the
spreading abroad of the Gospel before his own life. But by the gate of
speech, he plainly means that which he calls Ephe. 6.19. the opening of
his mouth: and that which Christ calls Mouth and Wisdom. For this manner of
speaking differs nothing at al from that former in meaning, but only in
fashion. For with an elegant Metaphor has he in this place showed playnelye,
that it is never a whit more easy for us, to speak boldly touching the
Gospel, than to break through a gate that is shut and barred. For this is
truly the work of God, as also Christ did say, It is not you that speak,
but the Spirit of your Father which speaks in you: Math 10.10. Having
therefore set forth the difficulty thereof, he pricketh forth the
Collossians the more to pray, when he testifies that he cannot otherwise
speak rightly, except his tongue be directed of the Lord. Secondly he draws
his argument from the worthiness of the things, when he calls the Gospel
the mystery of Christ. Neither must we slightly labor or take payns in so
great a matter. Thirdly he makes mention also of his danger.

4 As I ought. This piece augmenteth the difficulty: for he means that it
is not a vulgar or common thing. To the Ephesians he adds, that I may boldly
behave my self. Whereof appears that he wished to himself an unfearful
boldness and confidence, such as becomes the majesty of the Gospel.
Furdermore where as Paul does nothing here, but that he wishes grace to be
given him to fulfill his office: let us remember that it is a rule in like
manner prescribed unto us, that we give not place to the furye of the
adversaries, but that we labor and strive even to the death to set forth
the Gospel. And because that is above our abillitie and power, it is meet
that we be instaunte in prayers, that the Lord leave us not destitute of the
Spirit of boldness.

5 Walk wisely toward them that are without, redeeming the time.

6 Let your speech always be in grace poudered with salt: that you may know
how you ought to answer to every man.

7 Tichicus a beloved brother and a faithful minister and a fellow servant in
the Lord, shall make known unto you all mine affairs.

8 Whom I have sent unto you for this cause, that you might know mine estate,
and that your hearts might be comforted.

9 With Onesimus a faithful and beloved brother, which is of you. All things
shall be made known unto you which are here (done.)

5 Walk wisely. He sets them without, or forreyners, opposite to them that
are of the household of faith. For the Church is like a City, whose inhabitants
are all faithful, knit together with a mutual kindred or neighborhood among
themselves: and forreyners are the unbelievers. But why will Paul have these
respected before the faithful? There are three causes. First that to the
blind there be no stumbling block laid. because nothing is more ready than
for unbelievers by our unwariness to be made worse, and to have their minds
wounded, so that they daily more and more abhor religion. Secondly that there
be no cause and occasion given them to slander the Gospel, and so the name of
Christ be laid forth to be mocked, they are made worse, and turmoyles and
persecutions raised. Lastly that while we keep company with them at meat and
other affairs, we be not stained with their spotts, and by a little and a
little wax profane and holy. To which purpose belongs that which
follows, Redeemyng the time. Because the conversation of such is dangerous,
for Ephe. 5.16. he shows the reason, because the days are evil: as if he
should say, In so great corruption of the world the occasion of well doing
must be taken, and me must strive with those things that are lets. Therefore
with how many the more stombling blocks our way is enclosed, so much the more
attentiuelye must we beware that our feet stumble not, or that we through
sloth sit not still idly.

6 Let your speech. He requires pleasantness of speech, which may by the
commodity thereof allure the bearers. for he does not condemn only such
speeches as are apparantlye wicked or ungodly, but also such as are of no
accounte or idle. Therefore he bids that they be poudered with salt.
Profane persons have their saltes or witty sayings and conceits, but he
spea^eth not of them: nay rather because pleasant and witty conceates are
plausible, and for the most part win favor, he declares after a sort the
faithful from the use and custom of them, For he counts it unsavory,
whatsoever it be that edifieth not. In the same sense is the word grace, put:
that it may be contrary to scoffing, and all kind of fables and toys which
either hurt or else are vayn. That you may know how, He that has accustomed
himself unto circumspecte speeches, shall not fall into many absurdities and
inconveniences, into which those that are full of words, and bablers many times
do fall: but by continual use he will get himself knowledge how to
answer well and directly. As again it must needs be that blabbe tongue
fellows do set out and offer themselves to be mocked and laughed at as often
as they be asked a question of any thing, wherein they suffer just punishment
for their foolish babbling. Neither does he say only What, but also How (we must
speak): nor yet to all indifferentlye, but to every (and singular) person. For
this is not the worst point of prudencie and skill, to have a consideration of
every one.

9 Mine affairs. To the end the Colossans may know what great care he has
over them, he does confirm and assure them as it were with a pledge given. For
whereas he was in prison, and in hazard of his life, without having regard of
himself, he sees to them, by sending Tychicus unto them. wherein appears as
well the singular zeal of the holy Apostle, as his prudencie and wit. for
this is no small matter, that whilst he is held prisoner, and is in extreme
peril for the Gospel, yet he ceasseth not but gives his diligence to
promote and set forward the Gospel, and has a care for all Churches. So
his body iwis is shut in prison, but his heart which is careful, to do as much
as may be, spreads it self far and wide. It is prudencie and wit, in that
he sends a meet and discreet person that may confirm and establish them
as much as is needful and that may resist and withstand the wiliness of
the false Apostles: moreover for that he keeps still with him Epaphras,
until they shall try what and how great a consent in doctrine were among
all the true teachers: and that they shall have heard the same of Tychicus
that before they had learne^ of Epaphras. Let us diligently consider of
these examples, that they may stir us to the immitating of the like study
and zeal. He puts in Onesimus also, to the end the message may have the
more weight. Although it be uncertain who this Onesimus was. for it is scant
credible, that this is that Servant of Philemon, because the name of a Thief
and a run away had been in hazard reproach and misliking. He sets them
both out with honest titles, that they may do the more good among them: and
Tychicus specially who was to uses office of teaching.

10 Aristarchus my prison fellow saluteth you, and so does Mark the Cosine
of Barnabas: concearning whom you have received commandments if he come
unto you, that you receive him.

11 And Jesus which is called Iustus, who are of the Circumcision, these alone
were workers with me into the kingdom of God, who were to me a comfort

12 Epaphras saluteth you, which is of you a servant of Christ, always
striving for you in prayers: that you may stand perfect and fulfilled in all
the will of God.

12 For I bear him witness, that he has great care over you, and over them
who are at Laodicia and Hieropolis.

10 My prison fellow. Hereby appears, that other came unto Paul, after he
was brought to Rome. And it is credible that his enemies at the first earnestly
labored, to fear away by punishing them as they did him, all the godly from
helping him, and that this prevailed for a time: but afterward some, taking
heart unto them, not to have regarded whatsoever terror was laid before them.
That you receive him. Some books have, Receive him, in the imperative mood:
but wrong for he expresses that kind of commandment which the Colossians
had received: namely that it was the commendacion of either Barnabas or Mark:
which latter is more probable. In the greek it is the infinitive mood, but
yet it must be so resolved as I have done it. And let us mark that they were
diligent in giving testimonye: that they might discern good men from false
brethren, from dranes, from deceivers, and many that were straggelers and
wanderers about. Which diligence and care is at these days more than
necessary: either for because virtuous teachers have cold entertainment: or
else for that folishe persons and such as are light of belief or over liberal
bent and endaungered to deceivers.

11 These alone were workers. That is of them which were circumcised: for he
names others afterward, but those uncircumcised. He means than that there
were few Jews at Rome which showed themselves helpers to the Gospel: but
rather that the whole nation was aduersarye to Christ. Although by Workers he
understands them only which excelled in necessary gifts to further the
Gospel. But where was Peter at ye time? Surely either he was shamefully passed
over here, and not without injury: or else they fable that hold he was then at
Rome. Furthermore he calls ye gospel the kingdom of God. for it is even the
scepter whereby God reigns over us, and by it we have the adoption into life
everlasting. But of this more is spoken in another place.

12 Always striving.) An example of a good Pastor, who by means of distaunce
of place does in no wise forget the Church, but carries the care thereof with
him over the sea. And note the force of the prayer, which is expressed in the
word, Striving. For although in this place Paul meante to note the vehemency
of affection, yet withal he monisheth the Colossians, that they account not
the prayers of their Pastor to be in vain: but rather that they account them
to be no small help to them. Lastly let us gather out of Paul's words, that
this is the perfection of Christians, while they st^^^e fulfilled and in the
will of God: lest that they build their purpose of life upon any other thing
else.

14 Luke the beloved Physician saluteth you, and so does Damas.

14 Salute the Brethren which are at Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the Church
which is at his house.

16 And when the Epistle shall also be read among you, cause that it be also
read in the Church of the Laodicians: and that you read that Epistle which is
from Laodicia.

17 And say you to Archippus, Look to the Ministry which thou have received
in the Lord, that thou fulfill it.

18 The salutation of Paul with mine own hand. Be myndefull of my bands.
Grace be with you, Amen.

Sent from Rome, by Tichicus and Onesimus.
14 Luke saluteth you.) I am not of their mynds, who think this to be Luke ye
Evangelist, for I judge he was better known than that there needed such a kind
of showing: and he should have been set forth with a more worshipful title:
certaynelye he would have called him either his fellow helper, or at the lest
his faithful and trustye companyon, and partener of his contentions and
business. I rather conjecture that he was than away, and this other to be
discerned from him by the name of a Physician. Although I contend not about it
as being a certaintye: but I do only bring conjectures. This Demas of which
he makes mention, is the same without doubt whom he complains afterward
to have forsaken him, 2. Tim. 4.10. When he speaks of the household Church of
Nymphas, let us remember that in one household is prescribed of what fashion it
beseems all the householders of Christians to be: namely that they be so many
small Churches. Wherefore let every man know, that this charge is laid upon
him, that he instruct his house in the fear of the Lord, that he keep it
under holy discipline, to be short, that in the same he fashion an Image or
representation of the Church.

16 Let it be read (...) Church of the Laodyceans. This Epistle howsoever it
was entitled to the Colossians, yet ought it to profit other. The like must
we think of all the Epistles. They were in deed written once to certain
Churches by name: but because they contayn a perpetual doctrine, and that
which is common to all ages: it makes no matter what title they have. For the
argu^^^^ and matter belongs to us. The other Epistle whereof also he makes
mention, they have thought, though untruly, to have been written by Paul. They
are twice deceived who have thought Paul to have written to the Laodicea^s. I
doubt not but that it was an Epistle sent to Paul, the reading whereof might
be profitable to the Colossians: as Cities are accustomed which are nere one to
the other to have many things common between them. And it was to gross a
deceit, that, I wot not what Varlet, under this pretense, durst subborne and
counterfeite so unsavory an Epistle, that nothing could be devised more
contrary to the spirit of Paul [than it].

17 Say ye to A^chippus. As nere as I can guess, this Arch^ppus supplied the
room of the Pastor, whilst Epaphras was away. It may hap he was not such
an one, as of himself w^^ strong enough, except he were pricked forth.
Therefore Paul's will is that he be hartened on to do the better at the
motion of the whole Church. He moughte have warned him in his own name: but
he enioyneth the Colossians to do it, to the end they may know that they
ought to prick their Pastor forward also, if they see him to be cold, and the
Pastor himself may not refuse to be monyshed of the Church. For the
Ministers of the Word are endewed with high power, but yet such as is not
loose from Laws. And therefore it is necessary that they show the^^elues
apt to learn, if they will teach others well. In that Paul does again
set forth his bands he declares thereby that he is not lightly or a little
grieved. For he was mindful of humayne infirmity: and without doubt he fete
in himself certain prickings thereof, when he so greatly desired that all the
godly should be mindful of his trouble. But this is (...) sign of
distrustfulnes, when he does require on all sides the ^^des and ^^lpes that by
the Lord are appointed him. The subscribing of his hand, as elsewhere is
seen, declares that even than there flewe abroad forged Epistles, in so much
that it was but need to stop and prevent false dealing.

Finis.

