SERMON of Master John Calvin, on the History of Melchisedech: Wherein is
also handled, Abraham's courage in rescuing his Nephew Lot: and his Godliness in
paying tithes to Melchisedech.

Also, Abraham's Faith, in believing God: comprehending four Sermons.

And, Abraham's Obedience, in offering his son Isaac; in three Sermons.

Translated out of French, by Thomas Stocker, Gent.

LONDON Printed by John Windet, and are to be sold at the shop of Andrew
Maunsell, in the Royal Exchange. 1592.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable Sir Robert Cycill Knight, one of her Majesty's most
honorable privy Council.
AS it has been for the most part (right Honorable) a very commendable and
orderly course amongst the learned, as well divine as profane writers, to
publish their works to be read and heard of the common people, either in
their own vulgar tongue for their benefit, or else in Hebrew, Greek, or Latin,
for the learneder sort: so has been also their manner to dedicate them unto
some honorable or worshipful personages, for the patronizing of those their
pains and travels: which their doings, have at this present made me presume
upon your honorable courtesy, to dedicate this my travel of these Sermons of
Master John Calvin, translated by me out of French into English, for the
benefit of my Country men, that understand not the same language. Most humbly
beseeching you Sir, to accept hereof, as a toke^ of my pore good will toward
you, not in respect of my travel which is but rude and of no worth, but in
regard of the worthiness of the matter, and of the grave and reverend handling
thereof by mine Author. The Lord of Lords increase all honorable and godly
virtues in you (that you may be as excellent a Magistrate in this commonweal
as your honorable and most wise father has of long time been and still is,)
with prosperity in this life, to his divine pleasure, and after the course of
this time ended, perpetual joy and felicity.

Your Honors at commandment, Thomas Stocker.

The Translator to the Christian Reader.
THou shall receive here (Christian Reader) these few Sermons of Master John
Calvin, for thy benefit, if thou will diligently read them without a
preiudicate mind. Where, in the first three, thou shall find how Abram
delivered his nephew Lot from the hands of those which had taken him prisoner,
and wherein also is handled who they are that ought to take war in hand, and
how far they ought to proceed therein. In the next four is handled the
doctrine of justification and salvation, by Faith only: whereby such as are
led away by a false opinion of their good works and frree will, may greatly
profit themselves, and lay fast hold upon Jesus Christ alone, for their
righteousness and sanctfication, knowing how greatly these two graces must be
distingu^shed and not confused, and that although they be never so closely
tied and linked together, yet whosoever he is that will be said to be reputed
to be righteous and acceptable before God, by the benefit of his only beloved
son, and in the mean while have no care nor conscience, ne yet will show any
sign and token of the amendment of his life, and live in an holy conu^rsation,
that man I say must needs divide them, and cut in sunder the inseparable bond
of them, and as much as in him lies, strives to dismember Jesus Christ, who
by his righteousness, having made us good trees, does also sanctify us, to
cause us bear and bring forth good fruit. In the last three, there is handled
Abraha^s obedience in the sacrificing of his son Isahac, which was a wonderful
trial, so that in this thou may see that Abraham who is by the spirit of God
named the father of the faithful, was all the course of his life maruellously
tried. And therefore as many as will be indeed the children of faithful Abraham,
must walk in his steps and abide many hard trials all their life long,
except it shall please the Lord in great mercy to forbear them. Let us
therefore beseech the Lord of all mercy, in the name of this great mediator, by
whom alone we have access unto the throne of grace, daily to purge us more and
more, to the end, that by his holy spirit we may bring forth more and better
fruit, then we have yet heretofore dene, that it may all serve for his glory,
and the edification of his whole Church.

Farewell.
Faults escaped in the Printing
Page. Line. Faults. Corrections. Pa. 4. Li. 24. been peaceably, lived
peaceably. 60. li. 1. mighty array, mighty Army. 60. li. 15. and unto himself,
and not unto himself. 65. li. 30 Aduichilate, Adnichilate 84. li. 28. and to
apply, then to apply 86. li. 14 sophisled, sophisted 102. li. 7. Aduichilate,
Adnichilate. 102. li. 18. may remove. might remove. 102. li. 18. the same may
remove, might remove, 109. li. 6. OF HER, OF HVR. 158. without we have, without
doubt we have

THE FIRST SERMON of the History of Melchisedech: wherein is also handled the
deliverance of Lot, done by Abram.
Genesis Cap. 14. 13 Then came one that had escaped, and told Abram the Hebrew
which dwelt in the plain of Mamre the Amorite, brother of Eshcol, and brother
of Aner: who were confederate with Abram.

14 When Abram heard that his brother was taken, he brought forth of them
that were borne and brought up in his house, three hundredth and eighteen, and
pursued them unto Dan.

15 Then he and his servants divided themselves against them by night, and
smote them and pursued them unto Hobah, which is on the left side of Damascus.

16 And he recovered all the substance. etc.


WE are to proceed in the history which yesterday we began with all concerning
Lots deliverance. And first we may behold the great goodness and favor of God
toward Abram, in giving him the mean for the rescuing of him. And mark why
Moses especially says (That one which had escaped, came unto Abram the
Hebrewe) True it is, that this word is not spoken by way of reproach: For the
Tribe of Eber was there so called: And Eber, was descended of Sem (as
heretofore we have declared) so that now God had separated Abram in such sort,
as that he should not be tainted or polluted amongst the Cananites. Nevertheless
how ever it is, Moses gave him this title, as if he should have said, Thou art
but a stranger and a new come ghuest in the land of Canaan. And besides, no
marvel though there was no account made of him, since he had neither kinsfolks
nor yet friends there. And yet for all that, God granted him such favor and
privilege, as that when time and place served, he was advertised of the evil
that was betide his Nephew that he might help to rescue him. Now Moses adds,
that he was in league with some of his neighbors. And yet we see that he was
not long before driven to wander from place to place, this way and that, by
reason he was every where discurteously entreated: for where ever he came, he
was still driven to the worst. In very deed, God had commanded him to tread
over the land far and near, to try him, howbeit, he was before that driven of
necessity to do it. Now there is no doubt but that his virtues had gotten him
such credit and authority, as that he was accepted amongst the^, yea even the
chiefest men of that country made account of him as of their friend, and
allianced with him to join together one with another. And yet this is
certain, that all the virtues in the world cannot sometimes afford a man any
such good turn: except these two things co^curre together with the^: The one
is, that they which behave themselves justly and soundly: will first conform
their lives according to the prescript rule of the word of God, and so long as
they serve God, they will also show an humane affection unto their neighbors,
and thereby redeem unto themselves many times, peace, and stay the malice of
those which otherwise would be ready to grieve and vex them. And in very
deed, 1 Pet. 2.19.20.
Saint Peter in handling of this argument, when as he exhorts, servants to
well doing, and to serve those whom they are bound to serve, says: That they
may thereby obtain such favor as not to be stricken nor hardly dealt withal.
Howbeeit (says he) how ever it is, If you endure grief, and suffer wrong for
well doing, and yet by the testimony of your own consciences, ye take it
patiently, then are you worthy of thanks before God. And this is it that we
are here in this place to note. Now the second is, That God blesses all those
which so justly walk, and mollifieth the hearts of men toward them. When then
we hear it here said, That Abram had some to join with him, no doubt of it,
it may easily be seen, that they were such as before time no whitliked of
him, or else such kind of men as sought to live riotously and upon the spoil:
for in very deed such men were inclinable enough to join with him. Howbeit,
to say the truth, this alliance of theirs was to continue but only for a
time. For it is certain, that Abram would never converse with those whom God
had already condemned, although he stayed their execution: and it had been
also contrary to the promise. And therefore Abram stood always upon a sure
ground, because he would not lessen the blessing promised unto him.
Nevertheless, how ever it was, yet did he never refuse to allye himself with
them, because he might thereby have been peaceably, and not be as it were a
pray and spoil amongst them, whereby we are admonished, as I have already
said, so to converse with men, yea although they should be as it were sharp
pricks to prick us, despitefully to entreat us, and maliciously and hardly to
deal with us, yet should we yield unto it, because they might perceive that we
desired nothing but peace, and the procuring of their welfare. And although
they went about by all means possible to hurt, and injuriously handle us: yet
notwithstanding should we still rest in this hope, that God would change their
cursed and venomous hearts, or else so bridle them, as that although we were as
sheep amongst a sort of ravening wolves, yet that we shall be guarded and
warranted by the hand of this heavenly shepherd. Thus we see what we are
hereby to learn. Now the cause of the war is eftsoons set down unto us, in
that Abram seeing his kinsman taken prisoner, took arms upon him. They had
long before that, given him many occasions to fall out with them: and yet all
the damage they had done him, and all the loss that he had received at their
hands, could never induce him to make war. He bear all those things
patiently: but the only captivity of his Nephew moved him thereunto. Here a
question might be asked, whether it was lawful for Abram to take Arms upon
him yea or no: for although (as we say in common proverb) that blood cannot
lie, and that he might have such an affection to recover his Nephew, as that it
could not be imputed to him as a fault: yet nevertheless ^e must hold this for a
general rule: That it is not lawful for any man whatsoever, to take Arms
upon him. To. 13.4.
For it is God alone that must do that. It is he (as S. Paul says) which
armeth Kings and Princes. And when he says, That it is they that have the
right and superiority to punish the wicked, he says, Behold why they carry
the sword, It is not because they should usurp it at their pleasure, and do
with it as it pleases other men. God then must be the Author thereof. Thus
you see why I have said, that no man may use force and violence, without he
receive the same from him to whom it belongs. And therefore there are none
but Kings, Princes, and Magistrates, that may take Arms upon them, and with
whom men may join themselves. And this is a point upon which we must surely
ground our selves and stand upon: For, what a thing were it for every man to
take the fields when any wrong were done him. Without doubt that were to
bring an horrible confusion every where. Moreover, Saint Paul, to keep us
within compass, To. 12.19
and to exhort us unto patience, alleges that saying of Moses in his
Canticle, Deu. 32.35.
Vengeance is mine, says the Lord. Whereupon he concludes, that we must give
place to wrath and anger. God takes this office of revenge unto himself, if
there be any extremity and wrong committed, because it is his office to punish
the same: now then, if every man shall take this upon him, and that every
private man shall thrust himself in, to be revenged, no doubt of it that man
robs God of his honor and right, as if he would exclude him quite and
clean out of all. To the end then that we give place unto ire: that is to say,
if we will have God to show himself to be our protector and defender, and
be aduenged of our enemies, and take our wars in hand, we ought all be
quiet and peaceable. For, he that shall arm himself, robs God as I have
already said, of the jurisdiction which he gives to himself for the
defense of his. To be short, private persons ought not only to abstain from
all kind or violence, but also are to have a quiet and peaceable mind to
suffer, when soever it shall please God to humble them. And in the mean while,
1. Pet. 4.19.
(as Saint Peter exhorts us) we are to recommend both our souls and lives
to him, who is both the protector and owner of them. And yet nevertheless we see
here how Abram was approved (for Melchisedech in blessing him says, That the
victory which God had given him was guided by him) although he was but a private
man, for he was neither king nor prince: but dwelt in the la^d of Canaan as a
stranger. Howbeit, here is one thing first of all to be noted of us, that he
had been already constituted and ordained to be Lord and master of this
country. And although the possession thereof was not as yet given him, yet for
all that, the right and title thereof belonged unto him. For God had pronounced
it by his own mouth, saying, Behold this land is thine and to thy posterity.
Deu. 12.7 and 13.15.
And therefore Abram is not to be accounted of as of the rest, seeing that God
himself had testified unto him that he gave him the possession of this land,
although he presently enjoyed it not. Now then we must look into the
difference that is between Abram and others. For if any man shall reply and
say, that it is not enough that he was the right owner of it in succession of
time: yet are we hereupon to note: That the example which we here read, is like
unto the example of Moses. Exo. 2.12.
For, when as Moses slew the Egyptian, yet was not the time of the redemption
of the people as then come. For it was forty years after: and yet
notwithstanding Moses forbear not to execute with the sword: neither can it be
said that it was rashly and foolishly done, because God approved the fact. Act.
7.25.
And S. Stephen namely recites, That Moses thought that his brethren had
known that God had ordained him thereunto, and had appointed him that office.
And therefore Moses thereby declared that he thrust not in himself into that
action as of himself. And in very deed, Exo. 3.1^. and 13. Exo. 4.1. Ex.
10.13.
forty years after when God called him, he disabled himself, and used all the reasons and shifts that possibly he could to avoid himself out of that
Commission. Wherein he showed that he had not done that act upon any
foolehardines: And God himself also therein declared, that he had reserved his
servant, in making him commit that act alone, to employ him afterward when time
should serve, in matters of greater importance. And therefore God might for
once, give leave and liberty unto his servant Abram, to exercise the force of
the sword, although he was not as yet put in possession of the land which he
had promised him. And besides, we are also to note, that God gives oftentimes
singular motions unto his servants, which we must not draw unto our selves to
follow. Whereof we have a most excellent glass to look into in the book of
the Judges: for, whereas that book speaks of certain men whom God had
stirred up to aid his people, the same are so many testimonies unto us, to
show that we should not think, that there is always an assured and certain
election, when any one man should be armed, with the sword and with authority.
Did Gedeon know certainly that he was chosen? no surely he did not. Neither
yet Sampson nor any of the rest. I shall not need to recite three or four of
them: for as I have already said, as many as there are spoken of, were chosen
of God, and yet they themselves knew it not. We see how Gedeon doubted and was
in great perplexity: and therefore would have God give him a manifest token of
his vocation and calling: and a man would have thought, that when he had
obtained the thing which he craved, that it should have redoubled his courage:
and yet it fell not so out with him. For we see that he was very timorous. And
yet God had so chosen and appointed him for the deliverance of the people, as
that with 300. men he discomfited a great number, yea even a great and mighty
army. And yet all that which is here recited unto us, is not for us to make a
general rule thereof. For it were a mockery and a foolish argument for us
thus to reason. See how God has redeemed his Church from the tyranny of the
wicked and infidelles, by the hands of Iepththe, Judge. 11.33. Judge.
13.14.15.16. and 7.
Sampson, and Gedeon, and such like. And therefore when we see the children of
God unjustly oppressed, that it shall be lawful for us to take Arms upon us
to aid them: Now, this were too too horned an argument. For it were meet that
we should have the spirit of those whom we pretend to have, that is to say,
That we should be assured that God has also called us thereto. And why?
because as I have already said, they had their particular motions, as if they
had been privileged thereunto by a public law. And we are in all things
to note, that when God works extraordinarily, being grounded upon his word,
that privilege is not of us to be usurped. For it is the Office of a King or
Council, to grant a privilege to any, neither is it for me to know the
reason why he does so: for if I shall do the like that he does which is
privileged: I shall join my self with him that would separate himself from
the common order. For we must leave the authority of Kings and Magistrates to
do whatsoever they know to be best for the common weal: and it is great
reason we should do so. And therefore so often as we shall see God minded to
remember the redemption and deliverance of his Church by such as he has
ordained to be as it were ministers of his own preparing, we must understand,
these to be singular acts past from his own hand, and those men to be chosen by
him: and armed also by his authority and power, But to say, that every man may
take upon him to do as much, the same would bring, as I have already said,
horrible confusion. Thus we see what we have to learn as concerning that
matter which is here recited unto us of Abram. To wit, that God had already
given him a token, that he had not in vain constituted him lord and master of
the country of Canaan. And besides, he gave him also a little taste that his
successors should enter the land: and that whatsoever forces should come
against them, yet that they should no way let them from conquering the whole
land. And although the Army of those kings of whom we yesterday spoke, was not
passing thirty or forty thousand, yet nevertheless Abram had only but those
of his household, which were but 300. and 18. men. Now for any man to say that
they were experimented soldiers, were a very mockery: because Abram was
never brought up in the wars, he knew not which way to handle either sword or
Target. And it is so far of for him to be the more confident and bold by reason
of those confederates that came with him, as that it was an occasion to make
him the more afraid. For they might have alleged and said thus, Why this same
stranger goes about to have all our throtes cut. For do we not here see four
victorious kings which have spoiled Sodom and Ghomorre, and all their
neighbor Cities about them, and shall we think to do any good to set upon
them? surely in so doing, we shall as it were cast our selves wittingly and
willingly away. And therefore Abram seeing himself thus distressed, should in
the common opinion of man, rather desist and live in peace. Now at the first
sight, it should seem to be a great folly for him to take the war upon him
with CCC. and xviii. men, and himself being a silly old man, become their
Captain: he that never knew what either war or battle meant, as we have
already said, and yet would hazard the casting of himself away so fondly. And
therefore we are the more earnestly to observe that which I have already
touched: to wit, that God would thereby show him, that when he intended to put
his successors in possession of the land, that it was an easy matter for him
to do it, by reason of that noble victory which he had given him, a thing not
to have been believed, if a man would have judged thereof according to humane
reason. Here we see in sum, what we are to learn as touching this point
where it is said, That Abram armed his household meney. We see by this, with
what wisdom God endued him, although he had never been trained in the wars,
neither yet acquainted with any stratagemmes or warlike policies, whatsoever:
and yet notwithstanding we see that he surprised his enemies, charging them
sodeinly in the night, yea even then when they thought themselves most safe and
sure being thoroughly fraught with good meats and strong drinks: and solacing
themselves with the joy of the spoil of Sodom and Ghomorre. Now we know that
after such victories there is much riot and filthiness committed. And yet Abram
had so much cunning as to surprise his enemies: although in very deed, the
former victories which his enemies had obtained, had bin enough greatly to have
danted him. And again, his so sodein and speedy coming must needs bring
with it a great to do and tumult: had not God by his holy spirit governed
the same. By this we are to understand, that GOD would needs take this matter
in hand by him: and not only for Lots sake, but also because he should know,
that the proraise of GOD was neither vain nor frivolous, when as he had given
him the dominion and superiority over the whole land of Canaan. And this is
that in sum which hereby we are to learn.

It follows after (that the King of Sodom came unto him) which is to
magnify the great favor and grace that God bear unto Abram. For, we have
already alleged the saying of Ezechiel, Ezec. 16.49.
where it is said, That the Sodomites were extreemly proud, which was the
very spring head of all the enormities that provoked the vengeance of God,
utterly to root them out. Now how proud soever the King of Sodom was, yet
was he glad to come and do homage to Abram, because he knew that both his
life and all his Country were due to him.

Hereby then we see, that it was God which had the direction in this matter,
and blessed his servant Abram. True it is, that it had been much better for
him not to have gone out of his Tent to the hazardyng of him self so
dangerously: But it was GOD that stretched out his hand unto him, because he
would have him know by experience, his power and aid in the matter. This
consequently, greatly profited Abram: For if he had tarried in his house
without understanding the like defense of GOD, without all doubt he had never
been so rightlye confirmed as afterwad he was. And therefore we see, that
when GOD sends us any afflictions, although at the first they be never so
hard and grievous, yet for all that, in the end, the issue of them is
profitable and beneficial to our good. To. 1.2.4. Esai. 49.24.
For, as S. Paul says, Patience engenders trial. To the end we might
effectually know, that it is God which has succored us: and when we once know
that, we might more and more be confirmed to trust in him. And hope never
makes us ashamed: for, whosoever shall have recourse to God, shall never be
confounded. And therefore we see, that we can never rest quiet and be
peaceable, until such time as God shows us why he has afflicted us, and that
in the mean while, he makes us to feel that it is for our good, and so
consequently we have occasion to bless him, and call upon him more assuredly.
Thus we see what we are here to observe as concerning this point. Now where it
is said, that the king of Sodom came unto Abram, he adds anon after, (that
Melchisedech king of Shalem, offered also bread and wine.) And for as much as
he was the high Priest of God, that he blessed Abram: and that Abram gave him
the tithe of all the spoil. Here we see as notable an history as any is in
all the holy scripture, and not only an history, but such a one also as is a
lively image to represent our Lord Jesus Christ, as in the 110. Psalm it is
written. For, it is not without cause there set down, That God had sworn and
would not repent him thereof, that he would never break the solemn oath which
he had made. That is to say, That Jesus Christ is a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedech. If there were nothing else but the history thereof, we
see that Melchisedech is called God his Priest: howbeit how ever it is, yet is
he most like in estate and degree unto Abram, but wants a great piece of it.
For, as we shall hear after, Abram is called the father of all the faithful
and of the whole Church, and that all such as are the children of God, must be
his spiritual children. And therefore Melchisedech in one respect must needs
be his inferior. It is far from the meaning of Moses, to prefer him
before Abram, as the Apostle very rightly does, Heb. 7.4.5.6.7.
as hereafter we shall see. Some have thought this to be Sem: but there is no
likelihood of any truth therein. For if it had been so, would Abram have
tarried so long before he had seen the Patriarch Sem, of whom he was
descended? No doubt of it he would at the first have gone unto him, and have
dwelt with him: for he was king of Salem. And in very deed, Abram might very
well have sheelded himself under his protection, but be wandered all the
country over: and all that while there was no mention made of Melchisedech.
Moreover, it was not without good cause noted of the Apostle, that Melchisedech
had neither father nor mother without beginning and without end, as if he had
bin an immortal man immediately descended from heaven, not but that Melchisedech
was a man: but the Apostle his meaning is to show, that he is brought in as
though he had never bin borne. For, no man knows who was his father, nor yet
who was his mother: no man knows his kindred nor yet how he lived: and
besides, no man knows where he died: and yet he is a priest of the living
God. Nevertheless, he manifestly showed himself, and eftsoons hid himself, and
was buried, but no man knows how nor when. Whereupon the Apostle shows,
that he was a figure of our Lord Jesus Christ, who although he be the
everlasting son of God, yet notwithstanding he had no father after the common
manner of men, because his divine essence is spiritual and eternal: and was
also miraculously conceived by the holy Ghost, beyond the order of nature. And
although he be dead, yet he lives for ever: yea and has obtained life for
us, in that he died for us. And therefore he is without beginning and without
end: without beginning, because he is God eternal: and without end, because we
live for ever in him, as it is said by the Prophet Isaiah, Who shall tell the
line that shall come of him? The Church, by the virtue and power of our lord
Jesus Christ is immortal: Isaiah. 53.8.
and therefore by a far stranger reason, must he needs be without end. But we
will hereafter handle this more at large, and at this time briefly runs it over,
to show that it was not Sem. See the^ why David also especially counts the
redeemer that should come, unto Melchisedech. Howbeit, before we go any farther,
we are to note, that it was a wonderful grace of God, that Melchisedech could
so purely keep himself, considering that all the land at that time, was full of
idolatry: for Abra^ his fathers house was a den of idols, as heretofore we have
said, and as the holy Ghost witnesses unto us by the mouth of Joshua. Joshua
24.2.
Seeing the^ that al was so corrupted in the land of Chaldea, which was very
nigh unto the place where Noe dwelt, where he had continually lived, that Sem and
such as he was were there also: seeing then that the devil had perverted and so
fowly defiled the service of God, how is it possible that in the land of
Canaan, where the people are wicked, where there is nothing but impiety,
contempt of god, and rebellion, where there is nothing but iniquity, deceit,
cruelty and violence, that yet there should dwell a priest of the living God? By
this we may see how God oftentimes has his church, as a man would say, raked up
in the ashes, and in the judgment of men not to be seen: but it suffices
that God knows it. Whereof we have here a testimony in Melchisedech. A man
would have thought that there had not been at that time one man that
worshipped God sincerely and simply: For, seeing that the graundfather of
Abram and all his kindred were given to devilish errors, and served Idols,
what must we think of the rest? A man would have then judged that the Church of
God had been utterly abolished: but we may see, that he had reserved a little
seed thereof, when as his will was, that Melchisedech should be a Priest
there, yea even in such a land as more exceeded in all iniquity then any of
the rest. Let us then apply this to our own use: for, this is a dangerous
temptation for us to think that God has no church in the world: for then it
must fall out, that his promise is vain and of none effect. And besides, when
a man thinks himself to be left alone, he becomes so careless and
negligent, as that he falls into despair: as we see how nearly Elye was
drawn into it when as he said, what shall become of this gear? For, they have
killed thy Prophets, 1. Kings 19.10.
have set up their Idols in every place, and my self am left alone. He was as
it were like a poor dismayed man, being ready to cast himself headlong into
the bottomless pit of despair. But what? God comforted him and said unto him,
1. Kings 19.18.
That he had as yet reserved unto himself seven thousand, that is to say, a
great number, that had not bowed their knee unto Baul. So then, as I have
already said, our faith should be maruellously shaken, yea utterly
overthrown; If we should be persuaded of this, that God had so forsaken the
world, as that he had no Church left in it. And therefore let us learn, not to
judge by the outward sight of the eye, whether there be a Church, or no: but
let us rather reuounce our own insight: because we are advertised, that God
will many times have a little seed of it lie hidden: as the grains of corn are
not seen so long as there lies a great heap of straw upon it, because the
grains are small and few which are covered with it. Even so it seems
sometimes, that all the faithful servants of God, are here quite and clean
rooted out from the face of the earth: howbeit, the Lord has incomprehensible
means for the upholding of his: and he must needs be continually worshipped
and served, not that he does look for a great, glorious, and pompous multitude
in his Church: but it may suffice us that he knows who are his. And so let
us depart from all iniquity, that we might call aloude upon his name, and
join our selves with our brethren, although we know them not: For that
depends upon God his adoption, when as he witnesses unto us by his holy
spirit, that he has a great number of faithful ones, neither is it needful
that we know them. Wherefore it is his will and pleasure that they should be
dispersed throughout the face of the whole earth, and have no reputation before
men: but be contemtable and despised persons, and to be short, to be no more
known and esteemed of, then if they lay trodden under men's feet. And thus much
for this: and yet we are to gather from this place some exhortation, which is,
not to follow the multitude. For, Melchisedech might have fallen to idolatry as
well as the rest, if he had had a regard to that which they did: for, there was
nothing all there about, but a very polution of the service of God, and yet he
continued in that which he knew to be good and just, according to that which
God had instructed him in. Neither was there any law at that time written: but
God had given him so much knowledge, as well by Noe, as by Sem, as was necessary
to salvation. Now if so small an instruction as Melchisedech had, constantly
established him in pure religion, how shall we be able to excuse our selves,
when as god daily represents himself unto our ears, that he has set down
a law which shows us how he will be worshipped and served, has given us
prophets to explane it unto us, and has given us also a ghospel, which is a
trumpet to sound not only into our ears, but also thoroughly to pearce both our
thoughts and affections? when God then has so many means to keep us within
compass to serve him purely and sincerely, if we the^ decline from the same,
and be transported away by me^, and under a color that we see such a custom
bear sway, that such an abuse rules and reigns, and is received and
accepted, and that we dwell and live amongst infidels and idolaters: what a
condemnation shall that be unto us, seeing that Melchisedech so constantly and
firmly persisted and stood soundly in his faith and belief? Let us therefore
lift up our eyes unto God, have our ears fixed as it were unto his word, and
all our senses attentive, that we be never carried away, although we should be
tossed up and down here below as it were in the sea, and driven too and fto
with winds and tempests: and that if there were a people that should hold a
religion, and that there should be some great king that would have them, thus
and thus to govern themselves, yet let us learn to hold us always unto our
God alone, and that it is inogh for us, to bewar that we never decline from the
way which he has showed unto us by his word: and that the bright shining light
of the law and the gospel be ever before us, and that we shall never err, so
long as we know God to be our guide and leader. Thus we see what we are to
learn from the example of Melchisedech. Let us now come to the text of Moses:
It is said that Melchisedech king of Salem, offered bread and wine, and was a
priest of the living God, and blessed Abram. It is meet that this text be
resolved: That Melceisedech, inasmuch as he was a king, received Abram, and
gave unto him bread and wine for the refreshing of his people: and being by
quality, a Priest, blessed him, and that Abram also gave him the tithe of all
the spoil. Here we see, that Melchisedech is set before us both a King and a
Priest. Now here we are to distinguish, of the diverse acts, by the several
offices. For as I have already said, in as much as he was a King, he dealt
liberally with Abram: he refreshed him and all his company: and for as much as
he was a Priest, he blessed Abram. Now, it was a common thing amongst the
ancient Fathers, for every king to be a priest: and the very profane people
do show, that that was used in many Countries. For, Kings were not contented
with their kingly estate, but desired also through ambition to be Priests,
because they thought it to be a more holy dignity, then the majesty of a
King. And thus we see why they would oftentimes be Priests. And in very deed
we see, that that was a most ambitious desire, and that they which coueted
credit and estimation, would always aspire and clime that way: but how ever
it is, it is certain that Moses recites this as a singular thing in
Melchisedech. Nevertheless we see, that God has in his law made a difference
between the one and the other, and will not have them both to rest in one
person. And Moses was as excellent a man in all perfection F.x. 28.1.
of virtues as ever was born in the world: and yet would not God for all that,
have him to be a Priest also, but would have his brother Aaron to take upon him
the office, because Moses had enough to do with the civil government that was
laid upon him. And in very deed we see how Osias was punished: 2. Chron. 26.21.
for, being a king, he was arrogantly puffed up, to take upon him the
usurpation of the priesthood: and for only sensing upon the Altar with
frankensence, he was stricken with a leprosy, put to great shame, and made a
recluse all the days of his life. And yet for all that, it seemed that his
devotion was good, or at least, that he was to be excused. Yea but god did not
punish the outward act only: for he knew well enough the pride of king Osias
heart. And besides, it is said, That obedience is better then all the
sacrifices in the world. 1. Sam. 15.22.
And because he thrust himself into an office which God expressly forbad, and
troubled the vocation and order which should have been inuiolably kept, we see
wherefore he is punished. And for so much as he would not content himself with
his estate and degree, therefore it was meet that he should be made infamous
and detestable, and be quite and clean separated from the company of men.
Thus we see that in the law were two things which were not tolerated to be in
one man, to wit, kingdom and priesthood. And therefore seeing it is so, we
must conclude, that this example which is here set down is absolute singular,
and apperteineth not unto the law. True it is, that at that time, the law was
not as then written, and the Tribe of Levy was not yet in the world, to take
upon it the right of the priestly dignity: howbeit this example is here set
down unto us for instruction, to the end the law might remain in her full
strength, and the Church thereby might be edified, as appears by the Psalm
by me alleged. And therefore we must conclude, Psalm. 110.
that it was not spoken of Solomon, nor yet of any other king descended from
the Stem of David: For, if they were kings, they must not have entermedled
themselves with the priesthood, for if they did, they were Apostates.
Wherefore, when it is said, that there should be a king a figure of
Melchisedech, and according to his order and estate: that shows that it was
not spoken of the whole race of David, which was descended of him according
to the flesh, saving until such time as we come unto the high priest our Lord
Jesus Christ. True it is, that he is the son of David and of his seed. But
there is in him an especial yea an only regard to be had: which is, that
he made an end of the priesthood of the law, because his kingdom is
spiritual: and that is it also, that shall make an end of this earthly
kingdom, which was established but for a time, and that until his coming.
Now, when it is called perpetual: the meaning is, that he has continued in
the person of the redeemer. And therefore this is it that we are to observe out
of these words of Moses, when he says, That Melchisedech was king of Salem,
and that he was vvithall a priest. We see then, that these two offices
belong to none but unto our Lord Jesus Christ: according to that rule which
God has set down in his law: and therefore we are out of all doubt that it
was the priesthood of Jesus Christ which was shevved unto Abram: to the end
his faith by that means might be sealed and the better confirmed. For, since
the body was not seen, it behooved that there should be some shadows at the
least thereof. And therefore had the fathers the shadows of it for the
upholding of their faith, still looking for the appearing of Jesus Christ. They
had (I say) shadows and figures. And although that, be not to us common with
them: yet is it very profitable for us. For, we are to gather, that Jesus
Christ was not sent in have unto us, neither yet that God determined in a
minute of time to send him unto us for our redeemer: for he was already the
very true redeemer, although he had not as yet taken upon him our nature, nor
yet manifested, neither yet the gospel published. Whereupon we see, that the
faith which we have at this day extends it self far and wide. And the
Gospel has been from the beginning: in such sort as that the ancient Fathers
were built vqpon our Lord Jesus Christ, and that in him was their hope and
salvation: to be short, that is an help which is not to be contemned. But when
we shall compare the shadows with the body, we shall see that our redemption
is more to be wished, then the state of the Fathers. And therefore we see, why
it is said, That blessed are the eyes which saw that, that the Disciples had
seen: for many kings and prophets had an earnest desire to enjoy such a
fight, Luke 10.^4.
and yet could never attain unto that which they sought for: but contented
them selves with an assured confidence that the promise of God should be
accomplished in time convenient: as hereafter we shall see, when as Jacob in
passing out of this life said, I shall see thy saving health O Lord, Genesis 49.18.
and will put my confidence therein. Now then, when we shall make such
comparison, we have wherewithal mightily to be strengthened, and to be angry
at whatsoever the devil may thrust in, to withdraw us from the purity of the
Gospel: and be so much the more stirred up to embrace our lord Jesus Christ,
seeing that he has brought the full and perfect truth of that which was
figured in the law. Thus we see how we are to benefit our selves by this
place of scripture. As touching Melchisedech his dwelling place, it is most
like to be true that it was Irusalem how beit, there has bin a compounded word
Iebusale^, by reason of the Iebusites that occupied that place there. How ever
it is, that was the City wherein Melchisedech had been, and there also where
Jesus Christ exercised his office of priesthood, not only when he preached the
Gospel, but also when he was crucified for us, and offered up an holy oblation
unto God his father, to reconcile us unto him for ever, and to cleanse us of all
our sins.

Let us now prostrate our selves before the maiestic of our good God, in
acknowledging our offenses: beseeching him to receive us to his mercy. And
seeing that we are condemned as of our selves, that we might by the means of
the redeemer which he has given us, be delivered from the curse, in which we
should be plunged, if it were not that he had redeemed us by his infinite
goodness: and that as he has stretched out his hand to pull us unto our Lord
Jesus Christ, that he would more and more confirm us in such perseverance of
faith, as that we might cleave unto to him, and never be vvithdravvne from him
by any temptations of this world. But that we should rathet fight against all
the Alarms vvherevvith Satan should set upon us, until such time as we do
come unto that everlasting kingdom, which was prepared for us before the
creation of the world, and which was so dearly purchased for us. That it
would please him to show not only unto us this favor, but also unto all
people, etc.

THE SECOND SERmon of Melchisedech, wherein is showed that he was a figure that
Jesus Christ should be both an everlasting King and Priest.
Genesis Cap. 14. 18. And Melchisedech king of Shalem, brought forth bread and
wine: and he was a Priest of the most high God.

19. Therefore he blessed him saying: blessed art thon Abram of God most high,
possesser of heaven and earth.

20 And blessed be the most high God, which has delivered thine enemies into
thine hand.

And Abram gave him tithe of all the spoil.


WE have already begun to declare, that Melchisedech, of whom mention is here
made, was a figure of our lord Jesus Christ. And to the end we might the more
attentively hearken unto this doctrine, we are to remember that, which
yesterday was delivered unto us, that is, that God swear by a solemn oath,
That he that should be king; over the people, should also be a Priest. Now it
is certain, that God is very sparing and careful of his name; and casts it
not out at all adventures: for his meaning is, that we should have it in all
reverend regard, and not take it but upon necessity, and to such an use as is
worthy the holiness thereof: and for his part also gives us an example. And
therefore we are to conclude, that this is a point of great importance and
marvelous profitable for us to know, that he which should be the redeemer of
the people, should also have the title both of a king and a priest. And in
deed, if we should separate the one from the other, the faith that we have in
our Savior Jesus Christ, should be very weak, and should have no certain
nor firm foundation. For, there are two things requisite to our salvation: the
one is, that God accepts us as rightuous, and voweth us for his children: the
other is, that we might be guided by his hand, and maintained and warranted by
his invincible power. If we should take but one of these points, we should
understand it but by halfes. And mark how: Put the case that God were
merciful unto us, and would not impute unto us our sins, yet if the devil
had power over us, and we left as a pray unto all the assaults wherewith he
should assail us: how could it otherwise be, but that we must be most
miserable castawaies. On the other side, if God should display his power for
our defense, and yet we not reconciled unto him, and so not reputed and holden
to be righteous and just: no doubt of it but that we must needs still come to
reckoning. And then woe unto us, when as we should be judged without mercy.
But we know, that all our righteousness consists in this, that God has mercy
upon us, and has buried all our offenses. And therefore it behooves, that our
Lord Jesus Christ should show himself to be both a King and a Priest, that
is to say, that he should on the one side make an atonement between God and
us, to the end we might boldly come when as we were driven to call upon him
for aid, and assure our selves that he voweth us for his children. And all
this we have by the benefit of the death of our Lord Jesus Christ. For, in
that he shead his blood, it was to to wash and cleanse us of all our spots:
he was made a sacrifice of satisfaction, on, so that we thereby are discharged
of an our debts, and the obligation that was against our salvation, was, as
Saint Paul says to the Collossians, broken and cancelled. Thus we see what it
was that was accomplished in the person of the some of God, Colos. 2.14.
when as he was sent into the world: that is, that in suffering for the
remission of our sins, he has made us righteous. Not that we are in truth
altogether so: for there wants a great deal of it: but we are so far
righteous, as that GOD will not judge us according to our deserts: and
contrariwise, he by his infinite goodness supporteth us, and the obedience
which Jesus Christ performed is approved and allowed unto us. As if any man
should pay our debts: why then we are discharged. Eue^ so is our Lord Jesus
Christ as it were appointed to be the principal debtter for us, and thereby
discharges us before God. Neither can the devil have any thing wherewith to
accuse us, when as we shall trust unto the satisfaction which was paid for us
by the son of God. And therefore it is not without cause that he is called a
priest. Howbeit, we for our parts are rightly to consider, what fruit and
benefit we are to receive by this his office of priesthood. For it is not for
him self alone but for our profit and welfare, that the father by a solemn
oath bestowed this estate and dignity upon him. Now, we are here to note,
that he is called a Priest for ever, to the end this honor might be reserved
to him, and transported to none other. If this point then had been so well
considered as it ought, and as the Apostle most notably sets it down in the
Epistle to the Hebrews. Hebr. 7.8.9.10.
Hebrews. The abomination that has been brought into the world, and which to
this day rules and reigns therein, had never been: for the Pope makes his
priests with this condition to appaise God. For, these are the very words which
he uses when he charmeth them, that is to say, he priesteth them with these
words of authority: WE GIVE THEE POWER TO OFFER SACRIFICE UNTO GOD, TO APPAISE
HIM. What an horrible blasphemy is this? For this is as much as to make GOD a
liar, and to make void the solemn oath which he has pronounced with his own
mouth, and which is spoken of in the hundredth and tenth Psalm that we have
alleged, where God says, That Jesus Christ shall be a Priest for ever, even
he alone: that is, according to the order of Melchisedech, who has not his
like or match. And yet notwithstanding, behold how the Popish Priest brag
that they offer up Jesus Christ, and that they are Gods Priests to make
reconciliation for the sins both of the quick and of the dead. For they are
not content to redeem such as by them selves out of their clowches, as out of
the hands of the eues: but will have also their Priesting witcherie extend it
self even to the dead. We see here, that there is a constraint more then
manifest, between this decree which is pronounced and spoken by the holy
mouth of GOD, and that which Antichrist has falsely devised, and which even at
this day he still vpholdeth and mainteineth. We are therefore to note: that
Jesus Christ did not offer up himself only once for all, to the end to
appaise the wrath of God his father toward us, and to pay all our debtes:
but that also the power of this oblation which he made should endure for ever,
and qee permanent. And therefore we may see why the Apostle uses this
similitude, Hebr. 10.29.
That the way is as it were a fresh consecrated unto us by the blood of Jesus
Christ our Lord: as if he should have said, that the blood which was once
shed for our salvation, is never drawn dry, but daily ouerfloweth our souls
by the power of his holy spirit, which bedeweth us with the same, as S. Peter
in the first Chapter of his first canonical Epistle speaks. Mark also why
Jesus Christ in his Supper, says, This is my blood of the new Testament, and
so consequently sor ever: as if he should have said, that we should not
think that he had made a reconciliation which should not endure, and as though
it had bin but for a day or a year only: but that at this day he occupies
the place of a priest. Because he is the Mediator unto God his father, in the
power of the death and passion which once he suffered: and does make
intercession for us, as that we are assured that we are acceptable unto God,
when as we come unto him in the name of our Aduocat: and are grounded and
settled upon the oblation which he once made, to the end it might serve us at
this day, and unto the worlds end. I have already said, that it were not
enough that we were thus set at one with God, and our sins forgiven us,
without we were eftsoons defended and conserved, under his mighty hand and
protection. And therefore it was meet that Jesus Christ should be a king. For,
all the salvation that we must look for from the hand of God, must come from
our Lord Jesus Christ. We must not fly in the air to look a far of for
that which we want: for he gives and offreth himself unto us. And therefore
we must in the person of this Redeemer, find out all fullness of that which is
requisite for our salvation. For that cause is our Lord Jesus Christ called a
king: the unction which was bestowed on him apperteineth unto his kingdom, to
the end we might be enriched with all his benefits, and defended against all
our enemies, and to have him to be an invincible fortress for us. And although
we be set upon, yet shall we have always the victory. Thus we see how the
riches of the kingdom of heaven are bestowed upon us. And for so much as Jesus
Christ was replenished with them, in all perfection and fulness: we for our
parts are void of them, and want them. And thefore we must come and beg them
of him, that he might deal liberally with us in helping of us, which he does
when as he bestows the graces of his holy spirit upon us, that we might be
reformed according to his image: and the devil repulsed and put to flight. Now
I pray you what strength have we of our selves? For the least temptation in the
world will throw us down, yea and our very shadow will make us as it were
vanish away. But it is said, that when Jesus Christ shall take us into his
protection, we shall be in such a fortress, as that all the enemies we have
shall never be able to have power over us. Now we see a great deal better,
that it is not without cause that God used a solemn oath, when as he made our
Lord Jesus Christ a King and Priest after. the order of Melchisedech. Now the
Apostle goes further and stands upon the names, for, Melchisedech,
signifies a king of righteousness. He shows us then hereby, that the kingdom
of the son of God is not common, neither yet to be esteemed like unto other
kingdoms: But that the property thereof is to make us righteous. For, earthly
Princes may very well be called righteous, whilst they faithfully execute
their office, abstain from outrages, tyranny and cruelty, and render to every
man his due: in this sort they may be said to be righteous. Howbeit, there is
another manner of righteousness In the son of God: and it is it, whereof we are
made partakers. A man may be as it were an Angel in all virtues: nevertheless
this serves no further then for his own person. He may give good example unto
others, correct the^ that have done amiss, look that men live honestly and
according to the law: but to make other righteous, passes all man's power. And
therefore the righteousness of our Lord Jesus christ is not shut up within
himself to have it for himself only: but so to co^municat it unto us, as yt by
his means we may be made just before god. And how should that be? we have
already showed, that God reputeth us for just and innocent, when as it
pleases him to bury our sins and iniquities. And again, accordingly as he has
regenerated us by the spirit of our lord Jesus christ, that is also to cloth
us with his righteousness. Howbeit, this is but in part, whiles we live in this
vorld, our sins are fully forgiven us without exception: and yet
notwithstanding we are not so reformed, but that there still remains in us
infirmities and sins. And therefore we must embrace this righteousness, that is
to say, unto the remission of our sins. But how ever it is, we see in what
sort our Lord Jesus Christ makes us partakers of his righteousness. Here we see
the first point that we are to note. The second is, of the place Salem. And
Salem, is as much to say as peace: And the Apostle shows us, that over and
besides the righteousness which we receive from our Lord Jesus Christ, we
eftsoons enjoy a peace, which he only opens, and which by none other mean
we can obtain. And although the wicked, and contemners of God strive to be at
rest and peace, yet does the Lord so awaken them, with a spirit of frenzy, as
that they are like men half dead. For mark how the wicked strive to be at
rest and peace. That is, they forget God as much as in them lies, and so
become very brutish. And yet in despite of their teeth, God will put them in
mind of him, and when he appears unto them, they tremble as before their
Judge. And besides, they have an hundredth thousand witnesses: for their own
consciences are more then all the actions in the world, yea they cannot but
condemn themselves. And although God seems to hold his peace, yet cannot the
wicked be pardoned, but that they must needs be enforced to feel their curse.
Esaias 48.22. and 57.21.
And therefore as Esaie witnesses. There is no peace for the wicked. But as S.
Paul says to the Ephesians, Christ is our peace, because he has conjoined
and united us unto God his father. Ephesians. 2.14.
Mark also why in the first chapter to the Romans he says, That being
justified by faith, we are at peace with God. He makes a difference of the
peace of the wicked, that is to say, between the peace which they seek after,
and cannot find it, and the peace of the faithful. The wicked will turn their
back upon God, and fly from him as far as they possibly can: but the
faithful come before him, and acknowledge him for their father, because they
know that he will not impute their sins unto them, for so much as Jesus Christ
has forgiven them, them. And thus have they peace, and rejoice in the infinite
mercies which he has bestowed upon them. And therefore it is not without
cause that Jesus Christ is called the king of peace. And there is more in it
then so, for the faithful are not only assured for the time present, but also
for the time to come. For they know that God has begun his work in them
conditionally that he will perform it: Philip. 1.6
And therefore their trust is, that he will never fail them, but that he will
more and more guide and govern them until they come unto his kingdom. Thus
we see how we have peace, and shall possess it in Jesus Christ, because that
without him we cannot be but the enemies of God: and as we make war against
him through our sins and rebellions, he cannot choose also but arm himself
against us. Here is also to be noted, that he was a Priest for ever, when as
Melchisedech was brought in as yesterday was touched, without beginning,
without end, and without any petygree. And it was to this end that we might
know that although our Lord Jesus Christ was in the fulness of time sent, yet
that he was the son of the eternal God: and that he was also appointed to
be the Redeemer before the creation of the world. Colos 1.15 16.17.
For, he is the first borne of all creatures, because that in him and by him
all things were made, and also that he according to the wonderful counsel of
God, should restore all things, for so much as all things both in heaven and in
earth were dissipated, after the fall of Adam, who overthrew all the creatures
with him. Howbeit, all things were restored by our Lord Jesus Christ: knowing
also, as the Apostle in the last Chapter to the Hebrews says, That Jesus
Christ is yesterday, Heb. 13.8
and to day, and the same for ever: that his power does and shall show it self
unto the end of the world. Mark then how we must altogether have recourse
unto this power (which the fathers themselves felt and proved before such time
as he was manifested in the flesh) nothing doubting, that although men may be
absent from him, and that there is a great space between heaven and earth: yet
notwithstanding that we shall continually be quickened by his life, enriched
by his benefits, and vpholden and preserved by his power. For seeing the Sun
which is but an insensible creature, fructifieth the earth, gives heat
thereunto, and that God by mean thereof, nourishes and vpholdeth us: what
shall it be in respect of Jesus Christ, who is no insensible creature, no, no
creature at all, but very God manifested in the flesh, yea, our Mediator, on
whom GOD has bestowed whatsoever is requisite for our salvation. Thus we see
in sum, what we have to learn hereby. Now, where the Papists and all such
as bear the name of Christians, ought by this place of Moses to be taught,
that Jesus Christ, is an only King and Priest, that has united us unto GOD
his Father, and who also is the cause that the Father holds us under his
protection, they have turned it clean contrary to that which is here set
down.

And this error was not begun by the Papists, let us not lay more upon them
then in deed is due unto them: for they have blasphemies enough amongst them,
to condemn them selves an hundredth times. But it is great pity, that the
devil has so ruled and reigned amongst them, as that he has for these
fourteen hundredth years so blinded those that name themselves Christians, as
that they are gone so far as to devise a bewitching fantasy, that Jesus
Christ was figured in the person of Melchisedech, and that his body is the
heavenly brcad, and his blood the wine to nourish souls, and that he offered
both the one and the other. Now at the first sight, this Allegory will please
such as have itching ears: how Jesus Christ calls his body, bread, and his
blood, wine. And therefore this seems very well to agree, that Melchisedech
offered bread and wine, because the body of Jesus Christ ought to have this
power in it self to feed us, and his blood also to quicken our souls:
howbeit, here is no speaking of any oblation made unto God. But Moses says,
that Melchisedech king of Salem, offered bread and wine, that is to say, that
he presented it unto Abra^. It should here fall out that Abra^ was God, because
the oblation was delivered up unto his own person: and yet it was not to
himself alone, but for his whole company also. So here the kingly liberality
of Melchisedech, after he had once friendly received him. Now to refer this
unto God, were to pervert the whole substance of the matter, as may be seen.
And besides, our Lord Jesus Christ, offered his body and blood, not that they
were before bread and wine: but because they were offered, they are called bred
and wine: that is to say, they are of ye power and nature of bread and wine
unto us. For, how is it that our souls are sustained by the body and blood of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and our lives preserved by the^? Forsooth it is, because
that the sacrifice that was once offered, is the sum and perfection of all
goodness. And therefore if Jesus Christ had not been before offered up, his body
had not been at this day, meat, neither yet his blood, drink. And mark, why
Saint Paul says in the first epistle to the Corinths, 1. Cor. 5.7.8.
That Jesus Christ our Passover, was offered up for us: let us therefore now
eat. And this is the order that we must hold: that is, that the oblation be
first made, that we afterward, by the power thereof might be nourished and
filled with the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. So that now we see
every manner of way, that these miserable fantastical people who have
corrupted this place of Moses, have no understanding of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Now the Papists (as they have been possessed by Satan, and cast up into a
reprobate sense, not knowing to judge between white and black, and that by
the just judgment of God) have made themselves selves so rediculous, as that
the very children in the streets might spit in their faces, and yet not
co^tenting themselves with this erro^ only: have brought in also a great number
o^ other filthy dregs of their own. And thereupon have said, that bread and wine
must be daily offered up: since the priesthood of Jesus Christ is answerable
unto the priesthood of Melchisedech. Whereas first of all they are convinced by
their own mouths of over gross follye. For they say that in their Mass,
there remains neither bread nor wine after the consecration or rather
charming of their Oste as they call it, but even God himself. And although we
see bread, and the wine that distilleth, yet they say they are but speeches,
that is to say, visible figures, in which is no substance. For, they would make
men believe that there is neither bread nor wine, and so neither believe either
their sight, taste, or yet any of the rest of all their senses. And yet in the
mean while they make men believe that it is al nothing, when as they have
pronounced the sacramental words, as they term them. So that if they should
offer up bread and wine, where are they? For they say, that there is none of
the^ there. And yet for all that, they allege this text, and say that there must
be bread and wine offered up. We see then their beastlines to be so gross, as
that very children may laugh the^ to scorn, and be their judges. And besides,
if they will have any correspondence between Melchisedech and our Lord Jesus
Christ, then must the Psalm which we have alleged, Psalm. 110.
needs be true: that is, that there is but one priest, who was made by a
particular oath. And therefore he must continually keep his office: howbeit,
they make themselves priests in ye room of our Lord Jesus Christ. And thus is
their similitude cast to ground. And therefore we shall not need any other
replies nor arguments to confute their beastlines, but take the text barely as
it lies: and therwithall eftsoons take their confession from their own mouths
to cut their own throtes. But be as be may, we see that by this text there is
a singular doctrine and instruction, which the devil straineth himself to
darken, bring in doubt, and falsefie: yea and if it were possible, utterly to
overthrow it. And therefore we for our parts ought so much the more awake^
our dull senses, to imprint in our memories that which is here contained, and
the rather incited thereunto by reason of the solemn oath that God was willing
to pronounce. For, as if we have already said, it was not without cause that
he soswore by his name. But it was to the end, infallibly to confirm our
faith, that we should not doubt but that, whatsoever is requisite for our
righteousness, peace, and defense, leads us unto the kingdom of heaven,
through Jesus Christ his only son. And this is it that we are hereby to
learn. He says anon after, THAT MELCHISEDECH BLESSED ABRAM, because he was
the Priest of the high God. This blessing imports a superiority, as the
Apostle very well aduertiseth us, when as he says, Hebr. 7.7
That the better blesses the less. And therefore in the quality of a priest
Abram must needs be inferior to Melchisedech. And yet it is said, that Abram
was the father and head of the church: and therefore we must needs conclude,
that Melchisedech represented a greater person then any mortal man could be.
And this was it that made many of the Fathers imagine him to be an Angel: but
those are very foolish and mere toyish inventions. For, when he is called the
Priest of the living God, no doubt of it he was known to be a man in the
country, and also King of Salem. And this is as great a mockery: for put the
case it had been an Angel, yet should he not have bin greater then Abra^ in
this general paternitie of the whole church. And therefore we must come back
unto this: which is, that although Melchisedech was a mortal man, yet
surpassed he in dignity the Angels of heaven, by reason of his priesthood:
not as of himself, but hy reason of him whose figure he bear: as David was
far greater then all the Angels, when it was said of him, Thou art my son,
Psalm. 2.7. Hebr. 2.^.
this day have I begotten thee. This was not spoken says the Apostle, of any
Angel: and yet was David a wretched sinner, the son of Adam, even as well as
any of the rest. And how then is it here, that he is so highly exalted, as that
the Angels are made inferiors unto him? It is because that this figure
represented the majesty of the son of God, and not the person of David
alone. We must then come to this point, that Melchisidech could not be above
Abram, but in regard of the truth which he figured. And therefore we must
conclude, that Jesus Christ was even then declared, to the end that the belief
of the faithful might be altogether grounded on him: because there was none
other salvation given under heaven from the beginning, but the same which is at
this day revealed unto us in the Gospel. Now, it is true that there is a
common kind of blessing. For, to bless, is oftentimes taken in the holy
scripture, for to pray: as hereafter we shall see, that one common man,
blesses another saying, God bless thee: as when we salute one another, they
are blessings, this is the common phrase of the holy scriptures. But there is
a singular blessing which is reserved for the priests. And therefore mark,
why it is so often said in the law, The priests which bless the people in
the name of God, that is to say, which have that authority given them thereto.
And the same form has been delivered unto us in the sixth Chapter of Numbers,
where it is said: Number. 6.23.24.25 26. Luke 1.24.50.
Thus shall the priests bless my people, The Lord bless you and keep you,
the Lord make his face to shine upon you. And again, The Lord be favorable
unto you: and grant you his peace. Thus we see what a form the Lord has set
down in his church. And for this cause also it is said, when as Jesus Christ
ascended into heaven, that he lifted up his hands over his Apostles, as the
priests did: to the end to accomplish the figures of the law, in blessing his
Disciples. This then is the blessing which is here spoken of. Hebr. 7.7.
And mark why the Apostle reasonneth not without cause, that it must needs be
that Melchisedech in this quality was far more excellent then Abram, because
he blessed him. And yet is Abram the father of the whole Church. We are
therefore to conclude, that our Savior Christ has a far greater majesty
then any earthly majesty has or can have, and that in the person of the
Mediator. Wherefore all power and dignity must be subject unto him and regard
him, and both great and small must acknowledge and confess that God his father
has given unto him the chief authority even in this humane nature of his,
and every knee must how and kneel unto him. Thus we see how these words of S.
Paul in his Epistle to the Philippians, are to be understood. Philip* 2.9.10.
And this is it which we are to remember. It remains now that we apply these
words to our own use and benefit, that is, we must not doubt but that
Melchisedech blessed Abram in a figure, even as at this day our Lord Jesus
Christ, who is the everlasting Priest, blesses us in the name of God his
Father. For this prayer which is here set down is not in vain, but must needs
be effectual: because we know that it could not be otherwise chosen but
that he must needs be heard. Let us therefore conclude, that so long as we put
our trust in Jesus Christ, we have him for our Advocate toward God his
Father: And although we are cursed in Adam, and do daily bring a new curse upon
our heads through our sins and transgressions: yet notwithstanding the same
shall hereby be blotted out and prepared, in that our lord Jesus christ
vouchsafes in deed and in truth, to take upon him the office to bless us. We
see also the prayer which he once made in ye gospel after S. John, in this
manner. Holy father I do not only pray here unto thee for these (to wit, Ioh.
17.20 21.
for ye eleue^ apostles and Disciples which he had chosen unto himself) But I
pray also for all those which shall believe in my name through their preaching,
that they may all be one in me, as I am one in thee, and that we may be all
one. In this sort did our savior Jesus Christ pronounce these words out of his
own month: to wit, that he praid not for his Disciples alone, which were of
his own company, but also for as many as believe in him through their
preaching. Let us here then learn, that when soever we shall embrace the
doctrine of the Gospel in true obedience, that we be surely persuaded that
the son of God is given to us for our souereign and only good. Thus we see
how powerful his prayer will always be: for it is needless for him to
begin the same at evening, at morn, and every day. For it is sufficient
that he has sealed it with his blood, and by that only and everlasting
sacrifice which he offered up once for all. For, we are assured to have our
prayers heard, when as we pray unto God in the name of our lord Jesus Christ.
For, our prayers should stink, yea and infect the air, if we considered what
God is, and afterward considered what we our selves are. Howbeit our prayers
are made holy through the priestly blessing of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, unto whom we must look that we might be partakers of all his
benefits. Thus we see in sum, how we are to apply this saying of Moses unto
our benefit, and the building up of our faith, where it is said, That Abram
the father of the faithful was blessed. We see herein, that Abram as of him
self was accursed, since he was feign to borrow the priestly blessing. And
Melchisedech also right well knew, that there is nothing in us but misery and
wretchedness, and that it is God that must bless us, and that we must embrace
it with all humility, if we will enjoy the benefit that is brought unto us
by our Lord Jesus Christ, and which he daily offreth unto us by the preaching
of the Gospel. Now hereupon, Moses recites the blessing of Melchisedech,
BLESSED ART THOU ABRAM, says he, OF GOD MOST HIGH, possesser of heaven and
earth, And blessed be the most high God that has delivered thine enemies into
thy hand: he blessed Abram in the name of God, as we have already alleged
out of the law. We must not here understand, that when the priests have the
office to bliss, that it proceeds as from their own authority, and that
God has resigned his office over unto them, and his honor and praise to be
thereby so much lessened. For when God works by his Ministers, yet loses he
thereby no part of his dignity, neither is his power thereby by any whit
obscured, or yet any thing of that which he gives taken from him. But it
pleases him to use these means with this condition, that men should always
come again unto him, and not draw any one drop of good from any other fountain
then from that spring head. Here we see namely why it is said, Blessed art thou
Abram of God most high: as if Melchisedech should have said: that he is nothing
of himself, nor can do any thing as of himself. But seeing that God had called
him to serve him, that he should also call upon him, and testify likewise his
name unto Abram. We see then, that it is the office of Jesus Christ to bless,
that is to say, to make us agreeable unto God, to blot out all the iniquity
that is in us. But this must conduct us to God a great deal hier: that is,
unto the inestimable love of God the Father, Romans 8.32.
who spared not his only son, but delivered him to death for us. When the
principal cause of our salvation is showed unto us, the scripture sets
before us the love of God: Ioh. 3.16.
God then so loved the world, as that he spared not his only son. Thus we
see how we are blessed by the priestly power of this Son of GOD. Howbeit,
the Father notwithstanding calls us unto him, that we might honor him, and
acknowledge so great a benefit that it has pleased him to bestow upon us,
even through that springhead.

To be short, we see here, that all the good which we are to desire and hope
for, comes from God alone, from whom alone we must look to receive and have
the same. Every man desires to live easily and pleasantly, and to have
whatsoever he thinks to be fit for him. And this is a wish which is common
both with the good and the bad. But few there are that seek for their
felicity in God. They desire all to be happy and blessed: and yet they make
no account of him from whom all blessedness and felicity proceeds. And this
kind of dealing is like unto a man which were so meruellous thirsty, and
feeble as that he were ready to give up the ghost withal, and another should
come unto him and say, Behold here is a very fine spring of water, and yet he
would not once vouchsafe to drink of it: and should have there also water and
wine, and yet would not once come near to taste of the same. Even so fares it
with such as desire and covet to understand whatsoever comes into their said
brains, and which they also know to be meet and requisite for them, and yet
notwithstanding do contemn GOD, and will in no wise come near him. Let us
then learn, that as often as we desire to have either for our souls our
bodies that which is to be wished, to begin at this end, that God is merciful
unto us, and does so receive us to his mercy, as that we may approach and
have entrance unto him, and may be so satisfied with his benefits as may be
profitable for our salvation. Thus then we see what it is that we are to
observe by this saying: That Abram is blessed, even of the most high God. After
this, Melchisedech adds a blessing, in that God had given victory unto our
father Abram. AND BLESSED (says he) BE THE LIVING GOD THAT HAS DELIVERED
THINE ENEMIFS INTO THINE HAND. By this we are admonished, always to join
praise and thanksgiving unto God, with the petitions and supplications which
we make unto him, as S. Paul also shows unto us in his Epistle to the
Philippians, Philip. 4.6.
when he says: Let your desires and petitions be manifest to God. That is to
say, bite not upon the bit says he, as the infidels do, when as they see this
thing were good and fit for me. They complain. But wherefore? Their hearts
are even closed up, and never come unto GOD to crave at his hands the things
which they want. And therefore the Apostle says in that place, Pour put your
petitions, thoughts, and desires before God: that is to say, when you know your
selves to want this thing and that: seek for the benefit where it is, and
there you may find it, to wit, in God: Let your prayers, supplications, and
thankesgiuings, show that you are before God: and when you have prayed as I
have before said: Let your thanksgiving be conjoined with your petitions.
For, if we pray murmuringly, and with a grieved and discontented mind, that is
to blaspheme his holy name. And therefore our prayers must be a sacrifice of a
sweet smelling savor. For we do him great wrong and injury when as we will
make him to submit him self and be subject to our appetites, and not be
contented with his favor and grace. We see then why we ought to be roundly
admonished, as often as we pray unto God, to render unto him also praise and
thanks, and yield our selves wholly to his will, and acknowledge and confess,
all the benefits which we have received at his hands: as in the Psalm it is
said: Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, Psalm. 50.
and I will hear thee (...) and thou shall praise and glorify me. And after
this sort, we see how Melchisedech does here the like as touching Abram. Now,
that we may the more familyarly comprehend this matter, we are to note, that
our prayers are to have regard as well unto the time past, as unto the time to
come, and for the time past, to confess unto God the benefits which we have
already received of him: and for the time to come, to crave of his majesty,
that it would please him to continue and persevere the same his mercy unto us
as he has begun, even unto the end. Now we are here especially to note this
one thing: that although Abram was so mightily advanced, as to be made the
father of the faithful, to be blessed of God with all virtues, and to have a
most excellent spirit of faith: yet Melchisedech nevertheless told him that he
was continually to go forward and increase from grace to grace unto the end,
and daily have recourse unto God to call upon him. For, when he blessed him,
he read him eftsoons a lesson, which he was well to look unto, and to
practice the same also all the days of his life. If it behooved then Abram,
continually to call upon God, what graces soever he had received, and how
honorable soever he was, and yet notwithstanding must always be exercised in
prayers and supplications: what then shall become of us that are so far
inferior unto him in all these things? Thus then we see, why I have said that
our prayers should have respect unto the time to come, seeing we have always
need of God his help, to have mercy upon us, and heal us, and more and more
to increase his graces in us. And besides, these prayers of ours must have
regard unto the times past, concerning our giving; of thanks and praises unto
him for the same: that is, we must protest that whatsoever good we have
comes from him: and be so contented as that although we should be never so
much vexed and grieved: yet must we still rejoice, for so much as we have known
and proved him to be a father unto us, and has also showed himself to be
such a one in deed, by reason of the benefits which he has heretofore
bestowed upon us. And this is it which we are here to observe. As concerning
the words of Melchisedech, BLESSED BE GOD WHICH HAS DELIVERED THINE ENEMIES
INTO THINE HAND. The same tells us that all victory comes from GOD. And
also that Abram through his own industry, prowes, and valor, discomfite not
the Kings of whom mention is made: but GOD which conducted him. True it is,
that Abram surprised his enemies in the night, as we have heard, and he did
it because he was no expert man of war: now to what end serves all this,
save only to show that it was GOD which gave him that prosperous success?
We see also, that although DAVID had a strong and mighty araie, and had
valiant and renowned soldiers, and himself likewise an expert man of war,
besides, that God had made him a king, Psalm 18.32.33.
yet he says: That it was God that had given him the feet of an Heart, that it
was he that had advanced him, and so strengthened him, as that he brake in
sunder the bars of brass, and that it was he that had overthrown his
enemy. David then protests that there was nothing in him as of himself that
got him all his victories. Seeing then that David who in the judgment of men
had the means to discomfit his enemies, and yet confesses without hypocrisy,
that all was to be attributed unto God, and unto himself, to the end, that his
name might thereby be glorified: what shall we then say Abram, who never in
all his life followed the wars, neither yet ever knew, as a man would say,
how to draw a sword? And yet notwithstanding, that he should vanquish such a
multitude of people, who were already puffed up with presumption, by reason
they had discomfited their enemies, and pilled and sacked five Cities: and
therefore we must needs conclude, that it was the Lord which did it. Now
therefore how ever it is, we are to gather from this place, that if we lift
up but one of our fingers, we must confess it to be God that conducteth us
thereunto, to the end we might not take upon us any thing with a presumptuous
arrogance, as if we could do any thing of our selves, and were men of ability
and great power. Let those then which are to take in hand wars, or
governments of commonweals, or any other matters of importance, put
themselves into the hands of God, knowing that it is not without cause that he
is called the God of Hosts. And thus much for this point. Moreover, we are to
apply this unto a second use: which is concerning the spiritual power that is
given unto us to surmount and overcome Satan, with all, and whatsoever is
against our salvation: We fight not (faith Paul) against flesh and blood, but
against principalities and powers in high places, and against the devils which
have fiery darts flying. Thus we see how we must be exercised. Seeing then
that the devil is our principal enemy, and that the darts, swords, and all
the means which he has to hurt us, are spiritual, let us learn to call upon
our God. For, what power have we? Or what agilitie? And therefore it is God
that must fight for us, and let us be quiet and still, and stand as if we had
our hands bound behind us: and yet not so neither, but that we must do our
endeavors: because all the faithful must valiantly fight against the lusts of
their flesh: and yet must the power come from above, and they aduichilate all
opinion of their free will and strength, which is the drunkenness of Popery,
when as they proudly lift themselves up against GOD. To be short, we must
therefore (I say) acknowledge that we can do nothing as of our selves, neither
as concerning our bodies or yet our souls. But seeing that God has taken the
charge upon him to conduct us: let us understand and be fully persuaded, that
he has strength enough for us, and that we can do nothing without him, and
yet are able to do all things by him and through him.

Let us now prostrate our selves and fall down before the majesty of our good
God, in acknowledging our oftences, beseechyng him to touch us daily more and
more with such repentance, as that we may groan to obtain forgiveness of all
our iniquities which make us indebted ynto him: and seek after him by that
mean which he has establushed us in: that is, by the mean of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, knowing that since we are reconciled by his death and
passion, that God will not leave us, but accept us for his well-beloved children,
although we be miserable wretched creatures, full of sin and iniquity.
Morcouer, that it would please him by his holy spirit so to streng then us, as
that we may feel that the principal power and dominion was not given in
vain unto our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, for so much as he has enriched
us with spiritual blessings, of which in our own nature we are altogether
bare. That he will not only show us this favor, but unto all other people
also, etc.

THE THIRD SERMON, of Melchisedech, wherein is treated of the use and right of
tithes, and also of an oath.
Genesis Cap. 14. And Abram gave tithe of all unto Melchisedech.

21 Then the king of Sodom said to Abram, give me the persons and take the
goods to thy self.

22 And Abram said to the king of Sodom, I have lift up mine hand unto the
Lord the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth.

23 That I will not take of all that is thine, so much as a thread or
shoolatchet, lest thou should say, I have made Abram rich.

24 Save only that, which the young men have eaten, and the part of the men
which went with me, Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre, let them take their parts.


IT was yesterday handled by us at large, that Melchisedech, of whom mention
here is made, was a figure and image of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
because he was in dignity above Abram, who was the Father of the Church: and
as it is likewise said in the Psalm, That the Redeemer that was to come, Psalm.
110.2.4.
should not be only a king, but also a priest after the order of Melchisedech.
We have also showed why all this was spoken, to what purpose it serves us, and
what benefit we receive thereby. Lastly, the blessing likewise was set
forth, that is, that through the power of the office and order which was in
Melchisedech, Abram was blessed, thereby to show that all our prayers should
be abominable before the majesty of God, and be able to obtain nothing at
his hands, without Jesus Christ made intercession for us, which office is
attributed unto him in the holy scripture. Now it is here said, That Abram
gave tithe of all unto Melchisedech. This therefore declares a priestly
dignity that was in Melchisedech, as is well remembered by the Apostle. We must
not hereupon, certainly collect, Hebr. 7.4
whether these words have relation to the spoil, or to Abram his own goods.
For seeing he received no part of the spoil to benefit himself, it is not
likely that he meant to give unto Melchisedech that thing which lee took not
to be his own. But he had another manner of reason and diversity of his
acknowledgement unto God, and to apply the benefit unto his own use, for the
enriching of himself. Nevertheless how ever it is, it is sufficient that we
hold that which i^ certain, that is to say, that Abram protests that he
acknowledged Melchisedech to be Gods priest. For if he had served Idols, or
usurped any dignity which belonged not unto him, Abram had done very ill in
giving him tithe: because we know, that to offer sacrifice unto Idols is to
honor them, and to forsake God. This oblation then of Abram must needs
testify and approve the priesthood of Melchisedech. And therefore we see why
the Apostle comparing the ancient priesthood of the law, with the priesthood
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, says, Hebr. 7.9.10.
that Leuy which was yet in Abrams loins, paid tithes: that is to say, was
subject to that law. We might also allege the like of Judah, of whom our
Savior Christ came. Howbeit that is easily answered, to wit, that Melchisedech
cannot be separated from our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, because he
represents him, and that all the excellency which in him depends hereon, in
that he is the figure of Jesus Christ. And therefore the Apostle by great
reason shows, that he to whom the right of tithes by the law apperteined,
was yet notwithstanding under Melchisedech. We must therefore from hence
conclude, that our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is far more excellent then
ever was Aaron, or yet all his successors, albeit they were in that respect
separated as it were from the company of men. And when the priest had all his
priestly garments upon him, it was but to show that he was as ^n Angel of
God, which might come near unto his majesty: being a Mediator to blot ^ut the
iniquities, Hrbr. 8* 9, 10.
and transgressions of the people. And notwithstanding that all this was so,
yet nevertheless, the Apostle shows that our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
far excelled him in honor, and must be exalted above all the figures of the
law, that men thereby might see him to be the very truth and substance of them
all. And that although men did take all the shadows that ever were for a time,
yet should they profit nothing, and should be all of none effect, except they
came to the true pattern. Let us therefore well consider, that when Abram
offered all the tithes to Melchisedech, that it was to show, that although God
should establish soon after an order of priesthood in his people, yet that it
did no whit derogate from the priesthood of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ,
which was already figured in the person of Melchisedech, as it was at that
time already established* Moreover, as concerning the giving of tithes unto ye
priests, we see that Abra^ did it before there was any law written: and
therefore it is without all doubt, that it was the spirit of God which induced
him and pricked him foreward thereunto. For, Moses does not recite here, this
to be a thing done at rando^ and without reason: but rather declares that God
ratified the office of Melchisedech, for so much as he meant to make him his
priest, and that Abram acknowledged him to be so. Howbeit, we must not from
hence gather that there was any general law for the same, ne yet that the
faithful were bound to pay tithes, except that God also had instituted it in
his law: which was done not only because they should honor him with the
fruits of the earth, with protestation that they came all of his mere
bounteous liberality: neither was it simply for the maintenance of the
Ministers of the Altar, that is to say, for the maintenance of those that
served in the temple: but because they came of the seed of Abram. So that one
part of the land belonged unto them, who were to take possession thereof, Genesis
12.7
as it was said to Abram: Thy seed shall possess the land. Leuy should have
bin a chief man in the house of Abram: and yet he was thrust out of it: and in
stead of him, were two chief men made of the house of Joseph: to wit, Ephraim
and Manasses. Here we see that Leuy was deprived of his enheritance, albeit ^t
was before assigned unto him by God him self. And that is the reason why his
successors are recompensed with tithes. Now God did this for two reasons: the
first is, because they should not be distracted neither from the service which
was committed to their charge, ne yet from doctrine. For God chose not the
priests under the law, for performing of the ceremonies only: but for another
reason of which the Prophet Malachy speaks: Mala. 2.7
that is, he ordained them to be his Ambassadors, to the end we should demand
from their lips the true knowledge and pure enterpretation of the law.
Wherefore because the priests might have leisure enough to attend upon the
service of the Temple, and to teach the people: the tithes were appointed for
them. And for that cause also, were they dispersed all the country over. They
had no several and proper pertition, to say that they might dwell in any one
certain country as the rest did: but were sown here and there: to the end
there should be no corner in the world where God not would have his messengers
and lawiers to keep his people in awe. Here (I say) we see the reason why GOD
would have them to have the tithes, and not busy themselves about tilling and
sowing of the earth. The second reason is this, that if they had possessed the
earth, God had not been known to be Lord and master as he was, when as
Leuiticall priests were become as it were his Receivers, and had sent them in
his name to take upon them the superiority, and to demand the homage which was
due unto him upon the earth. And besides, although the children of Israel
received that which was due unto them by succession and inheritance of their
father Abram, yet for all that God as it were would seem to show unto them that
the earth was his, and kept the propriety thereof unto himself, and that they
possessed the same with this condition, that what soever they had, they must
hold as of him, and show the same also in deed and in effect to be so. And
therwithal also, that there should be oblations bestowed upon the poor, of
those tithes: for it is not said that the priests should eat and drink up all,
but keep themselves within compass, thereby to show that they were not exempt
from the general law, but were beholden to God for the food which they did
eat, and that all came from his pure and mere goodness. We see then how that
the tithes which were contained in the law were especially for the people of
Israel. And yet notwithstanding the tithes were very common amongst the
Heathen, even for kings, princes, and noble men. We see likewise by profane
histories, that they were also exac^ed, and that in some countries they exacted
more then in other some, according to the ^ertilitie and goodness of the soil:
for it was ^ot so great a charge to the husbandmen that had fat soyles and
plentiful bearyng grounds, to pay the eight part, as it was to those that had
but lean and barren ground, to pay the tenth part. But be as be may, this
word Tithe or Tenth, has been a common and ordinary amongst all nations. And
all Princes and great men as I have already said, since the Gospel was
received, have bestowed part of the tithes toward the maintenance of the
Ministers of the word, as is very great reason, according to the saying of
Saint Paul, That they which ministered at the Altar in the old Testament were
maintained, that they which at this day sacrifice unto God after a more
excellent manner, that is, which win souls unto him, to make of them
sacrifices unto his majesty, that they should also be as well provided for
and maintained: and although GOD has not quallified how nor by what manner of
revenue they should be maintained, yet is there a law for it. Now then, since
God has been known through the preaching of the Gospel, a Christian order
and law has been made, for the giving and bestowing of one part of tithes.
And herein we may see the deceit of the Pope and of his shauelings: for, when
they handle the law of tithes in their Canons, they take it as if it were
transferred to them after that Jesus Christ had put an end unto the priesthood
of Leuy. All these are very leasings, falsefying the holy scripture, and
wickedly corrupting the same. For we see to the contrary, as has been before
showed, that it is long ago sithence, that it was not known what the paying of
tithes was by virtue of the law of Moses* and they were always paid either to
the Emperor, or to some other particular great men. But now since the thing
has bin so ordained (so therein be no abuse, and to make men believe contrary
to all truth, that it came from the holy scripture: but to be taken for a
politic law.) Let us hold that rule which Saint Paul sets down: 1. Cor.
9.9.10.11.12.13.
to wit, That we musle not the mouth of the Ox when he trauelleth to feed
us: and therefore it stands with a far greater reason, that they which preach
the doctrine of the Gospel, ordained in so excellent an estate, should not be
abridged and deprived of their maintenance, but be very well waged. Now as I
have already said, when tithes and such like are bestowed unto a good use: we
must not so straightly look into the matter, as to ask the cause why it is
so, as many fantastical fellows will, who at this day could be contented to
turn the whole world vpside down saying, O, it is no time now to pay tithes,
for seeing the thing has been so long abused, it is no reason it should any
longer continue. Then must we by their saying scrape out all: for they think
that Christianity consists in changing the color of the Sun and the
Moon. But if there be any thing that is to be amended, as I have said, as if
the Papists have brought in any false opinion, let that be utterly abolished.
But in the mean while, let us hold us unto al good ordenance: to wit, let the
tithes and all such things that are for the maintenance of the poor, and the
Ministers: let these things be reduced unto their lawful use, and let not
insatiable wide gullets devour all. Let them not consume them upon their
superfluities, in pompes, drunkenness, and other dissolutenes: but let them
know, that these are holy goods, which ought to be reserved for the use of the
Church, as well for the maintenance of the poor as I have already said, as
also for the feeding of those which serve God and his people. Thus we see,
that it was fit we should touch by the way, the law concerning tithes: and
let us now go on with that which follows. Moses now returns to the king of
Sodom, of who^ he had before spoken: and cease to speak of Melchisedech.
He says, that the king of Sodom would have nothing else but the persons,
and leave all the spoil to Abram: As if he would have said, that he
demanded no whit of that which was taken from him by his enemies, for he knew
very well that Abram had won it by conquest: he only required but the
persons and his dwelling place. We know not whether he did this hipocritically
yea or no, considering that all was in Abra^ his hands, or whether he thought
in truth that he was worthy of all, and that it was enough that he and his
people were rescued from the hands of his enemies. But how ever it was, it is
said that Abram refused that offer, that he would take nothing that was his,
no not so much as a thread or a shoolatchet. That is to say, not the worth of
a pin as we commonly say: save that, says he, which the young men have
eaten: for they came not thither to pay any reckoning, and besides, they could
have no less reward for ventring their lives to deliver the Sodomites. Well
sir, as for that which they have eaten, let that, I say, alone: but as for
those that came with me Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre, they must needs have their
portion of the spoil: for I will abridge them of no whit of their benefit,
neither is it for me to impose a law or matter of necessity upon them: I am
liberal, and therefore I can in no wise straighten nor measure them. Let them
then take their shares, as for me, I will have nothing. And for the better
confirming of his speech, he says, I have lifted up my hand unto the Lord the
most high GOD, possessor of heaven and earth, as if he would have said, that
he had sworn and would perform it, because it was not lawful for him to
call back his word, and so thereby stop his mouth about the matter. We see
here, that Abram his meaning was to eschew all offenses, when as he refused
to reap any benefit of any thing that was his. For if the war which he
had taken in hand was lawful, that then he might justly reserve to himself,
in the judgment of men, whatsoever he had taken: but beause he would show that
he was not carried away with a covetous desire, and that he took not arms
upon him for gain, he said, That he would not have no not so much as one
thread of his: and that in saying thus, ( To the end thou should not say,
that thou have enriched Abram it is certain that he was not ambitious. As
oftentimes, we shall see men of great mind that do willingly desire to enrich
themselves with other men's goods: but because they fear the shame and
reproaches of the world, they will yet for fashions sake, show therein a kind
of constancy. Howbeit, Abram did not so: but as I have said, he did it because
he would not have the name of God through his occasion be evil spoken of.
For it might be said, what I beseech you? This man, for any thing that we can
yet see, has hitherto showed himself to be very simple, and that he
worshipped God by himself, and is wonderful devout: he says that he
forsook his country at the commandment of God, and yet he makes war,
robs and spoileth, and therefore any man may see that he is no better then
a thief. Here we see that under the name of Abram, the name of God had been
hazarded unto many slanders. And this is the cause also why he kept himself
within compass. Now this is written for our learning. For, in the first place
we are to observe this rule, that it is not mough that our consciences be pure
before God, but we must also procure (as S. Paul thereof shows us an example)
To be reputed and well thought of amongst our neighbors: And why? because
they might not condemn us, by reason they should have this opinion of us that
we would do no evil thing, but rather stir them up to well doing. True it is,
that we shall never be able to escape the bitings and barkings of many dogs:
yea and although we were without all blot and blemish, yet will they never
leave slaundering and evil speaking of us: for the son of Gnd had his part
that way, and all the Prophets and Apostles were also charged with false
reports. And therefore (as S Paul says in another place) we must be always
ready to do good, and yet to be evil spoken of, to be wonderfully scoffed at,
reproched and iniuried, for that must be our reward: and yet notwithstanding,
we must as much as in us lies, not give any occasion to such as hunt after it,
but stop their mouths to the end the name of God, as I have already said,
be not evil spoken of through our default. Here we see then wherein we are to
follow Abram, that is, we must understand that we are looked unto on every
side: yea and although we were not, yet we owe this duty unto our
neighbors, not to give any offense unto those that are weak: who by us might
take any evil example. For let us be assured that there will be always
wicked men to seek to accuse us, to pick quarrels against us and defame us:
but yet for all this, (as I have already said,) let us be clear aboard and
guiltles. For it is the will of God that we should be, as it were, set upon a
scaffold, to carry his name and badge, as S. Paul says to the Philippians, and
on the other side, shine before the wicked: and although they be froward and
perverse people, yet let us walk before them holily and godly: that thereby
they may be ashamed, not being able to find any thing in us whereby we may be
evil spoken of: and that they may by that means be made more inexcusable, when
as they shall see us serve God in integrity of life, and themselves addicted
to all fraud, villainies, and such like. Thus we see how we are to put in
practice this doctrine. Now, as concerning Abram his act, we see here what a
good conscience he had. For if wane be once taken in hand, we think then that
it is lawful for us to do what we lust, as it is said in an ancient proverb,
That when wars are on foot, then laws cease: although in deed there is
policy and law, because it is then more requisite then in the time of peace:
and there must be also a kind of superiority, to the end every Captain
might be obeyed, that all soldiers might attend upon their Ensign or
Colors, that men might not hazard themselves at all adventures, and also be
very vigilant to beware of the enemy. And therefore these things which
concern the factes of Arms, ought to have rules, laws, and statutes: and yet
notwithstanding it is impossible to have any wars without the committing of
many outrages, And this is it also, why all such as think to draw their
swords, ought to fear and tremble as often as they think of the tail and
sequel that it draws after it. For it is impossible but that in such a
mixture there must be a great number of innocents slain, many houses,
fatherles children, and widows sacked and spoiled: and that the goods of such
as are most impotent, shall be taken from them, according as the soldier
shall find himself to want: and over and besides all this, if they shall want
munition, and that the belly thinks it shall suffer famine, they will spare
nothing. Thus we see how war it self brings always with it confusion.
Moreover, they that go a warfare, although they have never so lawful titles,
and can show great reason and cause, to induce them thereunto, yea and be
enforced as it were of necessity to follow it: yet notwithstanding they will
not stick to take liberty enough and dispense with themselves in whatsoever
they do: for thus they will say, If mine enemy had vanquished me, what would
he have done? Do you think that he would have spared either me or mine? Out
of doubt if he had conquered me, he would have put to sack all that I had
had, all had gone to havoc: and since it is so, why should not I do the like?
Thus we see how they which make war dispense with themselves and take such
liberty, as that they think they do no hurt when as they spoil and scrape
together whatsoever comes next to hand: and yet we see that Abram dealt not
so. True it is, that when the children of Israel entered the land of Canaan,
they sacked the whole country before them. But why? because the Lord had so
commanded them, and therefore they could none otherwise do: yea they were also
most rigoriously plagued, because they spared the inhabitants of the land. And
besides, God threatened them, that if they left any one of them alive, that
they should be as goades in their sides, and as thorns or pricks in their
eyes. But in this case there is a particular reason: for Abram was not
appointed by God to put on Arms to purge the City of Sodom and the neighbor
Cities, of their inhabitants, nor yet to have rule over them. For he went not
only to recover his Nephew Lot: although by that means God had also
compassion of the Sodomites and their neighbors, because he would for a little
while defer the vengeance which he had prepared for them: Abram therefore
knowing the reason why he had taken Arms upon him, took not liberty, nor
yet sought cunningly to excuse himself, as such as hunt after gain do: but
said that he would take nothing. And yet for all that he could not abridge
Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre, of any portion that was due unto them, because they
were men over whom he had no government. For they came thither with him of good
will: and being his friends and allies aided him, to the end to bring back
his Nephew Lot: and therefore would in no wise take any of their right from
them. Here on the one side we see what a temperate man Abram was, and on the
other side we see, although he took not the worth of a pin, yet could it not
so fare with him, but that he received thereby Iosse and damage, and that such
as were in his company could not choose but be spoiled: which thing more
manifestly shows, that whosoever he is that shall begin to make war, yea
although he might be as it were as an Angel of heaven, that cared not either
for gold or silver, and had rather die then vouchsafe once to gain the worth
of an halfepenny, under pretense that he had adventured his life: yet
notwithstanding, that war of it self brings always with it many sins
and iniquities, or else wonderful excess: and although it might justly be said
to be lawful, yet can it not be chosen but that great outrage will be
committed, and many men come home by weeping cross as we say: for, one man
shall have his house set on fire, another shall be robbed, another rifled even
to his very bedstraw, and another shall be so spoiled of all his wares, as
that he shall be left stark bare. And therefore whenever there is open
wars, there must needs be weeping and wailing, and wringing of hands:
wherefore, we ought continually to be admonished to be as it were close
fisted: and take heed how they enter into such confusions, as that there can
be found no remedy against them, albeit they carried such a mind with them in
their government, as the very Angels do, as I have already said. To be short,
they that justly defend themselves, and are enforced so to do, ought yet so
wisely and warily to behave themselves, as that they follow at least the steps
of our father Abram. And if it cannot otherwise be avoided, but that there must
be great excess, great loss and spoil committed, yet let the^ at ye least
resolve thus with themselves, not to take war in hand rashly, of self will, and
for spoil: but that it be done for the just defense of a country, when as it
shall be invaded by some wicked and mischievous violence. For, men may defend
themselves against any king or prince, if so be they will set upon such as are
desirous to live peaceably, and crave their friendship. Let men then have
always this regard not to be ambitious and high minded, ne yet desire another
man's wealth: or else if any man will take arms upon him, let him look well to
that which is here spoken of Abram* and conform himself after his example.
For the holy Ghost meant not to commend him only because he was not covetous,
and cared not for gold nor silver: but has set him before us as a glass, to
the end to learn us what rule to follow to do the like. For, we may find out
fond excuses enough to cover our careless spoiling and robbing: but that will not
serve our turns without we conform us unto the example of our father Abram.
And this is it that we are to learn from this place. Howbeit, Abram contented
not himself simply and plainly to say thus unto the king of Sodom: but he also
swear withal, and said that he had bound himself by an oath, to the end to
stop all mouths, and cut of all exceptions that the king might not go farther
and say, well it were better for thee to take the spoil: no says Abram, I will
stand to that I have said. And besides, I have lifted up my hand unto the Lord
the most high God. Now this manner of speech, of lifting up the hand, is
because that men which are blockish and earthly* might be put in mind when
they swear, by some sign and token, that it is as it were to call God to
witness as judge. In very deed the word of it self imports as much, when as we
will say I protest before God, or as God is my witness, or God plague me else.
Now, when we use this manner of speech, our hairs of our heads should stand
upright if we lie, or use any kind of deceit, for God will not forsake
himself to agree unto our leasings, for if he should, he must needs
aduihilate his own majesty. For, he is as verily true, as his essence is
unchangeable. The words then are sufficient enough of themselves: howbeit we
are so blockish and dull, as that we had great need to have some helps to put
us in mind, and therewithal to make us tremble before his majesty when we
swear, and therefore we see why in all ages men were wont to lift up their
hands, and that by God his own conduction. And men lifted up their hands in
a solemn oath, even as we do when we pray. For, when we lift up our hands,
it is as much as if we besought God to come down from heaven to help us: not
that he changes his place, but that he so spreads forth his power as that
we may feel him to be present in granting our petitions. Thus we see how by
ceremony and our outward gesture, we show that our prayers conioyne us unto
God, and that by them we enter heaven through faith, and that God for his
part, descends unto us, to show himself to be at hand. Even so also it is
said of an oath, when as we lift up our hands, that is, as if we should say:
I call God to witness, and that I am here before him when as I speak: that if
I deal deceitfully, it is as much as if I stained and violated his majesty.
Now we see the meaning of these words. And let us here note, that the oath of
the faithful, ought to be rightly weighed, two or three times: for they that
use it, in taking the name of God also upon every light occasion of speech,
show themselves to be contemners thereof. For, if we reverenced the name of God
as it deserves, without doubt we would not so vainly toss it up and down,
as men use to toss Tennis balls: for when we hear oaths tossed up and down
in many men's mouths, by that we may perceive them to be wicked, godles, and
profane men, and such as in deed know not God at all. Now, they will not in any
wise confess that they know not God: for, when a man shall hear them both in
market place and street swear continually: and thereupon reprove them, this by
and by is their answer: O good sir, I promise you for mine own part, I fear
God: surely sir, it seems you do so with lie and all. For out of al doubt, if
we do fear him in deed, it would be seen by our sober and wise taking of his
name in our mouths, and not by profaning of the same. And in very deed, when
as we shall thoroughly consider what is the cause of an oath, assuredly we
shall continually provoke God against us, if we abuse and corrupt the same.
For, as S. Paul says, Mortal men swear by one greater then themselves, Hebr.
6.16.13.
and God swears by himself, because there is none greater then himself. And
therefore in all oaths the name of God must be put in. It is very true, that
when a man shall say, By God, it is not expressly said word by word, that God
plagueth and executes vengeance: men will not so say, but it is inogh that his
name is there put in as judge. After what sort then so ever we speak, God is
not to be so fisted withal: and besides, we shall gain nothing at his hands to
use any sophistication with him, for without doubt the shame will still light
upon our own heads. Moreover, if any man at any time would rightly deliver an
oath, it is most certain that God shall there be named and called to witness.
Now, he cannot be a witness without also he be a judge. And besides, there is
now and then cursing and banning, that is to say, a man will beseech God to
plague him as he deserves, when soever he abuses his holy name, we see also
why it is so often said in the holy scripture, God do thus and thus unto me,
that is to say, God plague me both in body and soul. In other places this is
not expressed, but there is only an if, and is an interrupted kind of speech
as in this place, I have lifted up my hands unto the Lord most high God, if
so be I take any thing thereof. Now what is the meaning of this? We must thus
understand it, Let GOD be judge, and plague me if I lie, and speak not the
truth. This broken and interrupted kind of speech, shows that when we
should swear, we must be held back as it were with a byt: to the end we
do not lightly and unadvisedly provoke the wrath of God. For, out of all doubt,
they which swear often and at randon, are every time forsworn, because they
are things that go hand in hand together: so that when soever we hear any man
swear at the Table or in the streets, a man may boldly say unto him, My
friend, you do not only abuse the name of God, but are also forsworn when as
the name of god is thus profaned in your mouth: we are therefore to keep us
within the bounds of sobriety, when as we must needs take the name of God so
in our mouths. But here by the way may rise a question: whether it was lawful
for Abram to swear for so small a matter: for it is said, Thou shall not take
the name of thy Lord thy God in vain. And therefore could not Abram have been
contented to have said plainly, no: I will not have one jot of any thing: but
whatsoever has been taken from thee. I will deliver it thee again with mine
own hand: for, I will not be the richer by one farthing of that is thine. A
man would think that if he had said thus it had bin enough: howbeit we see
what the hypocrisy of men is: for, for honesties sake, men will offer
wonderful much, and yet they which will thus speak, have a clean contrary
meaning in their hearts. Thus we see, that they think that a man is not bound
when he makes any such offer in words: for they say, that it is but a
superfluous kind of speech, because they think not that men which have such a
civil courage with them, have either faith or honesty in them, for so much as
most men are subject thereunto: and therefore it stood Abram upon, to swear.
And besides, it behooved him also to free himself from all kind of temptation,
and so hold himself within the compass of his duty, as that although he
might lawfully enrich himself with another man his goods, yet that he should
then abstain from giving himself any such liberty, and withdraw himself from
doing any such thing, by virtue of the oath which he had sworn. We see now
hereby, that it was not without cause that Abram said that he had sworn, to
the end the king of Sodom should by no means have cause to reply, and also for
that there was a law, which enforced him to abstain from doing of any thing
that might breed an offense, and whereby God likewise might be nothing
esteemed of among the heathen. Moreover, we have also another thing to consider
in that he says, (That he haa lifted up his hand unto the Lord God most
high, possessour of heaven and earth) Even as Melchisedech in like sort used
the same form when he gave the blessing. For, Abram was not contented to call
the name of God to witness, but he would also express what manner of God it was
that he worshipped. We know well enough that the world was at that time full
of idolatry and superstition, and yet every man had the name of God in his
mouth, even as at this day the heathen will greatly brag that they honor God.
For, the Turks, Jews, and Papists, will not stick to abuse this holy name:
howbeit, it is but a polluting thereof, for so much as the Turks worship that
which they have devised of their own brains, and so blaspheme the living God.
For as Saint John says, He that has not the Son, has not the Father: Ioh.
2.23.
for, when as the Son is not honored, the Father receives that as a shame
done to himself. For, his lively image must not be contemned, neither must
there be any despite done unto his majesty. And therefore the Turks worship
nothing else but the devil under the name of God. And as for the Papists, when
as we shall tell them that Jesus Christ is our Advocate, they can in no wise
abide that, and yet dare they not altogether deny the holy scripture: for that
is an heretical and an offensive proposition, because men take occasion from
thence to say, that the men and women saints do not make intercession for us.
For, when we speak of the free remission of our sins: and that we ought not to
amuse our selves about that idolatrous and most abominable hellish Mass of
theirs: they are so mad withal, as that to them, it were a far greater
offense once to swear by that Idol the Mass, then to blaspheme the name of
God an hundredth times. Thus then we see, that the religion of the papists is
most hellish. And as for the Jews, they do utterly renounce our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. We have now already showed that the son cannot be
separated from the father: and having rejected him, they have shut themselves
clean out of the doors, and forsaken the principal covenant which God made
with them: to wit, because they will not be partakers of the salvation which
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ brings with him. Thus we see how they
abuse the name of God in every condition. And so has it been even from Abram
his time. We see here then why he calls him the Eternal, and soon alter
the most high God: because he would discern him from the Idols of the
Heathen. For the very Heathen right well knew, that there was a most high and
excellent heavenly nature: but yet they had ever a desire to have a warren of
pety gods after their own will and pleasure. Abram was far from that, and
says, that there is none but the eternal, which is the most high God. And
withal he adds, Possessor of heaven and earth: to show that God is not in
heaven as fantastical heads imagine, as to say that he sits there, only to
behold that which is done in the world: and co^tenteth himself that he once
made all things: and now lets us alone scipping and leaping here below up
and down like Frogs. But Abram shows that he had not so blockish an opinion
of his majesty, but attributes unto him an infinite power that spreddeth it
self all over both henen and earth. And this is done to make us walk in his
fear, and to advertise us that we are always before his eyes: and that both
our wits and very thoughts shall come in a reckning before him: for God is not
the possessor of heaven and earth to eat and feed, and to do nothing else: he
is not possessor of the^ to make nothing but dumb shows with the^: but
co^tenteth himself also with his alone and infinite majesty, having in himself
all blessedness.

And although he had never created any thing, yet had he been thereby no whit
either lessened nor increased. And therefore when he is thus called, it is to
show, that he has all things in subjection, and that we must all answer
before him: and that he so rules the world, as that nothing is hid from him:
and that his office is so to sound the thoughts, and to examine all our words
and deeds, as that being possessor both of heaven and earth, he is also with
all, our Lord and Judge. Thus we see why this title is imposed upon him,
because we might walk here as before his majesty. We should have a wise
catch of it to hunt after secret corners, seeing that all things shall come to
light: and if so be we did think at this day to deceive him with our cunning
shifts, yet will it in the end light all upon our own heads. Again, when as
God is named to be possessor of heaven and earth, we are advertised to love him
as our nource Father, and to fear him as our Judge. For, he is possessour of
heaven and earth, because he is the chief ruler over us, and must appear
before his judgment seat, to receive whatsoever we have done in our bodies,
whither it be good or ill. This is the possession which he has in heaven and
earth. Now he possesses not this for himself only: but bountifully of his
infinite goodness, bestows upon us whatsoever we want, because he has created
all things for our use. And therefore we cannot be but villainous ungrateful
people, when as we hear the infinite power and goodness of our God thus spoken
of, and do by experience also feel the same, if we endeavor not ourselves
eftsoons to love him, and yield unto him obedience. And under this word Heaven
also, not only the benefits which we receive by the Sun and Stars are set
before us, but the angels likewise are here put in amongst, that we might
learn to conform our selves like unto them. If then such noble creatures as
they are, have none other regard but to apply themselves unto his service: what
shall become of us poor worms of the earth, or rather straying wild beasts,
when as we shall do nothing else but rebel against his majesty, in giving our
selves over unto our filthy lusts and appetites. Is it not too too great a
shame for us, to see the Angels so humble, as I have already said: and our
selves to be so proud and rebellious? Here we see the^ in sum what we are to
remember, that whenever we shall speak of God, we must always join his
power with his essence: and not suffer this word, God, so lightly to pass
through our lips as many men do, but we must know, that as he is eternal,
and has made all things, that he has also reserved unto himself the
dominion and rule over our persons, our goods, and over all the rest of the
creatures: and that we must know that we are to render an account unto him,
yea and that such an account as that we are yet in the mean while exhorted
notwithstanding to love him in deed and in truth, and submit our selves unto
his obedience: for he will not only win us by force and violence under the name
of his majesty, but also by the graces and benefits which he bestows upon
us, to the end we might be alured to come unto him: so that in all our words,
thoughts, and deeds, we always have regard to glorify his holy name.

Let us now prostrate our selves before the majesty of our good God, in
acknowledging our offenses, beseeching him so to touch us with the^, as that we
may be humbled before him, and be grieved with our selves and ashamed, to the
end we may put our whole trust in his mercy which he has showed unto us in
his only son, and have all our refuge to him. And besides, that he so dearly
redeemed us, as that we endeavor to dedicate our selves wholly unto him in
purity both in body and soul: and do him such homage as that we may show that
indeed we desire not to live to our selves: but yield our selves wholly to
serve him, since it has pleased him to receive us to himself. That he will not
only, etc.

THE FIRST SERMON, of Justification, preached by Master John Calvin.
Genesis Cap. 15. 4 Then behold, the word of the Lord came unto him, saying: this
man shall not be thine heir, but one that shall come out of thine own bowels,
he shall be thine heir.

5 Moreover, he brought him forth and said: Look up now unto Heaven, and tell
the Stars if thou be able to number them: and he said unto him, so shall thy
seed be.

6 And Abram believed the Lord, and he counted that to him for righteousness.


WE heard yesterday, how Abram in making his moan unto God, because he had
never a child to be his heir, mistrusted not the promise: as many of us will
murmr and grudge, if he by and by yields not unto us that we desire, and
which best likes us. Now Abram would not do so, but contented himself that
he felt God to be good and gracious unto him, and that he was his, both in
life and in death. For he never went further: but the thing which he only
looked unto, was, which way the promise might be accomplished. Now he had in
very deed, promised the Redeemer: and for that cause was he so earnest to have
issue: but not in any worldly respect as we have heretofore said, but because
he could not otherwise be persuaded that God loved him. And this is the rather
confirmed by the promise which God made him: for he granted him his request
even at the very first, and reproved him also for his doubting thereof, because
God had given him his word before. For he said ( HE SHALL NOT BE THINE HEIR,
but one shall come out of thine own bowels, he shall be thine heir. No doubt of
it, God many times grants unto men their unadvised requests: but we see
here, that he aduowed his servant Abrams desire. And it was not without cause,
for so much as he craved nothing else but to have the promise ratified by that
mean that it was required: but because he was over hasty, God said unto him,
no: and repulsed his over vehement hot desire, not but that he might
lawfully require to see the Redeemer: howbeit we must always keep a measure,
and how ever it is, rest upon the providence of God: because he knows when
it is best to do us good. And therefore we must patiently abide his leisure,
for, as the holy scripture says, it is the very property of faith so to do.
To be short, we see here how God shows that Abrams request in desiring to
have issue liked him well, considering to what end he desired it. And because
he saw his weakness he would needs add thereunto some confirmation: and
brought him out of his Tent, and said unto him, (LOOK UP NOW UNTO HEAVEN: and
tell the Stars if thou be able, so shall thy seed be.) But if there be
such an infinite number of Stars, as that they shall dazzle thine eyes when
thou would look upon them to tell them: even so shall thy seed, after such
an unaccustomed sort be multiplied, as that men shall wonder thereat, by
reason of the strangenes thereof. Now as we have already handled in the
twelfth Chapter, this place cannot otherwise be interpreted, but that Jesus
Christ is the head, and direct line as it were of the seed of Abram: for we
shall hear hereafter, that Ismael was begotten, and yet for all that the
promise was not accomplished: notwithstanding that he was the natural son of
Abram, but not (as Saint Paul says) the natural son of the promise. And
therefore we must not take this here to be a carnal generation: but look
higher, to wit, Galat 4.23.
we must discern between the children of Abram as they are in their estate
and order, whereby they are known and aduowed to be the children of God, and
those that be bastardes, although they come of his race. For although Isaac
begot Esaw and Iaakob: and Esaw was the first borne and both of one woman: yet
for all that, was Esaw turned quite and clean out of the doors. Now, no man
could perceive the diversity why (of these two children) Iaakob should be
preferred before the other: considering that they were conceived both at one
time, borne both at once, and besides, Esaw the first borne. And why then is
he accounted as a stranger, and to have neither room nor place in this
spiritual inheritance which GOD promised to Abrams posterity? The reason is,
because the blessing was taken from him, and given to his yoonger brother: but
yet he had the right of the first borne. We see here then in sum, that if
we take all those to be the seed of Abram which come of him as concerning
the flesh, we shall find neither reason nor yet sound ground herein.
Again, although God adopted all the posterity of Iaakob, yet was the greatest
part of them made strangers unto him. We see also why GOD so oftentimes
disavowed them by his Prophets. Wherefore there must needs be a chief and
principal one of this seed, or else we shall never be able to have the truth
of this promise. No doubt of it they spoke not only of Jesus Christ, as some
have over rawlye done: but this order also must be kept, that is, we must set
Jesus Christ before us, and be conjoined together in him: and then this union
will cause us to be holden and reputed the children of Abram. Wherefore there
could be no such seed as is here spoken of, except Jesus Christ were the
head, and we united to him as members of his body, and thereby to be of the
house of God, and so consequently of the house of Abram. Now we see that God
made this seed to seem small, that he might increase it. And this is a kind
of dealing which seems strange unto the world: but we must all be brought
to be acquainted with this. For according to the common opinion, when we
speak of seed, the first borne must bring in the second, and so all the rest:
one after another. Now, God deals otherwise, when as he will have seed: yea
such a great number and multitude as that it would make a man abashed to see
it, and GOD so cutteth off, abridgeth, and diminishes it, as that in time it
comes so to pass, that it seems to be as it were quyte and clean
consumed and no whit left thereof, as in the tenth Chapter of his Prophet
Isaiah he says: but he does it because he would within a while after
multiply the same beyond all man's reason and expectation: to the end his
wonderful power might be the better known, and all men thereby be forceably
driven to worship him. For although there descended of Abram marvelous many
people, as first of all, the twelve Tribes, besides the Ismaelites and the
Idumeans: yet was there never so great a multitude in his house, as came by the
means of our Lord Jesus Christ. For they which apperteined not unto Abram as
concerning the flesh, were notwithstanding made his household meney. For as we
shall hereafter see, he was the father of all the faithful in general.
Wherefore the posterity of Abram was far greater, when as he lessened that
which descended of him concerning the flesh, then if he had let them all to
have remained and continued still. We are therefore hereby admonished, not to
measure the works of God according to our opinion and fantasy: but give place
unto his incomprehensible power, and be contented when he has said the word,
that he is of power able to accomplish the same, as hereafter it shall be more
at large handled. In that God brought Abram out of his Tent where he dwelt, and
made him look up to heaven to behold the Stars thereof, we shall not need
to busy our selves about this childish subtlety, as how God compares the
church to the Stars, because we are citizens of the kingdom of heaven,
dwelling here upon earth as strangers, always traveling further. For this is
not the meaning of the place. And also where we have heretofore spoken of
dust, some men in a speculatiue sort have thought the Church to be there set
down under the image and figure of dust, and that the world should make no
account of it: these are nothing else but more trifling toys, without any sound
ground. But we see why God set before his servant Abram the Stars of heaven,
to look upon them: even that he might behold his power, and not by his own
discourse and reason judge of the truth of this promise, which in the natural
conceit of man was incredible. For we shall never have faith until such time
as this fault be amended and corrected: to wit, to leave our own natural
judgment, and cast away all our own wisdom, that we might attribute unto
God alone the honor due unto him. Now let us see if this be not a most notable
and excellent glass of the infinite power of God, to behold this infinite
multitude of Stars of heaven created in a moment. And we see also in the
Psalm why this miracle is magnified where it is said, Psalm. 147.4.
That it is he that numbreth the multitude of the Stars, and gives them their
names: that is to say, it is he that makes them subject unto him and to his
government. And therefore when we open our eyes to behold the Stars, we must by
and by look unto their creation: for in a minute, as soon as God had spoken
the word, behold the heaven was full of this army royal, as the scripture
calls them. Thus we see that the heavenly hosts were created in a minute,
and are continually obedient unto his majesty. We see that all the Stars keep
their due course and compass, and although their revolution be every way
great, and that the Planets may remove the firmament, and may be all mixed
together: yet we see that they are all so directed, as that we are enforced
to wonder at it. Seeing then it is so, no marvel though this glass was let
before the eyes of Abram: for therein he might have thus concluded, since GOD
in a moment furnished all heaven with Stars, where before was not one: may
he not also furnish not only my house, but an whole Country, yea many
Countries, whenever he means to bestow posterity upon me? For his
power is no whit lessened: for he did not only create the world at once, but
after he had created it, he miraculously preserved the same continually. And
therefore* Abram had a sure and certain token, and as it were a pawn given
him. And herein we see, that God knew some infirmity to be in him: not that
he distrusted that which God had promised, but because he was a man, he could
not keep himself within such compass, but that he would needs ask the
question how it could be possible that in his, seed all the nations of the
world should be blessed: and therefore because his faith was somewhat weak, as
yesterday we heard: we see why God after this manner added unto him this aid
and help. And so, we have to note in this place as in all the rest, that God
supporteth us in all our weakness. Not that we should flatter pur selves: for
we are to fight against all our passions, and against al our evil thoughts
and affections, to give place unto the truth of God, and to hold it for
certain and infallible: howbeit whatsoever we do, it cannot be but that it
must in some sort be weak: and although we know not our own faults, yet God
knows them well enough. How then should we do, if he of his infinite goodness
spared us not? Here then we see what we are to consider from this Text, where
it is said, That God confirmed Abram both in his word and in his promise, as
we might daily see the like in our selves, if we were not blinded in our own
malice: because we regard not so narrowly and diligently the works of God as
we should. But if we made benefit of all the means which God offreth us, that
we might assure our selves of his promises, we should see that where he spared
his servant Abram, as he knows us to be an hundredth times more weak, that
he will not for his part forget any thing which may confirm our faith. Now
hereupon, Moses adds and says, THAT ABRAM BELIEVED GOD, and it was imputed
to him for righteousness.) Here we see a Text plain enough, and at the first
sight not greatly to be stood upon, and yet the Jews are so blockish and
blind, as that they know not what it means. And amongst Christians also,
hardly shall we find one amonst an hundredth, which understands only the
meaning of these words. For if these three or four words were truly understood
(THAT ABRAM BELIEVED, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness) without
doubt it would overthrow the whole state of Popery: all superstitions which at
this day bear sway should cease: and all controversies now in dispute be
appaised. For this is the key which opens what soever is requisite for our
salvation: this is the means to decide all controversies: this is the
foundation of all true religion: to be short, this is it that sets open the
heavens unto us, if we can comprehend that which Moses here in a word sets
down unto us. And so much the more are we to detest these dogs that are so
shameless, as to dare to obscure such a marvelous clear light: of which sort
are they which say that Abram was taken to be a wise man, and that, that was a
virtue in him to believe God: now we should in very deed abhor these dogs.
For these are the most wicked blasphemies that Satan is anyway possibly able
to spue out. Now as for the Jews, we are no whit to marvel at them, because
they had no expositor. No doubt of it, God mightily shined in the face of
Moses, howbeit they had a vale before them, as S. Paul says: 2. Cor. 3.14.15.
and therefore they passed over these words without thinking of them what they
imported. But they which profess themselves to be Christians, and are able to
show the meaning hereof by the authority of Saint Paul, Romans 4.3. Gala. 3.6.
when these I say shall manifestly set themselves against God, and like mastiue
curres fight so impudently as we see them do: what reason have they for it? I
do not now speak of Papists, but I speak of these devilish spirits, which
will be called Christians, and will also with open mouth make profession
thereof, and yet notwithstanding are such as be far worse then the Papists,
for they never went thus far in Popery, to say that those which were damned
and cursed before God, could any way possibly be saved without faith. The very
Papists themselves will grant this: and these dogs do utterly reject and raze
out every whit of this, as if there were nothing else said but this: So Abram,
a very wise man, and this was the virtue in him which made him believe God.
Here we see a sort of villains that would be accounted to be famous men, and
be called Masters and Doctors, and yet are so mad and so possessed with
fury, as that they would utterly overthrow all. Wherefore we are to be so
much the more attentive and heedfull unto that which is here contained. For on
the one side, Moses says, THAT ABRAM BELIEVED GOD, and on the other side he
adds, that this belief or faith, was imputed to him for righteousness. And
first we are here to define what BELIEF is: for otherwise we shall make
nothing of it. And here we see how the Papists are entangled in their errors:
for although they confess in part, that we are justified by faith, yet can
they not fully conceive and accept it. And what is the reason? Forsooth, it is
because they understand not what this word Faith or Belief means. And for
the better understanding hereof, we must ioyn something between faith and the
promise. For a man may sing well with one voice alone: howbeit there will be
no perfect melody, without there be many tunable voices agreeing together. Even
so is it with faith: for, if the word of God goes not before, and faith agree
therewith, there will never be any good hermony. For the word of God and faith,
are two things which cannot be separated. For so a man may speak exceeding
much of belief, and yet notwithstanding it should be (as we say) like an hie
Almaine, a barbarous kind of speech, as it is amongst the Papists, until such
time as we be come unto this point, that God must speak, and we must have our
ears open and attentive to obey and give place unto his word. What the^ is
Belief? It is to receive whatsoever is spoken unto us from the mouth of god,
with such reverence, as that we hold it to be certain and sure. And yet we
must do more then all this: for God will sometimes speak in such sort, as that we
shall be no whit the better to hear him. We have seen heretofore that when he
spoke unto Cayn, and asked him where his brother was ye Cain right well knew yt
he must answer before his judge in despite of his teeth, nevertheless he
grombled and was angry, saying: who made me my brothers keeper? Adam also
heard the like voice, where art thou? howbeit he was so afeard as that he
would have hid himself, and have been glad to have found some bottomless dungeon
to have fled from the presence of God. Wherefore it is not enough for us to
hear the word of God with that authority that it deserves: but it must also
be therewithal quallified: that is to say, it must be such a sure and certain
word unto us as may make us approach near unto God, and make us partakers of
his bounty and goodness: and not to doubt but that he will be our Father and
Savior, and so thereupon may be bold to call upon him, and hold our selves for
his children, and fly unto him for succor and aid. Thus we see how Abram
believed: it was no fantastical opinion which he had conceived in his brain:
To. 10.17
for Faith (as S. Paul says) comes by hearing, and by hearing of the word of
God. Abram then heard and was taught before he believed. Neither was he
instructed by any creature or mortal man, but knew right well that it was GOD
which called him to be one of his children. Now this had not been enough, as
we have already said, but Abram heard these words: I AM THINE EXCEEDING Genesis
15. 1
GREAT REWARD. I AM THY DEFENSE: FEAR NOT, FOR I AM THE ALMIGHTY GOD WHICH
HAS BROVGHT THEE OVT OF CHALDE, AND OVT OF HER OF THE CHALDEANS, and as
hereafter we shall see, and as we have already partly handled it in the
twelfth Chapter, That Abram believed not God in hearing I cannot tell what, and
which apperteined nothing unto him, or to hear some particular speech: but he
believed God, when as he verily believed that he was kept and reserved to be
an inheritour of the kingdom of heaven. Thus we see what his faith was. But
for the better understanding hereof, we are to note, that there is a
particular faith, and a faith also which comprehends whatsoever is requisite
for our salvation. As if God should now threaten us, it might so fall out as
that it would move and touch the hearts of very hypocrites and contemners of
his word. Now this is said to be a particular faith. For how many do we see,
when as the judgments of God are set before them, to be amazed, and seared as
it were within with an hot iron, looking on every side when they should fall
upon them: and why so. Forsooth, the reason is, that although they would
stomach and brag out the matter never so much, yet shall they be driven to
acknowledge and understand, that they shall never be able to escape the heavenly
judge his hands. These men then, I say, have a certain kind of faith, howbeit
it is but in part: and it is such a piece of faith, as will do them no good: as
for example, you shall see some men assure themselves upon a particular
promise, when as they are in danger: for if a man shall come and say unto
them, that God will have compassion upon them, they can like very well of
this speech, howbeit it is but only in an expectation. Again, we shall see
another man extreemly sick, or suffering great poverty: and it may be that
he will call upon GOD for aid. Another man may be brought unto such an
extreme danger, as that he is as it were at his wits end: yet he has a
good hope, because he knows that God can help him. Now these are but
particular beleefes, and can not save us, and so consequently, not iustefie us:
but when we shall assure our selves of our adoption, wherein consists all
our felicity: this is it that makes us hope that GOD will be our Father unto
the end: because he has promised that his children shall not perish: and
that we may call upon him as upon our GOD, for our undoubted salvation. Now
then when as we shall have this promise by which God unites us unto him
self, and so allyeth him self unto us, as that we never doubt that he will
forget us: this then is such a faith as comprehends within it all the
promises. 1. Timo. 4.8.
For (as Shint Paul says) The fear of God which proceeds from Faith, has
not only the promises of the life now, but of the Life to come. For we may
conclude, that all things shall go well with us, if so be that God favors
us and accepts of us.

Here then we see what we are to retain as concerning this word Belief.
(Abram then believed GOD) that is to say, Abram received the promise, by which
GOD certefied him, that he was his Savior, that he embraced our Lord Jesus
Christ that was offered him, by whom he knew we were reconciled unto God,
although we were worthy to be accounted his enemies, and to have mortal
wars made upon us, by reason of our sin and corruption. Wherefore Abram is
beholden unto our Lord Jesus Christ, and was fully persuaded that that was the
very bond, by which we are conjoined and united unto God, as that we are
partakers both of his life and also of all his benefits. Here then we see
Abrams belief, to the end we take it not so leanly and sparingly as the
Papists do. We see now in sum, that we shall never be able to understand what
this word Faith and Belief means, except we come to this melody of the
Promise, and of the Receipt thereof. And why is it that God so often says by
his Prophets, I will call you my people, and you shall say, Thou art our God?
Thus we see why God first speaks: and it belongs to him so to do: for, what
a rash part were it of me to insinuate my self to come unto God, and to call
him my Father, who am no better then a worm crawling upon the earth, no nor
so good neither: but rather sin and horrible infection to be condemned for
ever, whom Satan by nature possesses, and whose bond-slaues we all are: and
yet call God my Father? Yea, to see me usurp and take upon me such honor as
the very Angels themselves as of themselves, are not worthy? But when he has
once pronounced this saying, I am thy Father: now it is no more cursed
boldness and presumption to take our selves to be of the number of his
children, but an holy confidence and trust, by which we ratefie his truth. And
this is the greatest honor that we can do him, when as he has said the word,
to content our selves therewith and rest therein. Thus I say, we see what true
belief is, even that which is here showed unto us by the example and
instruction in Abram. Now it is said, that that was imputed unto him for
righteousness: and that it was God that imputed the same unto him. We are now to
set down what this word Impute, and this word Righteousness, signifies, in
comprehending also therewith the name of God. This word Impute, imports as
much, as to allow or account of. As when a man owes any thing, if he has paid
it, he is allowed it. Or if when his debtes are set down he shows, that he
has paid this, and paid that, well he is so allowed it, as that he is
discharged of it, and has his quietus est. Now in our natural French language
this word Impute, is always taken in ill part. For we never say, that any
virtue is imputed to a man: for the word Impute imports a matter of reproach,
or of a fault done: for we will say, this matter will be imputed unto him as a
fault. Now the scripture uses this word in common, as well in good part as in
ill, that is, imputes righteousness, and imputes not sins. And therefore
when it is said, that Faith was imputed unto Abram* it is as much to say, as
that it overthrows whatsoever might come as from him. Nevertheless we shall
never be able to understand the valor and estimation of this word, but by the
contrary. For when it is said, that sins are imputed unto us, it is as much
to say, as our sins are registered in the Records, and we stand in them
condemned, so that there remains nothing but judgment and execution. And
therefore accursed are we so long as God imputes unto us our trespasses. For
it is said, Psalm. 32.
Blessed are they to whom the Lord imputes not their sins. And so
consequently, accursed is the whole world, when as GOD shall proceed as a
Judge against it, and impannell a Iewrie of life and death thereon. What then
is the meaning of these words: That Faith is imputed for righteousness? It is
this, that God puts it into an allowance for us, so that thereby our sins
are not imputed unto us: for the one cannot be understood without the other:
and therefore the imputing of righteousness, is the cause why our sins are no
more imputed unto us to judge and condemn us. For the imputing of
righteousness, is in sum, mere pardon and absolution. Here now we see the
right meaning of this word. And now let us see what this word righteousness
imports: For this word is not a virtue, as if a man should say him to be
just and righteous which governs without out reproach. But the righteousness
which is here spoken of, is a favor and grace which God bestows upon us,
because he would have mercy upon us, and of his mere liberality be
reconciled unto us. And therefore this righteousness which Moses here speaks
of, is not a quality that we are to look for in men: but a favor which God
bears unto us, when as it pleases him to bury our sins in the bottomless
sea of his mercy, and not once look after them again: and accept of us as if
we had absolutely accomplished the law. And why is that? Forsooth, because
Jesus Christ is righteous, and his perfect righteousness is imputed and allowed
unto us. And as he is ours by the gift of God his Father, and daily offers
himself also unto us by the Gospel, even so communicates he his
righteousness unto us, when as we possess and enjoy him. And God vouchsafes it
even as well as if we our selves had wrought the same in our own persons. And
thus we see what the meaning of this word Righteousness is: for now I do but
unfold these things by little and little, because we mean hereafter to
amplify the true summarie of the whole.

We will now come to speak of the name of GOD: For men may impute us to be
righteous, by reason of some appearance and outward show of holiness and virtue,
which they may think to be in us, and to like well of us, and so we shall
have a great number of imputations, that is to say, very Catalogues of
righteousness and imputations, we shall be absolved, yea and also exceedingly
commended and praised, when as they shall see us to have walked godly and
virtuously: and yet all this is nothing. And therefore we must come unto the
heavenly judge as it is said of him. And see why Moses namely expresses, That
God imputes Abrams belief for righteousness. Now if all the world had so
esteemed and liked of Abrams faith, and had canozized him, as a man would say,
as if he had been an Angel, it had vanished away all like smoke, but it is God
that spoke it, even he who is a competent judge, and to whom belongs the
giving of sentence, either of salvation or condemnation. Wherefore when God
absolved Abram after that manner, and acknowledged and held him for righteous,
this we see was the principal point. And therefore we now see that Abram was
justified by Faith. Whereupon S. Paul says, it follows, that he could no
way deserve to be righteous by his works, and that he brought nothing with him
of his own why God should like of him, but that he freely received him and
made him one of his children. And in deed S. Paul when he means to speak of
free justification, takes here this way with himself, to show that there is
none other hope to be saved, but by the mere mercy and goodness or God,
because he pardons our sins, that we might please him. Wherefore when S.
Paul enters into this argument, he fetches this Theme from Abram: for he
presupposes that which is true, that there are not sundry ways to be
justified before God, and that there is but one only rule. And therefore if
Abram was justified by faith, we al also must so be without exception.
Moreover, if there could be found in any mortal man that virtue which might
merit: no doubt of it, Abram surmounted all others therein. We have already
heard how he forsook the country, wherein he was borne, how he renounced him
self and all his humane and natural affections, and how he absolutely obeyed
God. We have also heard of his patience, how constantly he abode in all his
temptations, how he persisted to the end, in the vocation whereunto god had
called him: to be short, we have heard that he failed in nothing. Now, we that
are here are far from this perfection. How then dares he whatsoever he is, be
once so bold as to vant himself to be able to appear righteous before God
through his own merits, considering that Abram was never able to do it?
howbeit, let that suffice us which I have already spoken of, to wit, that
there is but one only rule that can make us please God: and that is it which
is here set down unto us in the person of Abram. And withal, we must thus
conclude also, that since Abram was justified by believing God, that our works
can no whit avail us to be lyked of God, and to make a foundation of the hope
which we must have of everlasting salvation: it is God that must give us all in
all, and not we once presume to bring any thing with us of our own toward
it. We will speak hereof more at large hereafter: but in the mean while we
will use the easiest way of proceeding herein we possibly may. Here now we see
as I have already said, our A. B. C. And this is the perfection of all our
wisdom. And will not this be enough when as we have learned the principle and
ground of our faith? and understood what entrance we should have for our profit
in the school of God? which is the principal key of all the Gospel, and
which leads us even to the true end, whereby we may know which way we may
walk aright, and attain unto the inheritance which God has laid up in store
for us. And therefore when as we shall perceive that this place leads us
thereunto, no doubt of it we should, either ought to look unto it, or else we
shall be most villainously unthankful. Now we have hitherto set down these
things most familiarly and easily, so that there is not so young a child as
cannot but taste thereof. Let us now then come to the point which I have a ready
touched, which is, that Abram brought nothing with him whatsoever, why God
should accent him: but rested wholly upon the mere grace and liberality
contained in the promise. Let us now then hereuppon consider of what time it is
spoken. Certain it is that Abram had served God so long, as that a man would
have thought he might now have been very well discharged and freed, in the
common and ordinary judgment of man. And therefore it must necessarily follow,
that Abram was all his life long justified by the only mean of Faith. Now this
would se^me somewhat obscure and dark if we should ^not make it more plain
and manifest. And it shall be made the plainer and minifester in giving light
unto the truth by the leasinges of Popery, and by the errors wherewith all
those infernal schools are corrupted and infected. I have already said, that
the Papists will easily enough grant, that without faith we can no ways please
God, ^or be in his favor. Wherefore when they have ^nce granted this principle,
that we are all accursed in Adam: then may they as well say, that we must
receive the first grace from Jesus Christ. That is to say, that seeing we are
plunged in the bottomless pit of destruction through original sin, Jesus
Christ must needs fetch us out of it. Now, from hence they draw a false and
pernicious doctrine, by which they corrupt and falsify Moses conclusion, and
S. Paul's also most excellent interpretation. For they say, that the
righteousness which they call Initiall comes of faith, and of pure and simple
Faith: but that afterward, we must be partly justified by our works. Now this
is somewhat dark to be understood, howbeit I will so set it down, as that
every one shall be able to understand it. This word then Initiall, is as much
to say as Beginning, and it is a word that is taken from the Latin: for it is
as much to say, as the beginning righteousness in a pure faith. Wherefore the
Papists will confess that God takes us to be his enemies, and does accu^se
us: because we are nothing else but as it were a most filthy and stinking
dunghill: and therefore by reason of our stains and poll^tions, he cannot
choose but reject us. They will grant all this: and it seems at the first sight
to be the way to humble us. And besides, also they show no les but that it is
Jesus Christ that must help and remedy whatsoever wants we have, to hold us by
the hand, and reconcile us unto God his Father. Now, when they have brought us
to this, then they tell us that we must in part merit to be righteous, and that
must forsooth be done, though the merits of our works: so as they set down
free righteousness all at once, when as we are received into the Church by
Baptism, which is enough: and so we see that Jesus Christ has done his part.
And yet in very deed they add and say, that we cannot be absolutely
righteous: but they shall in spite of their teeth feel it, and experience also
will convince them, that they are many ways beholden to God. But soon after
they come in and say, that they have their satisfactions, and do recompense God
otherwise, in doing of things which they are not commanded, as fasting on such
a day, abstaining from eating of flesh another day, going on pylgrimage,
causing Masses to be sung, and such other like tryfling toys, which they make
a mountain of to acquit themselves before God. Thus we see how they bestow
themselves all their life long, to be made righteous by their works and
merits, being once justified by faith, that is to say, being brought into the
way. They confess that Jesus Christ opens the door unto them: but they
say, that they themselves must enter in at it and perform the voyage. There
is in them also another error: for they think that when they do any good deed,
although there be much evil amongst, yet that this good deed is accounted of,
and this they call partial righteousness. And thus they make a patched and
peeced righteousness, taking here and there a piece, rouing about and making
such a medley, as is nothing worth, but a confused matter or no understanding.
They say also that we are first justified by the mere grace of Jesus Christ,
and next, by Faith: and then by our works and partly by our satisfactions,
which serve to appaise the wrath of God against us, and to acquit us of all the
sins whereof we are guilty. And this is the opinion of the Papists. Let us
now see when it was that Abram was justified, as we have already touched it:
he was a man endued with all virtues, a man that had forsaken him self, wholly
to please God. And therefore it might seem that he might have had some
righteousness in him, if any were to be found in any living creature: and yet
for all that, his faith was imputed unto him for righteousness. And therefore S.
Paul concludes thereupon, that he had no works in him to justify himself.
And when, I pray you, had he none in him? For sooth even then, when he had
had so notably traveled and endured such trials, as that he might have been
the very pattern as it were of all Angellike virtues, for his chastity, for
his patience, for his obedience toward God, for his piety: to be short, he
mortified all his affections, that he might frame himself wholly unto the
righteousness of God. And when he had done all this, yet (as Saint Paul says)
had he nothing whereof to glory: but must stop his mouth, until such time as
he was justified by faith, and therefore we see by the circumstance of the
time, that the righteousness of faith whereof we now speak, is not such as the
Papists imagine. But it is as much as if the scripture should say, seeing then
that we are poor miserable sinners engaged unto God, and under the
condemnation of eternal death: it must needs be that he must accept of us by
some other mean, that is, he must not examine what we are, nor yet look to
find any thing in us which any way might make us acceptable in his sight, but
hold us to be righteous, because it is his good pleasure so to do, or else
because we rest upon his promises, by which he has prevented us. Here we see
the righteousness that endures, which extends it self both in life and
death. But we are now to set down these things more largely and plainly. And
first we are to remember that which erst I touched, that is* we must seek
for our righteousness else where then in our selves, because there is none in us.
And see why S. Paul so greatly insisteth and stands upon the curse of
mankind, when as he would drive us to this point, that God freely justifies
us: for there he shows that the Heathen are also condemned, although they
have neither law, scripture, nor Prophets, and says, that they are of
themselves already damned, and need never go any farther. For God has
manifested himself to all in general, in giving us eyes to behold the creation
of the world. Now we see that we smother and suppress the glory which we ought
most manifestly to behold. And therefore we must conclude, that we are all yea
most unthankful sacrilegers, because we rob God of that honor that is due
unto him. As for those that are under the law, there is a double condemnation
upon their heads, for they sin wittingly, because they know the will of God
plainly manifested unto them. Here then we see all mankind enclosed within
the curse. Let therefore, says he, every mouth be stopped, and be still:
whereupon he brings in many places of the scripture, to show, that God
looked upon the children of men, and found not one good, but all corrupt: that
is to say, they were so wrapped up in their iniquities, as that they were to be
abhorred. Here then we see what we are to note in the first place, that is, we
are hereby to understand what our state and condition is, until such time as
God comes unto us to have mercy upon us, and looks after us when as we are
plunged in the bottomless pit of hell. Thus then we see at what end we must
begin, if we will rightly understand how and wherefore we are justified by
Faith. But this cannot now be followed as it should, and therefore we will let
it alone until our next exercise.

Let us now then fall down before the majesty of our good God and merciful
Father in Jesus Christ, in acknowledging our manifold sins and iniquities,
whereby we are most engaged and bound unto him, and for which we ought to be
utterly confounded in our selves. And although we be cast down into such a
bottomless depth of despair, yet let us not cease to lift up our heads and
hands unto his majesty, seeing he has showed us such favor as to look after
us, because he would gather us unto himself, and because also that Jesus
Christ descended into hell to bring us out thereof, and lead us unto the
kingdom of heaven. And therefore let this be so printed in our hearts, as
that we may be truly lifted up by faith to call upon this good God, who has
adopted us for his children, and wholly rest upon him. And let us farther
beseech him to grant us the grace so to walk, as that his adoption be not
vain nor unprofitable in us, but that it may show the fruits thereof,
insomuch as we shall be governed by our Lord Jesus Christ, accordingly as he
has incorporated us into himself.

Let us not only, etc.

THE SECOND SERmon, of Justification.
Genesis Cap. 15. 6 Abram believed the Lord, and he counted that to him for
righteousness.


WE began yesterday to handle which was the right way to learn how to please
God by faith, that is, we must begin at our first estate and condition, and
see what we were borne in Abram. In whom we see our selves to be all accursed,
damned, and lost. And until such time as we know that aright, we shall never
feel what it is to obtain the favor and mercy of God. Here then we see the
true foundation whereon to build, which is, that after we have rightly
examined what we are, and finding nothing in our selves but utter shame and
confusion, we might seek for the remedy else where. And for the making of such
a trial, we must of necessity come to the scriptures. In very deed if every
man did consider himself without flattery, we should judge our selves without
any further trial. We should not need to use long circumstances about the
finding out of testimonies enough against our selves: for every one of us has
an hot burning skarre in himself, to imprint the curse of God upon us. But
because we are subject to hide our sins and bury them, therefore has God set
his word before us as a glass, that we might therein behold how to learn to
judge our selves thereby, and not after our own fantasies. And although we
perceive not at the first our own misery, yet when we shall see the same laid
open by the word of God, that were enough wholly to confound us. For if every
one of us should trust to his own opinion, we would then be all righteous. For
Solomon says, That we are all so blinded with selfeloue, as that there is not
one of us all but will make our selves believe that we are wonderful verteous:
Pro. 21.2.
But it is God (says he) that weighs the hearts. And therefore we must be
tried by another balance: for when we think our selves to be full of merits,
they prove nothing else but false stuff and very dross. And when the world
also thinks so of us, it declares that they look no farther but to the
outward show. Now, that which men so highly esteem of, is abominable before
God. And why so? because that we must judge of works according to the hidden
and secret affection of the heart. Lu. 16.15
And besides, there is no purity therein, for it is imposible that we should
be pure and clean, until such time (as it is said in the Acts of the
Apostles) that we be purged by faith. Act. 15.9.
And on the other side) we shall never be able to serve God with a free
affection, without we know that he will be good and merciful unto us, as it is
said in the Psalm: Psalm. 13^.4.
With thee O Lord is always mercy and plenteous redemption. Now these
miserable faithless people who doubt of the will of God, and are never quiet
but in great perplexity, without doubt can never serve God courageously,
neither will God at any time accept of that they do, for he will have us
sacrifice unto him willingly: and S. Paul also says, 1. Cor. ^.8.7.
That he loves those which deal liberally with him, and come with a free
affection. Here then we see that our works how glorious soever they seem to be
either in our own eyes or in the eyes of the world* are but dung and filth
before God, until such time as he has cleansed us of our sports and
uncleanness, and besides has showed us, what mark he would have us shoot at,
and to what we should direct the whole course of our life, that is to say, he
would have us honor him, and being once dedicated unto his service, labor to
conform our selves fully and wholly unto that righteousness which he has set
before us. Howbeit we will handle this more at large, when as we shall speak
of the law: but for this present it shall suffice that we understand, that
because we are carried with self love, and that, that is not only as it were
a wimple to blindfold our eyes, but does also as it were wholly bewitch us, so
as we are become very blockish, and do not once conceive and think of our
miseries. And therefore as I have already said, it is meet that God should
condemn us by his word. Romans 3.10 11.12.13 14.15.16.17.18.
And for that cause also does S. Paul bring in so many testimonies, showing by
them that we are all damned. Every one therefore, as I have already said,
should have this feeling in himself without any other judge: but because we
are so sinful, and so full of dissimulation, and have so many shops and privy
closets, to withdraw and put us by from the true and sure knowledge of our
sins: therefore must the word of God serve us for a looking glass to behold
them in. Now the^, seeing that we are of nature pernerse, and nothing in us but
rebellion and malice, and all our affections and thoughts so many inimities
against God as S. Paul says, Romans 8.
how can we any way possibly present and offer unto his majesty any thing that
he may well like of. In very deed we may have some foolish arrogant proud
conceit of our selves, howbeit that shall be always but to redouble our woe: for
pride is a sin that more displeases God then all the rest. And therefore we
must confess that as we are but natural men, we are so great enemies unto
god, as that our very thoughts and imaginations are all contrary unto his will,
neither can we so long as we live, either speak or do any thing whatsoever, but
it must needs heap upon our heds a most grievous co^demnatio^. Wherefore we see
why the scripture compares us unto dead men, when as God once forsakes us,
and until such time as our Savior Christ has showed himself to be our life,
we are no better then dead men. And I pray you what can a dead man do?
Moreover, we are therefore to learn and take forth this lesson, or else we shall
never be able to lay open what ye goodness of god is toward us in our lord
Jesus Christ. But should despair in our selves to put our trust in God. For we
are so inclined unto this presumption which is so rooted in us, as yt we will
always extol our selves. And therefore god must altogether cast us down, yt we
may be redressed by his hand, and vpholde^ by his power. Furthermore we are
soon puffed up with a small blast of wind of vain arrogance: and therefore before
such time as we are to receive any true substance from god, we must first be
very empty, and as it were hunger starued. And so namely why it is said, Psalm.
132.15.
That God fills the hu^gry and pore afflicted. No doubt of it his goodness
exte^deth it self to none but to those yt are worthy of it: but when we speak
of gathering his church together, he must the^ prepare it by this mean, and
for that cause it is namely said, Esaias 91. 1
That the spirit of God must rest upon our Lord Jesus Christ, that he might
announce deliverance unto the captives, to make the miserable blind to see, to
heal the sick and diseased, and to strengthen and comfort the feeble and
weak. Now he accomplisheth that when he says, Come unto me all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you, and you shall find rest
to your souls. Here then we see that it is humility that leads us unto our
Lord Jesus Christ, that we might be partakers of ye righteousness which he
brings us. Now, humility is not such a manner of thing as many suppose it to
be, as to show a godly and humble countenance before God, but we must be so
bare and empty of any good thing in us, as that we must cast our selves down
at his feet, and acknowledge that we are nothing else but miserable and
wretched sinners, and so without al hope of salvation as of our selves. Thus we
see how we come unto his mercy, which is by the feeling and apprehending of
our miseries. And these two things cannot be separated. For why is it that God
takes pity upon us and helps us? Forsooth, it is because he beholds our
miseries, and that is it which stirs and moves him to mercy. And see also
why S. Paul treating of our salvation says, Ephe. 2.8.10.
you are not saved as of your selves, it is the gift of God through faith: for
ye are his workmanship, because he has created you in Christ Jesus unto good
works, which he has before ordained that ye should ^oo them. Here Saint Paul
excludes whatsoever good opinion we can conceive of our own power, when as
he says, Go to now, if ye shall attribute any part of commendation of salvation
unto your selves, and yet think that you have not atteined thereunto as of
your selves, but that you have been helped therein: see how this gear may or
can stand together? For you were created mortal men, that is to say, Sinners:
and therefore all accursed, banished and estraunged from the presence of God,
in whom is all goodness. And therefore you must conclude, that you are all as
it were dead. Wherefore there must be a new and a second amendment and
reparation before you be any thing in the sight of God. And when you have been
regenerated in Jesus Christ, the same then is called, a new creation. And
therefore every one of you is the creature of God, when as he has formed and
called you unto himself, without any disposition thereunto for your own part,
but God has prepared good works by his holy spirit. Seeing then that it is
thus, we may very well conclude, that our salvation comes no whit of our
selves, no not one drop of it, but is the only mere gift of God proceeding of
his own liberality. Thus then we see as touching the first point, that for the
obteining of mercy and grace at God his hands, we must truly acknowledge our
selves what we are, how miserable our estate and condition is, and that we are
all but castawaies. Now when I speak thus, it is not me^t that our knowledge
must be a rouing understanding, swimming in our brain, but our hearts must by it
be deadly wounded, that we may feel the judgments of God so to terrify us,
as that we may be brought almost into utter despair. For, how should we know
what a benefit meat and drink is, except we were touched with hunger and
thirst? For if we were stuffed, and full, we would continue so, we would never
seek after crum nor crust (as we say) but it is hunger that drives us to hunt
after victuals: for when we are sick, we seek for remedy, but if a man were
so sensles as that he felt no kind of grief, he would die an hundredth times
before he would call for help, or yet once desire it: wherefore (as I have
already said) we must be so touched with our miseries, as if we were dead in
deed, and as if we felt that death, whereof the scripture speaks, that we
might attain to that life which our Lord Jesus Christ offers unto us by
his Gospel, and this is the cause why the scripture so often reproves, and
as it were condemns us for our sins. For God takes no pleasure in dealing
with us after this manner, but because he knows the necessity thereof. So
then look how many threatenings, sentences of condemnation, of reproves, and
such like are in the holy scripture, they are even so many Mallettes to knock
us on the heads, to bring us unto that humility which we are so far from,
until such time as he has violently in such sort mortified us. And thus
much for this strain. Moreover, we must come to a larger account and reckening
of that which has bin already spoken, which is, that until such time as we
have beheld our miseries in the word of God, we shall be lulled in a dead
sleep in our hypocrisy and become very careless: and this security will cause
to contemn the word of God, and so by little and little be quite and clean
excluded from it. Now God has set before us our condemation, namely in the
law: and in very deed all the scripture is full of them: and when it is said,
that it is profitable, amongst other things, it lays out the reproves. And
besides, we know what the Gospel teaches, 2. Tim. 3.16. Mat. 3.2. and 4.17.
Repent and amend, for the kingdom of God is at hand. Thus we see how God
disposes his elect to receive the free righteousness which he bestows upon
them by his son, which is, that we should repent and amend. And what is the
meaning hereof? Forsooth, there must be such a sorrow and grief in us for our
sins, as that we must condemn our selves for our wickedness, and be revenged
of our selves as S. Paul says: ^. Cor. 7.9.10.11.
for he sets not down only the word Sorrow and Fear, but ^aith, that we
should have such a vehement desire and zeal, as to be as it were a duenged of
our selves, because we are so great enemies unto God: Now although this
doctrine is met withal in all the holy scripture: nevertheless, God has
especially or deined his law for that purpose, and therefore it is, why Saint
Paul says, romans 7.
That it brings nothing but wrath. When as we shall thronghly weigh and
consider that which is spoken, we shall find God to be against us, and cannot
come near, without it be to have him armed and thundering against us, and
clearly to destroy us. True at is, that the law right well shows us what it
is to live righteously, and to attain thereunto if we were capable thereof, as
hereafter shall be more largely handled. It is written in Leuiticus, That who
soever shall do these things shall live by them: but in the mean while, let
us see whether we come any thing near unto that which God commands us yea
or no? In very deed, we are so arrogant and proud, as that the law, until we
well understand it, can never be able to convince and conquer all our fond
presumption. For we see how Saint Paul, Romans 7.9.10.
who from his youth was trained up and instructed in the law, and a Doctor
thereof; yet notwithstanding says that he still presumed on his virtues, and
thought himself to be a very righteous man, because he knew the law, and rested
thereon, and utterly contemned the grace of our lord Jesus Christ. And what was
the reason? Forsooth, because he looked no further but unto the dead letter and
outward show thereof, as when it is said, Thou shall not kill, in very deed
he right well knew that he was no murderer: Afterward it is said, Thou shall
not commit adultrie, never any man knew him to be a leacher or whoremaister.
Next after: Thou shall not steal, neither yet was it ever known that he was a
thief. And therefore he thought himself to be clear before God. Thus we see
how in what a sound drowsy sleep he was in his vain flatteries. But
afterward God awakened him and drew him further on, and made him enter and
search into the depth of his thoughts. And where it is said, Thou shall not
covet, then he saw himself so convicted and condemned, as that there was no
more absolution for him. For he felt a great many of vanities in himself that
tickled him, his weakness made him think upon many temptations, and he knew
that he was not able to discharge himself of the hundredth part of the love of
GOD which ought to be in all the faithful. This did Saint Paul know: and so we
see how that he, like a miserable dead man forgot his life, whereof he was
beguiled and deceived, and acknowledged himself to be altogether like a
wretched rotten carkes before God. For the law so slew him: as that he had
nothing in the world to presume upon in himself. And therefore, as I have
already said, we may see, that there is an especial reason contained in the
law of God, to show us that there is nothing in us but condemnation. For we
must chiefly stand here upon every commandment. We must have but one only
God. And what is he? and how must we honor and serve him? Seeing then that we
must be wholly bound and tied unto him, let us look after none other good,
felicity, nor rejoicing, but to glorify him, let there be never heard from
our mouths any thing else but praises and thanksgiving, unto his majesty, and
let it not be perceived any manner of way, but that we forsake the world, and
wholly desire to come unto him, and to magnify his name as he worthily
deserves. Thus then we see the four Commandments of the first table, set
here before us. Now when we shall have thoroughly serched the contents of them,
let us the^ come to the examining of our selves, and we shall find that in
steed of resting upon him, we are become very wild roges and vacabonds, and
such also as that our thoughts and imaginations do lead us and carry us away
every where. And first let us come to speak of prayer: for this action should
cause us that are here beneath on the earth, to have our cogitations in heaven,
because we are then as it were in the presence of our God. And yet
notwithstanding when we do pray, what a number of frivolous imaginations
shall we have in our heads, which will hold us their captives? And seeing it
is so, what must be the rest of our whole life? Even the like will become of
all the Commandments of the law, when as we shall compare them with our
lives. And therefore we shall not find one only death, but an hundredth
thousand. Furthermore, we see also how God in his law means to touch us to
the quick: for it is said, that the heart must in deed and in good earnest
be wounded. For, after that this sentence is pronounced: Deu. ^7.26.
Cursed be he that shall not do all things which here are written, he is
not contented alone to be Judge, and to have thus condemned us by his own
mouth: but will have the people also to say, Amen: that is to say, he will have
every man to condemn himself willingly and of his own accord, and so be
altogether held as condemned, confessing the sentence which he has given to be
just and right. So then we see how the law drives us so to enter to examine
and try our life, that we shall find no hope in our selves, but be driven to
seek the beginning of our righteousness at our Lord Jesus Christ his hand. Now
we see, that these two things are as contrary one to another as fire and water,
as, to be accounted righteous before God by our works, and to be accepted of
him, by the virtue and power of faith. For as Saint Paul says, if we should
bring any thing that is ours, no doubt of it God should then be beholden unto
us, although we were neither wholly, nor yet perfectly righteous: yet how ever
it were, there might some proportionable reward be done unto us. But it is
said, that faith and works can never agree together: and therefore this must
be our conclusion, that when we are justified by faith, works must needs
cease and be nothing worth. Now this at the first sight, may seem to be an
hard kind of speech, to wit, that faith and good works can never go together:
for it might seem, that if faith only justifies, that the raines are slacked
and let lose to all iniquity. Gal. 3.12.
Now S. Paul speaks this according to a certain quality and regard, as he
also speaks of the law and faith the law, says he, can no way agree with
faith, for they are two incompatible things. And in what sort? For is not God
as well the Author of the law as of the Gospel? Is there any contrariety or
repugnancie in him? without doubt no, for he is unchangeable. Why then finds
S. Paul such a contrariety between the law and the Gospel? Forsooth it is
in respect of our justification. And even so is it between faith and works: and
the contrariety is this, because works are made merits. And that which is
more, we can do no good work but by faith, as we have already said, and
hereafter shall be more largely handled For the cause and the effect are not
contraries: but when we will establish any merit in our works, that is to say,
when as we will go about to make the^ auailable to obtain favor at Gods hand,
and to satisfy for our sins: to be short, when as we would bring them in, to
serve us for our salvation, this is, utterly to overthrow faith, and by this
means, make it of no worth. Thus then we see, that it is not without cause why
Saint Paul concludes thus: That seeing we are justified by faith, then are
works of no value, but must be quite and clean shut out of the doors, for
any opinion that we ought to attribute unto merits or virtues, whereby to
please God withal. Now we are here eftsoons to note, that God of his mere
liberality justifies us, and searches after our miseries to sustain them,
that he might be known to be only righteous, and the commendation of our
salvation, to be absolutely given unto him accordingly, as Saint Paul right
well notes both in his Epistle unto the Ephesians, and also unto the Romans,
Ephesians 1. Romans 3.
saying: That God has concluded all under sin, that he might be known to be
only righteous, and every mouth be stopped, because it is he only that
iuslifieth sinners through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that
brings us into the way of his righteousness. As also in the third to the
Galathians, when as Saint Paul propounds this question. How is it possible
that God gave the law after the promise? For it should seem that God changed
his purpose, and was misaduised, because he freely justified Abram, and a long
time after gave the law: and therein he says, That whosoever shall do these
things, shall live by them. Hereunto Saint Paul answers, That the law was not
given to adnihilate the free promise, but for the use, whereof I have already
spoken, that is, that we must be all concluded under sin and condemnation,
for else we should never feel of what price the mercy of God was, nor never
look after it, and besides we would think that we had no need of it. And
in very deed there are two sorts of people, which make no account of our
Lord Jesus Christ, robbing themselves of all the benefits which we have by
him, and of the faluation also which we have by his death and resurrection. The
one sort are they which persuade themselves to have some worthiness in them, and
thereupon in the abundance of their pride despite God: and such are your jolly
rabble of Monks, Friars, and their like: who have a certain glorious
glittering show of righteousness, counterfetting a marvelous, and as it were,
Angellike holiness. These men, I say, shut up the Gate and have no entrance
vuto Jesus Christ: for the thrust him far enough of from themselves. The
second sort are they which are negligent and secure, and think not themselves
to be righteous. And why so? for some of them ar whoremaisters, some are
thieves, some drnnkards, some effeminate persons, and some such contemners of
God, as that little children may judge them to be so. These men are not
deceived by pride and arrogance, but are made so drunk by satan, as that they
never think of everlasting life, but are become altogether brutish. And see
why Solomon says, That he is happy and blessed who is careful over his own
heart. And which fears, and watches to understand his sins and
wretchedness. We see then that the law was not given after the promise for any
other reason, but to condemn us, to the end we might seek for all our
righteousness in God, and to give all praise unto him for our salvation. Let us
then here note this final cause, and therefore S. Paul in the first Chapter to
the Ephesians, discourses of this matter more at large. For he passes it not
over slightly, but handlet the matter so as if he would thunder it in our
cares, to the end says he, That the glory of God might be known, he alone
to be glorified, he alone to be known righteous, that we might know that
from him we have all. For we must know says he, That without his mere
favor and grace we are all camned. Here we see I say in sum what God his
pretense is, when he takes from us all opinion of our own power and strength,
that is, he means that he would have him self to be known to be only
just, and us to be lost and damned souls of our selves. So that whosoever they
are which challenge to themselves the least righteousness that may be, as if they
were aiders and assisters unto God, as the Papists call themselves Cooperators
or workers together with God, do without doubt, commit a more detestable fault
then all the thieves in the world. For what is it to take away from a mortal
man gold and silver, and all that he is worth besides, in respect of robbing
God of his honor being the chiefest thing that he desires, to have to be
reserved unto himself? which is this, that he alone is to be acknowledged
righteous: and then when miserable mortal creatures, or rather crawling
vermin on the earth, who are no better then a most corrupt and filthy thing,
shall stand up in Gods steed and say, Thou art not the whole worker of our
salvation, but we have helped thee in it. Is not this most cursed blasphemy,
when as we shall presume to bring with us some portion of righteousness before
God? But here we are to remember that which we yesterday handled, that is to
say, that this word Justify, imports not that we are made righteous, that
is, that God so renueth us, as that we are Angels: but it imports that he
accepts and allows of us of his mere goodness, albeit we be miserable
sinners. And therefore we may here see, how Moses in this place touches this
word Impute, as if he should have said, that this hangs upon the free favor
of God, and is not be enquired of whether righteousness is in regard of man, or
whether he is worthy to be accepted. There is none at all of this meant. But
let us be contented that God accepts us for righteous, al though we are no
whit so in deed. And here also we see why the righteousness of faith excludes
works: for look what is wanting in us we receive from Jesus Christ. I say not
in part, as the Papists ensnare themselves, but we borrow the righteousness of
Jesus Christ: because there is not a drop or yet a myte thereof in us. And
therefore works must needs be overthrown, when as we seek for righteousness else
where. For if there were only one part in Jesus Christ, and another in us, he
should not be the whole: and then how should this saying be fulfilled, John 1.
That the fulness of graces were given to him by the holy Ghost, that he might
distribute them unto every one according to measure? For these two words, To
get, and to Receive, are clean contrary one to the other: and when God
justifies us, it is by his adoption, and because we are by nature the
children of wrath, therefore he adopteth us and takes us for his children. And
what finds he in us? nothing in the world that can induce us, to do well.
And therefore the inheritance of our salvation which we hope after, and which
is promised us in the Gospel, comes from this adoption of God, and from
nothing that is in us: for if we could obtain or get any thing of our
selves, without doubt we would part stakes with God, even as the Papists do.
But because GOD so deals as that we do nothing, therefore is he alone to
be glorified. We now presently see in sum, that the righteousness which is
here spoken of, imports nothing else but the remission of sins, and the
credit which we have in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to be made
righteous through the merit of his obedience: but when Saint Paul would
severely instruct us, according to our childishnes, he brings in only
remission of sins, and reasons after this sort, We cannot, says he, be
justified by our works: and why so? forsooth, because it is written: Psa. 32.1.
The man is blessed whose sin. the Lord pardons, and whose iniquities are
remitted, and whose wickedness is not imputed unto him. Here says he, we see
all our felicity, which is, when God receives us to mercy, and forgets
and burieth all our sins, whereof we are guilty before him. Seeing then it
is so, it must needs follow, that we are all accursed until such time as God
has forgiven us: and if we be wicked, where then shall be found our
righteousness? For, god cannot hate that which is agreeable unto his nature, for
he is the fountain or all righteousness: And therefore if he find in us never
so little goodness, no doubt of it he will accept of it. Wherefore we must
conclude, that because we are wicked, we are unrighteous and altogether
accursed, and can no way be blessed without God loves us. Now, if he loves
us, he must needs eftsoons allow and like of us, and if he allow and like of
us, we must needs be righteous. These are principles which we ought to
understand. Howbeit we are yet to know, that we cannot be blessed without God
love us: for so long as he is our enemy, Alas, in what a woeful estate and
condition are we? Whereupon then depends our felicity? Forsooth even
herein, when as God loves us. We are now to consider how it is that he
loves us: he must needs allow and like of us, as I have already said, for he
cannot deny himself. For if he reject and abhor us, how shall we be
reconciled unto him? Now let us see by what means: for God cannot be
transfigured, and if (as S. Paul says) we should pretend any such thing it
were in vain: for he will continue always like himself, and knows well
enough to separate us with all our leasings, and race us out of his Roll: and
how ^^all God then allow and like of us? Well sir, we must be righteous. Now,
what righteousness is it? It is not that righteousness which we suppose to have
in our works, ne that we are able to acquire our selves before him, or yet
satisfy by any duty that we can perform: none of all this will serve our
turnies. What righteousness then is it? Forsooth even this, that God must pardon
our sins, forget our iniquities, and not impute our offenses unto us. And
therefore David had reason to use these three manner of speeches: for a man
would think, this to be a superfluous kind of language: but he especially
reitterateth this, because the condition of man wherein he is borne and drowned
over head and ears, is not only a bottomless depth, until such time as God
draws him out thereof, but the bottomless depth of all depthes, that is, it is
the bottomless depth of hell. And therefore God must deal herein after a
singular manner. And therefore we see why he also soon after speaks, and that
in the spirit in whom is no deceit: for it is meet we should understand how
necessary the mercy of God is for us, because our sins are so filthy and
horrible, as that they are able to infect and poison both heaven and earth, and
not to provoke God alone against us, but also the Angels, the Sun and Moon
and all the hosts both of heaven and earth. Wherefore we see why David so
highly magnifieth the forgiveness of sins. And thereupon S. Paul himself also
concludes, and shows us wherein our whole righteousness consists, which is,
that onr sins are forgiven us. And let us likewise note as I have already
said, that David speaks and sets it down in the spirit, in whom is no
guile: for he shows that we cannot have our sins forgiven us, albeit God
offers us forgiveness: until such time as we be wholly confounded in our
selves, and be so rowzed up and awakened, as that no hypocrisy nor
dissimulation make us believe this or that, ne yet remain in a dead sleep of
security: but that we find our selves to be like most miserable damned and
lost souls, and such as the judgments of God do so persecute, as that we know
not which way to turn us, and to be in such a desperate case as if we saw
present death before us, and the hand of God armed to execute the sentence of
the curse which he pronounces against us. And this is the definition of the
righteousness which we are to note, if we will have it rightly defined. We
see also why it is said in the fifteenth of the Acts, where Saint Paul speaking
of the ceremonies of the law says, that we must be justified by our Lord Jesus
Christ, of all the things whereof the law of Moses could not iustefie us.
This word the Law, carries here a long tail with it: for, we must understand
why S. Paul, especially speaks of the ceremonies of the law, when as hesaith,
that works cannot any ways make us acceptable before God. Now the Papists, and
many of the ancient Fathers which knew not the scriptures, but were as a man
would say half Philosophers, were wonderfully troubled about this word the
Law, and though that Saint Paul contended not about moral works as they
called them: that is to say, that he went not about to deny that we were not
righteous before GOD, if we lived chastely, temperately, soberly, wronging no
man, and holding all such other like moral virtues: they thought that Saint
Paul touched none of this, but meant in very deed that all these works,
partly deserved salvation: but they thought that the ceremonies of the law
could no way be profitable to justification. Now this imagination is too too
gross folly: for, first, Saint Paul never once spoke of the ceremonies of
the law.

Wherefore see here I beseech you, how most unadvisedly they are abused: and to
prove it to be so, consider that place of the Psalm which I erst alleged,
how David places man's blessedness in the only forgiveness of sins, Psa.
32.1.
without naming any work: and this speaking of works comprehends within it
all vertnes in general, which we can any way attribute unto our selves,
and wherein we greatly glory. Now this cursednes (Saint Paul says) shows
that we must needs come all naked and empty before God, that we might be
filled and enriched of his mere and free goodness. Moreover, when as he
speaks of the works of the law, it is because that if there be any merit
in them, it is by reason of the covenant which we have already alleged, Leui.
18.5
That whosoever shall do these things, shall live in them. Put the case that
there never had bin any law published, yet should we have been no whit the more
acceptable unto God. And as for himself he owes us no duty, neither is he
any whit bound unto us: Lu. 17.11
for it is said, That when we have done whatsoever is commanded us, yet must
we needs confess that we are unprofitable servants. And why so? what? are we
at our own choice and liberty to do what we lust? Is there any thing in us
that is our own? no verily, and therefore cannot we plead any merit, albeit we
perfectly fulfilled the law. Whereupon then depends the confidence which we
take in our works? Forsooth even upon this promise, That whosoever shall do
these things, shall live by them. For God bound himself hereunto of his own
accord, albeit he was not in reason tied unto it. Wherefore when as S. Paul
speaks of the works of the law, he shows, that although God has promised
to all those to whom he has made promise, that how many soever shall
accomplish all which he has commanded by the righteousness of the law, shall
be reputed and taken to be righteous, and have thereby everlasting life:
notwithstanding that the works of the law cannot do it. And why so? because
they still leave us under the curse of the law and condemnation: for we can do
nothing else but sin, so long as we remain in this tabernacle of the flesh,
and he whatsoever he is, that shall think himself to be most righteous,
shall never be able to acquit and discharge himself of the hundredth part of
his duty therein. What shall we then do, but even hold down our heads, and
prostrate our selves at the feet of our Judge, and so crave pardon and
forgiveness? as hereafter shall be more largely let down. Let us now then
return unto the place depending upon that which I have already touched, which
is, that Jesus Christ is set before us to iustitie us in all things whereof the
law of Moses was never able to do. For it should seem, that they thought
themselves to be helped as well by the ceremonies, as also by all the rest of
the law, to make them of great account before God, and to be able to please
him: for if they failed, then had they the sacrifices as fit remedies, as the
sprinkeling of blood to cleanse them, certain washings also to make
satisfaction unto God, and many other promises besides. It should seem then
that all this was nothing to make them acceptable before God, but contrariwise,
that Jesus Christ must come to justify us of those things, whereof the law
was never able to do. What is meant by this saying to justify us of things?
That is to say, to pardon and forgive us them. We see now by this place which
I have already spoken of, that the righteousness which Moses here speaks of,
is not a thing resident in our persons. But Gods free forgiving of us, when as
he is merciful and loving unto us, albeit we are no whit worthy thereof: for
this which Moses here sets down, shall never be able to be found in any man
whatsoever, but in Jesus Christ who must only justify us: and how is that?
that is, if the Devil shall accuse us, and God ready to judge and condemn
us: then will Jesus Christ answer for us as our surety. Thus we see how the
obedience of Jesus Christ serves us as a cloak to cover al our rebellions and
iniquities. It is he that has satisfied for us, and discharged us of all our
debtes by the merit of his death, and shed his precious blood to wash us
withal. To be short, we find in the person of the Son of God, whatsoever is
requisite to make us acceptable before him, because our sins are not imputed
unto us. Here then we see in sum, what we are to remember from this place. We
are now to proceed somewhat further, that is to say, that when God has once
for all received us thus to mercy, how he continues, holds, and voweth us
for righteous all the days of our lives, and even in death also: for this is
the principal point whereat we must aim and come unto, howbeit we cannot at
this time stand to handle it. Let it suffice the^, to the end things might be
well kept in mind, that we know and understand what the open way is, that we
must have to be partakers of the everlasting salvation which comes unto us by
Jesus Christ the son of God, that is, we must know and understand how
miserable and wretched our state and condition is, not by confessing the same
with our mouths only, or having a vain imagination swimming in our brains
thereof. But to be so sorrowfully wounded and grieved, as that we be confounded
before the majesty of God, even to the very hating and detesting of our own
selves. And when we shall thus rightly judge of our selves, then shall we be
sure that God will forgive us. And when we shall be thus mortified in our
selves, then shall we find life in Jesus Christ. For it is not enough that we
know our selves to be very wretched sick creatures, and poor and needy
soule^^ but we must be dead altogether, to the end we might by the only grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ be revived. And that hereupon we may be so humbled as
the scripture wills us, which is, to give unto god that honor that is due
unto him. And it is not without cause that David speaks, Psalm. 51.17.
when as he says, That it is an humble and contrite heart which God requires.
For we shall never come unto him except we be altogether cast down in our
selves. And then we must carry this mind and affection with us, that we are
wonderfully grieved and perplexed in our distresses, and then will we in deed
confess that we are not righteous. And then also shall our desire and
affection be so enflamed, as that we shall not look for our righteousness in
our merits, but clean contrary, and having cast away all arrogance, look for
all our benefit and salvation in his only Son, and so when we have once
known that he has plucked us out of the shadow of death, our mouths shall
then be open and disposed to preach his unspeakable praises, according to that
saying of Saint Peter, treating of the end of our salvation, in the first
Chapter of his first Canonical Epistle.

Let us now prostrate our selves before the majesty of our good God, in
acknowledging our sins, beseeching him to cause us more and more to feel
them, and so to govern us by his holy spirit, as that we seek after nothing
else but the glorifying and blessing of his holy name, and to acknowledge how
many manner of ways we are bound unto him, even holding of him all the hope of
life we have, and all that while not to be weary in serving of him, but do the
best we can to conform us unto his holy will, until such time as he has so
spoiled us of all the corruptions of our flesh, as that we may be wholly
clothed with his righteousness. So shall we all say, O Almighty God and
heavenly Father, etc.

THE THIRD SERMON of Justification.
Genesis Cap. 15. 6 Abram believed the Lord, and he counted that unto him for
Righteousness.


WE heard yesterday that we must in no case part stakes with God in the matter
of our salvation, but all praise must be given to him for it. For when we
shall thoroughly look into whatsoever can be found in us, we must conclude,
that we are so void of all integrity, as that there is nothing in us but all
corruption, and so consequently, nothing but death. To. 1.17. Ga. 3.11.
Now it is not enough for us to know that God alone is to be glorified, and we
our selves as it were to be assured to be of no worth, for if we do not so,
without we have shut up the gate of salvation against our selves. For where
Saint Paul alleges out of the Prophet Habacuck, That we live by faith: we
are thereby taught, that faith is as it were the keye that opens unto us the
kingdom of heaven. If it be then our inheritance, we must needs being the
children come thither: and we cannot be the children of God, as Saint John in
his first Chapter says, but by faith. Ioh. ^.12.
Now this faith, as we have already said, imports a certainty. And see
also why it is said, That we may cry with open mouth that God is our Father,
and that except he be so, we cannot be reputed to be his children. And from
whence comes this cry? Forsooth, as Saint Paul says, as well in the eighth
to the Romans, To. 8.1^. Gala. 5.6.
as also in the fifth to the Galathians, even from the spirit of adoption. And
therefore the spirit of GOD does so certefie our spirit that we are his
children by adoption, as that we may without scruple or doubt call upon him
as our Father. And in another place also it is said, Ephesians. 1.13.14. 2. Cor.
1.22.
That he is called the seal of the inheritance of salvation which we wait and
look for. Seeing then it is so, that the certainty of faith imports that we
are gods adopted children, and that our salvation is grounded thereupon, there
must also be put to a seal, as a sign and token that it is infallible. Here
then we see, that it is not enough for us to confess that God is the author
of our salvation, and the same to be attributed to him only: but we must also
on the other sides come unto him, and privately call upon him as our father, and
be fully resolved that he will not forsake us. Now this certainty the Papists
could never skill of, but do strongly and constantly repugne it, saying, that
we may not in any wise resolve that God allows and likes us, and that we
stand in his grace and favor: but only that we may have some probable
conjecture thereof. Now to say thus, is utterly to overthrow the whole
foundation of Christianity. And in very deed, when Saint Paul speaks of this
matter, he drives us unto this reason, To. 4.14.
which is, that if we depend upon the law and trust unto it, then is Faith but
vain, and the promise made of none effect. And why so? Forsooth, it is not
because God is not faithful for his part, but because we shall never be able to
attain unto the accomplishment of that which is required for our salvation.
For God does ver^ly promise us recompense when as we shall have served him, and
kept whatsoever he has commanded us, from the one end to the other: God
undoubtedly promises us all that. Now this is an impossible condition. For
never man yet has accomplished the law, nor never shall. So then we for our
parts are never able to effect and perform this promise. And therefore we shall
always be reasoning, wavering, and out of quiet, and in the end fall into
despair, when as we shall go about to bring our works with us to keep Audite
and an account with God, for it is said in the 144. Psalm: Psa. 144.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant O Lord: for no man living shall be
justified in thy sight. And therefore we must conclude, that we shall be ever
vexed and troubled, and our spirits wonderfully perplexed, if we had not
salvation elfe where then from our merits. And for the better understanding
hereof, let us well weigh and consider of that which has been already spoken,
that is, we must not think to pay God with nifles. For it is a fearful
thing to have him against us. Now he cannot otherwise be, but so long as we
shall presume upon works. For we do even so much derogate from him, and rob
him of his right, as has been heretofore showed, that whosoever has not his
mouth stopped from attributing unto himself the least glory, and his mouth
wide to confess God only to be just: without doubt that man opposes himself
unto his majesty. Now we shall never obtain our suit against him: but the
condemnation will still light upon our own heads. And therefore let us not
wittingly and in deed provoke his wrath against us, and besides, it cannot be
chosen, but that we must needs be out of our wits, when as we will trust unto
our merits. And herein is a twyfold abuse, which also brings with it a
third. The one is, when as we think to reckon with God hand over head as the
Papists do. And although they fail in many things, yet make they themselves
believe that he accepts them. Now God has promised nothing but to such as
shall accomplish the whole law. And therefore let us note well these words:
That whosoever shall do all the things written in the law, Leu^. 18.5
shall live by them: It is not said one part only. Which also agrees with
the saying of Saint James, Iam. 2.11.
That he which forbad to commit adultery, forbad also to steal. For although
a man shall have lived all the days of his life chastely, and yet be guilty
of some other precept, he is nevertheless but a damned soul. Mat. 19.6
And why so? Forsooth, because that that which God has coupled together, we
must not separate. The righteousness of the law is coupled and united together:
and therefore we must not pretend to cut it in pieces and gobets, nor divide
it. Let us now then consider, whether we be able in part or in whole so to
acquit our selves, as that the whole course of our life may not be amended.
Alas what are we then? And as Solomon says, who can say I have cleansed mine
heart? Pro. 20.9.
In very deed, there are a great many that think they have, because there are
a great many of hypocrites in the world. And therefore that man as I have
already said, that is at that point, must needs be more then sensles: for if
he consider with what a judge he has to deal withal, how ever it fall out,
when as we shall have well bethoght us of all the matter, without doubt if we
bring with us unto him one ounce or perhaps an half ounce, there will be as
a man would say, five times as much found to weigh it down: and when we
shall think to pay him with half an ounce, he will find matter enough to
condemn us in five times as much. And what shall become of us then? Let us
therefore learn rightly to know what we are, that we be not in the end
found worse then naught. And let us consider as I have already said, that we
can never be saved, except we be assured that we may call upon God as upon our
Father. Now besides this first abuse, there is a second, which is, that they
that think to be justified by their merits, do never consider that not one
of our works is good, when as God will look straightly unto them: for as I have
already said, although we should keep the one half of the law or three parts
of it, yet were it all nothing: for we should all be condemned if we failed but
in one only point: and yet there is another reason, to wit, we never once came
near the accomplishyng of the law, either in whole or yet in part. And how
so? we said yesterday that God judges not of our works as we imagine. For
he has his own weightes and balance. And how judges he them? Forsooth, he
looks whether the heart be pure and clean from all fleshly pollutions. And
where shall a man find such an heart? We are ever mashed in a great many of
wicked affections, and although they reign not in us, yet can we not be
altogether rid of them. Moreover, we shall never find such a zeal in us to
glorify God as we should, but that there will be always some infirmity: we may
have a good meaning to do well, but yet it shall not be so perfectly done, as
that it may stand before his face. Now we do not here speak of this as to say,
I think, and I suppose: but we must conclude and say, God has said so, and
God allows and likes of it. And therefore we should be very far of, from
deserving any thing before him, nor yet be quiet in conscience: for, over and
besides that we fail in many things, and that there is no man but has always
some remorse of conscience, and although we thought to do the best that we
possibly might, yet were it altogether halting and lame. Yea and there may be
also some infirmity that may pollute even very good works in deed. For was
there ever a better work then that of Abram, Ge. 22.10.
when he was ready to kill his own son? And yet notwithstanding, his heart
was touched with many sorrows and griefs, which showed his weakness. Thus then
we see, that this work was poluted before God, and could not be reputed to be
any merit. What shall we say then to that which we do, considering that none
of us all but is soon stayed, when as we shall once be spoken unto to go that
way. And although we would gladly employ our selves to serve God faithfully,
yet go we not so rightly and soundly on as we should, by the hundredth part.
And must we needs be continually vexed and unquiet? yea verily, and we all
know it, without we will be too too blind. Now as I have alredie said, we must
assure our selves that God loves us, receives and accepts of us, as if we
were righteous. And from whom have we this privilege? We must come to that
saying of Saint Paul to the Romans: Rom 10.
which is, we must look upon our lord Jesus Christ. For, when our salvation is
spoken of, and then behold the glorious heaven, we are by and by on the one
side, astonished and amazed thereat: because we are not worthy once to come
near it. And besides, we see on the other sides, hell standing wide open
before us to swallow us up, because we are horrible wretched sinners. And then
will we say, Who shall ascend into heaven? For it is impossible that we should
come there: for where are our wings to fly up thither? And besides, as I have
already said, hell stands gaping wide open ready to receive us: if so be
that he will give judgment against us: and then we will say, how know we that
we are pardoned and forgiven, but that God may very well throw us down
headlong into the bottomless pit of hell. Now hereupon Saint Paul answers and
sets down the remedy, which is this, that we must not doubt, but that
heaven is ours. And how shall we be sure of that? Forsooth, because that in the
person of Jesus Christ we know it to be set wide open for us. And therefore the
asking of this question doubtfully, Who shall ascend into Heaven? Saint Paul
says, Is to fetch Jesus Christ down from thence. For we know that the Son
of God has said, That there are many Mansions in his fathers house, and that
he has not taken them for his own particular benefit, but to the end to
receive us together unto himself, as fellow heirs with him. As concerning
hell, he descended into it: for he suffered the torments and pains which we
should have suffered, he suffered the horrible torments of Gods wrathful
curse, which made him cry out and say, My God, mys God, why have thou forsaken
me? Even so then when as we make our salvation certain, then we may see that
we are assured. And that also is his meaning where he says, To. 8.33.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? He is angry with
Satan and with whatsoever is against us, as if he would have said, seeing that
we have forsaken all our arrogance, and have no such imagination as once to
think that we can bring any thing of our own with us unto God to make us
acceptable, considering that we know that it is of his own free mercy and
goodness that he has chosen us, as also called us unto him self by the Gospel,
let the devil with all his suppostes accuse us as much as they lust, yet will
he justify and pardon us: and how? Forsooth says he, behold how our Lord
Jesus Christ makes intersession for us, and by the power and virtue of this
prayer, for so much as he is our Advocate for the appaising of the wrath of God
his Father, by this we see how we are pardoned. And this is the certainty
whereof he speaks in another place, as we have already said. Romans 4.
This also is showed unto us in the person of the poor publican, that is to
say, of the customer whom the people scorned when he came unto God to pray. Lu.
18.1^. 12.13.
He came not unto him after a bragging sort, howbeit, he verily believed that
God would have mercy upon him: and therein he was bold as we all also must be, as
in ye Epistle to the Ephesians it is said. Ephesians. 3.
But when he looked toward him, he humbled himself, and was ashamed,
craving nothing but pardon: and Jesus Christ said, that he was justified even
with that only speech. And we see that the Pharisie was rejected, because he
so foolishly presumed of his works. And the Publican who plainly and simply
confessed himself to be a miserable sinner, and so wretched and damned a soul
departed justified before God: and yet notwithstanding the Pharisie commended
not himself by reason of his merits, for he said not, I have done this, and I
have done that, and therefore God is beholden unto me for them: but said only
thus, God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, an extortioner,
unjust, a thief, nor an Adulterer, nor as this Publican. A man would think
this to be a jolly entrance, when as he submitted himself wholly unto God,
and protested that whatsoever goodness and virtue was in him, proceeded from the
mere gift of the holy Ghost: but what of all this? yet was he so proudly and
arrogantly puffed up, as that he thought himself to be allowed and liked of
for his works. And therefore we see why God condemned him: for it could not be
chosen but that he was exceeding blockish, to think that God was bound unto him
for his works. Wherefore we must all fly unto the mere mercy of God, and
then, I say, we shall be assured that he will love us, when as we shall look
for all our merits in Jesus Christ, never ceasing to pray unto him
notwithstanding our great unworthiness, because he has not adopted us, either
for our persons or yet for our works, but of his mere and free mercy: thus
we see how we shall be assured of our salvation. True it is, that we shall
always be full of scruples and doubts, by reason that our faith is not
perfect in us: but yet our assurance shall always surmount, so long as we
fight stoutly, and embrace the promises of God, and make them a buckler and
defense against all the temptations and distrustes, which the devil shall set
before us. When then we speak of this certainty of faith, we mean not but
that it may be shaken, and we, many times be greatly perplexed and distressed:
but our meaning is, that we may in the end conclude how ever it fall out, that
God will have mercy upon us, and so upon this assurednes pray unto him. And this
is it which we are now to keep in mind. We easily see then by this, that they
which have taken this word Justify, to be said that God changes us, and
governs us by his holy spirit to serve God, are too too much abused: for
there are many that will say that we are not justified by our merits, neither
yet that there is any one jot in us wherein to glory, and that whatsoever
goodness is in us comes from the free gift of God, because that as of our
selves we can do nothing else but sin: all this they will confess, and will in
sum say, that we are justified by mere grace and not by our works, and that
there is no goodness in us, but that God gives all: have they confessed all
this? Yea verily: and yet they still go about to overthrow both themselves and
others. And how so? Forsooth, because they think that they have atteined unto
perfection, when as in very deed, there is nothing else in them but
imperfection. For, where shall we find a man that when he shall be thus cast
down in himself, as to be no body as it were, and confess himself to be
altogether accursed, and whatsoever goodness is in him to come of Gods own
mere liberality, so as God is therefore to be exalted and magnified, and
himself to be nothing, to the end he might acknowledge and humble himself
unto God and say, that all which he has, he receives from his mere goodness?
Yea but we have already said that if we be doubting, then are heaven gates shut
up against us. Now we cannot choose but doubt, or else be stark staring mad when
as we regard our own works. Admit that god by his holy spirit has regenerated
a man, and does only thank God as the Pharisie did, and say, surely all that
I have I have from God, and yet notwithstanding when he prays, he must pray
confidently and in full assurance. And how shall he do that? For whilst he is
yet imperfect and weak, the virtues which God has bestowed upon him shall be
mingled with many vices: yea and these virtues also shall be corrupt, because I
say, he shall not be fully cleansed of the spots of the flesh. When a man shall
find himself thus as a man would say, half seas over, and yet be far from the
end and mark whether he would go, how can he otherwise do but doubt? Let us
therefore now conclude, that it is nothing to confess and say that our
salvation proceeded from the mere grace and favor of God, because he governs
us with his holy spirit, but yt we must fly unto ye remission of our sins. And
so they yt play the wrangling so phisters herein, saying, that we are not
justified by our works, because the good works are not ours, but the gifts of
the holy Ghost, forget that point which we erst touched, that is to say, that
our faith must be certain, and that it cannot be certain except Jesus Christ be
our aduocat, and his death a satisfaction for our sins, so as we cannot do it
without we confess ye debt, as by the example of the publica^ which we have
alleged may be seen. And we see also, yt this righteousness must not be for a
day only, but must continue al ye days of our lives. For although we have
profited by serving of God, yet for all that it has bin in imperfection. And
therefore it is plain faith that must justify us. And here must be put to the
wall and overthrown, that foolish and perverse opinion of the Papists, who
think themselves to be partly justified by their works, and partly by the
forgiveness which they obtain by the grace of God: for God must fully and
wholly be merciful unto us, as has been showed. And why so? For part of our
works merit nothing: and besides, there is corruption even in the very best
work we do, if we shall speak of judging of it according to the worthiness
thereof. And therefore we see that we are fully and wholly excluded. Wherefore
we must grow to this point, that the most righteous, although they seem as
righteous as tht Angels, yet must they be accepted of God freely. But here may
arise an objection in this sort: why fir? there is a great difference between
those whom God has already called, and those who are altogether estranged
from him, and also there is great diversity between the faithful man, when
as God has set him in the right way, and when he leaves him unto the
corruption of his own nature. For we shall see some man to have lived a long
time like a straied sheep and castaway: and at last, God enlighteneth him by
his Gospel, and so touches and reformeth him, as that a man shall see him,
as the scripture speaks, to become a new creature. And without doubt, we can
never be said to be right Christians, without we be after that manner renewed,
and be made the workmanship of God created in our Lord Jesus Christ: to do
the works which God has prepared: all this, I say, must be in it. But herein
may seem to be some absurdity. God justified the thief that was hanged,
because he acknowledged his salvation to be in Jesus Christ: and when he was
justified, had he none other quality in him then he had before? Yes verily.
Why then say we, that free righteousness has her course all our life long. In
deed a faithful man will at the least be well affected to hold himself within
the compass of Gods obedience, he will be displeased with his sins, yea
groan and grieve for them, and his chief de^^re will be to frame his life
according to the law. Now when a faithful man is come to this, we must not say
that he is justified as he was at the first, because he was then a dissolute
man, and altogether estranged from God. To this we answer, when God at the
first justifies us, that is to say, when he has mercy upon us, and plucketh
us out from that condemnation wherein we were, he uses then a general pardon:
and then when he justifies us afterward, he then acknowkledgeth the benefits
which he has bestowed upon us, and auoweth and allows them, for he cannot
deny himself: and when he governs us by his holy spirit, although sin
dwells in us, yet reigns it not in us, as it is written, Although we do
not the good which we would, yet we strive to do it. And therefore God
allows and likes of that, because it comes from him: but here we are to
note, that he justifies us both in our persons and also in our works by faith
only. For when he receives us at the first, he cannot justify any works
that are in us. And why so? because they are all wicked. For as we have
already said, what fruit can a rotten tree bring forth. And therefore when
God draws unto him miserable sinners, that are banished and cast out of his
kingdom and Church, he does not justify their works: but beholding their
miseries, and having compassion of their perdition, lo, for that cause he
justifies them. Now after that he has received them, he justifies them in
their persons, that is to say, he accepts them as his children, and after
that, he justifies their works: and how does he that? Forsooth, not by
calling them to an account, nor judging them rigorously: for there will be
always, as I have said, some corruption amongst, or else some slips and by
slidings and such like things which will mar all. For if a man put the best
wine in the world into an unsavory hogshead, or into a fustie bottle, the wine
will be all mard. Even so fares it with all our works: for so long as God
guides and gonerneth us by his holy spirit, they are good, holy, and
commendable: but mark what vessels we are, surely very filthy and corrupt.
Even so are our works, and therefore God must purge and cleanse them. And how is
that? verily even by his grace in pardoning the faults and imperfectio^s which
are in them. Wherefore even as there is diversity between a faithful man, and
who^ God calls at the beginning unto the Gospel, so also is there some
diversity in justification. But it alters not in this behalf, that is, that
God always justifies his freely, that is to say, that he accepts them, not
for any virtues that are in themselves, for there is none at all in them,
neither yet for those which he has bestowed upon them: for they are to be
condemned by reason of the infirmity that is in them. But because as Saint
Paul says, That those whom he has chosen he has justified. Here then we
see in sum, what we are to retain as touching the motion of this question.
Now we are to note, that over and besides the thing which the Papists imagine,
that we may partly obtain to be righteous, and so consequently be pardoned at
Gods hand, they are too too grosSecondly deceived, bicaly deceived in their
satisfactions, and blind also, I say, in this they are, to think themselves to
have certain virtues, which God ought to allow and like of. But in very deed
they are ashamed to say that their works do merit, but that they carry some
likelihood with them: for, say they, although they do not perfectly merit, yet
is it meet that God who is just, should accept of that good which they do. Yea
but they are so far blinded in their righteousness, as that they understand
not their sins, as we have already said: Again, they are secondly deceived,
because they think themselves able to acquit themselves by their
satisfactions. I will here forbear to speak what their satisfactions are,
because they are most foolish, whereby they do nothing else but provoke the
heavy wrath of God against them, thinking to pay him with filthy toys and
trifles, to wit, with superstitions devised of their own brain: for what
satisfactions can we make, to deliver us from the judgment of God? And what is
the committing of one sin worthy of? Truly we think that when we have
violated the righteousness of God, and have paid some small portion for it, that
we have done enough. Must we not think that Satan wholly possesses us, when
as we become thus arrogant? Now this is the greatest part of Popish doctrine,
to be pardoned, when as we have deserved rather to be punished. And this
proceeds herehence, because they think they should be justified by their
works: and therefore they say, that this is but coniecturall, for they cannot
choose but see, that if we examine our selves, we shall come short in the end,
neither can we have that which is requisite for the making up of our accountes
before God, to say that we are discharged. But over and besides this
conjecture, they have another foolish toye in their heads, which is this, why
say they, if it were true that God fououred us to day, it may be that he would
not do so to morrow. Now they never think that faith is always accompanied
with hope, and that hope extends it self both in life and death. And we see
also besides, that there is a far greater fault, and that is, they never
look unto the last article of death, whereof we will speak (God willing)
hereafter. And therefore we will at this time go on with that we have begun,
which is, they think to satisfy and appaise God, when as they bring with them
some recompense for the sins and iniquities which they have committed. Wherein
they rob God of his honor: for, if it were so, then he alone were not
sufficient to reconcile us unto God his father. Now it is not without cause
that he is called our ransom: for he made himself our surety upon this
condition, that he took upon him to pay our debtes fully and wholly. And
therefore whosoever will now take upon him to pay GOD, usurps the office of
Jesus Christ, which is a most abominable abuse. And yet the Papists build
their salvation hereon. But for all this they cavil and say, that although
our Lord Jesus Christ has obtained pardon as well for the sin as for the
punishment thereof, yet notwithstanding that this is reserved: although they
manifestly gainsaie themselves. For on the other side they say, that our Lord
Jesus Christ has not merited for us, but is the occasion of merit. Now as I
have already said, they will say that we are by nature so ill and so
exceeding wicked, as that we can do nothing which God will accept: but say that
when Jesus Christ goes before, he gives us the occasion of merit, and this
they call the first merit, so that they give unto him some little gobet or small
portion, and to our selves the chief. Now if it be so that Jesus Christ has
only merited the occasion of merit, that is to say, that we must by him come
to heaven, it must needs follow, that we shall be always bound unto God as well
for the punishment, as for the sin. And this is an enormious abomination, when
as the papists will presume thus to discharge themselves before God with their
satisfactions. And besides, as one mischief draws on another, even so thrust
they themselves into a most wearisome labyrinth: for they know well enough that
if we strained our selves to do an hundredth times more then we are able, yet
could we in no wise content and satisfy God for our sins. And why so? because
we come so short in doing that we should, as is most fearful. And David says,
What man is he that knows his sins. Psalm. 13.12.
And therefore although we should take never so much pain to make satisfaction,
yet shall the Papists be enforced to say, that we are never able to come to the
end of the^. Yet is there also a third error amongst them, to wit, their
indulgences and pardons of full remission, for the pardoning of their sins, yt
will buy the^. And yet they think it not inogh that they have these
indulgences, but must also have their purgatory to make up their mouth withal
for altogether, so as they are so mashed in errors as yt they cannot tell how to
wind the^ selves out of the^. For seeing they have all at once straied from the
pure simplicity of the holy scripure, the devil has so possessed and
entrapped them within such nets and snares, as that they can never get out of
the^. Wherefore we must so much ye more diligently harke^ unto this doctrine
which excludes all satisfactio^s, and sends us to our lord Jesus christ, to
find that in him which is wanting in us. Moreover, we are to note for the
better understanding of this point, what it is to be saved by the mere grace
of God, and for faith to be imputed unto us for righteousness, and that cannot
be understood until we lie at the point of death: for, when as the Papists
speak of their merits, satisfactions, and indulgences, they may prattle and
iangle as it pleases them: but when hipocrites shall be so drunken and hard
hearted against God, as to be made to believe maruels and wonders all their life
long, the devil soon after remoueth them with a witness, when as they must in
good earnest come before the judge. For we see how blockish we are, and so long
as it pleases God to grant us life, we imagine him to be such a one as
pleases our selves, and transfigure him as we lust: but when we must depart
this life, and come before his judgment seat, at whom the Angels themselves
are afeard and tremble, Alas, how shall we most miserable mortal creatures
do in this case. And therefore when we speak of this certainty of faith, the
question is not of our entrance into the Church of God only, but our hope must
be invincible, to fight against all the temptations of Satan, but especially
when we must come to answer before God, we must then stand firm and sure
against all the fears wherewith we may be stirred and driven unto. And this is
no speculatiue doctrine, but a doctrine of practice. True it is, that the holy
scripture must instruct us, but no longer then until such time as God has in
very deed assigned us a day, and our consciences bound to appear to hear the
sentence of the heavenly judge. No doubt of it, we will make but a sport in
reasoning of this matter. But the practice thereof as I have already said,
will teach us another manner of lesson, what it is, that is to say, we must
wholly fly unto the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and understanding that he
is our Advocate, we may assure our selves that God will not enter into
judgment with us. And why so? because we are pardoned not according to the
draught of our indictment, but by putting away all our sins and iniquitie^.
And this is it which we are to remember concerning this point. It should seem
now that we cannot be wholly righteous, if our righteousness consists only of
says: for, our faith, as we have already said, will always be weak so long
as we live here. And therefore how is it possible that we should be fully
righteous before God? For the effect cannot be above the cause. For if we had
but half a Sun, we should not have so much light as we have; and therefore
we must have a whole Sun, that the beams thereof might spread it self all the
world over. Wherefore when faith is thus weak in us, it should seem that we
were but partly acceptable unto God, and so contrariwise, that he liked us
not: howbeit we are here to note, that we are not justified by the power and
virtue of faith; neither must we think it to be so perfect, as to say that
our salvation is perfect thereby. For, to speak properly, it is God alone that
justifies us, as out of the eighth of the Romans we have heard. And this is
that justification whereof Saint John speaks in his third Chapter, to wit,
That God so loved the world, as that he spared not his only begotten Son, to
the end that so many as should believe in him should not perish, but should
pass from death to life. Thus we see to speak properly, that it is GOD alone
which justifies us: agreeing with that saying of Saint Paul in the fifth
Chpiter of the second to the Corinths, saying, That God appeared in Jesus
Christ, ^. Cor. 5.19.21.
in reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their sins unto them,
because that Jesus Christ who knew no sin, was made sin for us, that we
should be made the righteousness of God in him. Here we see that Saint Paul
in the first place shows, how God justifies us, that is, that he imputes
not unto us our sins. And thus much as touching the definition of the word.
And yet we are taught, that it is the proper office of God to justify us. For
he says, that he was in Jesus Christ in reco^cilng the world unto himselfe^,
and besides, he is ou^ righteousness, that is to say, he allows and likes
of us: why then is it said, that faith justifies? Forsooth, even this way: for
if we did look unto the principal cause, and sought out who is the Author
of our salvation, we would still say, that GOD of his mere goodness
justifies us, because he has mercy upon us, imputes not our sins, but
pardons us. Now it is Jesus Christ also that for his part justifies us,
because he is the very true matter of our justification. Where then must we
seek after it. In the washing of his blood which he shed for us, in the
sacrifice which he offered for the recompense of our sins, in that he
rendered full obedience, in such sort, Ioh. 17.
as that all our offenses are buried and blotted out, because he was sanctied
for us, as in the seventeenth of Saint John it is said. Thus then we see,
after what manner and degree Jesus Christ justifies us. Now in that it is
said, that faith justifies us, is not by reason of the power and venue that
is in it, or for any worthiness that it has. And herein it is, that the
Papists are de^^^ued: for they make a comparison between faith and works, and
say, how is it that faith justifies more then love? For S. Paul says, That
Love is greater then Faith. True it is, that they mistake this place: but
admit, that love were more worthy then faith. For we do not now speak about
such trifling toys, as to say, that he were worthy to be the greatest king
in the world, that could may nure and dress the ground as well as any husband
man or vine-dresser. And even so fares it with faith, for, it justifies us
not as I have already said, for any excellency that is in it self, but because
it borrows that of Jesus Christ which is wanting in us. And therefore is it
that S. Paul says, That the righteousness of faith overthrows and makes void
all the righteousness of works, and whatsoever worldly glory else. And
therefore the Papists are herein too too blockish, and we for our parts are
so much the rather to rest upon this point which we have already spoken of,
that is to say, that we are justified by faith, to wit, that the way to make us
to be acceptable unto God is, to have us lay open a ready way unto our Lord
Jesus Christ, that thereby he may apply his righteousness unto our selves.
Here we see then, that faith is the only mean and instrument: but that God is
the cause and author, and that all praise belongs unto our Lord Jesus Christ,
who is the right and true matter and substance thereof. And this is it that we
are here to remember. And consequently, we see also that the Papists do too too
foolishly cavil to say, that faith it self is a work, and that if we be
justified by faith, that then works are not excluded. And to prove their
matter withal, they allege that which is written in the sixth of Saint John,
Ioh. 6.29.
This is the work that God requires of you, that you believe in his only
Son: Now Jesus in this place, calls faith a work, as if he should have
said, you see whereat you must aim, and apply your whole study: for the
question is not that the work should merit. And besides, if we did confess
that faith were a work, which indeed it is not, yet justifies it not as a
work done by us: for if I give alms, and pretend thereby to merit before God,
see how I should be justified by my works: if I help my neighbor, and
travel to do good unto this man or unto that, as they shall have need: Lo
how I should be justified by my works. Now the reason is clean contrary in
faith: for in confessing that we are all accursed, and that by faith we receive
that which God offers unto us, we bring nothing with us on our behalf, but
come empty fisted unto him. Faith then justifies, not by bringing any
worthiness or merit with it unto God, but because God receives from Jesus
Christ that which he presents unto him in our name. And this confession must
go before, that there is nothing in them which keep such a course, that is to
say, to demand righteousness at Gods hands, whereof they are utterly void. And
therefore we see that the Papists herein deal very foolishly, to say that we
are justified by a work, if so be we be justified by faith. Now faith is a
sacrifice wherewith God is pleased, because he is thereby honored, and praise
and thanks rendered unto him, who is only just and good: and yet are we not
justified, by the power and virtue thereof. To be short, when God justifies us
by faith, there is in this justifying enclosed the grace which he bestows
upon us, because he will not see and behold the infirmity which is in our
faith. Faith then justifies: but yet as it is defective and imperfect, and yet
therein it justifies. How can that be, being defective and imperfect? Yes well
enough: for as I have already said, it is not required at the hand of faith to
do any such thing, as having power of it self to justify, but receives
simply that which is given it to do it, from God. And therefore if we have
but the least spark of faith as a man would say, with this conclusion, that
there is no life in us but that which we have in Jesus Christ: and that all
fullness is in him, from whom we draw that which we have, and wherewith we are
filled, without all doubt, we have then enough. Wherefore let let us learn so
to believe in our Lord Jesus Christ, as that when soever we shall stand in
doubt, we yet never cease to submit our selves unto his mercy which can never
fail, and continually fly unto him, knowing right well that all perfection of
righteousness is in him, and is such also as that we shall be made partakers
thereof, and that although we had but the least drop of faith as Saint Paul
says, Romans 8.
and were environed and laden with this huge heap of corruption and sin that
is in us, which brings nothing else with it but death, yet if Jesus Christ
be in us, there is life: that is to say, the rest of the infirmities and
corruption of our flesh, and whatsoever else that may hinder our salvation,
shall all be abolished by the spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, if we have
never so little a portion, we shall be of whom sure to live for ever.

Let us now prostrate our selves before the majesty of our good God, in
acknowledging our sins, beseeching him to make us feel the power and virtue
which he has given unto his only son, that we might thereby be drawn and
wholly cleave unto him. And that we may learn to be gathered together under
the confidence which he has given us in him, fighting against all our
infirmities, and in the mean while, that all presumption and pride be cast
down in us, and that there remain nothing else in us, but to confess that as
he is just, so also that it belongs to him to pour out his righteousness upon
us, to the end we may enjoy the fruit which proceeds thereof, to wit, the
inheritance of the heavenly life. And that he will not only, etc.

THE FOVRTH Sermon of Justification.
6 Abram believed the Lord, and he counted that unto him for righteousness.

7 Again he said unto him, I am the Lord that brought thee out of Vr of the
Chaldees, to give thee this land to inherit it.


WE said yesterday that when God had once received the faithful into his grace
and favor, that he acknowledged and makes known also that which he bestows
upon them. For by faith we receive the holy Ghost, because Jesus Christ cannot
be separated from it. And therefore we must needs be renewed when as we
believe God, because we apprehend his power, which he offers unto us to
communicate with us in his son. Now God cannot set light by and reject his
own gifts: wherefore he must accept of these works which he gives us, not
that they are worthy as we have already said: because there is always some
infirmities so to corrupt them, as that they are unworthy either to be
accounted of or received. And although God should find fault and reject
whatsoever good that we able to think or do, yet could we in no wise accuse
him of cruelty: And why so? Forsooth, because they may be always amended: and
yet does he accept of that which is not worthy the acceptance, and al
because he acknowledges us for his children, and also vpholdeth us as by his
Prophet is said. If then we ask why God allows of our weak affection in
serving of him? It is because he bears with us, and would not have us marked
as mercenarie and hired men, but contenteth himself to see us serve him
frankly and freely, none otherwise than as a natural father requires at the
hands of his child. For although a child shall mar that which his father
sets him to do, yet is the father glad when as he has seen that in very
deed his meaning was to do it well. Even so fares it with our good God, who
bearing a fatherly love unto us, forgets whatsoever defect is in our works
and will not call them to an account.

Here (I say) we see in sum, how that over and besides our persons we are
justified also by that we do, that is to say, that God accepts both of our
selves and of our works also as righteous. And let us also see from whence
this word Reward whereof the Scripture so often speaks proceeds: For God
shows not only in the law, but also in the Gospel, that they which serve
him faithfully shall not lose their labor, nor be frustrate of their hope. And
why so? Verily because their Reward is surely laid up in heaven. But how can
this agree with that which we have already said? That is, that if our works
justify us, then must faith and the promises (as saint Paul says) be of none
effect. Now we shall see them agree right well together, when as one of them
shall depend upon another: But if we shall on the one side put our works in one
balance, and the grace of God in another, without doubt we shall find great
contrariety. Nevertheless, when as we say e that God has mercy upon us,
because we are sinners: and that when he has regenerated us by his holy
spirit, that he allows and likes of the good which he has put in us,
albeit it be nothing in respect of the ill that remains. When we shall speak
after this manner, it is as much as if we should say, that first God is
merciful unto us, and does not impute unto us our sins and iniquities, but
adopteth us who were lost and damned souls, to be his children. And in the
second place, it is said that he justifies us also by our works, and that
because he is merciful and will not judge us rigorously, neither regards
them what they are, to esteem of them as worthy or meritorious: But deals in
this behalf as a natural loving father does. And herein in I say, Math. 9.13
1. Tim. 1.13 2. Tim. 1. Tit. 3.5.
is no repugnancie. And so although our Savior Jesus Christ says, that he
came to call sinners and not the righteous, and although saint Paul also says,
that he came to call sinners to salvation, and that it is not for any works
that we have done, that the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven is prepared
for us, but because he is loving and kind unto us, and is disposed to bestow
his infinite goodness upon us: and yet for all this receive we reward; that is
to say, that when we have served God, we shall be rewarded, as oftentimes it is
said in the holy Scripture. Thus we see that after this sort these two places
which seem to be repugnant one to another, agree very well together, that is,
that by Faith we are imputed righteous, and that the zeal which Phine^^ had in
maintaining the honor of God and purging the Sanctuary which was polluted,
Number. 25.7 Psalm. 106.30.31.
was imputed unto him for righteousness. Here we see when Phinees the Priest
saw so infamous and detestable an act to be committed by an Adulterer and an
Adulteress in the Sanctuary as could not be a greater, and such a villainy
as the like was never heard of in Israel, that the Lord so armed him as that
he slew them both: and it is said that it was imputed unto him for
righteousness. Now this was a virtuous work: and therefore should seem that he
was not justified by faith; but yet as I have already said, this may very well
hang together. For Phinees was the son of Abram, and therefore God must be
merciful unto him as well as unto the rest. But because that God help him,
and was reconciled unto him by that grace which he bestows upon all his
chosen, even under the old Testament we see that God reputed it as a righteous
work. And how so? verily that for so much as there was some imperfection and
weakness in him, therefore must God as I have already said, support him. Let
us also hear what saint Paul says, which is this, Colos. 1.5.
that we must labor powerfullie to serve God, for the hopes sake which is
laid up for us in heaven, of which hope we have heard before in the word of
truth of the Gospel, where saint Paul shows that the faithful more
courageously and vehemently go on to serve and honor God, and give themselves
to be charitable; because they right well know that they shall not loose
their labor, as it is written. Yea, but how know they that? Forsooth by the
testimony of the Gospel. Now what are the words of the Gospel? Verily, Romans 3.
that God will be merciful unto us, if so we believe in his only son:
For the righteousness which is there offered us, as saint Paul says, has borne
witness of the law: But is not helped by the law: that is to say, by whatsoever
works we are able to do. But because we are grounded on the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ: This Text then shows us, that the faithful may be a
great deal better and more earnestly disposed to serve God, because they know
that their pains shall be accepted: And yet notwithstanding they rest
themselves upon this free goodness which is promised them, because they fly
unto our Savior Jesus Christ. Here we see how grossly the Papists are
deceived. For from this word Reward, they draw the word Merit, as if they
would play the Alcumistes. Now there is great difference between the one and
the other: For what imports this word Merit. To Merit, is to make God bound
unto us, that we might say, I have well deserved this thing or that; I am worthy
of it: And he which does not acknowledge the Merit, is unthankful, if he
discharge his duty unto him, unto whom he is bound and beholden. If we could
then deserve any thing at Gods hands, it must needs follow, that he for his
part should he beholden unto us, and do us wrong if he paid us not that which
he ought us. True it is that he is pur debtor; but a voluntary debtor: For he
shall never find any thing in us why he should be beholden unto us; but
binds himself by his promises. Now in very deed he has promised us
Reward, but it is of his own free gift, and of no desert of ours: for that
were to come from a post to a pudding-prick, to go so from one to another, and
to conclude that these two words are all one, where there is so great
diversity. Wherefore let us not marvel though the Papists still conclude
their Arguments thus, and storm when we say, That works cannot justify us.
For their supposall is false, that is to say, that if GOD rewards those that
are his, that therefore he is bound to do it, and that they are also worthy of
it, and that their works import some Merit; Now all this is not worth a
straw. The reason I have already showed, to wit, that when God promises us
Reward it is not because that we are worthy thereof, but because it pleases
him to add grace unto grace, and all of his mere mercy, goodness and
liberality. Now we are always to keep this in mind: and in very deed what
should we look for at his hands, if we had nothing but that that we deserve?
Assuredly, we should be driven to that unquietness whereof we erst spoke,
that we should alvvaies be in doubt and perplexed. And therefore our faith
must be certain. And this is that in sum which here we are to remember.

Let us now come unto the words of Saint James, who seems to be contrary
unto S. Paul and all the rest of the holy Scriptures, as we have already
spoken: James. 2.24.
For Saint James says, That we are not justified by faith, but by works. A
man would think that there could not be found two places more contrary one to
the other, as to say, That we are justified by faith only, without works, and
that we are justified by works, and not by faith, and yet notwithstanding it
is most certain that S. James, who spoke by the spirit of God, gainsaid not
the doctrine which was preached and published from the beginning in the Church,
ratified by the Prophets, and which has been lastly more notably confirmed by
our Lord Jesus Christ, and by his Apostles. Howbeit the solution is very
easy, when as we shall look into the drift and meaning of S. James: For he
reasons not there what true faith may do, neither does he speak at all of
true faith, but of a counterfeit faith, and such as is but like unto an image
and an illusion. For he reasons there against such as under the color of
Christianity will take liberty to do al wickedness, as at this day there are
too too many. And besides, the devil does so bestirre himself to blind us, as
he would make us believe that all our sins are forgiven us, and so under the
name of Christianity would make us become very brutish, and thereby pervert
all. And to bring also the doctrine of the Gospel and professors into a
slander, to the end also it might be thought, that the doctrine of the Gospel
did overthrow good works, and would not have us worship and serve God, as the
Papists at this day despitefully reproach us therewithal. Wherefore S. James
seeing many dissolute and profane people thus falsely abuse the name of the
Gospel, and pretended the name Faith: He says, well, Let me see thy faith
without works, and I will show thee my faith by my works: whereby he
sufficiently shows, that his meaning was not to speak of such a faith as we
have defined: that is; that we should be certain and sure of the goodness of
God by his word, and know him to be our Father through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Now S. James speaks not of such a faith as this is; and that which is not
such a one, cannot bring forth works. We have already said; that by faith
we receive the spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ. And he and his spirit cannot
be separated. And we know that it is said, That it is not given unto us only
for righteousness, but for sanctification also: that is to say; that we might
be purged of all the filthy lusts of our flesh, That we might be made like
unto the righteousness of God. So then if S. James had spoken of this true
faith, it had been great folly for him to have said, Show me thy faith
without works, and I will show thee my faith by my worlds: as is he would
have said; that true faith is so conjoined with good works, as without them it
is dead, to wit; it is no faith, as afterward he says. And therefore S. James
right well shows, that he spoke not of a faith which embraces the promises
of God, and by which we are certified of our salvation. And herein the Papists
do grossly abuse themselves, to forge unto themselves a faith, which they
call unformed; that is to say, without figure or shape, and say; that faith of
it self is as it were but like a piece of earth or claye which a man should
take to dawbe withal. Here ye see (say they) what faith is. And besides, they
say, that when Charity is conjoined thereto, then it is like a pot that is
made of the same piece or lump of earth, which before had no form or fashion.
Thus we see what a jolly imagination the Papists have, whereby they declare
that they know not what faith is: For it is an absolute and singular gift of
God. And after it is said. That we receive the spirit of adoption, by which he
so renueth and also incorporateth us into our Lord Jesus Christ, as that we
are made members of his body, and withal new creatures. We see then that
the Papists know not these things, neither yet understand the principles and
rudiments of Christianity no more than brute beasts without sense. And what
a fearful thing is this that they do nothing else but brag of these things:
And yet they think themselves to be the greatest divines in the world, when
as they have made a distinction forsooth; betvveene unformed and formed faith:
which is as much as if they had said; a God in whom is no power nor virtue,
and then a God who shows himself powerful and just. And thus have they
forged unto themselves a double faith.

And why then does S. James use here this word? And why do we use this
word, Church? This word Bishop? this saying Gods service? Devotion, and
Zeal? But when we speak of the Papists, we never yield unto them in
truth that they have any church which is to be obeyed: For in deed they have
nothing but some ruynes of a Church, and a certain canuassing and tossing of
service of their own devising, and (as they thought) to serve God vvithall.
But that is the Church where God dwells by his word. Afterward, when
we speak of them, we use honorable words, and yet our meaning is none
other, but that they usurp these titles with jolly shows and marks.
Howbeit we do not altogether stand upon words. And after this manner
deals S. James: for he stands not upon the word, but takes upon him to
speak of the frivolous vaunting which was in the mouth of these scoffers
that would be taken for good Christians, and says, your faith; that is to
say: that faith which you talk of is nothing: As if we should ask the
question at this day: what is the Catholic Church which the Papists so
brag of? Surely it is a very harlot. For we know that the true Church is
the spouse of our Savior Jesus Christ, which ought to be purged and vvashed
with his blood, Ephesians. 5.27 1. Tim. 3.15.
that she might be as saint Paul says without spot or vvrinkle, and after
that to be the pillar of truth: And in steed hereof; behold a den of the
eues, and an harlot which has corrupted all the service of God, and begot
nothing but Bastards. Thus should we say, and then we see that we should
not think saint James his phrase of reasoning to be strange, because it is an
ordinary and common thing amongst us. We now then first see, that when it
is said that Faith justifies us, we speak not of Faith but after the
accustomed manner. But when saint James says that faith without works is
dead, it is to bar such as abuse this name and have a iollitie to brag and
glory thereof: but in deed have it not. Let us come now to the second part,
when saint James says that we are justified by our works, it should by
this seem that he is contrary unto saint Paul. Now works must not be
joined with faith to part half stakes with it, as we have already said: For
if that were so, then we should never be certain and sure. And therefore
all consideration of our works must needs be excluded, or the calling upon
God with true confidence, to be taken for his children, to hope for the
inheritance of the heavenly life which is promised us, works must needs be
laid aside; for what were it if works justified. Now this word Justify
is not taken in saint James to be approved before God, to reconcile us unto
him, and to make him receive us as his children. How is it then taken? Even
as himself declares it without any other exposition. For he adds that Abram
was justified when he went about to offer up in sacrifice his son
Isahack. Now we never yet read that he sacrificed him, to wit, that he
meant to make a sacrifice of his son unto God: what meant he then? Forsooth
this, obedience, whereof we shall hereafter speak, was it that justified
Abram. If we did speak of the approouing of that which he had at that time
done, and was yet not indeed done: We must therefore conclude that saint
James speaks not in that place, how we are acceptable unto God; but how
we are made righteous. For what a blockish speech were this to say that the
son had begotten the Father. Now we right well know that faith is the
mother of righteousness, that is to say, that it is the mean and instrument by
which we are reconciled unto God, and allowed for his children. And
therefore faith must go before righteousness: for it is the mean cause, the
isntrumental or formal cause as we call it.

Let us now come unto the obedience of Abram when he was ready to sacrifice
his son: for if that be the cause of Abram his righteousness, it must needs
be that it went before: For what a doltish speech were this, to say, that
the corn that shall grovve a year hence shall feed me from this day until
this time twelve months. Now there is not the least child in the world
which sees not this. Now, there was a long time part before God commanded
Abram to sacrifice his son, and yet was he justified before. We see then,
in sum, that we need not to look for any gloss out of saint James his
words; he says, that he was justified, that is to say, that he was shevved
to be justified: For these Scoffers against whom he contendeth said, we
are justified by faith, and therefore what need we to take any great care to
serve God, seeing our works are of no vvorth, neither any reckoning be made
of them in time to come. Now first and foremost they pervert all in saying,
that there shall be no reckoning made of works: For they shall come in account
with the grace of God. But when they shall scoffingly say, that it is to no
purpose to do good works, is as much as if they would tear Jesus Christ in
pieces. For by faith we receive him, and are united unto him with this
condition, that he reconcileth us unto his father, puts away our sins,
and regenerateth and governs us by his holy spirit. And these are inseparable
things as we have alleged out of saint Paul. Seeing then it is so, saint
James had good cause to say, how can you be justified without works? For Faith
(says he) without works is dead. And besides, if you be the faithful
children of God, you can be none otherwise justified than your father Abram
was. Now Abram was so justified as that good works were joined with
Faith; And therefore you must shevve your selves like unto him, or else you
mock God, in profaning so holy and sacred a thing as the name of faith and
righteousness is. Here we see saint James his meaning out of this Text: But
these Popish mastiue Curres can no whit skill of this, and what is the
reason? Verily because they contemn God: howbeit you shall hear them with
open mouth talk of good works, and a man vvoulde think, to hear them
debate thereof, that they were Angels, and yet you may see what they are. And
I would to God that the whole state of their life were not altogether
dissolute; for a man shall find neither Monk nor Friar, Doctor, nor yet any
of that shorn Rabble, but they are either rybauldes, skorners of God,
whoremongers, drunkards, blasphemers: To be short, it should seem that they
had conspired with the Devil to bring the whole world unto confusion. And
yet for all this they vvil pretend good works, and speak of nothing else. And
therefore it is no marvel although they be so blind. But to speak but a
word of that which we have explaned out of saint James we are to note, that
we ar justified but not without works, and yet we are justified without
works: when we say that we are justified, but not without works, we
separate not this. And how so? verily, because that he who is justified
before God by faith, is as much to say; that God forgiueth him his sins;
believes in the passion and death of our Lord Jesus Christ, and knows that
by his resurrection, he receives life from him. So then, whosoever believes
after this sort, is not justified without works. And why? Because that God
bestows his holy spirit upon him, which so reformeth him, as that good
works cannot be chosen but be joined together with faith. And yet is the
other saying also true, to vvite, that we are justified without works; that
is to say, without any help of good works, so as we alvvaies remain bound
unto God. Here we see two places without altering the words: wherein it
should seem they were altogether diverse and sundry, as to say, that we are
justified without works, and that we are not justified without works, howbeit
the meaning is, that works are not for all this the cause of our salvation, as
to make them merit any whit before God, so as to accept us according to our
worthiness: But it is because that as I have already said, our Savior Jesus
Christ bears us not only a simple grace and favor, but a double, that is to
say: that on the one side he covers all our iniquities and offenses through
his pure obedience, and appeaseth the wrath of God his father by that Sacrifice
which he offered up once for all, to make satisfaction for our sins: And yet
he so rules and governs us in the mean while by his holy spirit whom he
has received in all fulness and rests upon him, that if so be we do not
abuse his grace bestowed upon us, we are freed from the bands of Satan, that
we might take good heed as (S. Peter says) not to follow the lusts and
desires of the flesh. This then we see may suffice for the exposition of this
place. Now Moses adds immediately following, that God spoke again unto
Abram, and said: I am the Lord which brought thee out of Vr of the Chaldees to
give thee this Land to inherit it. Here we see that God reitereateth his
promises for the confirming, nourishing and increasing of Abram his faith
until such time as it was grown unto a full perfection. Whereupon we are
to conclude, that although Abram was the mirror and pattern of all the
faithful, and the very Image of righteousness, yet was his faith imperfect: For
else the promise that is here set down, were superfluous. For if the faith of
Abram was so thoroughly confirmed as that it could not be amended; God needed
not to have spoken any more.

And why so? The promises have this use and benefit that they draw us unto
faith, and when we have gotten it, they are to lead us to the right way, to
encourage and stir us up to go on valiantly, to refresh us when we are
almost weary, to augment our virtue when it begins to fail and to be weak.
Here (I say) we see why our Savior Jesus Christ testifies and declares unto
us of his mere goodness that he is our God: that is, to begin faith in us; or
else to bring it to perfection. And therefore we must conclude that it was
needful for Abram to go somewhat further. And hereby we see that although our
faith be imperfect, yet that God cease not to justify us. And what is the
reason? Because he imputes not the infirmity that is in it unto us: but how
ever it is, we are here admonished by this place not to be prevented by any
foolish opinion of our own, as a great many of men are, who think themselves
to be such great Clarks, as that they will not once vouchsafe to come any more
unto the school of God. Let us therefore understand and know: that although
our faith were greater and more powerful than now it is; yet must we be
scholars all our life long to have the word of God sounding in our cares, and
to have our memories rubbed over and refreshed, that we might not forget that
which we have learned; that that which has not taken deep root in our
hearts, may receive a better and deeper impression: and that God when he has
cast his seed into us (according to saint Paul his comparison) we may daily
water it in us: For, it were not enough to have the seed cast into the ground
without God should send down rain from heaven and bedewe it: for when the
husbandman shall have done his duty in tilling the land, it is to no purpose
without GOD should give increase thereof from heaven. Even so must it be with
us when as we shall have received the seed of the incorruptible life, GOD
must rain down from heaven; that is to say, he must continually benefit and
strengthen our faith: which cannot be except we be daily instructed from his
mouth. Let us now come to the contents of this sentence,

I am the Lord which brought the out of Vr of the chaldees.

These words here are inserted for Abram to cause him to eschew all Idolatry
and superstition wherein he had been hertofore brought up. For as it is often
showed unto us out of the holy Scripture, that we must not worship God
confusedly, nor imagine him to be such a one as we think: But we must know
what God that is which we must fly unto, and must be separated and
distinguished from all the imaginations and devises of man's brain, whereby we
so greatly deceive our selves, and are also deceived by Satan. And that is the
reason which S. Paul makes in his Epistle to the Hebrews, the eleventh
Chapter and the sixth verse: saying, When we will come unto God, we must
believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek
him. We cannot come then unto God, except we believe that God is, that is to
say: we must not be wavering nor doubtful; but we must be firmly and
constantly assured, that that God which created heaven and earth is he who
shows himself unto us, and whose will we know both by the law and
Gospel: and not to reason what God is, as the poor heathen have done, who
have been so maruellously tormented about it, and have run themselves so
far into such a Labyrinth and Maze, as that they could never wind themselves
out of it again. But we know that God is manifested unto us in that he is
beneficial unto us for our salvation. And thus much for the first point. The
second is, that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Now this
word Rewarder, imports not that God renders that unto us which he owes us,
but that we shall not be frustrate in putting our trust in him. And therefore
we must look after what manner we ask him: For if we will bring our
works with us; that is even to kick against God: so far off is it for us
to be united unto him by that means. And saint Paul says, that when the
Jews thought to trust in their works and put their hope of salvation in
them, that they hurt and undid themselves: and that was the cause of their
break neck insteede of going forvvard. Wherefore if we will seek God
aright, we must without all doubt cast from us all vain presumption of our
own strength: For seeing he has adopted us of his mere favor and grace, it
is most certain, we shall never be accepted of him, except it be because he
forgiueth us our sins. And thus says the Apostle, shall we be assured; that
if we seek God after this sort, we shall never be frustrate.

And for the same purpose is it said, I am the Lord which brought thee out of
Vr of the Chaldees to give thee this Land to inherit it.

This is as much as if God hid bound himself a new unto his servant Abram,
declaring unto him that he should not need to fear but that which he before
heard should be accomplished: and that although the effect thereof was deferred
and prolonged a great while, yet must he walk patiently, knowing that God
speaks not in vain: and besides that he has his times and seasons for the
accomplishing of his will. And that it lies in him and in his secret
counsel, and is not to be brought to follow our appetites and humors. But
yet we are to note, that God confirmed the faith of Abram by his ancient
benefits: For he faith I brought thee out of Vr of the Chaldees. And this
made Abram to trust a great deal more unto God, whenas he had already found by
experience that God was his father and Savior. For by how much that we have
heretofore felt pi the goodness, aid, and help of God, by so much more should
we assure our selves of him for the time to come. Thus we see how the
experience of the time past should still more and more assure us afterward.
And this was the pretense of God in saying, I have brought thee out of Vr of
the Chaldees: As if he should have said: it is not now only that I have
showed my self to be thy God, but thou have felt that I have vpholden thee
with a mighty and outstretched arm: thou were utterly cast away, and a poor
damned soul; and yet did I take thee unto my self, to the end to save thee.
And therefore since I have plucked thee out of the bottomless pit of hell, let
my grace which thou have now felt, be an invincible fortress unto thee: and I
for my part also will so continue. No we it is certain that we have this
general rule also from God, which is, that one grace which he bestows on us
draws another with it; For he is never weary: and this is a spring that
can never be drawn dry, and therefore let us boldly dravv out of it, and we
shall be sure to find always more and more to fill us vvithall. Thus then we
see what this saying imports, I am the Lord which brought thee out of Vr of
the Chaldees After that God has set before us his majesty, and shevved
himself to be the maker both of heaven and earth, he brings in this as an
especial matter, which is, that Abram had felt and known him to be such a
one, when as he had plucked him out of the bottomless depth wherein he was,
and he adds To give thee this land to inherit it. Here (as I have already
said) God renueth all the promises which he had made to his servant Abram,
because he should make a collection of them. For faith ought to have this
priuiledg, to heap up together whatsoever may defend it against all the
temptations and assaults of Satan.

Here we see what the cause is of the ruin of a great many of men: that is,
their negligence and security. For, as I have already said, they think
themselves to be great Doctors, when as they have learned but one sentence out
of the holy Scripture: yea, they suppose that they have even enough of it. But
when they shall come to the trial they will show themselves then to be but
empty vessels: For if the Devil fi^d but the least hole to enter into them, he
will poison them with his deadly poison: much like unto a broken tile upon an
house, for the rain that shall run in at the brokennes thereof will in
process of time, rot the whole house, Even so fares it with such as think
themselves too too well learned, and yet are in very deed most blockish
dunces: whom the Devil after finding an hole in, so enters in thereat, as
that the house falls quite and clean unto the ground. Now we must not be
weary in profiring, but make a good big collection of all the promises of God,
and always have a feeling of the fruit of them: and not only so, but we must
also labor continually to increase our faith as it is very needful: because
it will ever be weak. And to be short we must still go on from faith to faith.
It is said that God gave the land of Chanaan to Abram: It was in very deed
already given him, as we have heard in the twelfth Chapter.

And this was reiterated unto him many times: his ears were now well beaten
with it. It should seem then that this was an unprofitable and superfluous
kind of speech. But as I have already said; this was an inestimable benefit
unto Abram, whenas he was thus refreshed and comforted, that he might not
fail, but still follow the holy calling of God. Moreover, we are to note,
that God entertaineth him only with words: And herein we see what honor we
are to bear him, and not distrust him, although we see not before our eyes the
effect of that which he promises us; but hold our selves still in suspens. He
says, I have brought thee into this land which I gave thee. Well, my God,
thou have promised to give it me in deed: But behold I am old and dry; when
will that time come?

O, care thou not for that: for I will be merciful unto thee. Well, be it so.
But where is the demonstration of that which I have looked for all this while.
For I am at deaths door, and am here a stranger, and have no seed (as has
been heretofore said) and how shall I do then O Lord? Well, take my word for
it. This then is the nature of faith: To have all our senses subject unto the
will of God, and believe his truth. Our ears also must be open and attentive
to receive whatsoever he speaks unto us: and that when he has once said the
word; conclude, that it shall be so. But which way can that be? O, we are not
to reason that; neither is it in our disposition: But we must leave it unto
the counsel and will of God, as we have already said. This then is the honor
winch we must do unto GOD; even to believe his holy word. More over, we are
still to observe that which has heretofore been spoken, that is to say: That
God simply gave the land of Chanaan unto his servant Abraham for a pawn, to
the end he should not muse to him self, nor trouble his head about it: For
then had Abraham had but a cold pull, if he had had nothing else but that
land. But without doubt he was led by another spirit, which is: He saw the
very day of our Savior Jesus Christ; as in the Gospel according to John it
is written. And besides, he confessed himself to be but a Pylgrime here in
this world: and therefore looked for his inheritance elsewhere. And where it is
said: that this land was given him for to inherit; that was not the mark
which he shot at: his mind was not set thereon; but had a further reach. For,
by reason (as we have already said) that he forsook his native country,
and left it, to live in a strange and an unknown place: it must needs be,
that his mind was altogether occupied about:the heavenly inheritance. So then
we are here to note: that although the land of Chanaan is here called his
inheritance, as also Gods house and resting place: yet is it but as a pawn; or
to speak more properly, but as an earnest penny: For a pawn imports as
much at the least as the full worth of the thing which we are to be assured
of. But an earnest penny is, as a man would say, nothing. And to give a
penny, as we call it, unto God, for a bargain worth an hundredth thousand
crowns and more is nothing. For of what worth is that piece which we give?
forsooth of no value. Now, can a potte^^ or gallen of wine be worth a great
possession or land that is able to enrich three or fouremen? And yet, be as be
may, this earnest penny is destined unto such an use. And therefore this land
of Chanaan was the inheritance of all the children of Abraham, and of as many
as have descended of his line: but yet so, as that it was but an earnest penie
for heaven: Insomuch, that the very faithful looked not so much unto that,
neither yet set so their minds on it; But settled their cogitations and
thoughts a great deal higher. We see then, whether God meant to call Abram,
as if he had said; that he did him no vvrong in leaving him to languish:
Because he was sure that the promises should be performed: and therefore not to
stand upon his own wit. And why so?

Because he was to look unto him that spoke the word, who was the
unchangeable God. Now by reason that we our selves are so changeable as that
our minds alter every minute; We therefore grieve and vex, when we see that
God perfourmeth not that at the very first, which he has promised us. And
because we see our lives to be so short; and the time we have to live, to be
but as a shadow which fleeteth suddenly away; we think that GOD will never
come time enough: wherefore we must learn to correct this fault, by these
words that we hear here to be spoken to Abram: I am the Lord which changes
not. And besides, we hear what is said in other places: The song of Moses.
Psalm. 90.4 2. Pet. 4.8.
That a thousand years are but as one day with him. And Saint Peter also
says: That in the last days there shall come mockers who shall say: where is
the promise of his coming? as though the threatenings and promises of God were
of none effect. No, no, (says he) deceive not your selves: he will accomplish
whatsoever he has spoken, though it be late: For a thousand years with him,
are as but one day: And therefore we must look a great deal higher, and
know, that since it is the Lord that has said it, and never changes; that he
will do that which he has spoken, but not whenas it pleases us; but whenas he
knows it to be best: first for his own glory; and next, for our salvation
and good: neither must we be over earnest, nor yet over remise and slack; but
go out of our selves and come unto him, in whom is no inconstancy nor show
of change, for he is the Lord. And let us learn thus much: that when he has
once spoken the word, that it is enough; because his word is an infallible
truth.

Furthermore, let us acknowledge his goodness in supporting and bearing with our
weakness herein, because he speaks not only once, but puts us still in
remembrance of his promises: meaning thereby to have us profit and be confirmed
by them all the days of our life; and not believe him only for a day or two,
but for ever. And let us be guided and governed by his power, not only all our
life long, but even in death also, until such time as we are come unto his
kingdom, where we shall never need to be more spoken unto; neither have need
either of Faith or yet any other such like things: For then shall we enjoy the
full brightness of that, which we do now but see in the dark; and see him
face to face, as it were in a glass.

Let us now prostrate our selves before the Majesty of our good God, and
acknowledge our sins; beseeching him to cause us so to feel them, as that
they may humble us before him, and make us continually groan under the burden
of our iniquities, until such time as he has freed us from this bondage of
sin, wherein we are, and have a singular desire to conform our selves unto
his holy will, and not live unto our selves, but unto our Lord Jesus Christ,
who has so dearly redeemed us, gave him self to death for our sins, and
rose again for our justification. That it would please him not to grant unto
us only this grace; but unto all people and Nations of the earth, etc.

FINIS.
Three Sermons, beginning at the latter end of the 21 Chapter of Genesis,
concerning Abraham's sacrificing of his son Izhak.
By John Calvin.
33 And Abraham planted a grove in Beersheba, and called there on the name of
the Lord, the everlasting God.

34 And Abraham was a stranger in the Philistims land a long season.


Genesis 22. 1 And after these things God did prove Abraham, and said unto him,
Abraham, Who answered, Here am I.

2 And he said, Take now thine only son Izhak whom thou love, and get thee
unto the land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of
the Mountains, which I will show thee.


WE saw yesterday how Abraham in discharge of his duty unto the king of Gerar,
paid him tribute. Now Moses heerevpon adds, that so soon as he was
thoroughly settled, he solemnlie called upon the name of God. We have here then
in effect to learn that Abraham willingly submitted himself unto the chief
Governor of the Country: not tarrying until such time as he was enforced to
do the duty of a good and faithful Subject, but did it without being
required thereunto: And yet for all this we contrariwise see, that it no way
let him to serve God truly. And although (as we have heretofore said) it
was an odious matter to be of a Religion, Genesis 20.
clean contrary to the Religion of that Nation amongst whom he dwelt: yet
was he not such a milk soppe, We must subject our selves unto God and to our
Prince as Abraham did.
as not to make confession of the same faith which the Lord his God had
commanded him. By this we see that he so behaved himself, both toward God and
man, as that he may be an excellent example unto us of true humility, thereby
to show us, how we ought to submit our selves unto those to whom we are
bound: and yet so to, as that we always give unto God the chief and most
sovereign government. And that although men be in great authority; yet are
we to learn, the same to be far inferior unto the heavenly Majesty, which
darkeneth and blemisheth all whatsoever excellency is in man. And this is
very certain, that if Abraham had meant to gratify his neighbors, he would
have conformed himself also unto their fashions, and never once have said that
he had a God by himself, whom he would worship; forsaking the Idolatries that
then were used, and the superstitions wherewith the land was fully poluted.
But come of it whatsoever might, he fully protested that he would worship and
serve God sincerely and purely: wherefore he had, as we have heard, an Altar
of his own, Genesis 12.7. and 23.4.
upon which he solemnly sacrificed unto God, by means whereof he renounced all
the sins and corruptions of his neighbors as condemning and despising them
all, as if he would have said, there is but one only true service that
pleases God, and but one only living God: and whatsoever else is beside, are
but mere false and deceitful imaginations. And although he before had no
certain abiding and resting place, but wandered up and down too and fro; yet
never ceased he to call upon God in every place where ever he came, showing
thereby that he no whit liked of the sins and corruptions that then bare sway
in the world. But yet there is here one special reason which afresh moved him
to call upon the name of God in this place; and it is this: because he now
received greater rest, and felt more benefit and commodity coming to him
self than ever at any time heretofore. For before that time, he never durst
take upon him to plant any tree: but there he planted many, because he had
leave to dwell quietly there. And as he honored and worshipped an earthly
Prince who was King of that country. Even so likewise showed he therewith,
that he had not forgotten his good God; neither yet that his zeal waxed cold:
and yet notwithstanding, he held him not always as his chief Lord, although
he subjected himself unto him, and was contented to remain under his
protection. Thus here we see, namely, why Moses makes mention, that Abraham
called upon the name of the Lord. The law for the consecrating of houses was
not as yet written, and yet he then observed it: to wit, he effectually showed,
that his house was the Temple of God: And so must also all the faithful surely
purpose to keep their dwelling place pure and clean without pollution.

True it is, that the ceremony which God commanded the Jews to use, cease
at this day: to wit, that they should consecrate their houses before they
occupied them. But the truth and end thereof whereunto God had respect, is
left unto us: to wit, that when we are placed and settled, not to use them
like Closets to shut out the presence of GOD, neither yet to take liberty to
walk after our own appetites and lusts.

But seeing God has vouchsafed us this favor, to grant us houses to dwell
in, although they stand in never so base an outcorner of a backside: yet let
us there honor him, and wholly dedicate them unto his service and worship.

Now it is not meant, that we should dedicate the walls and roofes unto
him; but the whole housho^de: to wit, we should be wholly his, and make our
souls and bodies an oblation and sacrifice, and labor also to make the rest
to be^ike and agreeable therein. Now, to say truly: an householder should first
of all begin with him self: and yet he must not forget, neither to have his
wife also well instructed. And besides, if God has bestowed children and
servant upon him; he is to look, that, they be all held within the obedience
of God, as here it is said; that Abraham held his household.

But to say truly: this is a thing seeldome used. For, we see that every man
will serve God, as best ^iketh himself: making in the mean time (as it were)
little or no account of his Majesty. For, if Masters and Mistresses may ho^de
their servant to their work which may benefit them, they think all is
well. But if God be never so much blasphemed and contemned, and the house so
profaned, as that there is neither zeal nor yet religion in it, there are no
words made of it, but all is well. But let them assure them selves hereof that
God will not slightly lose his right.

Let us therefore learn so to use our dwelling houses, as that GOD may there
dwell with us as our chief governor, and let both great and small, dedicate
them selves unto him, and therewithal not only offer up unto him their
souls, but their bodies also.

Neither let them think which cannot honor God, without it be to the
hazarding of their lives, that they are therefore to be excused if they honor
him not. For, that is the most excellent honor that we owe or can do unto
him. Neither must we allege and say; that we have not any such warrant or
liberty to hazard our lives. But say what we say will, that which is here
spoken of Abrabam, must serve us for an instruction; because we know him to be
the pattern of all the faithful, in as much as he is their father. And
therefore seeing it is so; let us know that although we dwell even in the
midst of the enemies of God and of his truth, and were presently to be
persecuted; yet ought we to make a confession of our Faith: for, we must
prefer the principal before the accessaries.

Thus we see what we have to learn from this place. Now it is namely said;
that he called upon the eternal God, the God that governs all the world;
to wit, of the God that lives for ever.

Here Moses makes, as it were, a comparison between the alterations and
changes which ran in Abraham his mind, and between the staidnes of his Faith,
which was so constant and firm, as that he would not change what ever came of
it. Here then we see how Abraham was carried too and fro. First he altered his
dwelling place; yea, and was driven like chafe before the wind. And yet the
case (notwithstanding) was such, that he knew he must needs still continue,
firm and constant in God; and his faith to be so foundly and strongly laid,
as that nothing should be able to shake it, nor yet once after his person.
Thus we see how Abraham still followed that course which God directed him in.
And so he worshipped the eternal God, although it seemed that God played with
him as with a Tennis Ball, tossing him this way and that. Now it is said, that
he dwelt in the Philistines country a long while together. But the words which
Moses uses, signify, To dwell as a stranger. And this is a thing well to be
noted: For although he was suffered peaceably to dwell there, and was no whit
wronged nor violently dealt withal as before time he had been: yet for all
that he knew that he was not as yet possessor and owner of this land: and yet
it is true, that God had given it him even before he came into it, and had
ratified the same benefit many time. For so it is, that it was said unto him,
Thy seed for four hundredth years shall be a stranger in another land. And
therefore Abraham must put this doctrine continually in practice: to wit, to be
quiet and at rest, notwithstanding that he be there as a stranger by way of
borowing leave, and must always have one foot lifted up to be going. To be
short, he must be like a bird on a bough, as we say. Thus we see why he did
homage unto the king of Gerar. For he forsook not the grant which God had made
him: but because the time was not yet come for him (to enjoy it, and to take
possession thereof: he was therefore contented to live there as a stranger. Genesis
23.9.
And we shall see also hereafter why he would buy a burying place for his wife:
It was because he was not as yet the owner of one foot of ground, and yet by
faith he received that which was given him. Thus we see that his hope extended
it self farther than this present life. And yet notwithstanding we see that it
is not without cause said, which is written in the 119 Psalm: That God is a
pauillion from generation to generation, to all such as trust in him. Fox
Abraham was thrust out unto wind and rain, and to all storms, when as he
dwelt amongst a barbarous and very cruel people; and yet God ouershadowed
him: but it was because he rather liked to leave the earth, and to lift his
heart up to heaven, than to beat his head about the getting of lands and
possessions. He therefore so passed over this world, as that he never set his
mind upon it. And so God in the end showed the effect and performance of this
promise; not but that he had seen somewhat thereof whilst he lived. But his
hope, as we have already said, stretched it self a great deal farther: and so
consequently we may say with the Apostle, That he builded not his neast here in
this world: neither was it the mark where at he aimed: Hebr. 11.13.
For he might have returned unto the country from whence he came, even unto
the country whereas he was borne; to wit, into Chaldea: but he held himself
there, where he had neither possession, kindred, nor friends. Thus then we see
that he looked higher than unto the world.

Now if this then was in him at those days when as the doctrine appeared
nothing so clear by far, as at this day it does unto us. What excuse shall
we make, for so much as our Lord Jesus Christ has once appeared, and was
conversant here in the world, and ascended into heaven, and has set open the
gate for us, and does by his Gospel incessantly solicit us to aspire upward?
If we (I say) be continually wrapped and swadled up in these corruptible
things? must not this be a most villainous unthankfulness?

And therefore, let us learn so to dwell in this world, as that we may enjoy
and take pleasure of the benefits which the Lord bestows here upon us: but
yet in such sort, as to say with Saint Paul: That our conversation is in
Heaven; Philip. 3.20.
and are already citizens thereof, although it be as yet but in hope. And in
deed, we are also to remember what is said in another place: That so long as
we dwell in these mortal bodies, 2. Cor. 5.6.
we are as it were absent from God. We see also that we have not the
fruition of his presence: Because that our spiritual life is hid. For if it
were not so, Colos. 3.3.
we should effectually enjoy it, and then shall faith cease: For (as Saint
Paul says) That which a man hops to have is not seen. Romans 8.24
And therefore let us learn, that since GOD draws us unto him self, not to
be so base minded as to drenche our selves here on earth over head and ears,
as it were, in filthy myer and dyrt: but continually go on, knowing that this
is the very beaten path and high way for us to aspyre a great deal higher.

Now, it is very much that is here spoken of Abraham. Lo here very great and
commendable virtues, as when GOD grants him rest and peace, he does not
securely sleep therein: for although the king gave him leave to dwell patiently
in his Tent, yet he acknowledged himself to be but a stranger: and although
every man became his friend, and were ready to be at unity with him; yet
could he in no wise keep company with them, but had rather have been at
utter defiance with them, than he would at any hand have conformed and framed
himself to their superstitions and idolatries, and still held his course in
truly worshipping of the living God. In all this (as I have already said) he
showed very excellent virtues. But Moses adds another sacrifice which is
far greater, and much more exquisite: that is, Abraham was enforced to kill
his son, yea even his own only son. Now this was an Obedience unto God
beyond all measure surpassing any man's power to perform, although in very
deed we ought to be his, both in life and death: But that which is here
commanded Abraham to do, is far beyond all the rest. For the matter in
question is not only of Abraham his full Obedience toward God, in forsaking
himself, and in having his son to be taken from him which was given him,
and so to be quite and clean rid of him when as it should please God to take
him from him, and to suffer all this patiently. This I say is not the question,
but the matter is, that he must kill him with his own hands. Now this is
such an hard and strange thing, as that the very hearing of it once spoken off,
is able to astonish and kill the very heart of any man. It is not then without
cause that Moses from the nineteenth Chapter after he had hertofore spoken of
the life of Abraham, sets down this Act, Genesis 12.1.
and says that after these things God again tempted him. Now it was a very
great temptation when as God took him from his fathers house: for so the
words import, when he said* Get thee out of thy fathers house, and from all
thy kinsfolks, and from the place where thou were borne, and I pray you where
could he find a better place to dwell in?

This is the Country which I mean to bring thee unto, a Country forsooth
which he never knew: and therefore he must be there like a feather cast into
the wind, not knowing which way to wind himself. This I say was a grievous
temptation to Abraham, when as he must needs go whither God called him, not
knowing whither, and yet nevertheless this was as it were his a b c. Thus we see
how God begins, when as he meneth to teach in his school. And he was no
sooner come into the land, but that he was eftsoons driven out thereof as it
were with famine, and his wife also taken from him. And the next time also, we
see that he was vexed in every place and could have no rest any where, for
there was not any one within all the Country which did not set himself against
him, and yet he patiently endured and suffered all these things. And yet
notwithstanding he did not once mu^mure against GOD, but endured all the
troubles and afflictions that were laid upon him without discouragement: being
far unlike unto those that are so delicate and effeminate, as that if GOD
deal not with them to their own good liking they will clout it up together,
and quite and clean forget their obedience toward his Majesty. And although
Abraham was this roughly hand^ed, yet conunued he the course he began: But how
long suffered he all these trials? he was not only thus dealt withal three
or four years together, but was so tumbled and tossed as that when he had
passed twenty thirty, and forty years in that Land, he was to begin again
to abide worse storms than he had at any time before bidden; as to be
enforced to forsake the love of his eldest son, and to be utterly spoiled of
him, which was to him more grief and sorrovv than a very kind of death it
self.

After he had sustained these great and most grievous temptations, that GOD
had promised to give him the Land, yet was he so baited, as if he had not
been worthy once to have set his foot in any place of the Land.

God had also promised him seed, Genesis 15.3.
but that came not neither until such time as he was four score years old,
and his wife barren, so as it seemed unto them, that this promise was but a
very mockery. And when he was an hundred years old he had Isaak. But Ismael
must be thrust out of the doors, and be banished as heretofore we have heard.
If we could well savor and taste these temptations, without doubt we should be
wonderfully amazed to see Abraham have such a powerful and constant faith, to
fight against such assaults and to overcome them. Now then, when it is said,
After these things: it is to show that God means to set before us in the
person of Abraham such a spectacle, as that whenever we shall come to the
fight, it shall not be hurtful unto us to follow his steps, neither yet
think it strange or any new thing to conform and fashion our selves like
unto him who is father of the whole Church. But yet this is most certain that
although every man would thoroughly look unto the temptations which he is to
suffer, yet shall he not be able to see the hundredth part of that which we see
in Abraham. And therefore this is to be noted; that as God had bountifully
bestowed the gifts and graces of his holy spirit upon him, so also meant he
to make a through trial of his faith: for God will not have his gifts lie a
rusting and be unprofitable in us; But will deal with every man according to
that measure of his graces which he has vouchsafed us. For he prepares us to
endure them, or else we were never able to undergo them: nor once move one
finger to do well, except the Lord does so dispose the same and gives us the
power to do it. And therefore whenever he puts us to the Combat, he
bestows the graces of his holy spirit upon us. Now for so much as Abraham had
great perfection in comparison of us, according as we are men, see how God
also proved him with such strange sorts of trials as we are never able to
come nere unto. Howbeit so much the less excuse have we for our idleness,
coldness, and wantonness, if we follow not at least in some measure our father
Abraham. And although the constancy of our faith be not equal unto his, yet if
we endeavor not our selves to follow him some what aloof (as we say)
according to our ability and infirmity, without doubt we shall be without all
excuse. So then we have from hence to gather: That Abraham was all his life
long tormented both in soul and body: and yet when it was come eue^ to the
vpcast (as we say) God would needs prove him without all comparison more
lively than ever at any time before he had done, so that it had been able to
have madehim a hundred thousand times to have dispaired, had he not in most
wonderfu^ manner confirmed him therein by his holy spirit.

To what end is this matter of Abraham's recited us? The benefit that every
one should make of these temptations of Abraham.
It is not because we should vvonder at his virtue and magnify and commend
his so great power and strength: But to the end to learn, not to be over
effeminate. And that when it shall please the Lord to exercise us in what
sect soever, to be tractable to be led to ^im, and to have our affection so
tamed as that God only be M^ister over them to rule them, and to covenant
with us as pleases himself. Thus we see what it is that we are here to
learn from this place. And so whensoever we have endured any temp^ation, or
have sustained any combat, and that God soon afrer tries us, let us not
think it any whit strange. For we serve him not with this condition, that
after he has roughly handled us for a day o^ a year we may by and by be
discharged and so crave a paspot: But contrariwise to harden us, because God
cease not continually to send such proofs to try our faith vvithall: But
the some should be I say, as an habit unto us: because we see that an old
beaten soldier can abide a great deal more pain, than a young fresh water
soldier (as we say). For a young Nouice knovveth not what it means ^he vvil
be weary with one nights vvatch, he is not able to abide either cold or
heat, not able to away with skirmishing, nor to be alvvaies in vvatch and
ward: but he that is long used hereunto, shall be far betterable to endure
these things. Even so must it fare with us, that when the Lord shall have
exercised us every manner of way, we shall be so much the more able and
ready the better and longer to continue. And although it should seem to us
that God dealt very severely with us in laying too great load upon us, yet let
not us think our case to be strange. And why so? Because we see here a
pattern thereof in our father Abraham unto whom we must be configured. Now
as concerning this word tempt, we know what is meant by it when it is
attributed unto God: It is not meant that he tempts us to lead us to do ill,
for we are of of our selves thereunto overmuch inclined: And as S. James says,
Every man is tempted of his own concupiscence: James, 1.14
And therefore we must not seek after the cause of these faults any where
else but in our selves: wherefore God tempts us not so as to say that the
sault is in him, and that we may impute the evil which we commit unto him,
as if he were Author thereof; but God tempts those that are his to sound
them. And therefore this word imports, To examine, to prove; not that he
needed to inquire what is in us, God seeeth our thoughts.
for we know that nothing is unknown to him.

The books are not as yet open: but yet so as that God knows and judges
that which he will make manifest at the last day. And therefore he has no
need to sound and try us, Afflictions are the gifts of God, and trials of out
faith.
for he does that, that is in us: But this is referred to the probation of our
faith. For as we have already said, God will not have his gifts to be
unprofitable, but will apply them to some use, to the end he may thereby be
glorified: and we thereby also so much the better be confirmed, considering how
wonderfully he regards us: and would have us with patience fight against all
the assalts of Satan and of the world: that we thereby might find by
experience, that God is with us, and loves us; Wherefore we have good cause
the more confidently to call upon him, to run unto him, and stay our selves
upon his goodness, and not to doubt of his help even unto the end. God tries
us by afflictions, both for his own glory and also for our salvation.
Thus we see then in sum why God tries us, to wit, that he will have the
gifts which he bestows on us to be applied to serve him: to the end all men
might know his power, goodness, and wisdom: that thereby he might be
glorified as he deserves: But it is chiefly to this end, that we might know
his fatherly goodness toward us, and be so much the more stirred up to honor
him, and fully and wholy dedicate our selves unto him: and vvithall to trust
altogether in him. Thus we see how Abraham was tempted, and so are also all
the faithful servants of God at this day. For, if we should live at ease, and
the serving of God cost us nothing, what proof should there be of our faith?
Moreover, which way should the true children of God, and such as serve him in
simplicity of heart, be discerned from hypocrites? And therefore we must be
tried by temptations, even as Gold and silver are tried in the Furnaise. See
also, why Saint Peter says: That it is good reason, that our faith should be
tried. 1. Pet. ^1.6.
Now because Gold and silver are precious things, therefore it is very meet
they should be tried by the fire. And yet are but these corruptible metals:
and shall our faith which is far more excellent be buried in the earth, and so
rust, and God his glory not be seen therein? No, no, it must not be so; and
therefore it is meet that it should be tried. Wherefore, let not us think it
strange, that if the Lord should so deal with us, as to lose the raynes to
the devil, to lead us to do evil: to have the wicked also vex and torment
us: and besides, to have other inward temptations laid upon us. To be short,
if we should be exercised every manner of way; Note.
yet let us know that we had need to have the Lord for his part to set down
unto us that which before was hidden, and to us unknown. We see then why
temptations should not seem bitter, but rather sweet unto us, because the
Lord our God applies them unto our salvation, and so serves his turn with
them, as that his name is thereby glorified, and our selves also by that means
more and more benefited, if so be we look unto the issue. Now, in this
temptation which is here touched, Abraham is deadly wounded, as if God would
have cast him into the deepest bottomless pit of dispeire that could be
imagined. And yet notwithstanding he abode by it: F^^ Abraham, as a weak man
failed a thousand ^imes when as GOD commanded him to kill his son: How beit,
this is not all: To have Abraham to take his own sword and kill his own
son: but there was a far^e more grievous temptation imposed upon him worthy
the noting, whereof we will hereafter speak more at large. But for this time
it shall suffice that we give you a little taste thereof. For, the question is
not, that the best beloved and only child of a father must be put to death,
and to dye a violent death before the fathers own eyes, and with the fathers
own hands: This is not all and the chief matter: but the question is; which
way that salvation should come that Abraham looked for by his dead son Isank,
according to the Lords promise. For, for men to kill their children is nothing
in comparison of this. For, there is no man that will acknowledge his child to
be his savior. But although Isaak was not Abraham his savior: yet he knew
that the savior of the world should come of him. From whence then is it, that
Abraham was to look for his righteousness, welfare, and salvation, without it
werein the person of Isaak, that is to say, in him which should proceed from
him? Is Isaak then dead? Why, then is all the world utterly lost and damned,
and the devil reigning and ruling every where. Behold then God an enemy to
all mankind and to all the creatures: and there remains now nothing else,
but the wrath and vengeance of God enflamed and set on fire to devour and
consume all: for this son of his, Isaak, must be killed by Abraham his own
hand: yea, even by Abraham, who received this promise from God his own mouth,
as thus: I will give thee a son, who shall be so blessed, as that all men
shall be saved through the grace which I shall bestow upon him: and yet must
this son be put to death?

Here then we see (as I have already said) Hell standing wide open, and the
devil so ruling, as that all is quite and clean destroyed: For there is no
more looking for the promises of salvation, seeing that he that should give
life to all creatures, is himself put to death.

Now, whither then must we go? The question then is not here, according to
man's judgment, to wound the heart of Abraham with afflictions and sorrows
only? but the question is to kill his very faith, and all the hope conceived
of his own salvation. It should seem that God meant to tread underfoot
whatsoever hope of his grace and goodness he had promised him. To be short, it
should seem that he did but mock Abraham: As if he should have said: Go thy
way; thou art but a beast to wait and follow me, and to take such pain to
obey me. I promised thee a Trybe, from which the salvation of the whole world
should come: and I have performed my promise in giving thee thy son Isaak:
But thou must by and by go and cut his throat, thereby to let thee understand,
that thou art but a simple and foolish fellow, to trust unto that which I have
promised thee; and to think to have a Trybe, and such a precious Trybe also as
should be more worth than all the whole world besides: yea, than an hundredth
thousand worlds. For this is a matter which concerns the everlasting
salvation of thine own soul, and of the souls of all men else: and yet thou
art now going about to deface all this. Now (as I have already said) it is
impossible for us ever to be able sufficiently to comprehend these things, and
so to be touched sufficiently to the quick with them: and yet notwithstanding
wen (...) meditate upon them, because they were^ (...) written in vain. Here
then we see the pr^^^ face of this history. Let us now set down particular
that which Moses has here to^^ched: Take thine only son, thy son Isaak,
thy son whom thou only love. Thus we see that God contenteth not himself
with the pearsing of Abraham his heart; as if he should stabbe him in with a
dagger, but sets him upon the rack, and retcheth him up to diverse pinnes,
as though after he had so racked him, he meant to give him also the strappado,
and after that another kind of more grievous torture. For when he had
commanded him to kill his son; was it not enough that he said unto him: Go
thy way and sacrifice thy son? But he said unto him: Take thy son, yea
thine only son, thy son Isaak, him whom thou only love: thereby to
show that he had cut away all hope from Abraham.

Now, where he says, Thy son whom thou only love; this was not a
fatherly love only, as natural fathers naturally love their children: But
Abraham loved Isaak accordingly as he respected the salvation of his soul, and
of the whole world, by which means they might be companions with the Angels,
and inheritors of the kingdom (...).

(...) ^^inally, here we see what this speech one^^ ^onne, and best beloved
son means. And (...) sides, the word Isaak which is here na^^^d, is set
down as a word of reproach. ^or God named him Isaak, and not men. Here we
see that God gave the child the name: and what was that? Laughter, and Joy,
Now it should seem that all this was but in mockery, as if he would have
said: This is very well for thee; for here is nothing but ioyfulnes. Thou
greatly ioyest in Isaak, and think all this to be matter of joy. But there
will come, ere it belong, such a quame over thy stomach as will pearse thee at
the very heart: For thou thy self must be the hangman to this child whom
thou so dearly love: and must draw out thy knife, and lift up thine hand
to cut his throat, Must not Abraham (now think you) be thought to be a very
hangman; and by this means stir up all his neighbors about him in a rage:
to say, what a villain is this, that is gone out to kill his own son?
Behold a mad man; a man possessed with a devil; must not this be a very
devilish fury?

Thus we see him confounded, as it were, before God, and abhorred of the
world. But yet this is not all: for he says, Take thy son; and what shall
I do with him? Take him, I say, and sacrifice him. And wither shall I lead
him? Carry him unto such a mountain As I shall name unto thee. Now, must
Abraham needs be very sore vexed and grieved: and besides; must he needs
kill his only son? Must he needs also travail such a long and tedious
journey without any guide he could not tell whether? And must God likewise
hold his nose not only to the grind-stone; but also so rack and torment him,
as it is impossible for any tongue to speak, or heart to imagine? Are not
these such things as far surpasses all man's reason, and (as it were
impossible) to suffer and abide?

For, as it was before said unto him, when he departed from the place where he
was; that he knew not whither GOD would lead him: even so is it here; for
there is no place at this time assigned him, otherwise than thus: Thou shall
go from hence into the land of Moria. He must needs go forsooth, from the
place where he had lived the most part of his aged years; yea, until he
was very old, as we have already heard: Go thy way (says he) and when
thou art there, then will I show thee where thou shall sacrifice thy son.

Here then we see, how many ways the Lord so sounded the heart of his
servant, as that all the temptations which we were able to pyle up together
would never be like: and if we should compare them with those that should be
laid upon us to abide, they would seem nothing in respect of that which we
here see. And therefore we see that God wonderfully spares our weakness, in not
bringing us thus far. For if any of us should be visited with any sickness
that should last long, we would so sorrow and grieve, as that we would be
very angry with God.

Again, if any man should dye, his wife would grow so melancholy, as that
she would be altogether impatient and murmuring. If God should take away any
of our children: yea, although we had many, we would be angry with our
selves, and weep and mourn extremely: and therefore, what would we do if we
should be brought to this pass, as here it is said, even to kill with our own
hands our own children, and not leave one alive, but dispatch our house of
them all? yet would not all this be any whit comparable unto Abraham his
trial. For, the children which God bestows upon us now at this day, are not
the ground work of our salvation: Neither ought we to leave the having of our
Lord Jesus Christ, although all human knowledge should perish and decay:
Wherefore let us acknowledge that God supporteth us, and pittieth our weakness
when as he brings not us unto so hard a trial, as this which Moses here
makes mention of. Let this then be a good advertisement unto us that when God
shall prove us, that we yield our necks to the yoke, and suffer him to make
trial of us. And this is the most principal point of all our life, so to
yield our selves as that God may dispose of us as pleases him: and not
grudgingly reply and say, that he deals thus and thus hardly with us. This (I
say) is the chiefest point of our whole life. In very deed (I must needs say)
that this were a very excellent great good gift in us, as to be able to walk
in integrity of life amongst our neighbors, to do no man wrong, to live
chastely, and soberly all the days of our life, eschewing all drunkenness,
intemperancie, blasphemy, and such like.

Well sir, I must needs in truth say, that these are great virtues, but yet
they are not always found in us; and yet for all that, this is not the
chiefest point. For the principallest point, (as I have already said) is this,
that when we serve God, although many sorrows and griefs torment us, although
the Devil sounds us alarmes, and lies in ambush for us, although men grow
so perverse and wicked, as that one spurreth us here; another strikes us
there, and another seeks our utter destruction: And on the other side,
although we hang our wings (as we say,) although we be hungerbit, and
altogether blamed and contemned, although all these things fall out for our
shares and portion, yet must we so bless the name of God, as that we must
mi^tigate and ease all our anguishes and sufferings, and be ready always to
say, O Lord, thy will be done, deal with us as it pleases thee, and although
this gear should fall out far worse than thus, yet must we receive all
things patiently. Now when as we shall grow unto this patience, that (no
doubt) is the most principal mark that we must shoot at. And above all
things, this history ought a great deal the move be respected and meditated
of us, considering that the Lord would show that unto us which we are to
comprehend from our father Abraham, to the end we might follow his example.
And when as God, (as I have already said) shall have thus framed us, and
brought us to this pass, let us dedicate our selves and all that we have unto
his Majesty. For it Abraham had not had this ground and principle, without
doubt he had never stepped one foot forward, but had rather fled away from God*
than have come near him: howbeit he had not this principle as from himself,
but because it was the gift of God, he was not therefore to use it and keep
it back as it pleased him: But must make a reckoning of it to him that gave it
him, saying, Here am I, as after ward he showed it. For when God called him
and said, Abraham: Here am I Lord, (quoth he) This answer showed that Abraham
was as it were ready at hand to receive the commandments which God would give
him, even as a diligent servant should do. For if his Master goes forth, he
is by and by at his heels, to say, will it please you to have any thing with
me? And if his Master tarrieth within doors, he will settle himself to
harken what his Master will command him; as to bid him do this, or go to such
a place. So then Abraham showed that he served not himself nor his own
affections, but so dedicated himself unto God, as that whatsoever he had was
his also. Neither did he this hypocritically, as a great many of men may say
unto God with their mouths, Here am I: and yet notwithstanding befarre enough
from him. But when Abraham said, Here am I, he protested thereby that he was
even before God: for afterward, he protested, that his feet, hands, eyes,
ears, all his senses, and all the parts both of his body and soul were
ready to serve God, and to put his neck under his yoke, and to go whither
soever he would have him.

Thus we see what we are to retain from our father Abraham: and so let us
understand and know that without this scope and end we shall altogether err
(as I have already said) we may have all the commendable virtues of the world,
and be esteemed of also like Angels, and yet all not worth a button, without
we know that God sees us, and would have us continually to bend our selves
in all obedience unto him. And although he should at any time make us turn
this way and that, and make us travail and toil to the uttermost; yet let not
us at any hand give over obaying and fearing him, but say: Lord, here am I,
whatsoever come of me: and be angry with all the obstacles which may hinder and
pull us back; and be at defia^ce with all the difficulties, vexations, and
combats that may be raised against us: Let us (I say) be angry with all this
gear, that we may continually go on our course, until such time as we be
come unto that scope and mark, whereunto God calls us: that is to say, until
we be delivered from all our miseries and afflictions, and enjoy the rest of
his heavenly kingdom.

Let us now prostrate our selves before the Majesty of our good GOD in
acknowledging our sins, beseeching him that he will make us so to feel them
as that we may be displeased with them, and more and more to be dispoiled of
them, and so to be clad with his righteousness, as that he may wholly rule and
reign in us, so that by that means we may declare our selves to be his, as
he has most dearly bought us: and that Jesus Christ being dead, and risen
again has also bought us unto himself, to make us partakers of his glory,
and continually to conduct us both in life and death.

FINIS.
The Second Sermon of Abraham his Sacrificing of his Son Isaak.
3 Then Abraham rose up early in the morning, and sadled his Ass, and took
two of his servants with him and Isaak his son, and cloue wood for the burnt
offering, and rose up and went to the place which God told him.

4 Then the third day Abraham lift up his eyes, and saw the place a far off.

5 And said unto his servants, Abide you here with the Ass: For I and the
child will go yonder and worship, and come again unto you.

6 Then Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon Isaak
his sonnee, and he took the fire in his hand, and the knife, and they went
both together.

7 Then spoke Isaak unto Abraham his father, and said, My father. And he
answered, Here am I, my son. And he said, Behold the fire and the wood, but
where is the Lamb for the burnt offering?

8 Then Abraham answered, My son, God will provide him a Lamb, for aburnt
offering: So they went both together.


WE have heard that this was the chiefest and hardest conflict that ever
Abraham sustained in all the days of his life, the going with his son Isaak
into a mountain and there to offer him for a burnt offering: because in the
first place he was to kill him with his own hands. Now it has been showed us
here before, that God would declare unto us in our father Abraham, that we must
so overcome all our natural affections, as that his honor be preferred above
all the rest. For although a husband loves his wife never so dearly, a
father his children never so tenderly, yet all this must be troad under foot
when the matter for the serving of God comes in question: For that is the
most precious of all other precious things. We have also declared, that
Abraham was not tempted only in that God commanded him to kill his son, but
in that it seemed that all the promises which God before had made unto him were
all as a man would say, quite and clean frustrate and void: For they all
depended upon that which we have already heard, That the blessed seed should
be raised in Isaak. And therefore it seemed that God meant to frustrate his
promise made to Abraham. Now although it might seem in any natural man's
reason, that God herein was contrary to himself, and that that commandment of
his was to adnihilate that which before he had heard from Gods own mouth, yet
he constantly obayed

(...) Majesty, without further questioning.

Now it might stand at the first sight, that that which he did, had no good
found foundation of a true and lively faith, because faith has respect to the
promises. And yet (as I have already said) Abraham could look for nothing
but by Isaak his means: Because it is said, That in Christ Jesus all the
promises of God are most sure, 2 Cor. 120
and yea, and Amen. For our Savior Jesus Christ must come of the stock of
Isaak, and that was in very deed the seed which was promised him. How then
could Abraham be contented to have his son to die, and yet to have the
promises of God to stand in full strength power and virtue? Now the Apostle
says, That by faith, Abraham offered his son Isaacke. Hebr. 11.17.
So that by this we are let to understand that Abraham (fall out as it would)
rested wholly upon the word and promise of God: and as for the contrariety
which may seem to be between the commandment and the promise: The Apostle
answers, Heb. 11.19 Genesis 21.12
That he believed that God was as able to raise seed out of the ashes of
Isaak, as he was able to perform his former promises. Now this is a profitable
point for us, if we understand it aright: For we are hereby admonished so to
believe in God, as that we look further than unto the world, and whatsoever
else we are able to perceive and comprehend by our natural reason and
understanding. For if faith staid it self upon that which we see, it Were
nothing. And then were the power of God maruelousely diminished. Moreover, we
are to consider of the words of the Apostle, saying in this manner, Faith is
the ground of things hoped for, Heb. 11.1.
and the evidence of things not seen: Agreeing with the words of the Apostle
in his Epistle to the Romans, saying, We hope not for the things which we see,
Romans 8.24.
but for the things we see not: yea, even for things that seem to be
impossible. Since then it is so that the promises of God do not set before our
eyes that which is contained in them: we must (as I have already said) when we
speak of faith look further than unto the world. And how is that? To wit, we
must not measure the infinite power of God with the means which are set before
us, and as we comprehend them. But when as we shall have these toys in our
heads, as to think that this or that can never come to pass, and that there
seem to be a very contradiction in the case, yet let us thus conclude,
without all doubt God will perform whatsoever he has spoken.

But we will say, how can it possibly be? Oh let not us judge of it, we
must here bring under our own senses and wits, and do God this honor, to
say, that he is faithful: But we know not what will be the issue thereof, or
else think that all is shut up and closed.

Here then we see what we are to learn out of these words of the Apostle. Now
if Abraham had reasoned like natural man, he might have said, that God was not
contrary unto him self: For he told me that I should have seed by Isaak, and
that from thence, the Savior of the world should come: and I must not forget
this. And yet at this present he has commanded me to kill Isaak; Here is no
order in this, for I will take him at his first word, and that must stand.

Thus we see that Abraham might after this manner have excused himself, and
yet have been a Rebel unto God under the color of obedience. But what does
he? he considered with himself that God was almighty, and therefore able to
accomplish whatsoever promise he had made concerning Isaak.

You say well sir, but what if he had died, how then? And what of that? As
though God were not Lord over death: Here we see the right conflict of
Abraham's faith, which is, death is set before his eyes which was enough to
confound him; but he extolled the power of God far beyond all this and said,
yet will GOD overcome and be a mighty Conqueror herein.

And how can that be? Oh this is not a matter for any man to judge or
determine of, nor to give scope to his opinion to measure the power of GOD, but
hoodwinke himself and say thus: God will so bring this matter to pass, as
that I shall be astonished to see it. But it is not for me to ask how and
which way he will do it: for I must keep me within compass, until such time
as God shows me that, which I before knew not. And this may the more clearly
appear, by the answer of Abraham unto his son, when he says, My Son, GOD
will provide one.

Now then when see how we are to honor God, that is, when as we speak
of the acceptance of his promises, we hold us to them, and resolve to go
vvhithersoeuer he commands us: To vvite, let us know, That the issues of
death are in his hand, as in the three score and eight Psalm it is said: and
although we see nothing else but bottomless depths before us, making show to
swallow us quite and clean up: yet let us go on vvhither soever GOD calls
us. Now it is namely said, That Abraham sadled his Ass, and laid the wood
upon him with the rest of the provision, and went on with two of his Servant
and his Son.

Here Moses more especially expresses that, which has been heretofore
touched* To vvite, that God tried the faith of Abraham to the full, in holding
him in suspense.

It was sufficient, if Abraham had but cut the wood, and had gone but an arrowe
shot only to have killed his son: But he must take a good long journey in
hand, he could not tell whither, nor yet how fair; and withal, night also
approaches, which always brings with it more sorrow, grief and care: for
whenever any man is full of pensiuenes and care, no doubt of it, his pain
and grief is far more intolerable in the night than in the day: and yet
must Abraham abide all this, and be vexed every way. Well Sir, he rises
again next morning betimes, and then begins his grief afresh. All that day
he beholds his son, whom he must after a short while kill: and besides,
these fantasies are still tumbling in his mind. What? must I murder mine own
flesh and blood? and must I commit the most detestable act that is possibly to
be imagined, both before God and men? Why? this is such a monstrous piece of
woork, as is able to make the hairs of all the whole world stand upright? And
yet (notwithstanding) fall out as it will, Abraham must be driven still to do
it, and continue the second night until the third day before such time as God
showed him the mountain Moria, which is the place whereon Jerusalem was
afterward built.

Here then we see what we are hereby to learn: to wit, that if we will
stoutly fight against all temptations, we must not have a^sodaine kind of
heat of faith only: But such a perseverance therein as that we never give
over, although God continues us still in combats and fights, and delivers us
not out of them at the first encounter. And this is a very necessary point for
us to consider of, for you shall have many men show great and singular
affection in their obedience toward God, and yet many times it will show it
self to be but like a puff of vvinde which soon vanishes away, as we
have seen too too much experience thereof. Wherefore let us not think it
strange if God delivers not us incontinent when as we shall be assailed
to fight, and to have our faith proved, albeit we conquer not the first day:
But we must fight continually and not think that God passes measure, but
rather let us choose to follovv the example of our father Abraham in this
behalf.

Now it is soon after said, That he commanded his servants to abide there,
and laid the wood upon his son Isahak which was for the sacrifice. For the
question was not only to kill Isahak, but to burn him also to ashes:
Wherefore he laid the vvood upon Isahak, and commanded his servants to abide
there: For he right well knevve that his servant would never have suffered
him to commit such an Act, But would rather have thought thus with
themselves: Did you ever see such a doting old man? Surely he is mad, he says
that God commanded him so to do: But is it possible that GOD would command
such a cruel thing to be done? And therefore they would never have imagined
this obedience to be any part of the service of God; but would rather have
taken it to be the part of a surious and mad man.

Now Abraham knevv this well enough, and this is a circumstance which we
are to note, to vvite, that seeing he understood the infamy and reproach that
would light upon him, and that every man would think it was done rather
like a frantic man, than a service which could any way please GOD: since, (I
say) he understood this, and yet cared not how ignominiously men would judge
of him in committing a fault clean against nature, and such an enormious and
detestable cruelty as could not be a greater, and yet would not desist from
the pursuing thereof: Let us learn after his example, that although all the
world should find fault with us, and spit in our faces, and be condemned,
where we should be commended for our true serving of God, yet let not us at
any hand cease to obey and do whatsoever he commands. For, if this
constancy be not in us, without doubt, we serve our own ambition; and so
shall have our revvard as our Savior Christ says: That when we shall look
after the praises of men, in saying that all that we do is well done, and
we well pleased to be here so commended: Let us look to have no part in
heaven, because we have had overmuch regard unto the world. But if we shall
have this patience in us; as that although men turn unto the vvorst
whatsoever we do in the obeying of God, and yet we go on that good course
which we began without pulling our heads out of the choler; Then shall we
be sure to find our revvard in heaven. Thus we see how we should show our
selves in truth, that it is God unto whom we go about to approve our selves.

To be short, if we set not at naught all the judgments of men, and
patiently bear all the opprobries, ignomies, and blames that can possibly be
laid upon us, it is most sure that our faith does not show it self such as it
ought to be. We see also why saint Paul exhorts us by his example, to
walk through shame and infamy, in steed of good report: and for well
doing, to be evil spoken of: that is to say, when as we shall have had a
just and good meaning, and that we shall have God for witness that we have
desired to conform and frame our selves to do his vvil: and yet men charge us
and lay false crimes unto us. Let us content our selves that God accepts and
approves us. Now we had as great need of this doctrine at this day as ever
we had: For generally, if we make profession of Christianity: We must
look to be eseemed as heretics, and dogs: and to have the world judge us
to seek nothing else but innouations and troubles: and to be very Rebels: and
that we have forsaken God: and to be short, that we are far worse than
Apostataes.

Thus we see how the Papists speak daily of us. Now if we be so
effeminate, and have such itching ears, as we see a great many that would
feign keep themselves in their good reputation; without doubt we shall
cunningly davvbe and smooth over every thing, and so in the end forsake God.
Wherefore we are so much the rather rightly to meditate upon this doctrine.
To wit, we must not care what reputation we have with men, so that we be
approved before God. We may also come to particulars, as if any man shall
walk in the simplicity of his heart godly and honestly, ye shall have some
fall a scoffing at him, ye shall have other some call him hypocrite, and
another sort will say, that he does it for gain.

Thus we see how the Devil by these subtle practices goes about to make us
become dissolute. Wherefore we are to learn, so to apply all our senses unto
God, as that although men never so unjustly blame us, yet let not us be moved
once to bend or yield, but have an eye always unto the way that is set before
us. We see also what collection we are to make hereof, what a strong faith
Abraham had when he was thus qualified, for he premeditated these things, as
if he had been at his ease: For if we be any whit passioned, and then have a
purpose to do good, yet shall our minds many times be carried away, and shall
become so blockish, as that we cannot tell at which end to begin, nor what
order to take. We see it in those that are of the greatest magnanimity, that
when they are perplexed, they will not go so directly to a matter as otherwise
they could. Now Abraham must needs have a troubled mind amongst all the
fantasies which were in his head, as to think, surely my Servants will keep
me from doing this Act, because they will think me to be mad: and in steed
of binding my son, they will bind me and carry me back in spite of my teeth
into some house, and there keep me like a mad and savage beast, as if God had
utterly condemned me. Now Abraham foresaw all these things. Hereby we may
judge, that in the midst of these darknesses he was so enlightened by the
spirit of God, as that he had always counsel and discretion accordingly as
he had need thereof. We are therefore by his example let to understand, that
when we have such great passions as may astonish us, so as we know not which
way to turn us; Let us beseech the Lord to direct us. And although our natural
senses be confounded: yet that the brightness of the faith which we have may so
overcome, as that we may know which way to hold. Now Moses has here before
recyted, that God sent yet a far more sharp torture unto his servant Abraham
than to any of the rest. For as he was going on the way with his son Isaak,
he said unto his father, My father: we must not think that this spe^ch came
from Isaak at all a very venture, (^s we say:) But God had determined so to
rack the faith of Abraham, as if he would have rent his heart in pieces. For,
there was nothing in the world that wou^d have so grieved Abraham as these
kind and loving words, My father. Now this was a sword to wound Abraham even
to death: and yet (as I have already said) all this came from the counsel of
God* who means here to set before us a pattern and glass of this his great
constancy; that whenever we shall be put to fight against all the temptations
of the world, we might understand that hardly shall we be able to abide the
hundredth part of that he abode, and yet he overcame it. Then Abraham said unto
him, Here am I my son. And soon after Isaak said unto him, Lo, here is wood
and fire, we are going to do sacrifice; and to what purpose? for here is never
a beast to offer in sacrifice? Isaak right well knew that they went to offer a
burnt offering unto God; but he knew not what it was that should be offered, and
therefore he asked. Was it possible for Abraham to be thus racked, and be able
to bear it? Yea forsooth: for God would not abate him an inch of it, because
we might learn to have so much the greater courage. Thus we see what we have
here to retain. True it is, that Moses recyteth this simply and plainly. Now,
if we should read these things without thinking why they were written: without
doubt we should have but a cold pull of it: neither should we be greatly moved
with it. But when as we shall have thoroughly considered, in what estate Abraham
was, and how mightily his heart was distressed, and there upon shall come to
judge when this strange temptation was put upon him: and into what anguish he
might be driven, when as his son said unto him, My father: First, to see
Abraham mark the simplicity of his son; and then after, to think with him
self, Alas poor boy, thou know not for what purpose thou art prepared.

As for example: If a poor man should be led to his death, not knowing any
thing thereof; although he were nothing to us, and we not present when as he
should be thus dealt withal, but did only think upon it, and say in our
selves: what a strange thing is this, to hear of a poor man ledd to the
shambles as a lamb to be slain, no whit doubting of any such thing. Surely,
the very thinking of it would make us shed tears.

Now, behold Abraham, he sees his own son, and besides, he sees him as a
lamb lead by himself to the shambles, and him self also to be the man that
must cut his throat, and afterward burn him to ashes: and to hear his soon
which was with him speak so simply, Where is the beast for the burnt offering?
To be short; we see, that although God at this d^y should send us all the
afflictions that could be devised, yet should they be nothing in respect of
that which Abraham here did bear. And if we would allege our infirmities,
and say, that our human passions would so carry us away, as that we should
never be able to do it. Why? Let us think that Abraham was no more made either
of Iron or Steel than we are. But fall out as it would, he was fully resolved
to give the whole mastrie and superiority unto God, and so subject himself,
as to renounce and forsake him self. Thus we see whither we must bend our
selves to come, although we have many lets by the way: and although we think
we are not able to march one foot forward; yet must we enforce our selves
beyond all force. For the question is not here; that we should go unto it as
in our own strength, as though we were very able people of our selves: But we
must attend and look to have God to furnish us with that which is impossible
for us to do, and far above our power and ability. This then is it which we
are here to retain.

Moreover, let us not doubt, that although there come never so many things
thwarting us. but that it is God that has to do in it: and not think any
thing to come by Fortune, when as we are vexed this way, and assailed that way;
but let us think that God guides and governs all: and that he does it, to
the end we might learn the better to obey him, and not to have our head and
arms only armed, but all the whole body: and to be so furnished as Saint
Paul also exhorts us, as that we may be armed to be able to fight stoutly:
for there he bids us Take the sword, the shield, and Helmet, and all the
whole furniture, even from top to toe. And besides he bids us to put on the
whole complete armor of God. And why does he so? because although we think
our selves to be well armed in one place, yet will the devil by his craft and
subtlety, find the mean td assail in another place, and continually lie in
ambush for us. Thus we see then, that we must learn wisely so to furnish our
selves, as that the devil shall not be able to find any breach about us,
neither yet find any open place to enter into us; but that we shall be able to
repulse both on the right and on the left side. And the answer which Abraham
makes unto his son shows the same a great deal better when as he says,
My son, God will provide a Sacrifice. In these words we see that which has
heretofore been declared; to wite, that our faith must look further than unto
this world. Neither can we believe in God, without we give place unto his
providence to rule over all things whatsoever that we are able to judge of or
apprehend. And in very deed, we should very well incline our selves
thereunto, if we did consider even of those works of God which we see before
our eyes. If we do think of the course of nature, we shall see the clouds
pass to and fro, and yet we know not what God will do with them. We see
how the rain falls: we see also a whirle-winde arise with great and sudden
rain. We see likewise the heaven in short time wax dark: and where before
it was fair and clear, there is now nothing else but obscurity over all.
All these things we see, and we shall have Philosophers set us down natural
causes hereof, and yet without all doubt we shall be confounded of these
things. Now, what if God should presently deal after a strange manner, not
keeping his common and accustomed order? This then should be our instruction,
to be wonderfully astonished when as we speak of the incomprehensible power
of God. And so we should frame our selves to acknowledge his providence, and
worship him when as he declares unto us that he will surmount all our reason
and understanding. But what? It is great pity that we cannot exalt God, and
say that he can do no more than all our senses are able, at the first, to
promise us. And this is the reason why there is so little faith in the world.
And they also which are reasonably well affected, and think themselves
disposed to believe GOD; yet is their faith so lean and weak, as that a man
shall not need to have any thing at all to rebate the edge thereof. Now, all
the mischief that comes hereof is this, that we are not persuaded of the
providence of God. When Saint Paul speaks of Abraham, he says, That he gave
glory unto God, Romans 4.2^
because he believed that he was almighty.

And this is a part of that whereof he speaks: That we must refer all
things whatsoever which may any way trouble us* and whereof we can find no
reason for it, unto the providence of God. And therefore we are a great deal
the more to meditate upon this doctrine. For whenever, and how often so ever
there shall arise fantasies in our heads to pull us back and cool us, not to
do that which God commands us, let this always be our shield and defense:
God will provide; But as how? It seems many times that that which God
commands us, brings therewith great inconveniences. And this is the cursed
wisdom of man that is the greatest enemy unto faith, and which has always
borne the mightiest sway. For, we see that God commands Kings, Princes, and
Magistrates to look that he be honored, and his service purely and sincerely
maintained. Now hereupon we shall have men consider thus and thus with them
selves, and say, why? the world is now grown to be so wicked and perverse, as
there is no dealing with it: and if we should go on this course, all the world
would rail and cry out on us. And besides; if this straight dealing should be
used, it will never come to good. For we see that it is not so easy a matter
to manage and govern men: There will come troubles of it. And again, if they
perceive things somewhat hard to be brought to pass; then must there be some
qualification, or else there will be no good done in it. Thus we see (I say)
with what temptations they shall be solicited which go about to oppose them
selves unto any wickedness. Now what comes hereof in the end? Surely, most
commonly, that they which seem to be most circumspect and wise, and think to
see farthest into this gear; will so speak and deal, as that they will
prove neither fish nor flesh, as we say: And so by this means, God is quite
and clean shut out of the doors. For, first this mischief comes of it; we
obey him not soundly and roundly as we should: And besides, we rob him of that
honor that belongs unto him. For, if any man shall say: O such a matter may
fall out if you so deal. What? is God dead? Has not he foreseen for all the
inconveniences that might come to pass? And if any man shall say; this gear
must not go on this sort: for then such a mischief will follow thereon. Is not
this to accuse God of folly? and to rob him of his power? as if he could not
restrain any man from going whither he would? and yet notwithstanding, the
issue thereof to be both good and prosperous? Even so stands it with the
ministers of the word of God: for, there are a very few of them that can
discharge their duties. True it is, that they have many vices which hinder
them: but this cursed and devilish wisdom reigns in many, which will not
stick to stir up sundry contentions and troubles, and thereupon be carried
with every wind, where they may any way corrupt and falsify the doctrine of
the Gospel, as at this day are many such. For how are they bewitched, that
will deal between Popery and Christianity, but that they think thus and
thus with themselves: O, my masters; to change and alter things after this
manner, were even to make a new world. O, we may not thus do: for, if we make
such an alteration as you speak of? It is twenty to one, that all will come
to naught. Thus we fee how we are contented to do all things by halues, and
swim between two rivers. By this we see how the doctrine of the word of God
is corrupted: and yet notwithstanding (as we have already showed) when as
there shall any mischief begin to arise, things will go continually worse and
worse, in such fort, as they shall not be able to help it when they would. Now
we need not to go so far as to public persons: but to come nearer unto an
householder that would set his house in good order; he shall have these
imaginations always with him: O, if I do that which God has ordained me,
such a thing may fall out thus and thus. Or if a man shall travel for the
maintenance of his life, he will consider thus with him self: O, if I deal
thus simply and plainly, I shall be like a sheep in the jaws of wolves: for
there are such subtle and cunning devises in the world, that the wolves will
beguile me: every man will seek to circumuent and entrap me; and if I do not
the like what shall become of me? Now, if I make my self either an Eawe or a
Weather, out of doubt they will eat the very wool off fro my back. Thus we
see What every man thinks, as if there were no providence of God at al. More
over, if the matter should come in question for the giving of our lives,
although it be not at this day said to every one of us, Take thy son, yea
thine only son Isaak, and kill him; yet God commands us in general to
obey him, in confessing that he is our father and savior. Our savior Jesus
Christ would have us to bear witness of him, Mat. 10.18
even before the most perverse and cruel tyrants of the world: For he would not
have us confess him only before such as desire to have his kingdom come; but
even before his very enemies, and before the greatest persecutors. Thus we
see what confession he requires at our hands. Nay, but good sir; what will
be the end of it? For thus you shall have some fay: what good will my death do?

And if I shall put my self in danger to be slain, I shall be quite and
clean forgotten within three days after, and so thereby breed offense to a
great many others: For many will say; he might have escaped this well enough if
he had listed: for we were quiet and all was well: we were not brought in
question about any thing: and now (forsooth) there must be a needelesse
persecution set abroch, and what good shall any man get by thrusting himself
in this manner so forward? Now surely these are very frivolous allegations.
For I pray you tell me, had not God some meaning when as he both would and
also commanded us to give our selves in sacrifice unto his majesty for the
confession of our faith; and make no reckning of our lives in regard of
honoring of his most holy name? Did not he right well know what would come
of it? And shall we think our selves wiser and circumspecter than he?
Wherefore it is not without cause (as I have already said) for us to retain
this doctrine amongst the rest, where it is said, My son, God will provide
a Sacrifice: For this is as much, as if the holy Ghost should exhort us, not
to be ouerwise (as we say) in our own conceits, and to be ouer-prouident to
dispute and say; which way, I pray you, is it possible that this matter should
this come to pass? But let us be contented, that since God has spoken the
word, that he knows well enough how to compass it. And then let it go as
it will: for this is most sure; that all shall go well, so long as he is our
guide. And in the mean while, our wisdom and reason must herein give place;
and we must be wilfully blind: to wite, we must not be so sharp sighted as
these jolly wise worlings are, which will know all and judge all; even to the
controlling of whatsoever God shall do. Neither let us take from him that
which is his: But let it suffice us, that we discharge our selves of our
duties.

Thus we see that we can have no faith except we set forth the providence of
God: and the mean to advance and set it forth, is, to put over unto him all
whatsoever that breeds nothing else but doubts, and snareth us in many
perplexities. And to be short, that we may say: I beseech thee O Lord, to
guide me whither it shall please thee: For, as for me, I am but a poor
blind wretch, neither is it fit for me to look into this; for that will be,
as it were, a bottomless depth, to cast my self down headlong into, when as
I shall take in hand to direct my self, and to be mine own guide. Here we see
what the true wisdom is, which all the children of God ought to have: that
is, not to be ouer-wise, but to be contented with their measure: and when they
see the way that is pointed out for them, to walk therein: and if they cannot
come to the end thereof at the first; yet let them not cease to go on. And
although they see, as it were, mountains to stay them, and the Sea to swallow
them up in: yet yet let them overcome all this, and know that it was not
written in vain by the Psalmist, where it is said, That God has commanded
his Angels to guide and direct us, when as we shall walk in our ways: Psalm.
91.11.12.
that is to say; that we decline not from that which he has taught us. But let
us know that he will always find out issues for those things that shall
grieve and trouble us, when as in our judgment we shall see nothing else but
confusion and shame of face. Moreover, here might, notwithstanding be found
some infirmity in Abraham amidst all his so excellent virtues, because it
seems that he dissembled in saying, That he and his son would come back
again after they had worshipped and sacrificed in the Mountain: For he did
assure him self that his son Isaak must be slain. Now it is not lawful for
us in any wise to lie: And therefore it seems that Abraham in this point did
amiss. Wherefore some men do judge that he spoke it by the spirit of
Prophecy. But if it should be so, then his faith was nothing; because he must
needs then be ignorant of that which should come to pass. For if God had
revealed unto him that his son should escape; then could there be neither
zeal ne yet constancy in him. But when as he imagined that there was no way
with him, but to kill his son; this showed a testimony of his obedience.

Why then said he, That he and his son would come back again? Let us not
think this to be any strange manner of speech: for when any of us all is
surprised and overtaken with any vehement and grievous passions, many vain and
foolish speeches may so pass our lips, as that we may speak we cannot
tell what. And therefore Abraham might speak like a man, as it were beside him
self: and yet not so, as if he knew not what he had to do? for, if he had
obstinatly done it, then had he not pleased God. But Abraham no doubt of it,
had such a stayed affection to do that which God commanded him, as that he was
(as a man would say) ravished therewith. And this we see to be in all those
whom God has strengthened: As when a man goes to execution, he makes no
reckning of it: neither wou^d he have any man to divert him from it: For he had
thus made his account; I must now present my self before God, and therefore I
must forget whatsoever else shall come in my mind.

Thus then it fell out with our father Abraham, as that he did not distinctly
think of every thing that he was to answer unto as concerning the sacrifice:
but said only, we will go and sacrifice unto God, and when we have made our
oblation, we will come back again. And thus much as concerning this point.

Now it is said; That Abraham and his son went farther together. It is not
without cause that Moses sets down these words twice, They went together:
and after, They went on farther together. When it is said, That they went
together, it is to let us understand, in what a wonderful passion Abraham was,
when as he saw himself alone with his son: For company many times
withdraws us from being so troubled and grieved as otherwise we should be.
For, when we are alone by our selves, we are then more pensive and
melancholy. Now Abraham saw himself to go with his son, and to conduct him:
and also after he had so answered him, yet to go on with his son: this
does a great deal the more amplify the strength he had; so that nothing
could so withdraw him, as that he did not continually pursue his purpose,
because God guided him. Wherefore we see that he was strengthened from above.
For it was impossible for him, as he was a man, to be able to overcome these
sharp temptations. And therefore God strengthened him with a mighty and an
outstretched arm. But that which is here set down of him is written for our
instruction, to the end we might know, that although Abraham was even as weak
a man as we are, yet he still strove and overcame whatsoever was contrary
unto his faith, and that through the only assistance of God. And although at
this day we know our own weakness, yet let us not as a great many do, flatter
and deceive our selves therein: But it is the thing that should the rather
stir us up and prick us forward to call upon God, and look for that at his
hands, which is wanting in us, and so persevere and continue, as that although
the Devil shall devise every manner of way to make us grow dissolute and go
backward, yet let us continually go on still more and more a direct course.
For, that which is here said of Three days journey, is to show unto us that
we must continue so long as it pleases God. True it is, that we may for a
while endure temptations; yea, perhaps a whole year; yea, ten, peradventure
all the days of our lives, and all this must be abidden. But here we are to
note that Abraham was after another manner of sort tempted, even all his life
long: For, after he had recovered his son Isaak, yet was he not at rest and
quiet, but we see what terrible conflicts he had in one only kind of
temptation. And therefore let us be stirred up continually to pray to God from
day to day, and never cease.

Moreover we are to note a thin which is most manifestly seen, to wite, the
obedience of Isaak: For it must needs be that he vvoulde in very truth
willingly and of his own accord be sacrificed, or at the least had such a
love to his father, as that he vvoulde frame himself to his will to be made
a burnt offering unto God. Here we see why it is namely said, That they went
together, and that Isaak carried the wood. Wherefore let us learn so to
submit our selves unto the will of God, as that although we must violently
suppress our passions and bring our selves under (as we have already said)
yet let us freely and of our own accord veeld our selves unto him; For, all the
faithful must thus strive and fight: to vvite, that although they suffer never
so much sorrow and grief, and although God so lively exercises them as they
be touched with some doubts and remorse of conscience, and be sometimes as it
were tired with their perverse and wicked dealing with God: yet must they in
the end conclude thus, even to submit and subject themselves unto his will,
and not suffer their contrary affections so to hinder them from submitting
themselves unto him, but that they willingly and of their own accord submit
themselves unto him both in life and death. An example hereof we have in our
Savior Jesus Christ, speaking unto Peter in this sort: John, 21.18
When thou shall be old (says he) another shall carry thee whither thou
would not. Now it is certain that S. Peter suffered for the Gospel, he went
not to it as enforced and grudgingly, but willingly and voluntarily offered
himself a sacrifice unto God. And yet our Savior Jesus Christ says, that he
should be carried whither he would not. Thus we see that there must be a
double will in the faithful: and yet such as are not inco^patible neither. For,
of our own nature we are continually moved, stubbornely to withstand God. And
th^^ is a wicked will. Wherefore it must be tamed and kept under, and there
must be another within us that must correct that, and must choose rather to die
and do Gods will, than to live and withal cast off his yoke. This then we are
to retain from these words, That Isaak and his father went together, and that
they went on further together.

Let us now fall down before the Majesty of our good God in acknowledging our
sins, and beseech him so to touch us, as that we may hate them, be rid of them,
and forsake the^. And yet so to support us in our weakness, as that he will not
but have our service to please him although it be imperfect, and that there are
many things in us which he may find fault withal.

And moreover let us learn so to be led by him, as that we open not our eyes
wider than is lawful for us: But assure our selves that he will always grant
a good issue unto our ways, so that we look no further but to go whither
soever he shall command us, and still aim at that mark which he has set
before us.

That it would please him not only, etc.

FINIS.

