An epistle both of GoDLy Consolacion and also of advertisement, written by
John Calvin the pastor and preacher of Geneua, to the right noble prince
Edward Duke of Somerset, before the time or knoweledge had of his trouble,
but delivered to the said Duke, in the time of his trouble, and so translated
out of frenshe by the same Duke.

To the Christian reader.
THat nothing is more odious or detestable before god then the disobedience of
subjects against their Kings and Governors, may partly by most open
testimonies of holy Scripture euydentlye appear, and partly by this argument
be manifestly proved, that it has never yet unto this day, neither in gods
elected people the Israelytes, nor yet in any other common weal, either
Heathen or Christyan, escaped without most grievous plages and punishme^tes.
Yet nevertheless so merciful a god he is, of so long sufferance, so loathe to
stryke, and so desirous of man's amendment: that it has pleased his divine
majesty, ere he will take extreme vengeance for tumultuous dysobedyence of
the people against their heads, to give many sondrye kinds of warnynges for
us to beware by. First he has now in these last days, raised up many godly
preachers, who cease not daily to publish (as it were) gods proc^amacion in
this behalf, plainly declaryng to all estates and degrees, what their duty
is. He has provided many godly exhortacions and treatyses daily to come forth
to the same effect and purpose. Yea, and lest any manne should think yt he
will daly in such a matter, he made us ye last Soomer here in England to feel
a littel touch of his sharp rod, by the kings regal sword, being a most
euydent token of his great wrath and indignacy on against all Rebels, and
sedicious murmurers. God has of his infinite goodness not only made little
England strong enoughe to withstand al foreign puissaunce, (if we hold
togethers, and agree well emonges our selves, obeying the king and magistrates
as we ought to do:) but also by many vndoubtable tokens has declared that
he myndeth (as it were) to make his habytacyon and dwelling place here among
us, of purpose to be our sure defense and proteccion, if we will receive him
accordyngly. But in case we will be so hard herted, as wilfully to refuse the
grace of his gospel most mercyfully and most fatherly offered unto us: it
cannot be doubted ne avoided, but that thextreme plages of gods wrath and
vengeance will at length light upon all such as either of an ungodly heart
will swell and strive against the grace and truth of his word, which he has
sent among us: or else of a malicious frowardnes will repine, and murmr
against their heads and rulers. Wherefore thou has^ here set forth unto the,
good Christian reader, an Epistle of John Caluyne, written in french unto the
right noble prince Edward Duke of Somerset, and sent hither into England
immediately upon the late commocion here in this realm. And by this Epistle it
may to the godly reader very well appear, how tenderly god of his goodness
does embrace us, and does (as it were) set us in his own lap, myndyng to
keep us safe from al perils of outward enemies, under the shadow and sure
defense of his own wings. He declares himself so mercifully to provide for
us, (if we will gladlye and willinglye receive his grace, and stand therein)
that he makes them careful for us that never were in England, nor never had to
do with us, saving only that (as the nature and property of christian
charity is) they wish and daily pray, that we may have grace so to use
our selves, that the blessing of god which he has so ple^tuouslye powered upon
us, may not through our unthankfulness be taken away again: which forasmuch
as it so is* let not us be less careful for our selves, than other strangers
be. Let us not have received the grace of God in vain. Let us stand in the
truth, and cleave to Christ's gospel, and by the same, let us practice (as
it teaches us) to obey quietely and willingly our rulers and governors by
him appointed. Which it we do, he will so defend us with his almightiful arm,
yt al foreyne enemies (what ever they be) shall either be unable to do us any
scathe: or else shall be turned in their hearts, and of eager enemies shall
beecome our earnest friends and folowers. Which thing GOD grant.

To whom be all honor and praise, world without end.

AMEN.
The Epistle of John Calvin
MY lord, although god has given unto you synguler prudence, magnanimitye, and
other virtues requisite to the place wherein he has ordained you, and in
thaffayres that he has put in your hands: Yet nevertheless, forasmuch as ye
do esteem me for a seruante of his son (whom above al ye desire to obey,)
I am certain that for the love of him, you will gently receive that, which I
write unto you in his name: as in deed I pretend no other end, but yt in
following that, that you have begone, you might more and more advance his
honor, unto the time that you shall have established his reign in such
perfeccion, as it may be known in ye world. And also you shall know, that
without aduauncyng any thing of mine own fantasy, all that I write shall be
drawn out of his pure doctrine. If I considered not other causes then the
dignity and greatenes where ye be: there were no mean for a man of my qualitye
to write unto you. But forasmuch as you refuse not to be taught of the master,
the which I serve: but that rather you prefer to all the rest the grace that
he has given unto you, to be one of his disciples: I think that I have no
need to make unto you any long excuse or preface, because I find you
sufficiently dysposed to receive all that shall proceed of him. We have all to
render thanks unto our Lord GOD and father, in that he will be served of you
in so excellent a work, as in setting forth again (by your means,) the
pure and true rule of his service in England: and in causing the doctrine of
health to have place, and to be there faythefullye publysshed, for all them
that will hear the same. And for that as he has given unto you such virtue
and constancye to pursue it unto this time against so many temptacions and
difficulties: And for that also that he has stre^ghtned you in blessing all
your deuyses and labors, for the prosperyng of them, they be things that
styrreth all true faythefull men to magnify his name. But in the mean time,
because that Satan ceasseth not to raise up by all ways, new combats,
There is nothing more hard then to cause the word of god peaceablye to rewle
among the people.
and that it is a thing of it self so hard as there can be nothing more
hard then to cause the word of GOD peaceablye to rewle emonges the people
(the which of their nature are given to lies:) And forasmuch as there be so
many cyrcumstances which in these days empeache the course of the same, and
above all, that the supersticions of the antechriste having taken root of so
long time, may not easily be taken away from their hearts: Me thinks you
have great need to be confyrmed by holy exhortacyons. And I doubt not, but
that experience teaches you to feel the same, which shall be the cause to
make me to proceed the more frankelye, because yt my purpose (as I believe)
shall be conformable to your desire. And albeit that my exhortacions shall be
superfluous: yet I am sure that you will bear with the good zeal and
affeccion, that stirs me to do it. Wherefore according to reason, I believe
that the necessity which ye feel, shall cause that the same shall be a great
deal the better received: Howesoeuer it shall be, I beseech you my lord, that
it may please you to give me the hearing in some aduertisementes which I
entend brieflye to declare unto you, hopyng that when ye shall have heard it,
at the least you shall find some savor for to be reconforted, and to take a
great deal the better courage to continue the holy and noble enterprise, in
the which god has appointed you to be employed unto this present.

I doubt not but the great troubles which happened unto you not long ago,
have been unto you very hard and annoyouse: and most of all for that many
might have taken occasion of slaundre, for as much as they were moved (in some
part) under the shadow of chaungyng the Religyon. Wherefore it cannot be but
that it has been unto you a very hard assault, as well for the cares,
which might come unto you, as also for ye mutenies of the malygners and
Ignorauntes, and also for the fear and trouble of the good. Truly the brute
that I have heard a far of, has caused me to have great grief in my heart,
unto such time that I did know that God had begone to put some remedy.
Nevertheless, for that, that they be not yet al pacifyed, and that the devil
may renew them again: you shall call to remembrance that, that the holy
story recyteth of the good king Ezechias: that is to say, at such time as he
had abolyshed the Supersticyons in Iewerye, Ezechias at his fir^ reforinyng
of the church was fore oppressed of enemies
and reformed the state of the church according to the law of god, yt the^ he
was so oppressed of his enemies, yt he was very lykelye to be a lost and
desperate manne. It is not without cause that the holy Spirit notablye
expresses that such afflyccyons happened unto him immediatelye after he had
established the true religion in his persit order. For it was very lykelye,
Whosoever goes about to set forth the glory of GOD, shall have persecucio^
that as soon as he went about to set forth the glory of God, he should
not have his realm peaceable. So all faythefull Princes and Governors of
Countries be advertised by this exaumple, that the more they shall employe
their labor to put out all Idolatrye and procure that god be truly wurshypped
(as he ought) the more their faith shall be proved, Why God suffers godly
Princes to be tempted.
by diverse temptacions. God suffers it, and so will have it, to declare the
constancy of his, and to exercise them, that they should have regard to an
higher thing, then this world. The devil labors privily to destroy al godly
doctrine.
In the mean time the devil also does his office, entending by all covert and
hidden means to destroy the good doctrine, because he cannot openly attain
to his desire. But following the admonicion of saint James (who says unto us:
that in considering the patience of Job, we must take heed to the end,) we must
also cast our eyes upon the end, which was given to the said good king.
The good end that GOD gives to the godly.
As god succored him in all his adversities, so in the end he remained
victorious. Considering that, and for as much as his hand is not now any shorter
than it was than, and that he has at this day in so great recommendacion the
defense of his people, truth and verity, as ever he had: Doubt ye not, but
that he will help you, and not only for one time, but in as many temptacions
as he shall send unto you. If the most part of the world resist the
Gospel, and likewise enforces themselves, with all rage and violence, to
empeache and hyndre the setting forth thereof: The ingratytude of men does ever
more resist God approchi^g unto them
We ought not to think it strange. For it is the unthankfulness of men,
which ever have been and shall be, to recoyle when GOD approaches to them, and
also to stumble against him, when he will charge them with his yoke. Moreover,
for that of their nature they be given to hypocrisy, they may not endure to
be brought to ye light of ye word of GOD, which discovers their infamye
and shame, nor to be drawn out of the supersticio^s which serves unto the^ as
hyding places, for to give them shadow. It is then no new thing, if there be
great contradiccion, when one goes about to bring them to the pure
obedyence of GOD. Jesus brigeth the swerd with the gospel
And also we have aduertisemente of our Lord Jesus, the which says to us,
that he has brought the sweorde with his euangelye. But this must not
astonyshe us, nor make us wurse willing or fearful: for in the end when men
shall have well mutined and put forth all their malices, they shall be confounded
in a momente, and shall overthrow themselves, with their own violences. It is
true (as it is said in the second psalm) that god shall not but laughe at
their styrrynges, How god laugheth at the malicious stirring of persecutours.
that is to say, that in dissimulyng he shall leave them tormented, as the
thing touched him not. But for all that, in the end they shall be always drieuen
back by his power, of the which if we be armed, we have a good perfect and
invincible municion against all conspiracies, whatsoever the Deuilles may
procure against us. And in the end we shall know by experyence, The Gospel
that makes a reconciliacion between god and us, can also a pease men
yt as the gospel is the messenger of peace, and of ye reconciliacyon between
God and us: So can he as well for us pacifye men. And by this mean, we shall
feel that Esai has not said in vain, that when Jesus Christ shall reygne
emonges us by his doctrine, the sweordes shall be converted into plough shares,
and the spears into Sythes. In the mean time, albeit that the malice and
Rebellion of men are the occasion of sedicion and mewtenies, which ryseth
against the Gospel: Yet nevertheless it behooves us to take heed to our
selves, God some time chasteneth us by the evil persoues.
and to know that god chasteneth our faults by them, which otherwise cannot
serve but to Satan. It has been an ancient complaynte, that the Gospel was
the cause of all euilles and calamities, Some lay the fault of sedicion to the
gospel.
which happened unto men. In deed we see by the histories that not long
after the christianity was spredde in all places, there was not almost a
corner in the world which was not horriblye afflycted. The mocyon of the
wars was as an universal fire lyghtened in all countries. The floudes in
the one side, the Pestilence and famyne in the other, an horrible confusyon of
order and pollicye, in manner that it was lykelye that the world should be
clearelye ouerturned. We have also seen in our time, sithe the gospel has
begone to be abroad, many myseryes: So that every manne complayneth that we
be in an unhappy world, and there is very few that feels not the wayghte
of the burden.

Now in feelynge such blows, we ought to regard the hand of him that
stryketh us, and we ought also to think wherefore. The cause why we feel gods
scourge.
The cause which moves him to make us so to feel his scourge, is not very
dark or hard to understand. We know that his word, by the which he will
keep us in health, is an inestimable treasure, and in what manner of recompense
is it received of us. Wherefore then, seeing we esteem not much that, which is
so precious to speak of: it is reason that he take vengeance of our
ingratitude. We also hear that Jesus Christ said, that the servant knowing
the will of his master and dooyng it not, is worthy of double chastisemente,
for because that we be so slothful to obey the will of our God, which has
been declared unto us, more than an hundred times heretofore, we ought not to
think it strange, if he be more sharply angrye with us, seeing that we be more
inexcusable. When we cause not the good seed to increase and profit: it is
reason that the thystles and thorns of Satan grows to prycke and torment
us. Because that we give not to our creator the obedience that is due unto
him: it is no marvel that men arise against us. As I understand (my lord) you
have had two kinds of mutenies, which be risen against the king and the
state of ye Realm. Two kinds of mutenies at once.
The One be fantastical men, which under the color of the gospel, would put
all to confusyon. The other be obstynate people in the Supersticyons of the
Antichriste of Rome. Altogether deserves well to be punyshed by the sweorde,
that is committed unto you. Seeing that they quarrel, not only against the
king, but also against God, which has placed him in the seat Royal, and
has committed unto you, the proteccion, as well of his person, as of his
majesty, and regal estate. How gods word must be receued
But the principal mean is, to do as much as is possible, to cause that they
which savor the doctrine of the gospel (to the intent to stycke and cleave unto
it) should receive it with such humbleness and fear, that they may forsake
themselves for the service of god. For they ought to think that god will reuele
all, to thentente yt they shall profit more (without fe^ning in his word)
then they have done before. These mad folks that would the world should
return into a confuse and disordinate liberty, be suborned by Satan for to
slau^dre the gospel: As yt it should not engendre, but rebellion a gaynste
princes, and all dysordre emonges the people. Wherefore al faithful ought to be
sorrowful. The Papists willi^g to maintain ye filthy abhominacio^s of their
Romain Idol, show themselves open enemies of the grace of Jesus Christ and of
all his ordynaunces, the same also ought to grieve the hearts of al them,
which have good zeal, wherefore they ought to think altogether that these be
scourges of god, which he sends to them: And wherefore? But only because
that they make none accoumpte of the doctrine of health as they ought to do.
The principal remedy to appeace sedicion.
Wherefore the principal remedy for to appeace such sedicio^s is, that they
which professes the gospel, do truly repair to the Image of God, for to
show that our christianity causes not dissipacion in the humain life, and
give good proof and trial by their sobrenes, and temperaunce, that we
governed by the word of God, be not me^ unruled and without a bridle. And by
their good and holy life, stop the mouths of all evil speakers. For by this
means god (being appeaced) shall retiere his hand, and in the place that this
day he punishes the slaunderers, for ye contemning of his word, he shall
bless their obedience in all prosperity. Law es and Justices ought to be
vncorrupt.
Likewise that all the nobility and lawiers govern them selves ryghtlye, and
in all humility to thobedie^ce of this great king Jesus Christ: Making holy
homage unto him (without feining) of soul and body and all that they have. To
thintente, that he correct and abate that to gancie and folly of them, that
would tyse against them. Lo, this is the mean how Princes of the earth
ought to reygne in serving Jesus Christ, to the end that he may have Sovereign
authority emonges all, both great and small. Wherefore my Lord, in as much
as you have the regal estate of the king your Nephieu dear unto you, and in
great recommendacion (as you show very well) I pray you in ye name of god, to
employe your principal care and vigilancye, that the doctrine of God may be
preached with strength, and virtue, for to bring furthe his fruit, and not
to leave for any respect to pursue a full and an entiere reformacion of the
Church. And the better to declare unto you my mind and intencion, I will
deuyde the whole into three points. The first shall be the mean to instruct
the people well. The remedies against all sedicion in a common weal.
The second shall be the taking away of the abuse that has been of long time.
The third with diligence to correct vices, and to keep so good order that the
slaundres and disordres may not have such place as ye the name of God should
be blasphemed. As to the first I mind not to declare unto you what doctrine
ought to have place. But rather I give thanks to almighty god, that besides
that he has given unto you the light of his pure knowledge, he has also
given unto you, good counsel and discrecion, to cause his pure verity to be
preached. So that God be thanked, you be not to teach what is the true faith
of christen me^, and the doctrine that they ought to receive. Seeing that by
your mean, the true puretie of the faith is restored. That is, that we
believe and take God for the only gouerner of our souls: that we keep his
law for the only rule, and spiritual gouernmente of our conscience, and not
to serve him after ye foolish inuencyon of man. Also, that according to his
nature, he will be served in spirit, and in purity of heart. Of the other
part, knowing that there is not but al evil in us, and that we be corrupted
in all our knowledge and affeccyons, on that sort, that our souls being
despayred in our selfs be like a bottomless pytte, or world of iniquity. And
having taken away al presumpcion of our wisdom, dygnitie, or power to do
well: we may have recourse to the fou^tayne of al goodness, which is Jesus
Christ, receiuyng that which he gives us: that is to say, the merit of his
death and passion. To thintout that by that mean we may be reconciled to
God, that being washed with his blood, we should not fear that our faults
should empeache or hyndre us, to find grace before his celestial throne.
That being certain that ou^ sins be freely pardoned us, by virtue of his
sacrifice, we shall put therein our trust and assurance, for to be asserteyned of
our health, and that we be sanctified by his sprite, in geuinge our selves to
the obedience of the justice of GOD, that being fortifyed by his grace, we
shall be vanquishers of Satan, the world, and the flesh. Finally, that being
members of his body, we fear it not, but GOD will take us for his children,
and that we may have confydence to call unto him as our father. That we be
aduertysed to bring to this end, all that is said and done in the church, it
is, that being retiered from the world, we may be lift up to heaven, with
our head and Savior. Wherefore seeing than that god has given you the grace to
restore the knowledge of his doctrine, which has been so long buried by
the Antichriste, I leave to keep you with longer purpose.

And that which I have towched of the manner of teaching, is only for that
the people may be ryghtlye instructed, and for to feel that which thapostle
said: The word of God is a two edged sword
that is, that the word of God is a sweorde, cutting with two edges, pearsyng
the thoughts and affeccions unto the mary of the bone. Few godly preachinges
in the realm
I say this (my Lord) for that I think there is veraye few lyuelye
preachynges within the realm. But that the most part recyteth, as by lecture,
I well perceive the necessytye that constrayneth you thereunto. For first you
have not (as I think) your pastors so good and apt, as you desire and wish,
wherefore it is nedeful for you to supply that lack. Secondly there might
chance to be many light spirits, which would peradventure leap beyond
their bonds, sowing some foolyshe fantasyes, as many times they do in new
things. But all these consideracyons empeacheth not, The ordinance of Jesus
Christo ought in all causes to have course.
but that thordinaunce of Jesus Christ ought to have his course as in
preaching the gospel. Now ths preaching ought not to be dead but alive,
Prechyng ought to be lively.
for to teach exhort and reprehende (as Saint Paul says to Timoth:) yea in
such sort as if an infidele enter, he may be wounded overcome, and taken (as
the same Paul says in another place,) for to give glory unto god. You know
also, my Lord, how as he speaks of the lyuelines that ought to be in the
mouths of them, which will approve them selves good and faithful ministers of
the gospel, that they ought not to have or use words of rethorike, entending
thereby to be in greater estimacyon: but that the spirit of God ought to
sound in their voices, for to work in dertue. All the dangers that are to
be feared, ought not to impeache the spirit of God to have his liberty, and
his course, in them in the which he has distributed of his grace, for to
edifye the church. It is true that in the mean time it is good and expedient
to stop the lightness of fantastical spirits, that takes to much license.
Also to shut the gate of al curiosities and new fangled doctrines. But the
best and most convenient means, such as God has showed unto us, is, There
ought to be a resolute su^me of doctrine that should be preached.
that first there be a su^me resolute of ye doctrine that al ought to preach,
the which al prelates and curates should swear to follow: And that none be
received to any ecclesiastical charge, All preachers ought to preach
uniformly.
but he promise to observe the same concord and vnpon. cathechismes for the
youth ought to be had in a christen realm.
After that to have a formal and commen instruccyon for to enstructe the
young children and ignoraunte people, which should make them acquaynted with
the true doctrine, in such wise that they may discern it from lies and
corrupcions, which else might be brought in. To the contrary, believe my
lord, that the church of god shall never be conserved without Cathechisme: for
it is as the seed, to be kept, that the good grain peryshe not, but that it
may increase from age to age. Wherefore if you desire to build a work of
continuance to endure long, and which should not shortly fall in decay, cause
that the children in their young age, be enstructed with a good Cathechisme,
that may learn them briefly, and according to their small capacities, to know
wherein consysteth the true christianity. The profitablenesse of a good
cathechisme.
This* Cathechisme shall serve for two purposes, that is to say, for an
introduccyon to all the people, for to profit well in that which shall be preached
unto them, and also to discern in case any presumptuously would attempt to set
forth strange doctrines. In the mean time I say not, It is necessary to
bind the Pastour^ to a certain form of doctrine written.
and also necessary to bind and restrayn the pastoures and Curates to a
certain form written, for to supplye the ignorauncies and symplenes of some of
the^, and also the better to show the conformity and concord of all
churches. Thyrdelye, for to bridle all curiosityes and new inuencions, such
as desires nothing, but to run riot, the said Cathechisme, (as I have
before rehearsed) shall serve and bees good bridle for such folks: And also
in such sort order is to be given, in the ministering of the Sacraments, and
in the public prayers. But in ye mean time, The virtue of prechinge the
Gospel may not be destroyed
you must take heed that such policy destroy not the strength and virtue
that ought to be in preaching of the gospel. And that you employe your
labour^ as much as ye possiblye can, that there be good trumpets which may
enter into the depenes of ye hertes, for ther^ is danger that ye shall not see
great profit of such reform^cion, Good prechi^g must be joined with a
reformacion
how good and holy soever it be, unless that even at once with it, the power
and virtue of good preaching, be desplayed and set forth togethers. It is
not without^ cause that it is said that Jesus Christ shall strike the year^he
by the Scepter of his mouth, and shall destroy the evil by the Spirit of
his lyppes. It is the mean by the which he will overcome us, in destroyinge
all that, which is against him. The gospel is in scripture called the
kingdom of God*
And for that cause the gospel is also called the kingdom of GOD. Also, albeit
that thordinances and statutes of princes be good helps to advance and
mayntaine the state of christianity: So likewise god will declare his
souereygne virtue in the spiritual sweorde of his word with it, setting
forth the same by his pastors. And to the intent I would not long trouble you
(my Lord) I will come to the second point which I have purposed to show unto
you. Abuses must be clean taken away
It is to abolyshe, and clearly to take away, the abuses and corrupcions that
Satan has mingled heretofore with the ordinances of god. We know yt under
the pope there is a bastard christianity which god shall dysalowe in the
last day: Under (...) papacy is a bastard christianity.
forasmuch as at this day, he has condemned the same, by his word. If we
desire to retiere the world from such perdicion, there is nothing better,
then to follow the exaumple of. S. Paul, who willing to correct the evil
that the Corinthians had joined to the supper of our Lord, said unto them: I
have received of the Lord, that which I have given unto you. We mu^ return to
the right commandment of GOD.
Of that we must gather one general instruccion to return to ye right and
natural commandment of God: if we will have a good and an approved reformacion
of him. For so many mynglynges as men have set up of their own inuencions,
there be so many infecctons, which turn us from the holy usage of that, that
God has given us, for our health. So to (...) of half the branches of such
abuses, It is not enough to cut of sum of the branches of abuses.
it cannot bring again the things in perfect and pure state, because that
we then shall have always a Christianity counterfette. I say this for that,
that some under the color of moderacion, be of opinion to suffer many
abuses, without taking them away, and they think that it is enough to have
taken out the root of the principal. But contrary wise, we se how much the
seed of lies is fertile, The seed of lies is fertile.
and that one grain of that is sufficient, for to fill all the world within
three days, as men be inclined and given unto. Our Lord teaches us
otherwise, for when David speaks of idols he says that their name shall not
pass by his mouth: to thentente to declare unto us what horror and
detestacion we ought to have them in. And if we considre well how much we
have offended God in the time of our ignorance, we ought to be dowbly
remembered for to eschew the inuencions of Satan, The craft of Satan.
who has provoked us to do such evil things, using the^ as allurementes
which serves not, but to seduce ye poor and simple folks. On the other side
we see that albeit men be sufficiently warned of their faults, and errors,
and be advertised of them as much as is possible: Yet nevertheless, they be so
hardened, that no man can attain to the perfect end. Tha^ if there shall be
left unto the^ some dregs to remain, it shall be a nouryshemente of much more
and greater obstinacye, and a couerture to hyde all doctrine that may be
propouned unto them. I confess that it is conueniente to observe some
moderacyon, Moderacion is necessary, and some ceremonies may be used.
and that to great extremity is neither good ne profitable. Likewise it is
convenient to use the ceremonies according to the grosenes of the people: but
it may not be that that which is of Satan, and of the Antichriste, should
pass under that color. It is for that cause that holy scripture praising
the kings which did destroy the idolatries, The kings that destroyed
Idolatry.
not having plucked away altogether: nevertheless gave unto them a mark for
that they had not destroyed the chappelles and places of foolyshe devotion.
Wherefore my lord, seeing that god has brought you so far forth, I pray you
continue without any excepcion, to the intent that he may approve you the
setter forth of his temple: in such wise as the time of the king your
Nephieu may be compared to the time of Josias: and that you may set al
things in such state as there shall rest nothing to him, but to maintain
the good order which god shall have prepared unto him by your mean. I will
allege unto you an exaumple of such dregs, which peradventure may rest to
be a little leven: the which in thend, will make the paste sour. Against
prayinge for the dead at receiving of the communion.
They do in your countreye some kind of prayer for the dead, when the
communion is received. I know well it is not for to aduowe the purgatory of the
Pope. I know also that it may be alleged by aunciente custom to do some
remembrance for the dead, to the intent to join together all the members of
the body. But there is a peremptorye argument to the contrary, that ye
supper of Jesus Christ is so holy a thing, that it ought not to be defiled
with no inuencions of men. Moreover, that in praying unto god, we ought not
let slip the bridle of our fantastical devotion, but to keep the rule that
Saint Paul did give unto us: that is, that we take our foundation of the
word of god. Wherefore such remembrance of recommendacion is not convenient to
the order of the good and due prayer, and it is an evil addicyon to the holy
supper of our Lord. There is other things, which peradventure should be
less blamed, which nevertheless, is not to be excused: As ye ceremony of ye
Chreame and vnccion. The ceremony of chreame and vnccion.
The chreame has been invented of a foolyshe fantasye by them that contented
not themselves with the administracion of Jesus Christ, and that they would
counterfeit the holy spirit by a new doctrine, as though the water were not
sufficient enough for that. And ye which is called the extreme vnccion, has
been retained by a foolyshe affection of them, that have will to follow the
Apostles, having not the same gift that they had. For when the Apostles did
use the oil upon the syck, The oil used upon the sick by the Apostles.
it was for to heal them by miracle: when the miracle ceased, the figure
ought no more to be used. Superfluous cerem^nies are to be pared of again.
Wherefore it should be a great deal better that the things should be so
pared of again, as they may be most agreeing to the pure word of God, and may
serve to the edifyinge of the church. How we ought to bear with the weak.
It is true yt we ought to bear with the weak, but that is for to strengthen
and bring them to greater perfeccion, that is not to say that in the mean time
we ought to please fools which desire now this and now that, and know not
wherefore. I know the consideracyon wherefore many are troubled: it is that
they fear that to much alteracion cannot be borne with, principallye when one
will have regard of his neighbors, with whom he desires to nourishe
friendship and amity. A man would gladly gratifye them in dyssymulynge many
things. This ought to be borne with, in worldly affairs, where it is
lawefull to yield one to an other, and to give some of our right to bye peace:
but it is not al one of the spiritual governance of the Church, As touchi^g
gods word, we may not yield to men for fauout.
the which ought to be ordered according to the word of God. In that it is
not in our lybertye to yield in any thing to men, in respect of their
favor. Likewise there is nothing that dyspleaseth GOD more, then when we
will by our humayne prudence, moderate or temper, or refourme, or set
forth, or draw back, any thing against his will. Wherefore if we will
not dysplease him, we must close our eyes in respect of men. As to the
dangers that may happen, we ought to eschew them as much as we may: but
not in declynynge from the true and right way, for we have his promise, God
by his promise will assiste us in walkinge the right way.
that he will assyste us in walking the right way. So that it rests not in
us, but to do our office in recommendynge to him that, Why the wise of this
world are many times void of their hope.
that shall follow. And for that occasion the wise of this world be many times
void of their hope, for that, that god is not with them, when they trust not
in him, and in his help in serching bymeanes, which he condemns. If then we
will have the virtue and strength of god on our side, let us follow symplye,
that he says unto us, and above all, we ought to keep this general rule:
The reformacyon of the church is the work of gods own hand
that the reformacion of his church is the work of his hand. Wherefore it is
necessary, that in this matter, men suffer themselves to be governed by him,
the which whether it be in restoryng or in keeping his church, will most
commonly proceed by a merueylouse and strange means and ways, unknown to
men. Wherefore to restrain this reformacyon that ought to be divine, by the
measure of our wit, and to make that which is celestial subject to the
earth and the world, is against al good reason. By that I exclude not the
wisdom which is very requisite to observe all propice and good means, and
not to excede either on the one side or the other, in any extremity, for the
wynnyng of all the world to god, if it should be possible. It is requisite
that the wisdom of the spirit rule, and not of the flesh.
But it is needful that the wisdom of the spirit should rule, and not of
the flesh. And that having examined the mouth of the Lord, we require of
him, that he will be our guide and conducter, sooner the^ to follow our own
wits: and when we shall require it in that sort, it shall be easy for us to
exclude many temptacions, that may stay us in the mids of the way.
Wherefore my Lord, as you have begone to reduce Christianity unto his
perfect state in England, and not in trustyng of your self, but to be
mayntayned by the hand of GOD: as unto this day ye have felt his mighty
hand, doubt ye not, but that he will help you unto the end. For if god
mayntayneth kyngedomes and Lordeshyppes of infydels that be his enemies, If
GOD maintain the kingdoms of Infidele^, much m^ he will of the faithful,
by much more reason, he will take into his guard, them that be obedyent unto
him, and do take him for their Superyoure. I come now to the last Article,
that is, to punyshe vice, and to reprove slanders. I doubt not but there is
good laws, and lawful statutes, within the Realm of England, People must
by good laws be kept in a^ honest discipline
for to keep the people in honest life. But the great dysordres and
enormytyes that I see in the world, constrains me to desire you to take also
the care that the people be kept in good and honest disciplyne: and above all
that ye have the honor of God in good reputacyon, to the intent to punyshe
such crimes, Crimes must be punyshed.
of the which men accustomablye make none accoumpte. I say it for that,
that somtymes, theftes, Robberyes, fyghtynges, and extorcyons shall be
sharpelye punished, for that in those me^ be offended: and in the mean time
whordomes, adulteries, dronkenes, and blasphemies of the name of god, be
suffered almost as things lawful and of small importance. Contrariwyse we
see in what estimacyon and detestacyon god has them in. For he declares unto
us, how much his name is precyouse, and in what estimacion we ought to have
it: and yet it is by us, as it were torn in pieces, and trodden under our fete.
Wherefore out of doubt, he will not leave unpunished such injuries and
dishonor. Yea, and moreover the Scripture shows us that by blasphemies a
whole realm is infected. By blasphemies a whole realm is infected.
As touching adultries, it is agreat shame unto us which profess the name of
Christ, that the Pagans have observed greater rygour in punishyng thereof then
we do: of the which we many times make but a laughing game. When the holy
marriage that ought to be a lyuelye image of the holy union that we have with
the son of God, Holy marriage.
is defiled, and that the allyaunce which ought to be most stable and
indyssoluble, is unjustly broken: If we take not those things to heart, it
is a sign that we have no great care nor love of GOD. Touching whoredom, it
may well suffyce us that Sayncte Paul doothe compare it to Sacrilege, S. Paul
co^pareth whoredom to sacrilege.
for as much as by the same the temples of GOD, which is our bodies, be
profaned and defiled. Item that the whoremongers and dronkardes be banyshed
from the kingdom of GOD, in such wise that it is defended unto us to keep
company with them. Wherefore it follows that they ought not to be suffered
in the Church. Whormo^gers and dru^kardes ought not to be suffered in the
Church.
And this is the cause that so many tribulacyons be this day upon the
yearthe. For insomuche as men pardons such enormities, it must follow that
GOD must take vengeance. Wherefore my lord, to thinte^t to prevent his wrath,
I pray you to hold the bridle short, and cause that they which hears the
doctrine of the Gospel, prove themselves to be christen men, by the
holiness of their life. For as the doctrine is the soul of the church, for to
give it life: so the disciplyne and correccion of vices be as the Senowes for
to maintain the body in his force and strength. Correccio^ of vices.
It is the office of Busshops and Curates to take good head to the same, The
office of bishops and curates.
to the intent that the supper of our Lord be not polluted by folks of
slanderous and dyshonest^ life. But considering the authority which God has
committed unto you, ye principal charge retourneth unto you, for to set others
in the right way, to the intent that every one dyscharge themselves of their
duty, and cause that the order which is established be duly observed. Now
my Lord following the protestacyon that I have made here before, I will not
excuse my self no longer, neither of ye prolixitie of my letters, nor of that,
that I have liberally declared that I had in my heart. For I trust that mine
affeccion i^ known unto you, according to your wisdom. And as ye be exercised
in the holy scripture, you see of what fou^tayne I have drawn all that which
is herein contained. Wherefore I do not fear that I have been tedious and
importune in declaryng unto you, to the best of my power, the good desire that
I have, that the name of god may be daily by you more largelye gloryfyed, for
the which I pray to him daily. Praying that it may please him to augment his
grace unto you, confyrmyng you by his holy spirit in a perfect and invincible
constancy, maintaining you against your enemies, having you with all your
household in his holy proteccion, and doing that you administer happelye the
charge that is committed to you. So that the king may have occasion to give
thanks to his Lord God, for that he has had such a Gouernoure in his
young age, as well of his person as also of his realm. So I make an end my
lord, having me most humblye recommended unto your good Grace:

The.xxii. of Octobre, in the year of our LORD. 1549. Your most humble
servant, John Calvin

IMPRINTED AT LONdon by Edward whitchurche, the.v. day of April. 1550.

Cum priuilegio, ad Jmprimendum solum.
